THE 


MATERIA MEDICA 

OF THE 

NOSODES 

WITH 

PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY 


BY 

H. C. ALLEN, M. D. 

Author of THERAPEUTICS OF FEVERS, KEYNOTES AND CHARACTER- 
ISTICS, AND BOENNINGHAUSEN’S REPERTORY (Slips). 


PHILADELPHIA ; 
BOERICKE & TAFEL 



IN MEMORIAM. 


/); Iltinj’ C AUen born in the village of Nilestoivn^ 
Htay London^ Ontario^ and zoa^ the son of Hugh and Martha 
Ddlin:^\ Allen. On las paternal side, he was a descendant of 
that thstiHi^nishcd family of Vermonters of the same name, 
i»en ha Allen and Ethan Allen, both famous tn the revoln- 
tion. (hi his maternal side, the Billings' mere well known 
amom: the Colonial tamilies of Massachusetts Bay, and one of 
them, the ^reat^^f^and-fafher of Dr Allen, owned the farm 
lands on whuk the present city of Salem is built. After selB 
ing this piopertw the family moved to Deerfield, in the Con-- 
nectii lit I lilley and were there at the time the Indians pillaged 
and ravaged that part of the country. 

lie leicived his early education in the common and grammar 
schools at lamdon, tohere he later taught school for a time. 
Ills medhal education was acquired at the Western Homeo- 
pathic College at Cleveland, Ohio {noio the Cleveland Homeo- 
pathic College), ndiere he graduated in x86c, and later from 
the College of Physieians and Surgeons of Canada. Shortly 
after graduation, he entered the Union Army, serving as a 
surgeon under iieneral Grant. 

A fter the %oar he 7oas offered and accepted the professorship 
on Ana tom r in his Alma Mater at Cleveland, and it was here 
that he first started practicing medicine. Later he resigned 
and accepted the same chmr in the Hahnemann Medical College 
of Chit ago. In rS6S he was offered the Chair of Surgery to 
succeed Dr, Beebe, but was unable to accept. He then located 
in Brantford, Ontario, whereon December 24th, i86y, he mar- 
ried Selina Louise Coold, who, with his two children, Frank- 
fin Lyman Allen and Helen Marian Allen Aird, survives him. 



In 1875 he moved to Detroit^ Michigan ^ and in tSSo^ Imn^n ap^ 
pointed Professor of Materia Medtca at the l iuverstty 0/ 
Michigan, he moved to Ann Arbo)\ where he remained nutii 
j8go, when he came to Chicago, where he has since resided. 

In 1892 he founded the He ring Medical College and Hospital, 
of which he was Dean and Professor of Materia Medica until 
his death, January 22d, tgog. 

Dr, Allen tms an honorable senior of the American Institute 
of Homeopathy ; a member of the International Hahnemannian 
Association; of the Illinois Homeopathic Medical Association ; 
of the Englewood Homeopathic Medical Society; of the Regu-^ 
lar Homeopathic Medical Society of Chicago; Honorary Vice^ 
President of the Cooper Club of London, England; and Hon*^ 
orary Member of the Michigan, New York, Pennsylvania and 
Ohio State Medical Societies and Honorary Member of the 
Homeopathic Society of Calcutta, India, 

He was owner and editor of the Medical Advance'* for 
many years. Besides writing many articles in this and other 
"magazines he wrote numerous books, among %vhich are the fol^ 
lowing: Keynotes of Leading Remedies,** lately placed on the 
Council List of Books** for use in the Canadian Medical Coh 
leges; The Homeopathic Therapeutics of Intermittent 
Fever;** The Homeopathic Therapeutics of Fevers;** 
Therapeutics of Tuberculous Affections ;** and recently com*- 
pleted the revision of Bmnninghausen* $ Slip Repertory, which 
he brought down to date and arranged for rapid and practical 

work, 

% 

This, his latest work, a treatise on the Nosodes, was com*- 
pleted only a short time before his death, and was the result of 
years of study, experience, and of proving and confirming the 
symptomatology of many of the nosodes. His observations are 
here published for the first time. 



PUBLISHERS’ PREFACE 


It is with deep regret that the publishers are compelled to 
offer a preface of their own to this great work instead of one 
by the author, which intervening death prevented. 

An outline of the history of this book, so far as we know it, 
may be of interest here, and indeed is needed. We have no 
means of knowing when the work was started, but, judging 
from the manuscript, it must have been many years ago, for 
much of the manuscript is old, and bears evidence of frequent 
revision and correction; of the work of a painstaking and con- 
scientious author. 

Close towards the end of the year 1908 Dr. Allen wrote us 
that his work was completed, the manuscript had received its 
final revision, and was ready for the compositor. The con- 
tracts were made, the manuscript was sent to the compositor 
Several pages of the first section, Adrenahn^ were set up and 
submitted to the author for style of type, and arrangement, 
passed on by him as being satisfactory, the compositors were 
told to go ahead with the work, and then when all this was 
finished, word came of Dr. Allen’s death. This threw the 
responsibility of seeing the work through the press, and the 
proof reading, on us. How well this work has been performed 
the reader can judge for himself. We believe it is good work. 

Concerning the character of this book, Nosodes^ it may be 
said that Dr. Allen first, last and all the time, regarded these 
drugs as homoeopathic, and not as isopathic, remedies, that 
they were to be proved as homoeopathic remedies and pre- 
scribed according to the totality of the symptoms. The pre- 



vi 


PUBLISHERS PREFACE. 

, * ^ 

liminary remarks, prebedinj^ the drujjs treated in tins book, 
tell all that we know concerning the source of the provings. 

Dr. Allen placed great store by this, his final work, uiiich 
he, we believe, considered his greatest. 

The Publishers 

Philadelphia^ Pa.yjan. 14^ iqhk 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Adrenalin . . . 

Ambergris 

Ambra gnsea 

Anthracinnm 

Anthrax poison 

Bacillinum 

Cat’s milk . 

Cholesterinum . . 

Cow’s milk . . ... 

Cow’s milk, skimmed 

Diplitherinum . 

Blectncitas . 

Blectricity , . 

Grease of horse 

Hydrophobinum 

lyac cammim . . ... 

Bac dedoratum .... 

lyac felinum . . . 

Bac vaccinum . . . 

L/ac vaccinum defloratum . . 

Byssin 

Magnet, the . . - . . 

Magnetis poll ambo . 
Magnetis polus arcticus 
Magnetis polus australis . 
Malandnnum . 

Malaria officinalis . 
Medorrhinum 

North-pole of magnet . . . 

Psorinum . . 

Pyrogen . . . 

Barcode . 

Secale cornutiim . . 

Sepsis, a product of . . 


I 

6 

6 

21 

. 21 

34 

129 

36 

134 

• 93 
. 38 

41 

41 

257 

139 

48 

93 

. 129 

134 

95 

• 139 

206 
. 206 

223 
241 

• 257 
277 

• • 295 

. 223 

. .344 

. . .409. 


^ . ... .427 

409 



CONTENTS. 


viii, 

South-pok of the magnet . . 241 

Syphiliniim . . 471 

TUyroidin ... ... . . , 495 

Tubercuhnum. . .... . 502 

TJstilago , , . • $ 3,0 

Vaccimnum . 54B 

VanoHnnm .... . 544 

x-ray 552 



Materia Medica of the Nosodes 


ADRENALIN (Sarcode). 

Extract of super-renal bodies. Its chemical formula is Cj 
Hj A, Oj and it forms shining prismatic crystals, which melt 
at a temperature of 207c. ; it is most soluble in warm water. 
It has a bitter taste, which leaves a sensation of numbness on 
the tip of the tongue. In dilute acids it possesses a marked 
affinity for oxygen, and when exposed to the air it changes 
into oxyadrenalin which is poisonous, though not possessing 
the properties of Adrenalin. It is to this chemical change 
that constantly occurs in the tissues that the evanescent effect 
of the drug is due. 

A number of cases of Addison’s disease have been cured, 
and others arrested in their course, by Adrenalin. The most 
of these cases have occurred in the practice of other schools, 
and with large doses of the crude drug Very few have been 
reported in the homoeopathic school, in fact, Raue says he 
has been unable to find an authenticated case of this disease 
cured, in our literature. As yet we have but one proving, 
made in 1904 by students of the New York Homoeopathic 
College, under the direction of Dr. V. L. Getman and the 
following provers : M. W. Macduffie, W. G. LaField, G. H. 
Clapp, J. B. G. Custis, Jr., G. C. Birdsall, and R. C. Miller. 
The day-books of provers are omitted. 

MIND. — Despondent and nervous; lack of interest in any- 
thing; no ambition; disinclination for mental work; absence 
of “ grit.” 

Aversion to mental work, cannot concentrate thoughts. 

HEAD. — Hot headache in left side, extending to right, < by 
reading and in morning, with a feeling as though the eyes 
were strained. 


2 



ADRENALIN. 


’P'rontal headache, supraorbital, with conRested nose and 
eyes. 

Burning heat in head, feeling as though he wantetl to open 
eyes wide 

Headache extending all over head but <! on left side and 
over eyes across forehead. 

Awoke with headache over eyes and left side of head as 
though he wanted to open the eyes wide and press on them. 

Dull pain all over head, sometimes nght-sided, sometimes 
eft-sided, but always e.xtending to eyes, causing a feeling as 
though he wanted to open the eyes wide. 

Severe pain > by pressure on the eyes. 

Headache with nausea and heat in face, without redness, < 
in the evening, but reappears as soon as pressure is removed. 

Headache extending to the ears. All headaches are *' in 
the afternoon or evening; in the evening they appear about 7 
p. M. and last until relieved by walk in the open air or sleep. 

If headache appears in the afternoon the time is 8 p. m., 
always > by walk in the open air, and somewhat relieved by 
eating and sleeping, but not so completely as by walk in the 
open air. 

When the headache is worse it is also > by pressure on the 
eyes and opening the eyes wide, and is < by mental labor 
and indoors. 

Dull headache over eyes; fulness in head. 

Neuralgic headache; pains start from base of brain, go for- 
ward over the head to front and sides; pains are first shooting 
and seem to be just under the scalp, appear at 11 A. M. and 
last until 3 or 4 P. M., and disappear by eating, in open air, 
< in close, warm room. 

. Brain feels swollen as though it were too large for skull. 
Congestion of brain during the day. 

Dull aching in the eyeballs with the headache, > by pres- 
lure and by rubbing the eyes. 

Headache coming on at 11 A. m., lasting until 12:30 at night, 
> by eating. 

Fulness of the head in the afternoon and evening. 

Flushes of heat in the evening over face and head, but face 
was only slightly red. 



ADRENALIN. 


3 


Dull feeling in the head from 3 to 6 p m. 

Frontal headache. 

EYES. — Strained feeling, congested, feeling as though he 
wanted to open them wide or press upon them. 

Pam in the right eye. 

Pressure on the eyes and opening them wide > the head- 
ache 

Hyperemia of the conjunctiva dissipated almost immedi- 
ately when used locally; thus rendering operations possible. 

Aching m eyeballs, > by pressure and rubbing 

EARS. — Aching in the left ear accompanies the headache; 
sharp pain in both ears at times. 

Itching and tickling in right ear, > by boring into ear with 
finger 

NOSE. — Congested, full feeling in nose 

Gelatinous mucus drops from the posterior nares, difficult 
to detach. 

On going out into the cold air had a copious, watery nasal 
discharge, < on right side; when indoors, the nose felt full 
and stopped up. 

Slight stuffiness m the nose, with full feeling at the root of 
the nose. 

"FACE. — Feels flushed but is not red 

Flushes of heat over face and head; flushed throughout 
evening. 

MOUTH. — Bad taste on waking. 

Mouth filled with dark brown mucus, which has nasty taste. 

Tongue coated white, red edge and tip. 

Tongue clean anteriorly; mouth dry 

Tongue coated white at times posteriorly. 

THROAT. — Much hemming and hawking to clear throat. 

Vocal cords inflamed; laryngeal catarrh, profuse secretion 
from the pharyngeal glands of whitish gelatinous mucus which 
was difficult to loosen. 

Right side swollen and sore, red and inflamed, < by swal- 
lowing. 

STOMACH. — Belching after meals. 

Appetite increased. 

Sensation of nausea as though he would vomit. 



4 


ADRENALIN. 


Pain in stomach passing from right to left, coming ami 
going suddenly. 

Nausea before meals, though appetite is good when he once 
began to eat. 

Appetite increased; ravenous hunger. 

Less thirst than usual. 

Thirst at times for large quantities, increased in the even- 
ing. 

AB0OMEN. — Rumbling in the intestines; borborygmus. 

STOOL — Passage of foul flatus. 

Stool loose, brown, semi-solid, pa.ssed (piickly, with fetid 
odor. 

Sudden spluttering diarrhea; all over in a minute, followed 
with burning in anus. 

URINE-— Strong odor, hot and scalding; frequent, profuse, 
pale. 

Burning before and during micturition. 

Sudden urgent desire to urinate. 

Amount of urine decreased, solids increased. 

Crystals of sodium oxalate increased while sodium urate 
appeared during the proving, and was very prominent, no 
casts. 

Pus corpuscles which were present at the beginning disaji- 
peared; no epithelia. 

Hematuna with severe pain in the renal region; cured. 

Urine more frequent than usual. 

Male.— Spermatozoa present (in the urine?) at the begin- 
ning and during the first part of the proving, totally dis!i|>- 
peared. 

Sexual desire increased, without erections. 

Erections; lascivious dreams all night causing waking from 
sleep. 

Emissions in early morning without any bad effects. 

RESPIRATORY. Cough, from irritation in supra sternal fossa. 

Expectoration of gelatinous mucus, which is hard to detach. 

Increase of respiratory movements, soon followed by suffo- 
cation and death from paralysis of medulla and pneumogastric 
(crude drugs). 

BACK. Pain especially on the left side; better by sitting up 
.straight or lying straight. 



ADRENALIN. 


5 


EXTREMITIES. — Slight rheumatic pains coming and going 
down leg. 

Left foot, leg and buttocks go to sleep easily and feel numb; 
this numbness extends to both lower extremities but is < in 
the left. 

Arms and legs go to sleep easily; numbness and tingling 
from below upwards. 

Corns on the toes. 

Aching in limbs on waking m the morning; aching in the 
calves. 

Rheumatic pains in left elbow and little finger on waking. 

Severe cramp in right heel lasting ten minutes, then the 
same in left heel, followed by stomachache. 

Legs tired and ache, especially in the calves and below the 
knees. 

Ankles feel weak and tired. 

Painful swelling on first finger of right hand, resulting in a 
felon. 

Tired aching m arms and legs on waking. 

Dull pam in arms and legs 

TISSUES. — It possesses powerful local action over dila,ted 
blood-vessels. 

When injected into the circulation arteries become con- 
tracted and blood pressure rises. 

Prolonged contraction of the general muscular system. Re- 
peated injections cause atheroma and heart lesions in animals. 

The skin becomes bronzed; great loss of strength, rapid 
emaciation; exceedingly rapid pulse; irregular intermitting 
heart beats; general marked anemia. 

SLEEP. — Great sleepiness and drowsiness. 

Sleepy in evening and after a good night's sleep. 

Dulness and sleepiness from 3 to 6 p. m. 

FEVER. — Flushes of heat over face and head. 



6 


AMHRA r.KISKA. 


AMBRA GRISEA (Ambergris). 

Of doubtful oriijin, for years on the bortlerluinl as to its tnie 
classification, but probably a nusotie or morbid prodtiet fmiud 
in the belly of the sperm-whale, the Phxit'tt'r 
It is often found floating upon the sea or thrown upon the 
shore of the Baltic, or on the coast of Madagascar or Sumatra. 
But, perhaps the best specimens are those which whalers cut 
out and are to be found m Boston and other whaling ports. 
It has many characteristics of intestinal or biliary concietions 
and has been considered to be of hepatic origin, probably a 
fatty excretion from its gall bladiier. - It was introduced by 
Hahnemann in 1827 ; proved by him and his friend. Count de 
Gersdorf, who personally obtained nearly one-half of the 
symptoms. 

The so-called Oil of Amber (used by Dr, Holcombe in hic- 
cough) is Oleum Succinum, and should not be confounded 
with Ambergris. 

CHARACTERISTICS.— For children, especially ..young girls who 
are>^xcitabIe/nervou3. and weak;\nervous affection^^ld peo- 
j^^nerves^.'worn out ^ -^premature senility/general func- 
^™P^irment. ^ilments^Hpf both extremes of life. 

Lgan, thin,^_e maciated persons who take cold easily; "dried 
nervous; thin, scrawny women (Secale); nervous bilious 
temperament. 

^r®?t!adne^its for days weeping. 

embarrassed in com- 

p any, in sick room. . 

T^ presence of others, even the nurse, is unbearable dur- 

desire, which makes her anx- 

lOUS. 

embarrassm.ents,_unable to sleep, must get 
up TAct., Sep.). - -- - 

Retires weary, yet wakeful as soon as head touches pillow. 

"^^glkness; lassitude, numbness of single parts ;vone-sided ' 
\complaintsy 

^]^ulywlth fetid breath (Thuja). 

^nsation of coldness in abdomen (CaL)xpf single parts*/ 



AMBRA GRISEA 


7 


Cannot urinate m presence of other persons (Nat mur ), 

Discharge of bloodv between periods, at very little accident — 
a long walk, after every hard stool, etc., nymphomania, 
severe pruritus, especially in lying-in 

Leucorrhea,. thick^ bluish-white mucus^ especially or only at 
night (Caust , Mer , Nit ac.) 

Cough violent, in spasmodic paroxysms, with eructations 
and hoarseness, < talking or reading aloud (Dros., Phos , 
Tub ), evening without, morning with expectoration (Bry., 
Carb. V , Hep., Hyos., Phos., Puls., Sep );^ whooping-cough, ^ 
but without crowing inspiration, < when many people are 
present 

RELATIONS: Antidoted by Camph , Cof., Nux, Puls ,* Staph., 
X-ray. Ambra antidotes Staph , especially the voluptuous 
itching of scrotum 

Nux antidotes the potentized Ambra. 

COMPARE: Calc., Nat c.. Tub. (coldness of abdomen) j 
Cast, Asaf , Psor., X-ray, Val , defective reaction, Coca, 
Per., bashfulness and blushing, Mosch., Val,, fainting, hys- 
teric asthma; Act., Ign , night cough, lod., Nux, Tub , thin, 
emaciated, nervous, irritable persons, Ars , Tub., asthmatic 
affections; Phos., asthma, nervous, excitable, weak, irritable 
patient, tall and slender, Bov., flow every few days midway 
between the periods. Lach , Rhus, Sepia, < from overlifting, 
Cof., Croc , China, Ign., Puls., Sec , Staph., Sulph., nervous 
hysterical affections, Kali bi., lod., itching behind sternum in 
violent, racking, paroxysmal cough. 

Carbo veg. and Petr, m lack of reaction in acute disease. 

In cases of women who ar^xcessively nervouj/and fail to 
reacF in acute "sick ness. 

' aggravation ; Warm drinks, warm room, m the evening; 
lying, especially on tKe^^amless side (Arn., Bry., Calc , Puls , 
Rhus); reading or talking aloud, music, the presence of 
many people; after waking (Lach , Sep.). 

AMELIORATION : After eating, in the cold open air, cold 
food and drinks, rising TroW bed, resting upon affected parts. 

Pains * tearing, drawing, sticking, with sensation of pressure 

The infantas weak,\peevish and mentally deficient, . thin and emaciated, 
the image of a little dned-up old man. 



8 


AMBKA C»HISKA. 


The hair turn^ ami falK; the me«ior> grtiws, isnri*hiibU\ rtmiiirvlirn- 
sioSTis dull, hearixig, smell ami M^Ut !»egin to tint; 

melancholy; ^x*rsion to campanv or nidifterenre to tamih urn! the allaifH 
jf lf?e are gradual steps in tlie path to seiuhty i'rom delVettve .is*,ii«ila* 
tion^e tisbuc'^jecome impoverishet^ from weak cireuktiiui there i-. eohl- 
ness oithe extremities, numbness, and %ertigo. Tiiese signs of senile de- 
crepitude may be found to a greater or kss extent in any ^ tage of life, and 
this is the sphere of Ambra — Farf 

MIND. — II Memory nnpaued. 

II Comprehension slow, has to reail everything three or four 
times and then does not understand it. 

I Is not able to reflect upon anything properly, feels stnpui. 
Confusion of the head; of the occiput. 

I Difficult thinking in the morning. 

II Distorted images, grimaces; diabolical faces crowd upon 
his fancy. 

She is excited, loquacious; erratic talking fatigues her; was 
unable to sleep at night, or averse to talking ami laughing, 
^eat sadness, despondent, does not want to live. 

Forced to dwell upon most disagreeable things; sj[eepless in 
consequence. 

^*Melancholy, sits for days weeping; with great weakness, 
doss ohmuscular powec-and painMn the small of the back and 
■^nstipation, 

II Fears of becoming insane. 

Despair; loathing of life. 

Anguish and sweat all over, at night. 

Anxiety, oppre ssmn, nervous weakness with irritability and 
im patienc e. 

"TMter business embarrassment cannot sleejg, must get up 
and walk about (Rhus r., Sep.) ?'^" " 

Hurries too much while engaged in mental labor. 

II Embarrassed manner in company; blushing, bashful (Fer., 
X-ray, Tub.). 

''Q2.*^sh wors^'When many persons are present. 

'I&fiO'resence of other people aggravates the symptoms. 
SENSORIUM. h^![grtiS 2 /'^*th feeling oi weight on the vertex; 
< after sleep, < after eating. 

I .§fe«.i2AiSJi?.iIqwn on Recount of vertigo and sensation of 
weakness in the stomach. ' 



AMBRA GRISEA. 


9 


Music causes the blood to rush to the head. 

I Great weakness in the head with vertigo. 

HEAD. — Pressure in forehead and vertex with fear of becom- 
ing crazy. 

^ Tearing.^' m forehead;., in left temple up to vertex, in right 
frontal eminence and behind left ear. 

Extremely painful tearing on top of head and apparently in 
whole upper half of brain, with paleness of face and coldness 
of left hand. 

Pressive drawing, ascending from nape of neck, and extend- 
ing through head towards forehead, considerable oppression 
remaining m lower part of occiput. 

Dullness in occiput. 

Tearing pains predominate in head 

II Rush of blood to head caused by music. 

Weakness in head with vertigo 

II Falling ofi of hair, hair turns gray early 

1 On the right side of the head, a spot, where the hair when 
touched pains, as if sore. 

The scalp feels sore in morning, when awaking; this is fol- 
lowed by a^ sensation of numbness, extending over the whole 
body. 

EYES AND SIGHT. “^Dullness qf vision, as if from looking 
through a mist 

Pressure and smarting in eyes, as from dust ,\t,kchrymation/ • 

Pressure on eyes, which are difficult to open, and pain in 
eyes as if they had been closed too firmly, particularly in the 
morning. 

% Itchin^^n eyelid^s if a stye were forming. 

EARS AND HEARING. — 1 Roaring and whistling in ears, m af- 
ternoon 

fOeafness^f one ear. 

Crackling in left ear (like the sound made when winding a 
watch). 

I Hearing decrease^ with cold sensation^n abdomen,/ 

Violent tearing pain in and behind right auricle. 

Tearing in right ear. 

Crawling, itching and tickling in ears. 

J| Music aggravates the cough. 



10 


AMRRA CtRlSHA. 


1 Listening to music brings on congestion to htnni. 

NOSE-—! Dried blood gutheicd m nose. 

[Bleeding of the nose eaily in the morning. 
lf.|losebleed>with the menses. 

impious nosebleetbteaily in beti/seveuil successive iiay.s. 
Nose stopped «p and paining as if sore internally. 

\Lon g continuecb(drynes'^»o{ the nosey- frequent mitution as 
from sneezing. 

FACE. — Idleness of face with headache. 

Flashes of heat in face 

Heat in face with chill of other parts. 

Tearing in the upper part of the fare, particnlariy near the 
rig&t ala nasi. 

’* Pimples, and itching in whiskers. 

Painful swellmgsof the cheekxjn upper jaw. with throbbing 
in the gums. 

’ ,|aundiced coloijfof the faco.^ 

^Spasmodic twitching. of the' facial muscles, lower part of 
43.CQ-/ in the evening, in bed. 

Lips hot. 

Lips numb and dry, in the morning on awaking, 
gramp of the lower lip. 

TEETH AND GUMS. — Drawjng pain now in one and again in 
another tooth; increased by warmth, momentarily removed 
by cold; not aggravated by chewing and passes off after a 
meal; at the same time the inner portion of the gums was 
swollen. 

1 Bleeding of gums . 

M0UTH.-^itter fasten mouth in morning on awaking. 

Sour taste after drinking niillc 

Pain as if sore, folds under the tongue, like small growths. 
Ili^j Ranula/ 

Tongue, bluish, lead colored (Ars.). 
ligetor of mouth^worse morningsy 

Blisters i n mouth, pain as if burnt; under the tongue, lumps 
like" small* gfowtKs,'*wKich pain like excoriation; smarting and 
cracked painful condition of mouth; on account of pain she 
could not eat anything hard. 

Accumulation of water in the mouthsiyith cough 



AMBRA GRISEA. 


11 


Rasping, smarting pam in mouth 'vs^hen eating solid food 
(Phos. ac.)‘ 

In the morning on awaking, tongue, mouth and lips as if 
numb and dry (sensation of numbness in throat, Mag., 
iSulph.) 

Tongue coated grayish-yellow. 

THROAT. — I Sensation of rawness in region of velum pendu- 
lum palati. 

Rawness in throat with cough 

Tearing pain m palate, extending into left ear. 

Dryness of throat in morning. 

Sore feeling in throat^during deglutition/ and from outward 
pressure, not when swallowing food, with tension of glands of 
throat as if swollen. 

I Sore throat after exposure to a draught of air; stitching 
from the throat into r. ear, pains particularly from motion of 
the tongue. 

Tickling in throat which induces coughing. 

Tickling in throat and thyroid body, during act of coughing. 

I Accumulation of grayish phlegm m throat, which is diffi- 
cult to fiawk up, accompanied by 'rawness. 

Hawking the phlegm from fauces produces vomiting and 
choking. 

Papular-like eruption in pharynx. 

Smarting at the back of the fauces when not swallowing. 

Wh en hawking up mucus in the morning, almost unavoid- 
able retching and vomiting 

*'^5MACH.-^hirstlessness^ After breakfast, nausea. 

After eating: ! cough and" gaping or gagging; anxiety, pres- 
sure in pit of stomach, as if the food stuck and would not go 
down (food descends slowly and gets into the larynx, Kali 
carb.); food is felt until it enters the stomach (Alum., Bry., 
Phos.). 

1 Aggravation from warm drinks, especially from warm milk. 

Ere!fer"afteFTaTing:*'l:oo oppression in chest; chill, 

etc. 

After drinking milk: £Our taste, heartburn. _ 

vBelchingvwith and after^coughy 

fEructations either empty, sour or bitter. 



12 


AMHKA r.RISI A. 


When walking; in the open :ur he.nt-hurn with i>.ilkeii euic- 
tations. 

I Ernctattonsnwith cnujily “lo us ahimsi in iMiisf eliokuiu. 
Belching removes pressure under srruhieiilmn. llicrungh. 
Sensation of coldness in the stomach. 

After exposure to the cold in a sleigh-iide, had sullered c»n- 
t inu ally, summer and winter, for 14 years, with sensation of 
.coldness/in the stomachi had used all kinds of pads and 
warmers without relief; cured in 24 hours. 

Heartburn; with abortive eructations; when walking in the 
open air; from drinking milk, especially warm milk. 

Every evening, sensation of disonlered stomach aiul acrid 
I risings up to larynx. 

Nausea after breakfast. 

Vomiting and choking when hawking phlegm from fauces. 
Pressure and burning under scrobiculurn; belching re- 
moves it. 

1 Pressure in stomach andyhyjiochondria. ' 

'Pension and pressure or stitches and pressure in the stomach. 
Concussion in pit of stomach with the cough. 

Weakness in stomach accompanying vertigo; must he down 
on account of vertigo and a sensation of weaknes.s in the 
stomach. 

ABDOMEN.-A£ressing paiivin a small spot^n the iipper«right 
<^id e^ f the abdomen/ though not felt to touch. 

"Tearing pain in the region of the spleen, as if something 
were torn away. 

l.Pain.4n r. hypoch ondriac region > while lying upon it. 
^ensioiKand distensioij^n abdomeivafter every mouthful he 
^K.'even after every mouthful of fluid. 

‘JDistended abdomen^' accumulation of much flatus, which 
subsides without being passed, 

'*111 Sensation of coldness in the abdomen. 

1 Coldness of one side of the abdomen (left); also with the 
deafness. 

Colic, sometimes followed by diarrhea. 

Pressure deep in the hypogastrium after the evacuation. 
STOOL AND ANUS. — First copious, soft, light brown stools, 
after a few days’ constipation. ' 



AMBRA GRISEA. 


13 


Constipation.. Frequent ineffectual urging as in Nux vomica, 
but attended by much anxiety at stool and a sense of marked 
coldness in the abdomen, the patients being put to a great 
distress by the presence of others in the room (near presence 
of"" others unbearable while urinating, Nat. m.); after stool, 
aching deep in hypogastrium; itching and smarting in anus 
relieved by rubbing. 

Diarrhea preceded b^r colic 

Stool not hard, though large. 

11 j Frequent ineffectual desire for stool; this makes her very 
anxious, || at this time the presence of other persons becomes 
unbearable. 

t^arge flow^^of blooc^ith the stool/ 

Itching in anus. 

Stitches in anus 

After the evacuation pressure deep in the hypogastrium. 

URINARY ORGANS. — Frequent micturition at night (Lyc.) 
and m the morning after rising. Pam in bladder and rectum 
simultaneously. 

SHlii'ilrVv ■> 

Urine sour smelling, urine turbid even when first passed. 

I Urine when emitted is clouded, yellowish-brown and de- 
posits a brownish sediment, after which the urine looks clear 
and yellow, coffee ground sediment. 

1 Sour smellmg^uriiie. 

Urinates three times as much as the drink taken, especially 
m the morning, followed by a dull pain m the region of the 
kidneys 

Sensations as if a few drops passed through the urethra. 

[During urination, burning, smarting, itching and titillation 
in tSe urethra and. vulva* 

Tiis smoKim A man, aet. 80, gets asthma when 
attempting coition. 

^mp otenc^ 

Violent "morning erections without desire, with numbness in 
th^ parts. 

Internal, strong, voluptuous sensation in genital organs. 

Itching pimples over male genitals. 

l,Sore rawnesSf between the thighs. 

1 Voluptuous itchin^on scrotum./' 



14 


AMliSA r.RlsrA, 


FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS. -Nvmphuin.ini.i; often with dis- 
charue of bluish-while muciH, at luitht. Mitehin!,' in v.inin.i 
preceedinfi: discharge 

||»3urnintf/in sexual parts, with •!isehiUi;e of a few diops of 
blood. 

^Jtitchesvjn ovarian reiiiou./when dr.iwiuK in abdomen or 
pressing upon it. 

I lj|J)ischarge of blood between the pennds^iiat evt'iy little/ 
l^ccident/as evei\ hard stool or after a walk a little longer 
' than usual. 

Menses early, 'the left legbecomeinpiite bliaeiiotn distended 
I varices, with pressive pain in the leg. 

Lying down aggravates the utiniiu* Hymptoins 
Is said to cause uterine atony. 

Suppressed catamenia. 

II Mensess^oo earlj^ndsjoo profuse / 

1 Menses appear seven days before time. 

1 Severe itching on the pudenda, must mb the parts. 

I Soreness and itching, with swelling of the labi.i. 

II During urination: itching, titillation, burning of vulva and 
urethra. 

1 Thi ck, mucous leucorrhea, increased from day to day, or 
leucorrhea at night, of bluish-white murH.s, prectuiing each 
disch arge, a stitch in the vagina. 

During pregnancy: nervous, restles.s; pruritus vulva;. 
Impending abortion. 

I Puerperal eclampsia. 

Lessens the severity of the labor-pains. 

; childbe clipbstinate con stiipa tion a^nd tenesmusj/abdomen 
'pul^. causing much anxiety; so nervous she cannot attempt 
: ^stool in the presence of other people, not even the nurse, 
'“^villout compares the general action of Ambra with that 
of^Kah bromatum. The effect appears quicker after Ambra, 
bnT tKat of Kali bromatum continues longer. Ambra, there- 
llf ffe, is preferable for the removal of'i^ever^eflex actionsj,^n- 
|>^m||[^' ^pasros^ne rperal^eclamp sia)/ Ambra' g,uiets,.'b®auti- 
K^n^ he nervous restlessnes^f pregnancy-and thus prevents 
convulsions; it also retards uterine contractions. 

Reyillout recommends Ambrd^in pregnancy.^ 



AMBRA GRISEA. 


15 


1 To prevent eclampsia 

2, To diminish too severe labor-pains 

3. In, too early labor or threatening abortion^ 

But Ambra given too frequently and in too large a dose may 
also^ produce uterine atony Ambra given in large doses may 
|;enerally remove convulsions, from whatever cause, and by 
,^minishing nervousness acts favorably on nervous persons, 
mfants and young girls. 

Here, then, is another case of involuntary Homeopathy 
Ambra produces m the healthy burning in the sexual parts^/ 
with discharge of a few drops of blood, menses set in a few 
days too soon, it produces discharge of blood at other times 
than the catamenia, also fluor albus, and also perhaps ovaritis. 
It also produces twitchings^^n muscular part^<spasms^rest“ ^ 
lessness'^infirmity^anxiety^ oppression,\gcryous weaknessji^ith/ 
f^ritabilit^and impatience/ twitching and jerkingS^^in the ex-/ 
^tremities,^with coldness of the body and great debility, a state 
so often found in females and excitable, weakly children, com- 
bined with sleeplessness, many dreams, frightened awaking, 
s^stless sleep^t nighty, general restlessness, irritability, anx- 
iety and despair. 

'n^SPIRATION. — I Titillation in larynx with spasmodic cough. 

iTitillation in throat, larynx and trachea, causing violent 
cough. 

^Hoarseness and roughnessspf the voicey with accumulation 
of thick, tough mucus, N^asily thrown off/by coughing./ 

I Itching, scrapinp: and soreness of the larynx and trachea. 
Reading aloud or talking aggravates the cough, 
v Hchin^n thyroid gland^ itching behind the sternum caus- 
ing cougn. 

\rig htness)^f the chest/ cannot take a deep breath or yawn 
deeply. 

1 Oppression felt in chest and between scapulas, it subsides 
for a short time after eating. 

Feeling of pressure in chest worse during exhalation. 

I AsthmaNjf old peopl&.and children. 

II Asthma comes on while he is attempting coition 

I ^histling in chest during breathing. 

II Get out of breath with the cough, which is spasmodic; 
rush of blood to the head. 



16 




COUGH. -Spasmodir counh,- ln’i Inv.ith, ujtli rush uf 
blood to tht* head; hually some ))hl«-w»! i nim s tij., 

* lUCouKh in spasmudic juinw sms 

I Hollow, sjiasinodir, b.ukiiti; mnnh. wmsi* liuni t.ilkiiif; or 
readinj' aloud; with naBuiii},' aJtei iMtniK, 

j Spasmodic coutih ul cldoily or emaciated peisnu*! 

i Paroxysms of coni'll cominii frtuu deep in i tu’st, esrited by 
violent tickling in throat, cveijuig without, inoininii with ex- 
gectoratiun, generally of grayish-white. selthun of vellow 
mucus, of salty oi sour taste; tough gra\ish mucus, wurse in 
the morning. 

ill Violent spasmodic cough, with frcipicut einctatious .ind 
hoar.seness; with pain in region ot spleen as d sDiuethuig were 
torn off. 

Lifting a heavy v/eight aggravates the i ough. 
s4,CougH)^ily at night/ produced l»v an e\t essue uiitation in 
the throat. 

Cough with eructations of gas so as almost to choke the 
patie nt (Lach.). 

I^ough every evening with pain undci the left ribs, as if 
something was torn loose there. 

Accumulation of grayish mucus, difliciilt to hawk up, accom- 
panied by rawness and aiiuo.st unavoidable retching and vom- 
iting. 

^ugh worse when many persons are present. 

C^gfi causes concussion in pit of stomach. 

1 Cough with emaciation. 

lA kind ofs^whooping-congh^ paroxysmal but without crow- 
ing inspiration. < after lying down, 

[Deep dry cough, with accumulation of water in mouth, and 
subsequent rawness of the throat. 

1 Choking and vomiting when hawking up phlegm from the 
fauces. 

Sputa yellow-white, cream-like; a “sputum coctum." 

Collection of phlegm in t he throat difficult to cough up. 

Old coughs. 

Scraping and tickling in the throat, larynx, down along the 
windpipe causing violent cough with sensation of tightly ad- 
hering mucus in the windpipe: during breathing whistling in 



AMBRA GRISEA. 


17 


the chest; rough and hoarse voice, collection of mucus in the 
throat, difficult to cough up. 

Cough mostly only at night from violent irritation, with 
concussion of the pit of the stomach; cough sometimes in 
spasmodic paroxysms, with oppression of the chest, getting 
out of breath, great restlessness, and afterward a great deal of 
belching, a kind of whooping cough. 

In nervous persons it causes titillation in the larynx and 
spasmodic paroxysms of cough; whistling in the chest, spas- 
modic short breathing, cardiac anguish and spasmodic palpi- 
tation 

CHEST AND LUNGS. — Pam in lower part of r. chest relieved 
by lying on the back. 

Lancination in chest extending to back. 

Oppression of the chest extending to back between the 
scapulas. Relieved a short while by eating. 

I Sensation of pressure deep m r. chest; also in 1. chest or 
in upper part of chest. 

Wheezing in the chest. 

1 Sensation of rawness in chest. 

Tearing pressure in left side of the chest. 

1 Itching m phest. 

Tightness* ’^orihe chest, can neither yawn nor breathe 
deeply. 

Sensation of a lump in chest. 

Aching in the chest over epigastrium, as if parts had been 
beaten, relieved by eructations. 

Violent, dull stitching pain in right mammae, interrupting 
breathing. 

Burning m the external parts of the chest. 

Pressure in upper part of the chest, coming in regular 
paroxysms. 

HEART AND PULSE.— 1 Mxiety at the heart, causing oppres- 
sion of breathing, with i^sh^ of heat; oppression beginning 
in the heart 

Palpitation when walking in the open air, with paleness of 
face. 

1 Violent palpitation, with pressure in chest, as if a lump lay 
there,*"or as if the chest was stuffed up. 

' 3 



m 


AMUKA r.KJSl A 


Pulse accelcrateil, with 

He perceives the pulse in the ; it feels like the tirk uf 
a watch. 

OUTER CREST. Bnriunt: on the ehe.st 

NECK AND BACK. Glands of the throat tense as if swollen. 

Burning in left scapula. 

Tearing in the left, or in both shoulders. 

Rheumatic pains in the r. side of the back. 

Pain ful tension in the lumbar muscles. 

Stitches in small of back, when sitting. 

II Stiffness in small of back after sitting. 

small of back, with loss of muscular poweiNaml coii- 

sti patiom 

'""dIpER limbs. -Tearing in left .shoulder joint. 

Drawing, as if sprained and lame in the shoulder. 
jThe arms go to sleep when lying on them, when carrying 
anjthlng in the hands or at night; with numbness especially 
of the left arm in rest; tingling in the thumb. 

“Tearing'pains in the shoulder, elbow, forearm and ham!. 
Weakness of the fingers at night. 

Stinging in hands and fingers, as from insects. 

Drawing in fingers and thumb. 

Itching in palms of hands. 

sometimes only when taking hold of any- 
thing. 

Tips of fingers are shrivelled. 

Tearing, lancinating or itching in tips of fingers and thumb. 
Skin on the fingers feels tense. 

Long lasting icy coldness of hands, 
i Coldness o f left hand jwith^adaohft 

k^ger naU'^rittleJi^ith a vefy'old man; they got soft, 
elastic and pink. 

LOWER LIMBS.— Tearing pain, firs t in I, then in r. hip joint. 
Sensation of contraction inlTiEt 'thigh; the limb seems to 
be shortened. 

Tearing in nates, hip, knee, leg, ankle and foot. 

Heaviness o f the legs. 

Strumming sensation in legs. 

Sensation as if “gone to sleep” in both legs; has no firm 



AMBRA GRISEA. 


19 


Qramps in legs and calves nearly every night 
\Cqld feet. 

Gouty pain in ball of great toes. 

Itching on inner border of sole of the right foot, not relieved 
by scratching 

1 Sore and raw between the thighs, || and in the hollow of 
the knees 

"Left leg becomes blue from distended varices during 
menses. 

Tearing or rheumatic pains, in parts of all the limbs. 
Uncommon twitching and coldness of the body ^ at night/ 
Uneasiness, like a crawling, with anxiety, only by day. 
Weariness, with painful soreness of all the limbs. 

NERVES. — Trismus neonatorum. 

Restlessness. 

1 Jerks and twitches. 

Convulsions 

Epilepsy 

1 Infantile spasms. 

I ^asms and twitches in the muscular parts 
Spasmodic complaints. 

1 Arms and limbs *'go to sleep” easily. 
kGreat lassitude/especially mornings in bed 
Fainting. 

("Weakness of the whole body, of the knees, as if they would 
giveaway, of the feet, with loss of sensation, in the stomach, 
so that she must lie down. 

Great prostration after lingering fevers 
Chlorosis 

1 Loss of muscular power 
Vertigo and nervous apoplexy. 

Paralytic complaints. 

Numbness of the whole body. 

When" walking in the open air, an uneasiness in the blood 
and more rapid circulation, with greater weakness of the 
body 

Conversation causes fatigue, heaviness of the head, sleep- 
lessToppression of the chest, sweat, anxiety; tremor and 
quivering, nervousness and irritability. 



20 


AMUKA f.RlRKA, 


B. W., act. 5*^, stout, tlori«l. riKht suit- jMi.ih.'i’.l fnt five 
years, walks with difficulty, rmht font; '£niwo. .o/M 

fee ling ^0' grt'at wetjiifif.oii .eilex foi })\«' vimi-*, wni-r .iftor 
sleeping; sleepless after I A. M.; toss of meiiios\ , loss nf s,'nse 
of smell; numbness of right side; cold swe.it on eviieimties, 
right foot colder than left; nausea in alnloineiu h.is had much 
grief. Ign., Con.. Ver. b.; little relief. Amhru 
doses drj^^emoved pain in vertex,*yertigi»<^nd nausea. 
'-Top: -j Cannot sleep, must get m*. wornuumt from busi- 


ness embarrassment; insomnia of business men. 

Cannot sleep at night, yet knows not why. 

ll"Sleepy on letiring; hut as soon as head tout-lies the (tillow 
is wide awake for hours, restless, tossing, ot sinipl\ unable to 
close the eyes. 

, Restless s!eep|(with ainsious dreams/ 

Pi^exatious,.,^ansious dreams^ an<K talking- in sleep, .nvaken 
frightened. 

Sleepless after 1 a. m. 

Worse from too little sleep. 

Twitching of limbs preventing .sleep, ami coldness. 

Uneasy sleep from coldness and twitching. 

I^early every night cramp in calves. 

Worse after sleep; vertigo; weight on vertex; whooping 
cough; feels weak; mouth dry; weary, eyes feel as if they had 
been closed too tightly. 

When awaking: soreness of scalp: lips numb and dry; bit- 
ter'taste* in'mouth. 

Early in bed: nosebleed; great lassitude. 

TEMPERATURE AND WEATHER. -< from warmth: tooth- 
ache. 

> from cold: toothache. 


< in w arm room: cough. 

> from motion in open air, 

< from warm drinks. 

A fter exposur e to draft of air: sore throat. 

When walHiig in open air: heartburn; palpitation; uneasi- 
ness in the blood; < weakness. 

Took co ld and had perspiration cheg ked, after a thunder- 
storm, p y north wind in face: tormenting cough for several 
weeks/"' 



ANTHRACINUM. 


21 


FEVER. — I Chill in forenoon, with lassitude and sleepiness; 
relieved by eating; skin of whole body cold, except face and 
genitals Chill of single parts of the body, with heat of the 
face. Anxious flushes of heat returning every quarter hour; 

1 most violent towards evening. 

Profuse sweat at night, worse after midnight and most on 
the affected side. 

Profuse sweat, particularly on the abdomen and thighs, dur- 
ing exercise. 

^^ahgnant fevers/ 

SKIN. — ]1 Itching 
Jaundiced color of face. 

Burning in skin. 

The tips of the fingers become shriveled 
Soreness of a wart on the finger 
Numbness of the skin. 

Burning herpes 
Leprous complaints. 

Itching pimples m whiskers. 

Sore and raw between legs and in hollow of knees. 
Diste nded varices on leg during menses. 

Reproduces the itch-eruption 

Nervous itching over the whole body, especially the mucous 
outlets of the body. 


ANTHRACINUM ^Anthrax Poison). 

The alcoholic extract of the anthrax poison prepared from 
the spleen of cattle ill with the disease. A nosode rejected 
by the old school, and by a majority of the new, in spite of its 
being a remedy which bears out our theory, and one which 
has proved of the utmost use in practice. It has not yet been 
proved, but the frequent use made of it and the verification 
of the toxic symptoms by some of our best practitioners justi- 
fies its reception. The first preparation was made according 
to Hering’s propositions (laid down in Stapf s Archives, 1830), 
by Dr. G. A. Weber, and applied with the most astonishing 
success in the cattle plague. He cured every case with it, and 



AMHKAi IM M, 


9 ^ 

also cured men poi'^oiu'd lt\ the runt.ii^imn. u-puti, a 

small treatise of 111 pact's was iiuldi-'ln'tl iit ls;;ii. l^^ Kn l.uti, 
LeipKig. Mo notice was taken of it. ttnh tin- taleiiti d Dr. 
P. Dufresne. the founder of the 

of Geneva, used it and prevetited the fnithei iiiiiiileious sinr,id 
of the disease, in a flock of sheep tainoii)t which it is .dways 
more fatal than anwnfj other domestic animals and cmed 
the shepherds as well f A’/W/eM. //i<wiie/t t/c tAffc/r, January 
and February, 1837 K 

The discovery of the bacteria am! their inrreilihly lupid 
propagation, seemed to be of much mote importance than the 
cure of cattle, and the loss of millions of dollars Uj, this «l!s- 
ease. In 1842 France sustained a loss of over seven miliums 
of francs, and every year a small district of Germany hatl a 
loss of sixty thousand thalers, from the cattle plague; iii 
Siberia, in 1785, lOti.tHH} horses died with it; in iMHt. one small 
district lost 27,000 horses. Radiate heat, proposeil .scores of 
years ago, for other ayniotic diseases, by Hering, was discov- 
ered, in a very ingenious way, by Pasteur, to prevent the in- 
crease of bacteria. Now the heat (as it has done in hydro- 
phobia), and the nosode may suffice to cure every case. 

Doctor KSsemann had moral courage enough to introduce 
anthracin in gangrene and sphacelu.s, in 1852, and Doctor 
Raue has given it in carbuncles, since 1858 (see his Pathology 
and Diagnosis) and in gangrenic whitlow (see Jour mi of 
Clinics^ 4, 142). 

All symptoms produced by the poison on men are inserted, 
because the symptoms from the snake-bite and from the bee- 
stihg have been proved to be useful in numerous cases as well 
as the toxic symptoms of Arsenic, Opium and other drugs. 

Dr. Hering says: “ Homeopathic practitioners of the great- 
est integrity, and trustworthy beyond a doubt, long ago cured 
splenic fever in cattle, flocks of sheep and their shepherds by 
Anthracin, an alcoholic tincture made from the blood of a 
bacteric spleen. Of course the alcohol killed, the infusoria, 
but what remained dissolved therein cured the disease in ani- 
mals and men.” This proves conclusively ; 

1. That the crude poison and its alcoholic solution must 
possess similar pathogenetic properties; hence to a proving 



ANTHRACINUM. 


23 


of Anthracinum must be added all the symptoms of uncompli- 
cated splenic fever, to those of Hydrophobinum, the symp- 
toms of every case of pure hydrophobia, to those of Syphi- 
linum all those of pure syphilis, etc., etc. 

2. That bacteria are not the cause but the effect of the dis- ^ 
ease, a doctrine which we hold to be true with regard to all 
parasites connected with deranged health, and that therefore 
their destruction by local application is not equivalent to the 
cure of the disease itself. 

CHARACTERISTICS — In carbuncle, malignant ulcer and com- 
plaints with ulceration^ sloughing and intolerable burning. 
Painful glandular swellings, cellular tissue indurated, anthrax- 
quinsy. 

When Arsenicum or the best selected remedy fails to relieve 
the burning pain of carbuncle or malignant ulceration, study 
Anthracinum. 

Hemorrhages blood oozes from mouth, nose, anus or sex- 
ual organs; black, thick, tar-like, rapidly decomposing (Cro- 
talus). 

Septic fever, rapid loss of strength, sinking pulse, delirium 
and fainting (Pyr ). 

Gangrenous ulcers; felon, carbuncle, gangrenous erysipelas 
of a malignant type. 

Felon; the worst cases, with sloughing and terrible burning 
pain (Ars , Carb. ac., Euphorb., Lach ). 

Malignant pustule; black or blue blisters, often fatal in 
twenty-four or forty-eight hours (Ech , Lach , Pyr. ) 

Carbuncle: with horrible burning pains , discharge of ichor- 
ous offensive pus. 

Furuncles and all forms of boils, large and small. Some 
forms of acne, successive crops of boils or carbuncles on any 
part of the body; to remove the tendency. 

Dissecting wounds, especially if tendency is to become 
gangrenous; septic fever, marked prostration (Ars., Ech., 
Pyr.). 

Suspicious insect stings. If the swelling changes color and 
red streaks from the wound map out the course of lymphatics 
(Ech., Lach,, Pyr ). 

Septic inflammation from absorption of pus or other dele- 



24 


ANTHRACmrM. 


terious substances, with burning pain and great prostration 
(Ars , Ech , Euphorb., Pyr,). 

Epidemic spleen diseases of cattle, horses and sheep. 

Bad effects from inhaling foul odors of putrid fever or tlis- 
^secting-room; poisoning by foul breath (Ech,, Pyr, 

Hermg says. “To call a carbuncle a surgical disease is the 
greatest absurdity. An incision is always injurious and often 
fatal. A case has never been lost under the right kind of 
treatment, and it should always be treated by interna! inedi- 
cine only. ' 

RELATIONS: Antidoted by Apis, Ars., Camph , Garbo v., 
Garb, ac , Each , Kreos , Puls., Rhus, Sil, Sah. ac. ; P\r. in 
malignant septic conditions. 

COMPARE: Anth. bovum, Anth. suum, Ars,, Garbo a., Garbo 
V., Ech., Euphr., Tar em., in the terrible pains of cancer, 
carbuncle or erysipelas. 

It follows well: Ars, Garb, ac , Phos., Phos ac., Phyt., 
Sec., in burning pains of ulcers. 

Is followed well by Aur. mur , Nat., Fluor, ac., Hecla lava, 
in periosteal swelling of lower jaw; by Sil. in cellulitis and 
grandular affections post-surgical. 

MIND.— II Anxiety, particularly m prascordia. 

II Delirium. 

II Excitement. 

II Loss of consciousness. 

II Depression, with debility, and chill. 

II Thinks she feels death approaching. 

Animals howl, bite, run about, become greatly excited; fol- 
lowed by paralytic symptoms. 

I Disinclined to work. 

head. Dulness in head as from narcotics. 

II Confusion 

I Dizziness. 

II Dizziness with pain in head. 

Loss of consciousness. 

III Headache, as if a smoke with a heating pain was passing 
through the head (fumde de douleur chande); two shepherds 
who caught it from their flock. 

1 Head is affected in an indescribable manner. 



ANTHRACINUM. 


25 


II Uncomfortable feeling in head, slight chills, mild fever. 

II If fully conscious they complain of great pain in head. 

II Pam in head, dizziness; inner anthrax. 

II Here and there in all parts of brain small and large hem- 
orrhages of embolic origin; after death from anthrax. 

II Membranes of brain exhibit circumscribed or symmetri- 
cally extended bloody infiltrations 

II Headache with chill Cerebral symptoms with carbuncle, 

1 Flying gangrene. 

Small swellings on temples and cheeks, extending through 
the orbital sutures and foramina to the dura and pia mater. 

Carbuncles mostly on head, near the ears or temples 

Flying gangrene, head swollen (in swine). 

I Swelling of the head (sheep). 

EYES AND SIGHT. — 1| Great dilatation of pupils, inner an- 
thrax 

II A pale yellowish or greenish swelling, if in the eyelids, of 
a half-translucent aspect 

I A pale redness above the brows along the forehead 

EARS AND HEARING. — 11 Ringing in the ears, inner anthrax. 

Parotitis gangrenosa, after scarlatina. 

I Swelling extending backward over the angle of the r lower 
jaw, which could not be felt and up to near the ear. 

NOSE AND SMELL. — Nose swollen and red, fetid smell from it. 

II Bloody suffusions on mucous membrane of nose. 

I Intense redness of the r. half of nose, extending to the 
cheek 

FACE. — I Erysipelatous, dark brown redness and swelling 
over the whole right side of face, the nose and part of 1. cheek; 
swelling very hard, redness does not disappear under the pres- 
sure of finger 

1 Extending to cheek, redness from nose. 

I Could not move the lower jaw as usual 

I Could open the mouth only so far as to put the point of 
the tongue out 

I Impossible to open the jaws in the least 

I Tearing in the right lower jaw 

I Beginning of swelling was in the region of the r. submax- 
illary gland. 



26 


ANTHRACINUM. 


I A stony swelling around the r lower niaxilhi, the inner 
space of the mandibula filling up to half, reaches to nearly 
half the cheek, and disfiguring the face, extending backwards 
over the angle of the lower jaw; very little pain, not red, but 
sharply defined edges. 

I Swelling extending from the inner edge of the left lower 
jaw across the whole throat, in front and over the edge of the 
r. lower jaw, and au mz'eait with the upper surface of the r. 
lower molars. 

I A large stony, hard, pale swelling around the r. lower jaw, 
nearly painless, disfigunng the face. 

I Gland under the chin painfully swollen. 

TEETH AND GUMS. — |On making an incision near second 
molar a mass of stinking, brown ichor is discharged. 

TASTE, TONGUE.— 1 Flabby taste. 

II Tongue often furred, with a thick brown coat; dry. 

MOUTH. — I Ofiensive odor from mouth. 

I Mouth could not be opened. 

I Saliva increased. 

II Continued bleeding from the mouth; the blood shows a 
lack of power to coagulate, with inner anthrax. 

II Dark red, bloody ecchymoses of mouth. 

II Bloody suSusions and hemorrhagic collections on the 
inucous membranes of canthi of mouth and nose; inner an- 
thrax. 

I Fundus of mouth is elevated by the swelling, as hard as a 
callus, extending back to the parotids, and reaching up to the 
external surface of the lower jaw. 

II Superficially escharred pustules in mouth after death. 

THROAT. — II The submucous tissue, especially in fauces and 

around the larynx, is thickened and cedematous. 

I Region of the throat above the larynx to the mouth 
swollen. 

Submaxillary, laryngeal, and retro-pharyngeal glands are 
infiltrated, hypersemic, filled with hemorrhagic foci, colored 
of a grayish or dark blackish-red, and considerably enlarged. 

1 Right tonsil hurts. 

Anthrax-quinsy 

ICynanche cellularis, a sharply-marked margin about the 
swellings. 



ANTHRACINUM. 


27 


II Slight difficulty in swallowing; inner anthrax. 

1 Swallowing exceedingly difficult. 

I Could not swallow, with great thirst. 

APPETITE. — Eating and drinking. Eiimmished appetite, 
with heat. 

II Loss of appetite, with chills. 

II Loss of appetite and gastralgia; inner anthrax 

llpi^Loss of appetite, prominent in every patient. 

Thirst with heat 

1 Excessive thirst, but can hardly swallow. 

I Symptoms from putrid water. 

STOMACH. — B elching, nausea, and inclination to vomit. 

II Nausea and vomiting with chill. 

Vomiting of bilious and slimy masses. 

II Vomiting followed by diarrhoea 

Nausea and vomiting following great pain m the abdomen. 

I Pressure and burning in the region of the stomach. 

II Gastralgia 

II Walls of stomach and intestine oedematous, discolored, a 
cloudy red. 

II Mucous membrane of stomach and intestines reddish, 
swollen, with isolated or numerous oedematous, hemorrhagic 
prominent infiltrations, from size of a lentil to that of a coffee 
bean, showing a grayish or greenish-yellow discolored surface, 
with a positively sloughing centre 

II Numerous peculiar hemorrhagic and superficially eschared 
infiltrations of stomach and intestines; intestinal anthrax. 

ABDOMEN. — I Sensation as if the diaphragm was pushed for- 
ward. 

I Sensation of anxiety and constriction, most in the prse- 
cordia, liver engorged, slight hemorrhage here and there, 
spleen moderately enlarged, soft, full of blood, dark color 

II Enlargement of spleen 

II Epidemic spleen disease of cattle or horses. 

Preceded or followed with Arsenicum, Carbolic ac or 
Euphorbium as called for by the symptoms. 

II The same disease in sheep. Anthracinum suum is better 
than Anthracinum ovium in the acute form, but m the chronic 
form Anthracinum ovium is better 



28 


ANTHRACINUM. 


Sudden prostration with great abdominal soreness, niostl\ 
in the epigastrium with vomiting, cold limbs, dull head 

II Bellyache with chill. 

II Colicky pains; inner anthrax 

I A horse fell down with colic, no motion except now and 
then bending the head towards the abdomen. 

II Mycosis intestinalis, intestinal anthrax. 

II In the intestines a thinly fluid material, slightly colored 
with blood 

II The retro-peritoneal and mesenteric connective tissue in- 
filtrated, jelly-like, and of a yellowish-reddish color. 

II Moderate serous or sero-hemorrhagic effusion aiui sub- 
peritoneal suggilations 

II Simple hemorrhages, infarctions and foci on different paits 
of intestines. 

II Serous and sero-hemorrhagic infiltrations of the peritoneal 
and mesenteric connective tissue, walls of stomach and intes- 
tine, and of the mucous membranes. 

II Mesentenc and r.etro-peritoneal glands enlarged to the size 
of a walnut; form blackish-red masses, held together by a 
jelly-like congestive tissue, infiltrated with serum. 

Dark red carbuncle in the omentum. 

II Peculiar pustular and carbuncular foci m the intestinal 
tract. 

II Swelling of the abdomen; inner anthrax. 

RECTUM AND STOOL. — Vomiting, followed by a painless, of- 
ten bloody, diarrhoea. 

Diarrhoea with bellyache. 

IIJDia rrhoea. 

11 Vomiting followed by a painless, moderate, more or less 
intense, often bloody diarrhoea, inner anthrax. 

II With the diarrhoea sometimes a cholera-like collapse; 
inner anthrax. 

Retarded stool. 

URINARY ORGANS. — 1| Kidneys swollen, with oedema, sprin- 
kled with small hemorrhages, engorged; suggilations in mu- 
cous membranes of the pelvis. 

RESPIRATION. II Breathing frequent, laborious; quick, spas- 
modic; inner anthrax. 



ANTHRACINUM. 


29 


LUNGS. — Pulmonary hyperaemia, ecchymoses 

II Slight serous effusions into pleural cavities. 

II Sub-pleural ecchymoses with vascular engorgement, and a 
dark coloring of the parenchyma. 

II OEdema of the mediastinal lymphatic glands. 

HEART, PULSE AND CIRCULATION.— Heart-beat frequent but 
weak. 

I Her heart beats altogether different. 

II The beating of the heart stronger, more decided and more 
perceptible. 

I Pulse frequent, small, with violent action of the heart; 
soft, I small and feverish. 

I Soft, scarcely frequent pulse. 

II Discolored lines over the veins, or red lines and stripes in 
the course of the lymphatics. 

II Cyanosis, inner anthrax. 

II Blood of a dark cherry red, generally fluid or with some 
loose clots. 

II Blood not coagulating, 

NECK AND BACK. — Axillary glands swollen and painful 

1 Swelling in the neck size of hazelnut, burning and fiery 
red , is pointed and hard. 

I I I Carbuncle on the back, nine inches m length and five 
inches in its greatest width, with sloughing, abundant dis- 
charge of ichorous, terrible smelling pus, and blood-poisoning 
by absorption of pus. 

Hydro-rachitis (Grubbe, Kreuzdrehe), a disease of sheep. 

UPPER LIMBS. — Tetanic spasms of upper limbs, inner an- 
thrax. 

[Arms and hands covered with a crusty eruption, full of 
cracks, discharging pus and an acrid fluid, with painful, un- 
bearable itching, checked for a while by the Old School, it 
had burst out again with terrible fury. After Anthracine, the 
crusts pealed off and were flying about like snow. 

I The whole left hand (not the fingers) swollen, highly red- 
dened, very painful, the redness extended over the whole hand 
and even the wrist, and a red streak ran up the forearm 

I On the middle of the palm of the hand a large blister, 
which, when opened, discharged a yellow watery fluid. 



30 


ANTHRACINUM. 


11 Felon, the worst cases, with sloughing: severe torturing 
pain and great prostration. 

I Whitlow. 

LOWER LIMBS.— I Thighs livid to the nates, hard and pain- 
ful; lower legs dark blue, feet cedematous; when the blisters 
break they discharge an offensive ichor 

|The_\^ole thigh was swollen, most above the knee, and 
also the foot 

*~*f Livid redness on lower part of the whole thigh, up to the 
buttocks, hard and painful. 

I Above the knee, redness, swelling and pain, and later a 
large black blister on inside of thigh, extending four inches 
upward and inward, after being lanced bloody water ran out. 

I On outside of knee a large fluctuating swelling, by pres- 
sure discharging a horribly smelling gangrenous ichor. 

I From the openings on lower leg, caused by the fracture, a 
copious stinking pus (like carious bones). 

1 Bluish-brown spots which break open. 

I The whole lower limb blackish-blue; the region of the blis- 
ter (foolishly lanced) mortified, discharging much offensive 
ichor. 

1 Ulcers size of a hand on lower limbs, no antipsoric had 
relieved, Anthracinum helped very soon. 

Carious ulcers 

I Fo ot cedematous 

Discolored lines trace out the veins over the cedematous 
parts. 

II Severe pains in limbs and joints with the fever; intestinal 
anthrax. 

Limbs as if beaten 

Limbs weak. 

NERVES. — II Great restlessness. 

Paroxysms of trembling. 

Single muscles start or tremble. 

II Epileptiform convulsions; inner anthrax. 

II Clonic spasms, trismus or opisthotonos; sometimes in 
senous cases. 

Clonic spasms. 

II Tetanic spasms in upper limbs. 



ANTHRACINUM 


31 


11 Opisthotonos, inner anthrax. 

Debility and depression, with pain m the limbs. 

II Debility with chill. 

II Great weakness with the fever. 

II Debility and depression, witS* pains in limbs and general 
sense of malaise, followed by disturbance of intestinal canal, 
inner anthrax 

Debility and sweat all over 

I Completely exhausted, she thinks she feels death. 

II Cholera-like collapse after diarrhoea 

Collapse, with difficulty of breathing; loss of consciousness, 
death. 

II Sudden fatal issue, preceded by extreme collapse. 

II With cyanosis, asphyxia and the most extreme collapse, 
followed by death in all cases of bleeding. 

II Marked rigor mortis after death. 

SLEEP* — II Somnolence, inner anthrax. 

Could not sleep for pain. 

I Sleeplessness. 

Restless sleep 

I Restless, irritated at night. 

II Restless sleep, with chill. 

Delirium, sopor, then death. 

Sleep short, not refreshing, more like a stupor 

FEVER. — II Chilly, with debility, headache, followed by a 
general malaise, ^ss of appetite, restless sleep, great debility 
and depression, and in eight or ten days carbuncles, most on 
the arm, forearm, head. 

II Decided chill, followed by bellyache, nausea, vomiting and 
in two or three days with the supervention of collapse and 
cyanosis; death. 

II Slight chills with fever and strange sensation in head. 

With great prostration, chilliness, pains in the limbs, in- 
crease of fever and weakness, anxiety, restlessness, vertigo, 
delirium, dull head, stool retarded, urine scanty; skin dry, 
later covered with cold sweat. 

II Temperature very slightly elevated, inner anthrax. 

II Febrile movement, slight in the beginning, is often fob 
lowedTapace by high fever, great weakness, delirium, excite- 
ment, confusion. 



32 


ANTHRACINUM. 


I Moderate heat, little thirst, i^eneral sweat. 

I Very much fever. 

I Heat, thirst, less appetite, suffering and fatigued 

I Fever with diarrhoea 
Fever attended by sweating. 

II Sweat all over with debility 

I Disposed to sweat; rather sticky. 

I Copious sweat. 

II Cold sweats in serious cases. 

Typhoid type, with rapidly sinking pulse, loss of strength, 
fainting, delirium. 

SKIN. — Dark-red spots (sheep). 

Ecchymoses. 

Cyanosis. 

Skin of the affected part either hard or doughy. 

I Skin dry, itching violently and burning. 

I Unbearable itching on arms and hands. 

I Itching with dry skin; violent as if mad (horses). 

I Crusty oozing eruption, with the most violent itching. 

I Crusty eruption discharging acrid fluid. 

A small red spot, sometimes with a blackish point in the 
middle, gradually becoming more sensitive, has to scratch, it 

reddens more and more, swells and forms a small pustule or 
blotch 


IjA little red speck, like a flea-bite, with a central black 
point, swells gradually and changes into an itching papule, 

capped with a small, clear, reddish or bluish vesicle, gradu- 
ally enlarging. 

II The excoriated spot dries up, becomes brown and livid and 
a local eschar forms. 


By inflammatory swelling of the surrounding skin a red or 
violet raised border is formed, around it a bluish or pale yel- 
low ring, upon which little vesicles, size of a hemp seed, ap- 
pear surrounding the central eschar. 

It With an increase of the round thick eschar, one-fourth to 
three-fourths of an inch, the raised border also extends. 

fcmXro1„r'*“ 


II Small and large epidermal vesicles filled with serum. 



ANTHRACINUM 


33 


I Blister on palm of hand. 

II The secondary vesicles contain a yellowish, reddish and 
blackish fluid. 

II Over the pustule a blister, ^ize of a lentil, with a clear, 
bright yellowish, later a reddish or bluish fluid. 

I Black or blue blisters 

II Black blisters, fatal in twenty-four to forty-eight hours 

I Large black blister on inside of thigh. 

II In case of more than one detritus, the whole is swollen 
like erysipelas, and when cut it looks like the Vespajas of the 
Italian dermatologists. 

I Erysipelatous inflammation about the carbuncle, 

I Erysipelas gangrenosa 

I Erysipelatous form of chronic anthrax. 

I Small-pox of sheep 

Umbilicated pustules, yellow or bluish around, with the de- 
pression of a dark red hue, and hemorrhagic foundation. 

If scraped off soon the excoriated spot dries, turns brown 
and hvid and leaves a scar. 

II The dense or doughy soft papules or pustules, around and 
beneath the eschar, vary in size from a pea to a nut. 

II The papule promptly bursts and discloses a dark red base. 

Sometimes blisters looking more like furuncles; a pus-like 
collection under the epidermis, which loosens and discloses 
decomposed matter. 

II Papules and pustules, with extensive cedematous and 
phlegmonous infiltration of the neighboring skin and subcu- 
taneous tissue. M 

II The anthrax pustule penetrates deeply into the subcu- 
taneous cellular tissue 

II Anthrax pustules most on face, forearms, hands, fingers, 
neck, less often the ear, still less frequent the covered parts. 

Anthrax carbuncles, with typhoid symptoms. 

II Little carbuncles, inner anthrax. 

I Carbuncle. 

II Carbuncle darkish red, greasy, and is often more eroded 
than ulcerated. 

Circumscribed carbuncle, hard large knots. 

Diffuse, erysipelatous carbuncle. 

4 



34 


BACILUNUM. 


II Carbuncle on arm, forearm, head. See chill. 

III Carbuncle with horrible burning pains; or discharge of . 
ichorous offensive pus 

III Anthrax carbuncles cured by Anthracine, every day, also 
externally, in four days 

Anthrax contagiosus. 

I Seventh day after the remedy several larger and smaller 
openings, discharging watery, sometimes bloody matter, very 
little pus, swelling less hard around the base. 

1 All openings run into one, discharge much pus. 

I After having taken homoeopathic medicine for malignant 
ulcers, suddenly the greatest malaise, and a black b!i.ster 
formed below the knee with swelling ail around, and feverish 
shaking chill through the whole body. 

1 Ulcus excedens (sheep) 

I Most malignant gangrenous ulcers (sheep). 

I Chronic forms of anthrax with indurations like knots under 
the skin 

II Large cutaneous eschars 


gACILLIOTM, 

' MIND.— Taciturn, sulky, snappish, fretty, irritable, morose, 
depressed and melancholic even to insanity, 

NElptfnl ailing/ whines and complains; mind given to be 
by dogs, 

. headache, > deep in, recurring from time to 

time, compelling quiet fixedness; < shaking head. 

Terrible pain in head as if he had a tight hoop of iron 
around it; trembling of hands; sensation of damp clothes on 
spine; absolute sleeplessness, 

Jopecia areataj 

condition nf eyelids. 

Tcheek, breaking out 



BACILLINUM. 


35 


^qund), felt at the roots, especially on raising or projecting 
lower lip, very sensitive to air 
Grinds teeth in sleep 
Imperfectly deyelpped teeth 
THROAT.-»«^Tickling in fauce^^ compelling cough/ 
STOMACH.— Windy dyspepsia, with pinching pains under 
ribs of r. side in mammary line. 

ABDOMEN. — Fever, emaciation, ' abdominal pains “^and dis- 
,comfort, restless at night, glands of both groins ^enlarged and 
indurated, cries out in sleep, ‘.strawberry tongue. ^ 

^Tabes mesentericaj talks in sleep, grinds teeth; appetite 
poor; hands blue; indurated and palpable glands everywhere, 
drum belly, spleen region bulging out 

Inguinal glands indurated and visible, excessive sweats; 
chronic diarrhoea 

STOOL AND ANUS. — Sudden diarrhoea before breakfast, with 
nausea 

Severe hemorrhages from bowels, cough 
>Qte?aX^nsJ:ipation/ 

Passes much ill-smelling flatus 
Stitchlike pain through piles. 

URINARY ORGANS. — Increased quantity of urine, pale, with 
white sediment 

Has to rise several time^in nighfcto urinate./ 

RESPIRATOlRt ORGANS. — Sl^ht, tediousTK^^kmg cough, 
^^ard cough/shakmg patient, more durihg sleep, but it did 
not waken hirn. 

Pricking in larynx with sudden cough 
Single cough on rising from bed in morning. 

Cough waking him in night, easy expectoration. 
Expectoration of non-viscid easily detached, thick phlegm 
from air passages, followed after a day or two by a very clear 
ring of voice. 

Sharp pain in precordial region arresting breathing. 

Very sharp pain in left scapula, < lying down in bed at 
night, > by warmth. 

NECK AND BACK.-AQ.ands of necl^i^nlargecJ^nd tender^ 
LOWER LIMBS. — Pam in l^t knee whilst walking; passed off 
after perseverance in walking for a short distance. 



36 


CHOLESTERINUM. 


^Tubercular inflammation of knee. 

GENERALITIES— Great weakness, did not want to ho dis- 
turbed. 

SLEEP.-^Drowsyv during day ; ^ restless at night; many 
dreams, 

FEVER.— Flush of heat (soon after the dose), some perspi- 
ration, severe headache deep in. 


CHOLESTERIN0M (C,, H,, 0). 

To the late Dr Wilhelm Ameke, of Berlin, we nulebteti 
for the first mention of this remedy. From him Dr. Bnnirtt 
obtained the suggestion and used the lower potennes with 
more or less success for several years, a description of which 
he gives us m his Diseases of the Liver. Unfortunately the 
remedy was either given m alternation or followed by other 
remedies m such a manner as to greatly mar the \aiuHtv of 
its clinical work 

Swan appears to have taken his hint from Burnett's work 
and potentized the remedy, using a gall-stone for his prepara- 
tions Like many of the rest of the nosodes originally intro- 
duced by Swan, the work was necessarily empirical, yet he 
affirms after much experience that it is ‘‘almost a specific for 
gall-stone colic; relieves the distress at once/' And this after 
failure with Nux, Cinchona, Carduus, Podophyllum and other 
apparently well-selected remedies, 

Yinglmg reports some cures of gall-stone colic and otlier 
diseases of the liver m the Medical Advance, page 549, August, 
1908, and arrives at the following conclusion: 

In gall-stone coltc the patient suffers so severely that it is almost im- 
possible to obtain symptoms. In such a case, when I cannot give a well* 
selected remedy, of late I rely on Cholesterinum, and thus far it has never 
failed. ^ It should have a proving. Until then it can be used instead of 
Morphine in cases where the symptoms cannot be obtained for the proper 
selection of a remedy Where a case of routine work is necessary, as it is 
sometimes, I believe the homeopathic guess should be given the prefer- 
ence. It is very improbable that a person suffenng from gall-stone colic 
will wait very long for the physician to study the case. 

Clarke says, it is found in the blood, in the brain, the yolk 



CHOLESTERINUM. 


37 


of eggs, seeds and buds of plants, but is most abundant in the 
bile and biliary calculi. It occurs in the form of crystals with 
a mother-of-pearl lustre, and is fatty to the touch. It is solu- 
ble in both alcohol and ether 

Ameke claimed to have derived great advantage from its 
use in cases diagnosed as cancer of the liver, or in such obsti- 
nate engorgements that malignancy was suspected. 

Burnett claims to have twice cured cancer of the liver with 
it, and “in hepatic engorgements that by reason of their in- 
tractable and slow yielding to well-selected remedies make 
one think interrogationally of cancer. In such conditions, 
where the diagnosis is in doubt, especially if the patient has 
been subjected to repeated attacks of biliary colic, Cholesteri- 
num, he claims, is very satisfactory and at times its action 
even striking 

Ymgling reports the following cases 

Woman, age 60. Frequent attacks of gall-stones, involving 
liver and region of stomach. 

Attacks come suddenly and cease suddenly. 

Pam is pushing in region of gall duct 

Vomits much odorless hot water 

Very pale, then became yellow. 

Marked acidity of stomach since last attack. 

Erratic rheumatism, pam < in damp, rainy weather. 

No appetite; food nauseates. 

Region of liver sore, sensitive to touch or jar, < lying on 
the sides. 

Before the attacks profuse urine, scanty and dark since. 

Tongue coated dirty, yellowish white. 

Heart becomes very weak, can hardly feel pulse. 

Very weak, unable to breathe deeply 

This wom'm was practically cured m a year, under various 
potencies of Cholesterinum, from the 2m. to the dmm. 

Man, age 64, for three years has been passing gall-stones. 

Vomits bile and becomes very yellow. 

Has received Morphine which causes such disastrous after 
effects that he is away from business nearly a week. With 
one attack was in bed several weeks, and required a long time 
after to recover from bad effects. 



38 


DIPHTHERINUM. 


Liver very sensitive and sore, pressnie in front oi behind 
very painful, worse m region of gall duct. 

Bending or any sudden motion aggravates. 

Had severe attacks of ague m Wabash bottoms when young. 
Is a large, portly man. 

Cholestennura 2m. not only promptly relieved acute attacks, 
but has effected a practical cure. 


DIPHTHERINUM: AN INVOLUNTARY PROVING. 


BY J. E. FRASH, M. D., METAMORE, OHIO. 


A girl nine years of age having been e.vposed, Nov. 13, to 
malignant diphtheria received Diphtherinum lin. (.Skinner) 
three times daily for eleven days, as a prophylactic, lieveloji- 
ing chilliness, high temperature, red face. She complained 
of being tired and cold, severe pain on swallowing and on the 
12th day the tonsils and posterior walls of the pharynx were 
covered with dirty gray, yellowish membrane, corrugated ver- 
tically, like the surface of a wash-board turned up. 

Thursday, Nov 14, 1907, began powders, three each tlay 
for eight days, then two daily for two days. 

^ Nov. 23, complained of being tired, sat down to rest three 
times. 


Nov. 24, would he down because tired, but after a while felt 
playful. 

Nov 25, temperature 103. pulse 148. full, with throbbing of 
carotids, eyes bright, face flushed, with center of cheeks 
almost purple. 

Throat dark red, no membrane; but on posterior wall of 

throat,, yellow, dirty cream color with dry membrane in folds, 
up and down. 


^ Monday night talks in sleep, with eyes wide open. Wanted 
imaginary objects taken from room, and to “make those peo- 

pie g,t awey.- Sat up and picked among bed-clothes lor 

strap for her school books. 

Nov. 26, temperature 101.2, pulse 116, membrane lighter 
and moist, thin in middle of throat. 

midHU 'Throat clearing from 

. Jerking of single limb, or shoulder, or finger. 



DIPHTHERINUM. 


39 


Nov. 28, temperature 101.2, pulse 116. Desired to have 
mother hold her hand Tongue whitish, with exceedingly red 
tip (moist) 

Nov. 29, temperature 101 2, pulse 116, breath offensive 
Nov. 30, temperature 99.4, pulse 100. Membrane white, 
and showing more to front Clearing from center of poste- 
rior wall of throat Tongue coated whitish, with red papille, 
very red tip, with a dark red spot in center of red tip. Slept 
well last night, until 4 am, then was restless and wakeful; 
moved and changed position, moved arms and legs often, 
snored and fan-like motion of ala nasi Skin seemed dry, 
forehead moist along edge of hair, when first falling asleep. 

GENERALITIES: Fluctuating temperature, very little pain, 
membrane in vertical folds on posterior wall of throat, when 
the membrane first appeared, spreading forward as far as bor- 
der of the tonsils, and also began to fade and disappear firs^ 
from center of posterior pharynx. 

In center of the tip of tongue was a very dark red spot, also 
very dark red or purple spot in centre of very red cheeks 
The membrane from a case of malignant diphtheria, tritur- 
ated with milk sugar to the 6th centesimal, then potentized 
by Swan. The diphtheritic virus, or diphtheria toxin, from 
which the serum anti-toxin is made. These potencies have 
been very effective, not only in malignant diphtheria but in 
many cases of post-diphtheritic paralysis and kindred nervous 
affections following the use of anti-toxm. 


DIPHTHERINUM. 

Diphtherinum has made many brilliant cures of diphtheria 
and post-diphtheritic affections to its credit, yet to receive its 
place among the remedies of the homeopathic Materia Medica 
it must pass the crucial test that all others have encountered, 
viz., a careful and thorough proving of the dynamic potency 
on the healthy. Thus far, like its great congener Antitoxin, 
its use has been clinical and empirical, the distinctive differ- 
ence being that its action has been dynamic, while that of 
antitoxin is Chemico-catalytic 

Yet the empirical use of Von Behring's Antitoxin is a great 



40 


DIPHTHKKINrM. 


advance on the former empincal methods of the profession 
and has proved a blessing to humanity. 

The indications here given are chiellv clinical and aic tenta- 
tively held until verified or disproved by provings. 

CHARACTERISTICS.— Especiallj adapted to the stiumous dia- 
thesis; scrofulous, psoric or tuberculous persons, prone to 
catarrhal affections of throat and respiratory mucoms niein- 
branes 

Patients with weak or exhausted vitality hence are ex- 
tremely susceptible to the diphtheritic virus; when the attack 
from the onset tends to malignancy 1 Lac c.* Mer. cy. K 

Painless diphtheria, symptoms almost or entirely objective; 
patient too weak, apathetic or too prostrated to complani, 
sopor or stupor, but easily aroused when spoken to 
Sulph ) 

Dark red swelling of tonsils and palatine arches; parolu! 
and cervical glands greatly swollen; breath anti dischaiges 
from throat, nose and mouth very offensive; tongue swollen, 
very red, little coating. 

Diphtheritic membrane, thick, dark gray or brownish black; 
temperature low or subnormal, pulse weak and rajnd, extnuni- 
ties cold and marked debility, patient lies m a semi-stupid 
condition, eyes dull, besotted (Apis, Bap, ) 

Epistaxis or profound prostration from very onset of attack 
(Ail, Apis, Carb. ac.); collapse almost at very beginning 
(Grot., Mer. cy ), pulse weak, rapid and vital reaction very 
low. 

Swallows without pain, but fluids are vomited or returned 
by the nose, breath horribly offensive. 

When the patient from the first seems doomed, and ike mmt 
carefully selected remedies fail to relieve or permaneutlr im- 
prove. 

Laryngeal diphtheria, after Chlor., Kali bi, or Lac c. 

Post diphtheritic paralysis— especially where Antitoxin has 
been used, many cases cured— after Caust., Gels,, Nux, 
Secale and the best selected remedies have failed. 

In post-diphtheritic paralysis and spinal affections following 
diphtheria many brilliant cures have been effected by the 
potencies. The same indications for its use in all forms of 
diphtheria that are used when Antitoxin is exhibited. 



ELECTRICITY. 


41 


ELECTRICITAS (Atmospheric and Static). 

Caspar! and his colleagues obtained the symptoms caused 
by Electricity, natural and artificial, and was first published 
in Horn Bibhot Later it appears in Jahr and has recently 
been republished, with additions by Clarke. Every medical 
man knows the extreme susceptibility of some persons to the 
electric fluid and the sufferings they experience on the ap- 
proach of, and during, a thunderstorm, or the contact of an 
electric current 

The potencies are prepared from milk sugar which has been 
saturated with the current 

CHARACTERISTICS. — Intense nervous anxiety, timid, fearful, 
sighing; screams through nervous fear, paroxysms of weep- 
ing. 

Dreads the approach of a thunderstorm, suffers mental tor- 
ture before and during an electric storm 

Heaviness and paralysis of limbs and entire body , feels as if 
she weighed a ton. 

Electricity should not be used nor electro-thermal baths 
taken when suffering from a cold, especially if the chest be 
involved; fatal results have followed. 

RELATIONS. — Antidote Morphia acetate, especially the po- 
tency. Clarke says: ‘‘I have found Phosphorus the best anti- 
dote to the effects of storms.” 

COMPARE: The X-ray, Psor , Tub to remove the suscepti- 
bility. 


ELECTRICITY. 

MIND. — II Weeping, timid, fearful, sighing, crying out through 
nervous fear. 

Paroxysms of oppressive anxiety. 

Violent uneasiness, anxious, restless. 

Dread at the approach of a thunder-storm; fear, internal 
anguish, especially of chest; nervous agitation. 

II Involuntary hysterical laughter. Rage Ill-humor. Un- 



42 


ELECTRirJTY. 


able to comprehend time. Comprehension sknv and ilitYirult. 
Suffers mental torture before and during an idoctiic stoun. 

II Loss of memory. 

SENSORI0M.— Loss of consciousness 
II Loss of sensibility. 

Looking around with haggard eyes. 

Dulness of head. 

II Stupefaction. Giddiness, especially on stooping. 

HEAD.— II Headache; pressure in the forehead, from above 
downwards, as from a stone. 

Darting from the vertex to the right side of the head. 

I Tearing from the nape of the neck to the forehead. 

Painful spasms in the head. 

Sore pain in the occiput. 

Disagreeable shocks, generally in the occiput. 

Roaring in the whole sinciput. 

Sensation of torpor in right side of head. 

OUTER HEAD. — Prickings in the scalp. 

Undulating sensation under the scalp. 

F eehng of coldness on the vertex. 

Stinging Itching of the head and thighs. 

The growth of the hair is considerably promoted. 

EYES. Gnawing in the left eye, or violent drawing, extend- 
ing to the forehead. 

Sensation as if the eyes were deep in the head. 

Sensation as if something would come out of the eyeball. 

II Inflammation of the eyes; profuse lachrymation. 

Wild rolling of the eyeballs. 

Contraction of the morbidly-enlarged pupils. 
Dim-sightedness. 

II Blindness. 

Improved sight (cur. effect). 

I Black point before the right eye. 

II Everything looks yellow. 

A dark room looks as if brightly illumined. 

EARS.-Darting in the right ear, from the throat. 

Drawing from the jaws into the ears. 

Redness and warmth of the ear. 

Swelling of the inner ear. 



ELECTRICITY. 


43 


Suppuration and small ulcers m the meatus auditorius. 

II Blisters behind the ears full of an acrid fluid. 

Whizzing in the ears, or sensation as if obstructed by a plug. 
NOSE. — Tingling in the nose, or pressing from within out- 
wards, 

I Loss of smell. 

Discharge of a milky fluid from the nose 
FACE. — Expression of terror in the countenance. 

Swelling of the face. 

Scurf in the face, on the arms and body. 

I Large blisters on the cheeks. 

Chapped lips 

Eruption around the mouth and chin. 

TEETH. — Tearing in the upper teeth, proceeding from the 
head. 

Pain as from subcutaneous ulceration in old sockets of the 
molar teeth. 

Rapid growth of teeth. 

MOUTH AND PHARYNX. — Soreness of the inner cheek. 

II Increased secretion of saliva 
II Foam at the mouth 

II The tongue is very sensitive, particularly at the tip 
II Swelling of the tongue. 

THROAT. — Loss of speech, inability to articulate. 

Blisters on the palate, the epidermis becoming detached. 
Constant titilation in the throat. 

Inflammation of the pharynx 

APPETITE. — Increased appetite 

STOMACH, NAUSEA AND VOMITING.— 11 Heartburn. 

Ptyalism. 

Nausea, also after a meal. 

Desire to vomit 
Vomiting with sore throat. 

Hematemesis 

STOMACH. — Sense of repletion m the stomach, after a slight 
meal. 

Spasmodic contraction of the stomach. 

ABDOMEN. — II Cutting m the abdomen at the approach of a 
thunder-storm. 



44 


ELECTRICITY. 


STOOL— Black-yellow, liquid stools, having a fvtui smoll. 

Drawing up of the testes during stool. 

Constriction of the anus, after stool. 

Violent pressing in the anus (during menses). 

Burning at the anus. 

Flowing hemorrhoids. 

URTOARY ORGANS.— I Sensation as if the bladder would 
burst. 

II Frequent micturition. 

Incontinence of urine 

Discharge of blood with the urine. 

FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS.— Appearance of the menses (while 
in the electric bath). 

I Black and thick menstrual blood. 

Profuse menses, with pressing in rectum. 

Leucorrhea, first thin, then thick, with coaguhi of the size 
of a hazel nut. 

LARYNX 'AND TRACHEA. — Cough with violent titilation in the 
throat and pressing in the forehead from within outward. 

RESPIRATION. — Panting breathing. 

Asthma all one’s life, with palpitation of the heart and dis- 
position to faint. 

CHEST. — Chilliness in the left side of the chest. 

Palpitation of the heart, with fever, or with headache, or 
with oppressive anxiety and bright-red face. 

Painful quick movement from the region of the heart 
through the chest. 

Chest and arms become stiff, almost paralyzed; unable to 
walk. 

Heaviness and stiffness of chest and shoulders, felt like 
marble. 

BACK. — Creeping in the spine. 

1 Boils in the back and nape of the neck. 

Drawing through the scapula as with a thread. 

Formication in a muscle which had become shortened by 
suppuration. 

Stinging in a swollen cervical gland. 

UPPER LIMBS.— Tearing in the nght shoulder, going off in 
the warmth of the bed. 



ELECTRICITY. 


45 


II Frightful pains in the arms and lower limbs 

Jerking or tearing in the joints of the arms and hands. 

II Paralysis of the arms. 

Swelling of one arm. 

Crusty ulcers on the arms and lower limbs. 

Violent jerking in the upper arm. 

I Trembling of the hands. 

I Swelling of the hand, also red, or sudden. 

Red, smooth spot on the hand. 

Whitish, itching spot in the palm of the right hand. 

II Feeling of numbness in the tips of the fingers 

Blister filled with a greenish, sanguineous fluid on the finger 
which discharges the bottle 

LOWER LIMBS. — Sensation in the thigh as if the flesh had 
become detached from the bone. 

Tottering of the knees 

Tingling m the knees down to the foot. 

Red, burning spot as if sore on the knee, or also itching 
elevation on the knee. 

Tingling or languor in the tibise 

Red spots on the skin. 

II Burning m the feet, up to the knees, particularly at night. 

Coldness of the lower extremities up to the abdorpen, in 
summer, during a cool wind. 

Trembling and feeling of weariness in the feet. 

Sense of numbness and distension in the feet, and as if they 
had gone to sleep 

Tingling in the soles of the feet. Sensation as of a broad 
ring around the malleoli 

Feet would patter rapidly on the floor during a thunder 
storm, could not be controlled even by husband sitting on 
knees. 

Intense suffering of electric shocks through left foot and en- 
tire 1. side of body to head, repeated at every discharge dur- 
ing a thunder storm 

SLEEP.— Yawning, with shuddering over the whole body. 

Sleeplessness for two months. 

FEVER.— Shuddering over the body, every morning with 
yawning 



ELECTRIC! fY 


Chilliness, then dry, short heat. 

Frequent alternation of chilliness ami heat, with sale throat. 
Chilliness with profuse sweat, with painful spasms in the 
head and along the back. 

Warmth m the parts which were toucheii by the electric 
stroke. 


Heat through the whole body, with chilliness on motion. 
Heat m the parts which had been touched by the .sparks. 
Pulse intermittent. 

Pulse quick and strong. 

Accelerated circulation. 

Excessive night sweat in an arthritic individual, without re- 
lief, sweat with anxiety during a thunder storm. 

SKIN.— Itching or tingling over the whole body. 

Violent pains and swelling of the foot which had been frozen 
twelve years ago. 

Red pimples on the spot touched by the sparks. 

White vesicles. 

Itch-like eruption m the joints. 

II The skin becomes blackish. 

II Ecchymoses 

GENERAL SYMPTOMS.-il Pains in the limbs. 

II Drawing through all the limbs, e.xtending to the tips of the 
fingers and toes 

Shock through the whole body, proceeding from the malar 
bone 


Tingling in the electrified parts. 

Violent burning of the parts which are in contact with the 


II General languor after a meal. 
Relaxation of the nerves and muscles. 
II Fainting. 

II Stifiness of the limbs. 


II Paralysis of single limbs, particularly the lower 

have 


Subsultus tendinum. 


Painful spasms along the back from below 
St. Vitus dance. 


upward. 



ELECTRICITY* 


47 


Aggravation of the epileptic fits 

Intense suffering with paralysis of nervous and muscular 
system. 

Heavy sensation as if she weighed a ton. 

The following are reported by Seward (Trans. C. N. Y S., 
Medical Advance^ 1891, p. 150). 

A lady had taken electricity for partial paralysis of 1 arm. 
During a thunder storm felt severe electric shocks through the 
1. foot, the entire left side of the body to the head, repeated 
at every severe electric discharge, which left that side and 
limbs painful for days. The previous electrical treatment had 
rendered her more susceptible and its injurious effects will 
often last for years, or even during life, unless antidoted. 

A young lady took an electro-thermal bath when she had a 
cold, and acute tuberculosis soon developed. She died in 
spite of the best homoeopathic treatment 

A lady who had passed the climacteric had taken electrical 
treatment, at first going to the office. Soon she became too 
weak to walk, her chest became weak and painful, and the 
arms stiffened and almost paralyzed; the entire body heavy 
and weak 

A young married woman had been under general and local 
electrical uterine treatment for several weeks, without benefit, 
complained of feeling so heavy, as though she ‘ ' weighed a 
ton.” 

A woman received an atmospheric electric shock six or 
seven years before, and since had suffered in every electrical 
storm, even while it was miles away It affected the whole 
body, but was worse in the lower extremities. During every 
storm her feet would “patter” upon the floor, and her hus- 
band, sitting upon her knees, could not prevent it She re- 
ceived three or four doses of Morphia acet 200, and has never 
felt such effects from a storm since, now more than ten years. 

My son, during the effects of a common cold, took an elec- 
tro-thermal bath. Soon after felt a heaviness and stiffness of 
chest and shoulders he had never felt before; “ his chest and 
shoulders felt like marble.” An incurable tuberculosis devel- 
oped and he died in two years. Did not know he had taken 
bath for over a year after. 



48 


LAC CANINl'M. 


A brother of Dr. Hawley, while in New Voik in 
took a severe cold, followed h\ iheuiiiatir fevi-r; w,!" tit .iicd 
homoeopathically, without relief, advised t«> tiv eli'i tio-tlu-r- 
mal baths, and became worse. Was lenuncil t«i i.tniNf an,! 
was under care of Drs. Hawley, Millei and Sc'waid, with little 
or no benefit. His sufferinRS were intense, his vnluiit.uy mus- 
cular and nervous systems were paralyzed by electrieity; 
could neither move nor feed himself Was taken to liis home 
in Illinois, and in May, si.x months later, could walk a little by 
dragging his feet. He fell, and had hemurih.ige finiii the 
longs. The doctor said there was no hope fui a cure ami gave 
him Morphine, as a palliation, in water. In a few minutes 
after the first dose he said: “I can use my hands better than 
at any time since the electrical treatment," and iimlei the 
antidote recovered. 


LAC cAmmm. 

Like Lachesis, and many other well known polychrest*> in 
the Materia Medica, this remedy met most violent opposition 
from Ignorance and prejudice It was for yeans looked upon 
as one of the novelties or delusions of those who believed in 
and used the dynamic remedy, yet its wonderful therapeutic 
powers have slowly but surely overcome every obstacle. 

It was successfully used by Dioscorides, Rhasis and Pliny in 
ancient times, and Sextus recommended it for the removal of 
the fetus. Sammonicqs and Sextus praise it in photophobia, 
otitis and other affections of the eye and ear. Pliny claimed 
that It cured ulceration of the internal os. It was then used 
as an antidote to many deadly poisons. 

The use of the remedy was revived by Reisig, of New York 

for throat diseases, and on his return used it successfully in an 
malignant diphtheria. He called the attention of 

dnnn wondcrfuI resuIts he obtained 

mg that epidemic, and induced them to give it a trial. 

def ^hich the poten- 

of Swan and Fincke were prepared. The profession is 



LAC CANINUM. 


49 


indebted to the indefatigable labor of Swan for its provings, 
which were made from the 30th, 200th and higher potencies, 
and published in a small volume by Swan and Berridge, from 
which it was published m the Medical Advance The prov- 
ings of this remedy have placed it among the polychrests of 
our school and verified and confirmed the clinical accuracies 
of the observers of ancient times 

CHARACTERISTICS. — For nervous, restless, highly sensitive 
organisms 

Symptoms erratic, pains constantly flying from one part to 
another (Kali bi , Puls , Tub.), changing from side to side 
every few hours or days 

Very forgetful, absent-minded, makes purchases and walks 
away without them (Agnus, Anac., Caust., Nat ). 

In writing, uses too many words or not the right ones; omits 
final letter or letters in a word; cannot concentrate the mind 
to read or study; very nervous (Bov., Graph , Lach., Nat. c., 
Sep.) 

Despondent, hopeless, thinks her disease incurable; has not 
a friend living, nothing worth living for, could weep at any 
moment (Act., Aur., Cal., Lach.) 

Cross, irritable, child cries and screams all the time, espe- 
cially at night (Jal , Nux, Psor.). 

Fears to be alone (Kali c ), of dying (Ars.); of becoming 
insane (Lil ), of falling down stairs (Bor.). 

Chronic ** blue"' condition, everything seems so dark that it 
cannot grow any darker (Lyc , Puls , Psor ) 

Attacks of rage, cursing and sweanng at slightest provoca- 
tion (Lil , Nit ac.), intense ugliness, hateful. 

Coryza, with discharge of thick, white mucus. 

One nostril stopped up, the other free and discharging, 
these conditions alternate; discharge acrid, nose and upper 
lip raw (Arum, Cepa). 

Itching of roof of mouth (Puls., Wyeth.). 

Diphtheria and tonsilitis; symptoms change repeatedly from 
side to side. 

Sore throats and cough are apt to begin and end with men- 
struation, yellow or white patches; painful swelling of sub- 
maxillary glands. 

5 



50 


I. At* fANJNJ M. 


Throat; sensitive to touch extctn.illv ( l.iich. ‘ . hv 0111511 y 
swallowing (Ign ), constant incliiiatttni to nwalhiw. ''aifiiiii, 
almost impossible (Mer. ), pitnn I'lltfui A' t,i>\ < Ign., 

Kahbi., Mer., Phyt.); begins on left side 1 l..u*h /. 

Shining, glassed appearance of diphtheiitic tle5>i>sit, rhancies 
and ulcers. 

Very hungry, cannot cat enough to satisfv; as liungrv after 
eating as before (Case., Cal., Cina, Lyc.. Stront ). 

Sinking at epigastrium; faint ihi-^ m stamat h. 

Menses; too early; too i>rofii.se; flow in gushes, hnght red, 
viscid and stringy (dark, black, stringy. Cior. >; Ineasts swol- 
len, painful, sensitive before ant! tlunng (Con. 

Stool: urging, but passes nothing but flatus or sinall black 
balls 

Discharge of flatus from vagina (Hroin., Lve,, N’lix in.. 
Sang.). 

Breasts: inflamed, heavy, painful; • bj least jar ami to- 
wards evening, must hold them firmly zohen fiainx dawn 

stairs (Bry.). 

Serviceable in almost all cases vvhen it is retpiired to <!ry up 
milk (Asaf.); to bring back or increase it (Lac d . ). 

Sensation as if breath would leave her when lying tiown; 
must get up and walk (Am. c.. Grind., Lach.). 

Loss of milk while nursing, without any known rau.se 
(Asaf.). 

Palpitation violent when lying on left side, > turning on 
nght (Lach., Tab.). 

Sexual organs easily excited, from touch, pressure on sit- 
ting, or friction by walking (Cinn., Coff., Mur., Plat.). 

When walking, seems to be walking on air; when lying, 
does not seem to touch the bed (Asar.); legs as if floating 
(Sticta). 

Backache, intense, unbearable, across super-sacral region, 
extending to r. natis and r. sciatic nerve; < by rest and on 
first moving (Rhus); spine aches from base of brain to coccyx, 
very sensitive to touch or pressure (Chin, s., Phos., Zinc.). 

- RELATIONS— Similar: to Apis, Con., Murex, Lach., Kali bi.. 
Puls., Sep., Sulph., Taren. and the X-ray. 

Probably no remedy in the Materia Medica presents a more 



51 


valuable pathogenesis in symptoms of the throat, or one that 
will better repay a careful study 

‘‘Acts best in single dose, if repeated, should be given at 
exact intervals ” — Nichols. An observation frequently verified. 

Lachesis and other serpent poisons are very analogous. 

COMPARE: Amb , Lach , Nat m , Staph , weak memory for 
what she has read, not for other things, Bov , Graph., Hepar, 
Lach , Lyc , Nat c , Nat. m , Nux, Sep , Tub , forgetful in 
writing, uses many words or not the right ones, Anac., Caust , 
Con , Dul , Lach , Nat. m , Sep , absent-minded. Cal , China, 
Graph , Hep , Lach , Lyc , Med , Nat c., Nat m , Nux, Sep , 
Syph , cannot speak correctly half the time, Am. c , Cal , 
Sep , Sulph , Tub , substitutes name of objects seen for that 
which IS thought; Nux, Sil , Sulph , very restless, cannot con- 
centrate her thoughts or mind to read, wants to leave every- 
thing as soon as it is commenced; Cal , Pal , Sep , cried, fear- 
ing she was contracting consumption, Plat , Med., exalted 
sensation of sensorium — Lippe. 

Aur , Nux, Rhus, headache < in cold wind and > in warm 
room. Cal., headache < by noise, > by keeping quiet, con- 
fused feeling in head. Aeon , Bell , Cal, Gels , Nat.^ Ruta, 
Stram , must have light, but intolerant of sunlight. Kali bi., 
Teuc , Thuja, soreness and crusting of nostrils, Nat m., lips 
dry and bleeding. Apis, Lach., throat sensitive to touch ex- 
ternally; Ign , < by empty swallowing, Bell , Cal., Carbo 
an , Lyc , Nit. ac , Phos , Phyt., Psor , breasts as if full of 
very hard lumps, very painful when going up and down stairs. 
Cal., Mur., sensitive to pressure, Mer , sensitive to deep pres- 
sure, Bell , Bry , Cal , Phyt , soreness and enlargement of; 
Mer. 1 r., small round or irregular gray- white ulcers on ton- 
sils and fauces, Apis, Diph., Mer. cy., diphtheritic membrane 
and deposits on vulva; Chel., Dig , Ign , Pet., Sep., empty, 
weak, all gone sensation in stomach, Bry., Kali bi , Nux, pain 
as from a stone or undigested food m stomach. Apis, Lil., 
Lyc., Pal., pain in right ovarian region; Am c , Grin., Carbo 
V., Opium, as soon as he falls asleep the breathing stops, 
Asar., China, Cof , Nat. m., Nux, Opium, Rhus, Spig , Stram., 
Stic , Phos ac., Thuja, when waking seems to be walking on 
air, when lying does not seem to touch the bed, Lach , Lac 



52 


LAC CANIXCM. 


V. d , Sane., Sil., dream of KohiR on a jornm-y.^ 
fingers wide apart in convulsions, Nic , 1 ub. , i ub . ictiiiii ic- 
tains impression of objects -eai retains niipit-sMi.n id sdnmi; 
Lyc., Dubois., Hyos., red spot before visum; l'.i<*m . L\r . 
Nux m., Nux V., Sang., discharge of llatus front vagina. Hoi., 
Same., < going down stairs. 

AGGRAVATION: In the morning of one tlay .uui evening of 
next, alternate menstrual nisus; at night; cohf winds and cold 
sharp air, motion; extension of limbs; after t>li'ep, touch of 
external throat; of breasts, causing suMial ewittuiient . <le- 
scending 

AMELIORATION: Cold applications ; rest, lying down; 
warmth; bending of limbs; warm room. 

THE WORK OF A.V .VKiTSi. 

Dr. Wm. P. Wesselhoeft sa;^b* No mare tnhuli* tan ht* |mui 

to the memory of Dr Adolph Dippo than to hIiow hi*. ni tho 

application of medicine in disease. It was not on l> his 
of the finer and more subtle indications for remedies, a*, ^nen in owr 
Materia Medica, or his judicious examiiiaticm of patients, whah in.nle him 
an acknowledged master of our art, butmanUy that freer anti auier appli- 
cation of our law which elevated him to tlie sphere of the true artist, Hu 
readiness and rapidity in getting at the gist of symptoms, even in the most 
complicated case, could never be called careless or hasty. It remiiuied me 
of the words of an eminent artist* who .said: **The chief tlithcidtj with 
fiiost painters is that they see ioo much, and in seeing too mneh they get 
confused with endless detail, which leaves their work wiltiout charaeler* 
and they have little to show for their pains.** 

He knew the value of our art so well that the comnum phtres of every 
disease were almost instinctively avoided by him» and he never lunt time 
in noting worthless signs, always looking and finding with unusmil rapidity 
the salient points m the case before him. He heeded ami iivetl np to the 
greatest thought of the master. ‘*The physician*^ bimitiess is only w*ith 
patients, not with diseases.** 

The cure of the following case will demonstrate what I mean b> a freer 
and wider application of our law of cure: 

I had treated the patient more than eighteen month}!* without improve- 
ment, es;cept that his great liability to taking cold had become less. 

I copy from my record, taken December, i88i. 

G R., aged forty-five, light brunette, married ten years, general appear- 
ance healthy. 

Tor SIX years has had no discharge of semen during coitus. 

Occasionally nocturnal emissions. 

Erections usually weak, give out during coitus. 



LAC CANINUM. 


53 


Burning m perineum, worse after going to bed, and when thinking of it 
Drawing pains in testicles, with sensation of weakness of genitals. 
Occasionally itching, dry eruptions in crotch and inner upper surface of 
thighs and anus 

With the sensation of weakness of genitals his eyes feel weak. 

Very sensitive to cold and changes of atmosphere. 

Takes cold easily, usually affecting nose and throat first with dryness, 
then with watery catarrh and sneezing, or he has aching pains in different 
parts of the body and limbs, changing location frequently. 

Twenty years ago had African fever 

Never had gonorrhea, syphilis, or other eruptions than those mentioned 
above 

All other functions normal 

While on a visit to Philadelphia he applied to Dr, Lippe, at my advice. 
Dr. Lippe wrote me the following letter 

“I find that your patient had diphtheria* about ten years ago, and was 
treated with inappropriate mercurials and gargles by Dr . The char- 

acter of the attack was that it went from one side to the other and finally 
back again to the original side. Great weakness, almost paralytic, followed 
the attack, and he thinks he has never regained his full vigor and usual 
strength since this illness. His acute cold has always the character of 
shifting pains and change of location I have given him a dose of Lac can. 
cm , which may be required to be followed by a dose of Pulsatilla 
Suffice it to say that my patient never needed the suggested dose of Pul- 
satilla. 

In three months after his visit to Philadelphia his wife was pregnant. 
She has since borne two remarkably healthy children 
As far as we know Lac can has no sexual weakness That fact disturbed 
Dr Lippe very little in his selection He looked deeper and found the 
cause and the remedy. Thts %s true homeopathic pathology. All the 
knowledge in the world of the special pathology of this case could not 
have revealed the remedy to any one To the homeopathic artist, how- 
ever, it was revealed, and a man regained his manhood and became the 
father of two children, after ten years of impotence 
Mrs. J B. B. , aged 29, blonde For a week has felt a sense of impending 
illness, weary, languid, depressed 

Sleepless, restless, frequent turning, because bed felt so hard 
Fever at 2 p. M continued all night, chilly on movement, cheeks flushed 
and hot 

Soreness of entire body, “aches all over 
Throat dry, •with thirst for cold dnnks, which relieve 
Profuse saliva, slightly viscid and salty, wetting the pillow during sleep, 
frequent swallowing 

Throat* sharp pains on swallowing < right side, neck sensitive ex- 
ternally. 

Pain and soreness begun on right side, extended to left. 

Tonsils swollen, red, shining, membrane light yellow in color, most on 



54 


LAC CAKIXVM. 


riglit side, in diffused points ske of pin liead, Init lur^king Itil oi :i 
pepper box; 25 or 30 points on right tonsil, abont ono4iall‘ nuiii,^ un Iri't, 
Points and larger irregular patches on poslerior and pillar** <'»f pliair ii\. 

Offensive breath, characteristic of the graver loniw ot iliplnlst'ria; bar 
can. 45m., one dose. 

The following symptoms, not in the pathogmieNis, were cured: 
as if bed were too liard; chill on moveinent; aching all ovtn, great latigue; 
desire for and relief from cold drinks.— a r/ 

Tommie H. : About three weeks succeeding the maiiite-iatioii of 

diphtheritic disease in the case reported to the Society in wliiiii Lac caiii>- 
num cm, proved curative I was consulted for a condition of paralx'^iH of 
the muscles of the neck, which has become <|«ite ntarked, -o innch a-. !i» 
cause a falling forwards of tlie head so that it rests 011 tlie potlion of 

the sternum. There is return of fluid thnnigh the and an r\hie«l 
weakness of the muscles of the upper part of the hack- l 1 ios. iui ipuicral 
principles. 

August 6tli.— Plis father brings the boy back in a imich worst* comihlioii. 
Three weeks after recovery from diphtlreria: Paralysis of niiisch's of the 
neck, quite marked, so as to cause falling forwanl^ of the head iinfil it 
rested upon the manubrium. Fluids return through tire nose, aiul marked 
weakness of muscles of the upper part of the back. The paralysis btn'oines 
more pronounced, with staggering when walking; stiffness and MU’cnos tif 
the muscles of the neck. After Phos. and Rhus, tlunigh apparently well 
indicated, had failed, one dose of Lac caninum cured the diphtheria and 
the paralysis, — Baker, 

' MIND. — I Very forgetful; in writing, uses too many words or 
not the right ones; very nervous. 

i Omits final letter or letters of a word, when writing; in 
speaking substitutes name, of objects seen, instead of ohjeet 
thought of. 

Finds it very difficult to read imderstaiidingly anything re* 
quiring mental effort. 

, . I Very absentminded; makes purchases am! walks off with* 
out them; goes to post a letter, brings it honuj in !mr hand. 

Cannot remember what she reads, but can remember oilu‘r 
things. 

I Cannot collect her thoughts; confused feeling. 

I Very restless; cannot concentrate her thoughts or mimi to 
read; wants to leave everything as soon as it is cominenc(‘d, 

I Is impressed with the idea that all she says is a lie; it seems 
to be very difficult to speak the truth, but contimially distrusts 
things; when reading anything she rapidly changes the mean- 
ing, omitting or adding things. 



LAC CANINUM. 


55 


Every time a symptom appears she feels very confident that 
it IS not attributable to medicine, but that it is some settled 
disease 

I Sensation as if she were going deranged, when sitting still 
and thinking; sometimes she has most horrible sights pre- 
sented by her mental vision (not always snakes), feels hor- 
ribly afraid that they will take objective form and show them- 
selves to her natural eye 

II Thinks that she is looked down upon by every one, that 
she is of no importance in life, and feels insulted thereat. 

II Imagines that he wears some one else’s nose 

II Imagines to be dirty 

I Imagines she sees spiders 

Feels very short in morning, while walking, same in even- 
ing. 

Woke at daylight feeling that she is a loathsome, horrible 
mass of disease (while the breasts were affected), could not 
bear to look at any portion of her body, not even hands, as it 
intensified feeling of disgust and horror, could not bear to 
have any one part of her body touch another, had to keep 
even fingers apart (cannot bear one foot to touch the other, 
Lac f ) , felt that if she could not in some way get out of her 
body, she should soon become crazy, could not think of any- 
thing but her own condition, feels weak, and nerves thor- 
oughly out of order 

II After inhaling gas for extraction of teeth, very strange sen- 
sation in head (such as he felt when going off under gas); 
sometimes imagines heart or breathing is going to stop, or 
otherwise frightens himself, and this makes heart beat vio- 
lently; occasionally very depressed, and fancies he is going 
out of his mind. 

After menses, imagines all sorts of things about snakes. 

Wakes at night with a sensation that she was lying on a 
large snake. 

Sensation or delusion as if surrounded by myriads of snakes, 
some running like lightning up and down inside of skin; some 
that are inside seem long and thin; fears to put her feet on 
floor, lest she should tread on them and make them squirm 
and wind around her legs, is afraid to look behind her for fear 



56 


LAC ( ASINi M 


that she will see snakes theie, d«M*s inn ilirani of llinn aiul is 
seldom troubled with them after itark* on Koine to bed she 
was afraid to shut her eyes for feai that a laiue ^nake. tln^ si/e 
of her arm, would hit her in the face 

Worries herself lest pimples which appeal tliiuuK menst*s 
will prove to be little snakes, and twine aiul tvvi^t annnul each 
other. 

Horrible visions, fears they %vi}l take objectivi* fiitni; when 
sitting still and thinking. 

On lying down either by night or dav begins to think how 
horrible it would be if a very shaip pain, hke a knife, slundd 
go through her, ami thought <d it causes guMt mental dnstiess. 

II Attacks of rage, cursing and swearing at sliglih^st ptovoi a- 
tion 

II Cannot bear to be left alone foi an instant 

li No desire to live. 

Anxious. 

Fear of disease, of consumption, of heart <liseuse. 

Sits and looks under chairs, table, sofa ami everything In 
room, expecting yet dreading to see soiiu* leirible monster 
creep forth, and feeling all the time that if it due.s it will drive 
her raving mad, she is not afraid in daik, it is only in light 
where she can imagine that she can see them. 

III Fits of weeping two or three times a day. 

11 Child cries and screams all the time, especially at night, 
and will not be pacified in any way. 

II When paroxysms of intense nemnisness romc on, feels 
like tearing off her clothes; takes of! herrings; cannot bear 
anything to touch her, especially over L ovarian n*gion, from 
which she frequently lifts bed clothes. 

I Depression of spirits, doubts her ability and success, thinks 
she will have heart disease and die of it. 

^ 11 Chronic blue condition; everything seems so dark that 
it can grow no darker. 

II Gloomy feelings, < as headache gets worse. 

II Fears she will become unable to perform her duties, 
of death, with anxious expression of countenance. 

II Vepr nervous; constant dread; a feeling as if she was 
going to become unconscious. 



LAC CANINUM 


57 


II Wakes distressed, and obliged to rise and occupy herself 
in some manner, fears she will be crazy. 

Has great fear of falling down stairs at times. 

I Very cross and irritable only while headache lasts. 

II When awake, very irritable and cries constantly 

I Intense ugliness and hatefulness, writes to her best friends 
all sorts of mean and contemptible things 

II Easily excited. 

II Too excited to allow examination of throat 

II Feels weak, and nerves so thoroughly out of order that she 
cannot bear one finger to touch another. 

II Exceedingly nervous and irritable 

II Very easily startled. 

Maud R , aged lo, a light brunette, parents healthy^ while playing one 
and a half years before, fell forward and hurt her chest Nothing was 
thought of it at the time, but when brought to me she was pale, emaciated, 
capricious with no desire to play. Sleep disturbed by frightful dreams, 
during the day piteously begs her mother to take her, she is so afraid She 
feels as though snakes were on her back In response to advice, I^ac can 
50m , one dose dry on her tongue, was given, and in 24 hours the child be- 
came more lively and cheerful, and very soon all abnormal sensations dis- 
appeared and never returned — B T. Balch, Horn Phys 

HEAD. — I Dizzy sensation with slight nausea. 

II After inhaling diphtheritic breath, light headed, with ting- 
ling on vertex and slight sore throat. 

tl Constant noise in head, very confusing, < at night and at 
menses. 

II Wakes at night with sensation as if bed was in motion, 
noise in head bad beyond description, first thought on waking 
that headboard was swaying, and so occasioning distress, but 
found it arose from internal causes 

I Frontal headache 

Headache first on one side of the forehead, then on the 
other 

I On going into cold wind, terrible pain m forehead as if it 
would split open, > on going into warm room. 

I I I After midnight, very severe frontal headache, and a pierc- 
ing pain on vertex. 

Ill Headache both frontal and occipital, < by turning eye- 
balls upward. 



58 


I.AC CAMXt \l. 


li Headache over ejes, --4 whon 

I Headache: in afternoon, piinriiMlh owi 1 eu*. io<-i i. 
eye on first awaking. 

Pam in forehead, afternoon, lust on 1. Mdc. ihon mu i i*rin- 
cipally over 1 eye 

Throbbing pain jii.st over i toniplt', then sliaip {mid in i, 
socket of r. eye and in r. temple, dis.ippe.uing ipiu klv 

II Pains and throbbing in temples. 

11 Headaches mostly thiough temples, duiling, stabbing, 
sometimes begin on r. side and sometiine.s on 1. ; .iKvajs going 
from one side to the other. 

(Sick headaches beginning in nape; the pain settling grad- 
ually in r. or 1. forehead), - on waking. 

Pain in 1. occipital region running up when imning hi'atl. 

Sharp pain like a stab in r. temphs at 7 n. m. 

I Pains in head during day, first on one sidi*. then on other 
seem perfectly unbearable, ■ on first going into ait, but soon 
grow <. 

II Headache from below eyes over whole heuti ami top of 
shoulders 

II Severe pressure on brain. 

I Arose in morning with heavy, dull, frontal headache, and 
at 9 A. M., severe sharp pain on top of head, coming from nape 
of neck, then stretching across head forward; pain so severe 
that he presses top of head with hands; neck stiffened; bend- 
ing head forward, or lying down, cau.ses cong(*.stion, increas- 
ing pain; again pains subside for short tune, ami begin anew, 
either in front part of head, or in nape of neck, or all over 
head at once, when pain is frontal it causes lachrymation. 

II Darting pains from occiput to forehead; beating. 

Darting pain across forehead and eyes. 

II Headaches seem unbearable, and are attended by pain in 
lumbar region; all pains cease as soon as throat gets <. 

I Headache < by noise or talking, by keeping tpiiet ; con- 
fused feeling in head. 

Intense headache, entirely > by cold-water application, but 
soon returned, not, however, as severe. 

Sharp lancinating pain, in a zigzag line from r side of fore- 
head to an indefinite point in occiput; instantaneous, and 



LAC CANINUM. 


59 


sometimes repeated, as soon as it is felt, she lays aside what- 
ever she IS doing and lies down, from an indefinite dread that 
it will return, if at night, she goes to bed at once, has great 
dread of the pain, though not very severe, recurred for sev- 
eral days. 

Sharp, throbbing pain in r side of forehead, then in h side 
of forehead, slightly 

Headache over 1 eye on first waking, and great pam in pel- 
vis, most marked at r. ovary 

Neuralgic pain in 1. side of head, followed by a film over 1. 
eye, wants to rub it off, not > by rubbing. 

Headache m upper part of forehead, with sensation of a 
broad band pressed firmly across forehead from one temple to 
the other. 

Headache over both eyes, extending back over 1 ear 

Slight pressure on vertex and over eyes, the day before 
menses ceased 

Dull pain in r. temple and r eye, with pressure on vertex 
during menses 

Stiffness in occiput on turning head, with soreness on pres- 
sure 

Occipital headache, with shooting pains extending to fore- 
head 

Headache commencing m occiput (3d day) and extending 
to vertex and forehead. 

Sensation as if brain were alternately contracted and re- 
laxed, several times rapidly; generally only when lying down; 
at various times all through proving 

Head very sore and itches almost all the time. 

Sore pimples on scalp which discharge and form a scab, ex- 
tremely painful when touched, or combing the hair < at 
night 

Excessive dandruff on head for past week 

Throbbing in forehead and temples, finally settling in eyes, 
eyes very sensitive to light during headache; eye-balls sore 
and painful, pams extending deep back into the brain with the 
headache 

Headache commencing all over head at once (second day) 
m the morning, a dull, heavy, confused feeling m head all 



60 


LAC rAMlNVM. 


day, becoming a severe ache towjuds evening, anti setthng in 
eyes and temples. 

Headache worse from motion and stooping, better from 
cold applications. 

II Frequently wakes with .sick he.adaohc, which seems to 
commence at nape. 

II Sick headaches, beginning in nape; pain settling graiiually 
in r. or 1. forehead 

EYES. — Sharp pain in socket back of r. eye, followed by ten- 
derness in r. temple, both transient. 

Darting intense pain round 1. eye. 

Heaviness of upper eyelid, with pain above 1. eye; burning 
in 1. eye; agglutination of 1. lids Crheuinatism). 

Eyes slightly swollen; profuse l.u hi \ mat ion. with catarrh. 

Looking at different objects causes eyes to ache. 

Pricking sensation in eyeballs; eyes sensitive to cold an. 

Upper eyelids very heavy, can scarcely keep eyes open, 
very sleepy. 

Pain in eyes when reading; followed by a tihii over theni. 
apparently requiring to be wiped off before she can see. 

I Tendency m retina to retain the impiession of objects, e.sp. 
of colors, or somewhat of the object last looked at is projected 
into the next. 

II Sees faces before her eyes, < in the dark, the face that 
haunts her most is one that she has reallj seen. 

Small floating discs before eyes occasionally, anil showing 
primary colors at edge of discs. 

I When reading the page does not look clear, but seems cov- 
ered with various pale spots of red, yellow, green and other 
colors. 

Occasionally when looking at an object see.s rctl spots on it. 

While looking at an object appears to see just beyond or 
out of the axis of vision an object passing acros.s the field of 
sight, but on adjusting the eye to it, it is gone; it always ap- 
pears as a small object, || like a rat or bird, sometimes on the 
floor, at others in the air. 

Swelling and inflammation of upper and lower lids of both 
eyes, the left the worst. 

Tired feeling in eyes, considerable lachrymation — both 



LAC CANINUM. 


61 


eyes — redness of conjunctiva, eye-ball sore, aching and pain- 
ful, pains extending deep back into head, with headache; 
pains in eyes better from cold (wet) applications, eyes sensi- 
tive to artificial light. 

II Eyes sensitive to light, 

II Must have light, yet is intolerant of sunlight. 

II Sees big eyes and creeping things. 

II Difficulty in distinguishing objects, in reading, letters run 
together. 

II When looking m a mirror by gaslight, after exerting eyes, 
sees a green spot or a green band before her 1. eye, the band 
slanting downward from 1. eye to r. cheek. 

II Square or round green spots or brown spots before 1. eye, 
when sun is bright, sometimes bright spots before 1 eye. 

II Frequent sensation of a film before eyes, with vertigo, and 
while thus suffering would see a small dark object, like a 
mouse or bird, coming up to her left. 

II Film over eyes when reading or looking closely 

II Eyes blurred. 

11 Heavy pain m the eye-balls with outward pressure. 

11 Burning ini eye. 

II Eyes watery and discharging 

II Eyes dull and lustreless 

II Dark brown areolae under eyes. 

II Non-oedematous swelling of upper and lower lids, pink 
color of lower lids, most noticeable on right, 

II Heaviness of 1 upper lid, with pain above 1 eye. 

1 Upper eyelids very heavy, could scarcely keep eyes open, 

1! Agglutination of 1 eyelids. 

A dull aching pain in r eyeball, with sensation of dryness 
and tendency to lachrymation. 

EARS-— Pam in r ear, sometimes intense. 

Very sharp pain in r. middle ear, while walking in wind; 
had to cover it with hand, which gave entire relief, sharp pain 
in r. side also. 

No pain during day, but is awakened several times during 
night by sore aching pains m middle and external ear of side 
on which she is lying; soon passes off when the pressure is 
removed. 



62 


I, At' t AMM M. 


II Green, odorless disrhaiK'f 

Reverberation of voice as if sjic.ikiny m a lai^e, empty 
room; with pain in frontal legion, tiiNl ovei oiu' rw aiul then 
over the othei. 

II Sounds seem \erv fat off. 

Ringing in t ear. 

At night a buz/.ing in t. ear 

Noises m ears, sensation as thtnigh eai-« weu- hill, pain.s m 
both ears 

II Mere than any other remetlj. leliewd deafness fiom 
hereditary syphilis. 

Earache the first time in her life on light side, uehing deep 
in ear, worse from cold air; hud to keep eai euvi-ieil all the 
time; pain m ear bettei by pressure with the ptnnt td the 
finger in the meatus; e.xteinal ear sole ami painful; stneness 
and swelling on r. side from ear dtiwii side t>f face in legioii of 
parotid gland and angle of lower jiiw, right side; soreness ex- 
tending from r. ear down sitlu of m-ck to r. shouldiT, painful 
when turning the head. 

NOSE.— I Sore on r. side of septum of nose; ne\t day nose 
sore, constant inclination to pick at it and get tile scab off; 
nose still sore on sixth day, and on seventh <iay was verv pain- 
ful to touch, but on eighth day scab came off nose, leaving it 
as well as ever. 

Left nostril first dry, afterwards discharging a thin, ichorous 
fluid, excoriating nostrils. 

Stuffed feeling in nose and throat. 

Watery discharge, followed by tiry sensation in iiosi". 

I Fluent catarrh from both nostrihs, with sensation of fulness 
m upper part of nose. 

III Profuse nocturnal nasal discharge, like gonorrhea, stain- 
ing pillow greenish yellow. 

Ill One side of nose stuffed up, the other free ami discharg- 
ing thin mucus at times and thin blood; these conditions 
alternate, first one nostril stopped up and the other fluent, 
and vzee versa* 

Bad smell in nose 

Cannot bear smell of flowers; they seem to send a chill over 



LAC CANINUM. 


63 


All drinks return by the nose, nothing being swallowed. 

II Fluids escape through nose while drinking. ‘ 

Discharge of clear white mucus from nose and sneezing. 

II Nose cold 

llEpistaxis when speaking or swallowing; at 4 p. M., re- 
turning at intervals 

I Considerable sneezing 

I Head so stuffed she can hardly breathe. 

I Stuffed feeling in head, as of a severe cold in head. 

I Nasal discharge, excoriating nostrils and upper lip 

I I I Coryza, with discharge of thick white mucus. 

I Coryza, constant watery discharge from nose, excoriating 
nostrils and upper lip 

II Nose became so bad that there was fear of destruction of 
bones, bloody pus discharged several times daily, nasal bones 
sore on pressure 

II Two very angry gatherings, one under 1. side of nose, and 
one on upper 1 nostril; both came to a head, and discharged 
matter and blood, and afterwards scabbed over, before dis- 
charge shooting pain. 

Ozaena, mercurial or syphilitic, when the labial commissures 
and alae nasi are fissured, and when the angina is marked with 
the glazed appearance of mucous membranes. 

FACE. — Right cheek burns like fire, and is red after coming 
in from the cold. 

Pam as from a knife-thrust from under 1. zygoma up to 
vertex 

Burning, flushing of face. 

Marked pallor of face. 

Lips dry and peeling off 

II Jaw cracks while eating. 

II Face indicates great anxiety. 

1 1 Countenance pale and careworn. 

II Face very red and then suddenly pale. 

I Face flushed; cheeks red. 

I Dark brown areolse under eyes. 

II Face flushed, swollen and hot, burns, feels dry. 

1 1 In morning, 1. superior maxillary feels sore; most of time 
there is dull pain, < by exertion, sometimes throbbing pain, 



64 


I.AC f.AXlNrNf 


burning, throbbing, aching hi-at, wn<5ation uf fnlnfHv. raiinot 
wear her false teeth from soreness an»i swelling uf ni.iMilajv, 
an exacerbation of pain leaveh face ver% sore, pani^ bv 
warm applications, bat only cold applicatnms si'i> m -.,. 

llRed circular spot below i. malar bone, hmning t.t toneh 

1 1 Flushes on 1. cheek 

I Lips dry and peeling off; drv and vuiiched, hut nimuh eon- 
stantb' full of frothy saliva. 

II Seems to affect lower li]) most, and blisteis and fever sores 
on hp are amenable to its inSuence. 

II Submaxillary glands swollen. 

II Swelling of 1. parotid, with sore thioat and loss of appe- 
tite. 

II Parotid gland first attacked, ami disease evteiuis to other 
glands of neck; throat and sido.s of neck not tendei to extmiuil 
touch. 

II Swelling of parotid passes from i. to 1., but more often 
from 1. to r. 

TEETH. — Pam in 1. upper molars, coming thiough 1. temple 
through 1. ear. 

Teeth sensitive to cold water. 

II Gums swollen, ulcerated, retracted, bleetiing, teeth loose; 
caused by defective nutrition and exposure. 

II Paroxysmal gnawing pain in I. upper canine, temporarily 
yields to any cold application. 

Gums, upper and lower, very sore and red. 

Toothache, severe pain came on suddenly about lOrJlO 
every night. Would begin immediately on lying down, or 
getting warm in bed. Was obliged to arise ami walk about 
the room for relief. Pain began in a much liecuyed r. lower 
molar, soon extending to all the teeth on r. side; > by appli- 
cation of cold water. Pain continued for a month, coining on 
each night; the teeth feel sensitive as if they were too long or 
too large. It was often daylight before I could get any sleep. 
Pam of a dull gnawing sensation like a worm gnawing at the 
teeth. It came on at same time, whether I had my evening 
meal early, late or went without it. If I retired earlier and 
fell asleep, pain would awaken me at 10: 30. 

MOUTH. — ^Tongue coated brown. 



LAC CANINUM. 


65 


Tongue dirty, deeply coated near back and centre, except 
on edges, which are bright red, at 9 p m. tongue looks 
patched. 

Taste putrid, of lead, afternoon. 

Swelling of 1, sublingual gland, ranula. 

Mouth and throat covered with aphthous yellowish-white 
ulcerations, easily bleeding. 

Itching of roof of mouth (Puls , Wyeth.). 

Roof of mouth very sore, with blisters that break and leave 
loose skin, any seasoned food causes great pain. 

Inside of lower lip feels tender and sore, and looks very red. 

1 Mouth very dry, without thirst. 

Saliva: increased, slightly viscid, ran from mouth during 
sleep 

I Mouth constantly full of frothy mucus, but a constant in- 
clination to swallow 

I Frothy mucus in mouth < by going into open air, and 
after eating. 

Breath very offensive. 

Talking is very difficult, and there is a disposition to talk 
through nose (nervous throat affection) 

II Nothing tastes natural, except salt food. 

I Putrid taste in mouth 

II Tongue generally red and moist. 

I Tongue coated whitish, except edges, which are red. 

I Tongue coated, dirty looking, centre to root. 

I Tongue furred, whitish edges, centre and root darker. 

I I Tongue heavily coated, and dry to the tip; dirty coated, 
yellowish" white and slimy, dry; thickly coated, greyish-white. 

I Tongue coated whitish grey, having an underlying bluish 
look 

I I Slight yellow coating on tongue. 

I Tongue coated brown 

I I Difficulty in articulating, owing to a semi-paretic state of 
tongue, causing stuttering if she talks fast; has to speak very 
slowly. 

II Peculiar rattle in mouth, right along tongue; on attempt- 
ing to hawk her mouth clear, mucus rattled along tongue 
quickly and continually; utterance was so indistinct as to be 
6 



66 


LAt; < AMXl M, 


unintelligible, and ewry wnid sin* fin’d fo spi'.ik w,i% arnoin- 
pamed by this quick anil rontimimis lattli* .dung tunune. 

tl Breath offensive, putiid 

11 Mouth dry and pinched, dunks little .ind tdleu 

I Increase m <iuantity of '.aln.i which is slightiv visnd. 

I Mouth constantly full of frothy suliv.i, lips diy, pauihed. 

II Constant spitting and drooling, very profuse, making rhin 
and breast sore 

I During sleep saliva runs from mouth so as to wet pillow. 

II Stomatitis; stomacace; cancrum oiis; inn sing sort' mouth. 

Tongue coated white, breath offensive; sensation of a hair 

in back part of mouth on right side, which she tried ineffectu- 
ally to wipe away; profuse expectoration of salna. 

THROAT.— Quinsy: alternating siiies; tiiiek, tough pieces of 
diphtheritic membrane coming away, ami new menihrane con- 
stantly re-forming; .swelling in throat so large and tense that 
mouth could not be closed. 

[Throat sore; with severe headache; pain extemiing to 
chest, dry and sore; deep red color on either sale of throat 
opposite tonsils; on 1. side; painful to external pressure on 
both sides 

Sore throat, alternating sides, beginning and ending with 
menses 

Feeling of a lump in throat, which goes down when swal- 
lowing, but returns; throat < r, side; < on swallowing saliva; 
afterwards, throat, which had been getting well, sudilenly one 
evening grew rapidly <, but this time on 1. side. 

Constant inclination to swallow, which causes pain extend- 
ing to r. ear. 

Chill on movement; aching all over; great fatigue; desire 
for relief from cold drinks; bed too hard. 

Shortly before going to bed, throat began to feel raw and 
sore, did not sleep well; next morning throat felt full and 
sore, somewhat <C on r. side; this condition continued two 
days, when it seemed to continue downward to chest. 

II Throat very sensitive to touch externally 

1 1 Sensation as if throat were closing and she would choke, 
sensation is between throat and nose; feels as if something in 
throat was either enlarged or relaxed; desires to keep mouth 



LAC CANINUM 


67 


open lest she should choke, sometimes cannot swallow, be- 
cause there seems to be a kind of muscular contraction in 
throat 

1 1 Paralytic symptoms strongly marked, as soon as he went 
to sleep would stop breathing, and was only kept alive by 
keeping him awake, apparently respiration was kept up by 
voluntary effort 

II Talking is very difficult and there is a disposition to talk 
through nose 

I I I Swallowing very difficult, painful, almost impossible; 
fluids return through the nose. 

II Uvula elongated and very much swollen, diphtheritic coat- 
ing on it, tonsils swollen and coated, back of throat patched, 
extending up to hard palate; odor offensive and diphtheritic. 

I Constant inclination to swallow, causes pain extending to 
both ears 

I Pricking sensation m throat, as if full of sticks. 

Pricking and cutting pains through tonsils on swallowing, 
shooting up to ears, 

I Pam in throat pushes toward 1 ear. 

I I On swallowing acute pain at one time on r side of throat, 
and again on 1. side. 

II Throat > after drinking cold or warm; < by empty swal- 
lowing 

1 1 Throat sensitive. 

I Tickling and sense of constriction in upper part of throat, 
causing constant dry hacking cough 

II Sensation of ball or round body in 1 side of throat, and 
feeling that it could be removed with a knife 

Sensation of muscular contraction in the throat, sometimes 
inability to swallow 

1 1 Marked sensation of lump m throat on 1. side, when swal- 
lowing; pain extends to ear. 

II Sensation of lump in r side of throat, with a feeling that 
she could take hold of it with her fingers and pull it out, ac- 
companied' by a very annoying pricking, stitching feeling, 
constant inclination to swallow saliva, which causes soreness 
of throat 

1 1 Lump on left side of pharynx below tonsil, causing an en- 
largement that filled each arch of palate, nearly to r. side. 



68 


I.Af « WISI M. 


II Most pain when swaiUiwinu M<ii<is, ii<» ttt (-tild 

drink; when swallowiin; solui hunl it si’em" tn p.H*? <i\(*r a 
lump, with sore ami achinir juuk cKti'inlmij to and into 1. car. 

I Soreness of throat cominenocs with a tirklmu. 

I Throat feels raw. 

II Sensation of rawness, riiinim‘iioiiii> iisiialh on I suic of 
throat 

I Throat feels dry, huskv, as if scalded In hot thud. 

II Throat has a burnt ami drawn feelini' as fioin cau.stir. 

I Pain in r. side of throat in rejiion of tonsil. 

II Wakes with throat and mouth panifnlly di\ . 

II Throat very dry ami sore, much mtlanieii, i. side; 
palate red, uvula elongated; ’iiny painful degiutition 

II Throat sore, oedematous, puffeil, tonsils badlv swollen. 

I Especially shining, glazed and red aiipeaiance of tiiioat. 

II Sore throat, pains in whole body ami limbs, seveic head- 
ache. 

I Sore throat on 1. side; painful to e.xternal pressure both 
sides. 

II Sore throat on r. side, low down, and extending up to ear; 
pain when swallowing; sensitive to external pressun*. slight 
coryza. 

II Throat sore, swollen, red and glistening. 

II Sore spot on 1. side of throat, only at night, removed by 1 
A. M.; next night same on r. side of throat; after 1 a . m. re- 
turned no more. 

I Crusts on skin, with grayish yellow matter under them; 
mucous follicles of throat raised and swollen, and covered 
with whitish, cream colored mucus; bloody pus dtsciuirgeci 
from nose several times a day; nasal bones sore to piessiue 

I Partial suppression of urine; throat sore and of an (edema- 
tous, puffy appearance, next morning, pulse bk); temperature 
102 , tonsils badly swollen; great indisposition to take food oi 
dnnk, 

III Soreness of throat commences with a tickling sensation, 
which causes constant cough; then a sensation of a lump on 
one side, causing constant deglutition; this condition entirely 
cmses, only to commence on the opposite side, and often 
alternates, again returning to its first condition; these sore 
throats are very apt to begin and end with menses. 



LAC CANINUM. 


69 


II Sore throat just before menses for several years ever since 
diphtheria; small yellowish white patches of exudation on 
tonsil of affected side, with great difficulty of swallowing, and 
sharp pains moving up into ear, these patches are also pres- 
ent on back of throat and uvula, some are quite yellow and 
some are white; scraping them off makes them bleed 

I Shortly before going to bed, throat began to feel raw and 
sore; did not sleep well, next morning, throat felt full and 
sore, somewhat < on r side; this condition continued two 
days, when it seemed to continue downward to chest. 

I On waking in morning, throat felt as if there were lumps 
in it like two eggs, and sore all the time, especially when 
swallowing, cold water seemed to > momentarily; in even- 
ing, examination revealed both tonsils much swollen and very 
red, 1 most, and distinct patches on 1. tonsil. 

I Right tonsil red and swollen, pain in tonsil of gnawing 
character; < at night, dreams of snake in bed 

III Tonsils inflamed and very sore, red and shining, almost 
closing throat, dryness of fauces and throat, swelling of sub- 
maxillary glands. 

I O^iJ^sy just ready to discharge, disappeared without dis- 
charging, in an unusually short time; the trouble had been 
changing from one side to other and back again; has not re- 
turned. 

I Sore throat, rapidly growing <, fever, difficult swallow- 
ing, r side <, r tonsil intensely inflamed, bright red and 
greatly enlarged, and a yellowish grey spot on inner surface; 
whole pharynx, uvula and velum much inflamed, spot became 
larger, and others formed in pharynx; 1 tonsil became nearly 
as large as right; fetid breath; subsequently a bright scarlet 
eruption on face, neck, hands and chest, like scarlatina; 
almost total inability to swallow, especially fluids, aversion 
to liquids, particularly water. 

II suppuration ran from 1. tonsil to r , then from r. 
to L, then back again to r , then both tonsils equally, and 
again one tonsil would > and the other grow <; whole pos- 
terior portion of throat was an oedematous swelling, rising up 
like an insurmountable barrier; thick tough pieces of diph- 
theritic menfibrane were coming away, and new membranes 



70 


L\C CAMNl'M. 


constantly reforming; swelling in throat so huge and tense 
that mouth could not be closed. 

I! Mucous follicles raised oi swollen, and coveit'd with a 
whitish, cream colored mucus. 

II Whole membrane of throat swollen, dark led, with grey 
patches and small, irregular shaped iilceis, membrane peeled 
off occasionally; articulation and deglutition intenselv painful; 
< after sleep. 

II White ulcers on tonsils. 

(Sore throat, beginning at I. tonsil, swollen and nicerated; 
throat feels swollen and raw, pricking and cutting pains shoot 
through tonsils when swallowing; submaxiUary glands swol- 
len, sore and aching pain in i. ear; most pain when swallow- 
ing solids; food seems to pass over a lump; no aversion to 
cold dnnk; while drinking, fluid escaped through nose. 

II Sore throat commencing on 1, tonsil, which was swollen 
and ulcerated, and presented a depression covered by a white 
patch; the disease later extended to palate and r. tonsil, the 
parts red and shining. 

1 1 Throat highly inflamed, swollen, almost closed, grey 
diphtheritic spots on 1. side of throat. 

II Sore throat, ulcer on inner side of each tonsil, tonsils red 
and slightly enlarged, rest of the throat dry. 

II Ulcers increase in size and number, but neighboring mem- 
brane looks clearer. 

II Small, round or irregular, grey white ulcers on tonsils and 
fauces, both sides. . 

II Tonsils swollen as almost to close throat. 

1 1 Right tonsil covered with ash grey membrane extending 
along free palatine border to uvula, which it had already in- 
volved; room loaded with diphtheritic odor; next day mem- 
brane had passed centre, involving whole arch of palate, and 
reaching far down on 1. tonsil. 

11 Right tonsil raw, swollen; grey white membrane there and 
on fauces. 

I I Whole of r. tonsil covered with diphtheritic patch. 

II Both tonsils swollen and covered with spots of exudation, 
like the mould on preserves. 

II Tongue, fauces, tonsils, all swollen and covered with a 
dirty coating. 



LAC CANINUM. 


71 


1 1 On each tonsil a very thick exudation, covering nearly 
entire surface, while examining a large piece of membrane 
was accidentally detached from one tonsil, followed by con- 
siderable hemorrhage 

11 Throat very sore, tonsils enlarged, especially L, very large 
white patches, tonsils and pharynx deep purple red, putrid 
odor from throat, after patches were expectorated, they left 
throat very sore, raw and bloody 

11 Throat very sore, < 1 side, large greenish ulcers on both 
tonsils, surrounded by grey white exudation, parts not covered 
are a deep purple red, swelling externally on both sides; after 
exudation on tonsils disappeared* a raw, bloody surface was 
left 

11 White patches, like eggs of flies, on both tonsils, extend- 
ing thence to back of throat; tonsils enlarged and deep red; 
felt she would suffocate at night from full feeling in throat, 
which prevented sleep, swallowing toast gave some pain, but 
seemed to clear throat, and she had to gulp it down 

1 1 Gargling with warm water brought up a stringy mucus, 

II Whole membrane of throat highly inflamed, swollen, and 
glands enlarged on both sides 

II False membrane in throat, thick, grey, or slightly yellow, 
or dark and almost black, or white and glistening, almost like 
mother of pearl, or fish scales. 

I I Dark red, angry streaks of capillaries in fauces, giving 
place to shining, glistening deposit, or tough membrane, half 
arch is filled with sticky, fetid saliva, 

I I I Diphtheritic membrane white like china, mucous mem- 
brane of throat glistening as if varnished, membranes leave 
one side and go to the other repeatedly, desire for warm 
drinks, which may return through nose, post-diphtheritic 
paralysis. 

I Glossy, shining appearance, disposition on part of mem- 
brane to change its position in fauces. 

I I Ulcers on throat shine like silver gloss, symptoms went 
from side to side; croupy symptoms not well marked; after 
exudation was cleared off, a deep excavation was left. 

1 1 Diphtheritic deposits look as if varnished; exudations 
migratory, now here, now there. 



72 


KAC r\MM M, 


II Thick membranous mass l\in« on sott palate, 1 Mth;; 
diphtheritic masses coieriii}’ iniila ami posteiim wall i»f 
throat, next day. membrane on soft palate thu'kei, diitv 
brown on uvula and postenor walls and pdlaisot thinat. much 
more extensive and offensixc, veiy diJIirnlt deulutitimi. a 
large membranous mass, which thieatenet! suftocatioii. having 
been removed by forceps, on following uioiiiing a -ectinti 
membrane had taken place ot first, ami walls td throat were 
covered with a dirty grey exudation, uvula alimvst black, and 
coarse shreds of membrane hanging from it. 

I In morning throat very sore, r. tonsil coveiod with ulceis 
and patches, which extended over palate and cyvcK'd 1. tonsil; 
next day membrane extended across ])ostoiior wall of phai yn\, 
uvula elongated, accompanied by chilliness, high fever, pains 
in head, back and limbs, great lestlessness and (‘xtieiue pios- 
tration. This was pronounced to be “seveie iliphfhena," 
but it soon got well 

II Throat sore, but little swelling, tonsils veiy shglitlv en- 
larged, soreness of throat, first chiefly r. then 1 ; well niaiked 
diphtheritic membrane on both sides of the throat situated on 
an inflamed red base, ?4 inch long, h inch wide, ' ■ inch 
thick, and the same length and width as at the base; anterior 
edge a dirty yellow; centre more organized, pearly, glistening, 
white like cartilage; membrane on r side seems more firm 
and dense, and disappeared later 

1 Severe chills, headache, pain in back and limbs, restless- 
ness and sore throat; three days later r. tonsil covered with 
ashy grey membrane, extending along free palatine border to 
uvula, which it had already involved; peculiar iliphtheritic 
odor in room; pulse small; skin clammy; rapid vita! e-xhaus- 
tion, next day membrane involved whole arch of i>alate and 
passed down to 1. tonsil. 

I Roof of mouth and back wail of pharynx coated with a 
greyish yellow deposit, greater part of which soon disap- 
peared, lasting only about an hour; throat very much by 
noon, deposit had nearly disappeared, but <C again by night. 

I I Throat covered with diphtheritic membrane; uvula elon- 
gated, swollen and covered with black and white or grey 
diphtheritic deposit; back of throat extending to hard palate, 



LAC CANINUM 


73 


all covered, breath very offensive, 1 side of neck swollen and 
almost even with jaw; great difficulty in swallowing, alter 
throat began to improve, disease seemed to work through 
whole alimentary canal, for uvula and parts were very much 
swollen, and every little while there would be involuntary dis- 
charges of diphtheritic matter from uvula and rectum 

1 Patch of diphtheritic membrane appeared first on r. tonsil, 
then on 1 , and frequently alternated sides; swelling of neck 
(submaxillary and lymphatic glands) also alternated in like 
manner, < during and after a cold storm from northeast; 
tickling in throat when drinking, one side of nose stopped up, 
the other free and discharging thin mucus at times and thin 
blood, this condition of nose also alternated, non-oedematous 
swelling of eyelids, pink color of under lid, particularly of r. 
eye, breathing hoarse and croupy, at times entire stoppage of 
breath, often snoring, and only possible through mouth, ob- 
stinate constipation, frequent desire, with darting pains in 
rectum, no power to expel, stool large in size, whitish, rough, 
scaly, hard, could not bear to be left alone an instant, saw 
big eyes and creeping things, must have light, yet is intoler- 
ant to light of sun, urine scanty, infrequent, no desire, coffee 
colored, 80 per cent, of albumen and much mucus, quantity 
less than a gill in twenty-four hours. 

I Fever bathed in warm perspiration, especially about the 
face, neck and hands, anxious expression, eyes watery and 
discharging, wants to sit up m mother’s arms, cries and de- 
sists at every attempt to nurse, reaches for water, yet refuses 
to take it, respiration hoarse, crying whispered and broken, 
often no sound at all; pulse 170, tongue, fauces and tonsils 
swollen and covered with dirty coating, drooling from mouth; 
throat tender to touch externally, thick, dirty, grey, diphther- 
itic membrane, covering free border of epiglottis, and extend- 
ing off to each side, child refuses to swallow and sputters out 
the medicine, some returning through the nose. 

I Soreness of throat, accompanied by intense heat, pulse 
scarcely to be counted, prostration so complete that patient 
refused even to make an effort to take medicine; temperature 
102 6°, great sensitiveness of throat externally, symptoms 
after sleep, very thick exudate, covering nearly entire surface 



74 


LAC CANJNl’M. 


of each tonsil, which, if forcibly renun e<i, is ftill<nvc»l by con- 
siderable hemorrhage 

I Throat highly inflamed, swollen, alniovt rlosfd; grey, 
diphtheritic patches on 1. side of throat, ihfticnlt Ineuthing, at 
times suffocative spells, pulse 1 lb; fare flushed, swollen and 
hot, tongue dry and thickly coated, grevish white. 

I On third day r tonsil swollen and on it a small diphthentic 
patch, rest of throat inflamed, on fourth day both tonsils 
swollen and covered with diphtheritic patches, with diflicult 
deglutition, high fever, restlessness, crieti out and talked in 
sleep, complained of pains in head, back and limbs; bright 
scarlet redness on chest and around neck, which, on fifth day, 
extended all over body and legs; disease now at highest point; 
skin, in large patches, assumed a dark red color bordering on 
purple, whole body swollen; membrane, swelling and .sore- 
ness on r. side; deglutition impossible; refusing to drink 
while complaining of intense thirst; characteristic fetor in 
room, soreness on r. side decreased and coniinencctl on 1.; 1. 
tonsil and posterior wall of pharynx covered with inoinbraiiu; 
posterior nares invaded; marked sensation of lump in throat 
on 1. side, when swallowing, with pain extending to 1. ear.; 
tongue coated dirty, yellow white and slimy; absence of pros- 
tration; improvement commenced on seventh day and remedy 
was discontinued. 

iPains in limbs, small of back and head disappear, and 
throat becomes more painful, but looks better; often ulcers 
increase in size and number, but neighboring membrane looks 
clearer; < by empty deglutition; throat feels stiff; '* after 
drinking, warm or cold, no thirst, but dry mouth; pain pushes 
toward 1. ear; r. tonsil raw, swollen, grey white membrane 
there and on fauces; epistaxis when speaking or swallowing, 
in one case; sweat all over; great exhaustion with poisoned 
feeling; frequent micturition, urine dark; restless, legs and 
whole body; face burns dry; constant spitting, drooling;, 
ulcers small, round or irregular, grey white; voice hoaree, in- 
terrupted by weakness and hoarseness. 

II Throat filled with substance that looked like ** smear 
kase,” throat, tongue, roof of mouth, gums and cheeks com- 
pletely lined with this substance; mouth and throat filled with 
loose particles; horrible odor. 



LAC CANINUM. 


75 


I Heaviness, and stomach bloated and tender, enlargement 
of tonsils, 1 tonsil <; feels weak, cannot eat or drink any- 
thing without pain in pit of stomach, shortness of breath and 
general languor. 

I I Membrane would leave throat, and a very severe inter- 
stitial hemorrhage of bright red blood would ensue, hemor- 
rhage would slowly improve, and membrane appear again in 
throat, these had continued to alternate for several days. 

li False membrane, thick grey, yellow or dark, surrounding 
mucous membrane dark or bright, may be < on either side, 
or inflammation shift from side to side, generally < on 1. 

II False membrane, thick, yellowish grey, often greenish. 

II Pharyngeal inflammation, with wholesale destruction of 
epithelium, viscidity of saliva, heat of palms, absolute neces- 
sity for constant change of position. 

1 1 Thick, dirty grey diphtheritic membrane covering free 
border of epiglottis, and extending off to each side. 

1 1 Uvula pretty free from membrane, but intensely sore and 
bleeds. 

I Uvula coated (in seven cases). 

I I After membrane exfoliates, mucous membrane appears 
raw and bloody, with increased deglutition. 

II In most cases of diphtheria, the throat symptoms begin 
on r side. 

II Inflammation, ulcers and swelling shift from side to side, 
generally < on 1. 

III Diphtheria and diphtheritic croup, membranous croup. 

Awoke about four A M. (second day) with a feeling that she 

was going to have sore throat; rawness and soreness in throat 
on right side 

Swollen feeling in throat. 

Feeling as if she wanted to expectorate but could get noth- 
ing up 

Sensation of a sac (lump ?) m her throat on right side which 
seemed to descend when she swallowed, and scraped or rubbed 
against the mucous membrane as it went down, returning 
after deglutition. 

Fauces and tonsils very sore and red. 

Right tonsil appeared puckered and drawn up from circum- 
ference to centre. 



76 


UAC CANIN'. M. 


In centre of right tonsil, ;i small black spot abmil the si-ie 
of a pin-head 

Two long shaped ulcers on right tonsil, towaiii inni'i edge. 
On third day a ung of small vcllmv hhstei-. anmnd each 
ulcer, which later presented appearance of a lalse menilnune. 
False membrane on light tonsil but not on left. 

Left tonsil became sore and inllamed on second ila\. when 
the right was not nearly so painful; bv evening pam and sore- 
ness returned to right side when left side was relieved. This 
alternation from side to side continued one week when the 
painful symptoms wholly subsided. 

All deglutition painful, but worse w'hen swallowing solid 
food. 

Pam extends to ear when swallowing. 

Pains in throat worse in cold aii . 

Throat feels stiff as a board. 

Feeling of lump in throat which goes down wlien .swallow- 
ing, but returns; throat < on r. side. 

A lady, aged 50, a widow, mother of one child, is syphilitic, 
and has suffered very much with inflammation and ulceration 
of the tonsils and fauces — which are completely honeycombed 
by abscesses — and for the last month the pain and soreness 
has changed from one side to the other every day. For in- 
stance, the side that was sore yesterday is well to-day, and 
the side that was well yesterday is the sore one to-day. She 
has been treated a long time for this disease without benefit, 
by a professed homeopath. 

Four doses, 200th, of this remedy were given, two each day, 
when improvement set in, and in ten days she wa.s well, and 
has so remained without further medication. 

“Right to left, and from left to right" — daily.- Weii'ermifi. 
One of my cases was little Moody, son of Moody, of 
“Moody and Sankey,” sick with scarlatina “for the third 
time ” (so reported). His throat was full of large, foul, grey- 
yellow patches, deglutition extremely painful after sleep and 
from swallowing acid fruits, lumpy sensation in throat, unrest, 
delirium with undefined fears, considerable bright-red, fine 
eruption on face and chest, itching with dry skin. (I do not 
remember to have seen a case of diphtheria, so-called, fairly 



LAC CANINUM 


77 


well defined, but some eruption appeared at some time during 
the disease) Lac can. cm , one dose dry, and in forty-eight 
hours after a dry powder of cmm. potency, cured promptly 
without any other remedy 

In the use of Lac can. in diphtheria I have observed an in- 
teresting point: “It was twenty-four hours from the appear- 
ance to the entire disappearance of the patch in the throat” 
in the original proving. In prescribing I was just twenty-four 
hours before repeating the dose or reconsidering the case. If 
no better at end of twenty-four hours, with symptoms still 
pointing to Lac can , I give another powder of a different 
potency I have thus obtained much more prompt and satis- 
factory results than when the remedy was given in water and 
repeated every three or four hours — Nichols 

APPETITE. — Appetite improved; increased 

Cannot satisfy her hunger. 

1 Desire for highly-seasoned dishes, which is very unusual, 
has used pepper, mustard, and salt freely 

I No appetite 

Considerable thirst. 

Great hunger for large quantities, often 

I I Craves milk and drinks much of it 

Aversion to anything sweet. 

No appetite or thirst. 

II Thirst for a little at a time, but often, as throat is so dry 
and hot 

1 1 Thirst 

II Great thirst for large quantities, often. 

1 1 Desire for warmish water with a pinch of salt in it. 

II Aversion to liquids, especially water. 

II Appetite and strength failing, dislike to food, especially 
fat or greasy. 

STOMACH . — I Nausea, with headache, on waking; continuing 
all morning 

Nausea > by eructations of wind. 

At 5 P. M. while smoking a cigar, great nausea with severe 
pain m stomach-pit, vomiting seemed imminent, but the sen- 
sation ceased m four or five minutes. 

At 10:15 A. M., empty, weak feeling in stomach-pit; next 
day, same at 6 p. m. 



78 


L.vr CVSINl'M. 


iWeak, sinking feeling at stomach pit, on waking in morn- 
ing. 

Burning in epigastric region, feeling of a weight ami pies- 
sure of a stone in stomach. 

Ill Great faintness of .stomach ami nausea. 

11 Nausea at beginning of diphtheria. 

11 The almost constant diphtheiitic dischuiges from month 
and nose nearly ceased, and she almost imnietiiately had spells 
of sickness of stomach, and would occasionally vomit pieces 
of membrane. 

II Frequent attacks of severe vomiting, and when not so, 
always feeling of nausea, and fear to eat. 

II Gnawing, hungry feeling, not ' bv eating; ever> thing 
she eats, except fish, makes her worse; the thought of milk 
makes her sick. 

I Dyspeptic pain, as from a stoiu', or undigested food, in 
stomach-pit at 9:4 .j p. m.; followed hv a stabbing pain in r. 
lung, ]ust below nipple. 

[Burning in epigastric region; feeling of weight and pres- 
sure of stone in stomach, very thir.sty; abdomen swollen and 
burning, with bearing down pains therein; mueou.s, yellow, 
liquid stools; pulse 100; pains and throbbing in temple.s; 
flushes on 1 cheek, red, circular spot below r. malar bone, 
burning to touch, no appetite, cannot bear fooii; jaw cracks 
while eating 

II Stomach tender and bloated; cannot cat or drink anything 
without pain in stomach-pit. 

II Beating m stomach and bowels. 

11 Severe throbbing in region of solar plexus; when it be- 
comes very severe, which it did daily for hours at a time, it 
would seem to extend or continue upwards to head, when dix- 
ziness and lightness of head would supervene, requiring her 
to lie down at once, otherwise she would fall violently to the 
floor. 

II Gastralgia or cardialgia, < at menses, so she would drop 
to the floor, comes and goes suddenly. 

ABDOMEN. — Pain m r. side of pelvis; while it lasted there 
was no pain in 1. side. 

Pain and burning in 1. side of abdomen and pelvis, with 
weight and dragging on that side; clothes feel very heavy. 



LAC CANINUM. 


79 


II Feeling of tension in 1. groin, does not want to walk or 
stand, as it < the sensation, > by flexing leg on abdomen 

Very acute pain in 1. groin, extending up 1 side to crest of 
ilium, > by stool, sometimes the pain is in track of colon 

Abdomen swollen, and sensitive to deep pressure, which 
also = nausea, the nausea passes off when pressure is re- 
moved* 

Felt as though abdomen and chest were firmly compressed 
all over, as if the skin were contracted 

Abdomen very sensitive to pressure and weight of clothes, 
entirely > by removing them, during very profuse menses 

Pains in abdomen, intermittent. 

Pam in pelvis, principally over r ovarian region 

Headache (1 ) on first waking, and great pain in pelvis, 
most marked at r ovary. 

I Pressure from within outwards, as if contents of abdomen 
would be forced out literally, just above pelvis 

Sensation while walking as if abdomen would burst 

I I Severe burning pain r. hypochondriac and iliac region and 
corresponding part of back, extending across back to 1. side of 
abdomen, < when on feet or when fatigued, > lying down. 

I Abdomen very hard and swollen, m evening. 

I I Abdomen swollen and burning, with bearing down pains 
therein 

II Extreme heat in abdomen 

I Severe shooting pain in abdomen, passing in all directions. 

I I Intense sharp pain in 1. side of abdomen, with nausea 
while leaning forward 

II Pam and burning m 1 side of abdomen and pelvis, with 
weight and dragging on that side, clothes feel heavy. 

I Pam m pelvis, principally in r ovarian region. 

I Headache over 1. eye on first waking, and great pam in 
pelvis, most marked at r. ovary. 

I Pams in abdomen intermittent. 

II Pam in abdomen, < leaning forward; > leaning back. 

II Smarting in r. groin; pains seem to be m pelvic bones, 
uterus and limbs. 

I Very acute pain in 1. groin, extending up 1. side to crest of 
ilium, > by stool; sometimes pain in track of colon. 



80 


LAC CAMM M. 


STOOL AND RECTUM. -Frequent for stciol .ill thjonixh 

provings. 

When having a soft passage gieat tenesnins; jcrtuiii does 
not act as if it had lost powei. hut as if it roiiid not cxiiel 
faeces because they are soft, and adhou* to the pasts like rlay. 

Constipation, occasionally natnial passage, ingcnit .lesire 
for stool, but passes nothing hut wind, <n possiblv one ui two 
small pieces like sheep-dung; consuierable wind in abdonien, 
with rumbling, but never any pain. 

Profuse diarrhea, with colic pain; dial rhea watery, profuse, 
coming out with great force. 

Great constipation before and after menses, bowels very 
loose (not diarrhea) during inense.s. 

I (Mucous, liquid, yellow stools. 

1 Constipation, 

II Obstinate constipation, frequent desin* with darting pain 
in rectum, no power to expel; stool large, whitish, lough, 
scaly, hard. 

Frequent urging, passing only flatus or sinall bl.iek balls. 

URINARY ORGANS.— Urination causes intense p.iin in urethra, 
soon passing off. 

Sensation after urinating, as if bladder %vere still full; con- 
tinued desire to urinate 

Frequent desire to urinate, which if not immediately at- 
tended to causes pain in bladder; a numb, dull .sensation; if 
not > by urination it spreads over abdomen and 1. .side to ends 
of fingers; never in head; would frequently wake at night 
dreaming of the pain, and would have to urinate to > it. 

I Constant desire to urinate, passing large ciuantities fre- 
quently; at night she dreams of urinating, and wakes to find 
an immediate necessity; a less strong and healthy person 
would probably have wet the bed, 

(Nocturnal enuresis, a specific.) 

II Constant desire to urinate, with intense pain, 

1 Constant inclination to urinate which was restrained, as 
unnation caused intense pain when coming in contact with 
vulva. 

1 Urine unusually frequent and dark. 

1 Urine frequent; especially at night; scanty, high colored; 
red sediment 



LAC CANINUM. 


81 


llUnne very scanty and dark. 

I Urine dark, heavily loaded with thick reddish sediment 
that adhered in different colored circles to bottom and sides of 
vessel. 

II Great difficulty in urinating 

II Urinating only once in twenty-four hours, and then copi- 
ously, but with some difficulty and slight irritation. 

II Urine scanty, infrequent, coffee colored, no desire to 
urinate, quantity less than a gill in twenty-four hours, eighty 
per cent albumen, with much mucus 

II No urine for 47^ hours, bladder pretty full, parts fearfully 
swollen, and irritation on urination very great 

II Urine partially suppressed. 

I Constant desire to urinate, urine scanty. 

MALE SEXUAL ORGANS* — Sexual desire quite marked 

R spermatic cord, low down, sore to touch. 

I Chancre on prepuce, 1 side of frenum, penis greatly swol- 
len, chancre like a cauliflower excrescence, red, smooth, and 
glistening, granulating rapidly from centre to circumference 

(Small sore at entrance of urethra, parts of glans around 
urethra an open ulcer, exhaling most fetid smell, and with 
most excruciating pain, red, glistening appearance.) 

II Gonorrheal pains, intermittent, in front, middle, or pos- 
terior part of urethra, when the gonorrhea is >, catarrh sets 
in. 

II Large chancre on dorsum of penis, with a fungoid bacteric 
mass covering whole of corona glandis, which was at first of a 
glossy, shining white appearance, and later covered with a 
fungus, looking like fully developed aphthae, edges of swollen 
prepuce covered with nodosities and itching. 

I Penis enormously swollen, and a chancre on glans like a 
cauliflower excrescence, over half an inch m diameter, it was 
red, smooth and glistening, no pain; in a week there appeared 
two small chancres, deep, sharp edges, clean, and with same 
shining appearance 

II Small sore at entrance of urethra; kept getting <, prepuce 
involved for about half an inch, and parts of glans around 
urethra an open ulcer, exhaling most fetid smell, and with 
most excruciating pain; hemorrhage at 10 p m. every evening, 

7 



82 


l.Ar ( \NI\l M, 


and during day when removing i-unit.iiit dcMru to 

urinate, with intense [miij; im sleep tm ,i foitni-tht. led. j'hs- 
tening appearance. 

I Prepuce mvolved tni abutit .ui eii'iilh of .in iin h, .uid jmrts 
of gians penis aionmi iirethi.i an open uleei exii.ilme must 
fetid smell; pain exauciatmg; liemonhages at ten e\ei v even- 
ing and during day when removing ihessing; (iesne tu iinnate 
constant, and accoinpanieil by intmise pain, had not .slept for 
a fortnight, red, glistening appearance of nicer. 

II Buboes and chancres. 

FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS. —Menses scanty: tiTubly cross 
and impatient first day, severe paroxysmal pains in uteiine 
region, causing nausea; occasional pain in I. uv.uian legion, 
passing about half-way down thigh, on nppei itarl of it; all 
these pains > by bending backwani; pain ami aching in r. 
lumbar region when leaning forwards ( as m sewing t even for 
a short time; entire .> whim bcmling back. 

Menses scanty at first; with pain in !. ovary. 

Menses very profuse; abdomen very sensitive to pr«‘ssure 
and weight of clothes, entire by removing them. 

Several cases of membranous dysmenorrhea. 

Dysmenorrhea, pain in 1. groin, with bearing tlown and 
nervousness. 

Leucorrhea all day, but none at night, even after taking a 
long walk. 

Slight leucorrhea during the day, ■•C when standing or walk- 
ing. 

Severe pain in r. ovarian region, completely • by a How of 
bright-red blood, which lasted an hour, ami iltd not return. 

In afternoon, intermittent, sharp pains in r. ovarian region. 

Constant pain in r. ovary. 

Sharp pains beginning in 1. ovary, and darting like lightning 
either towards r. ovarian region, or else up 1. side and down 
arm, or sometimes down both thighs; but generally down 1. 
leg to foot, which is numb; pains like labor-pains; accom- 
panied by great restlessness of legs and arms, and great ach- 
ing in lumbar region; (5th d. after premature labor). 

II Sha^, lancinating pains like knives cutting upward from 
os uten, and as these were being relieved, sensation as of 
needles darting upwards in uterus. 



LAC CANINUM. 


83 


I Escape of flatus from vagina 

Pressure on anterior part of vulva, entire > by sitting, sen- 
sation as if everything were coming out at vulva, with frequent 
desire to urinate and smarting in urethra 

I Itching in 1 side of labia, with rough eruptive condition on 
L side of vagina, with acrid leucorrhea, excoriating severely. 

Great swelling of 1 labia, and terrible pam while urinating 
(from gonorrhea) 

I Intense painful soreness of vulva, extending to arms, com- 
ing on very suddenly about noon, and lasting for about two 
hours, came on again during evening, could not walk, stand 
or sit; > by lying on back and separating the knees as far as 
possible 

I Raw and bad-smelling sores between labia and thighs, 
in folds of skin; < when walking, would rather keep still all 
the time, these sores are covered with a disgusting white 
exudation 

Sexual organs extremely excited, very much < from the 
slightest touch, as putting the hand on the breast, or from the 
pressure of vulva when sitting, or the slight friction caused by 
walking 

After-pains very distressing, extending to thighs, rather < 
on r. side. 

Menses very stringy and sticky, cannot get rid of them. 

Urination caused intense pain in vulva, when even the least 
drop of urine came in contact with it 

Breasts very sore and sensitive to pressure for a day or two 
during menses 

I Breasts very sore and painful, with sharp, darting pain in 
r ovarian region extending to knee, very painful and must 
keep leg flexed (1st d. after miscarriage at 6th month) 

Constant pam in breasts, they feel very sore when going up 
or down stairs 

Constant pam m nipples. 

Breasts sensitive to deep pressure 

Breasts painful; feel as if full of very hard lumps < going 
up or down stairs. 

Loss of milk while nursing, without known cause. 

Calactorrhea (many causes). 



84 


l.AC » AMM M. 


Dries up the milk when musing. 

Given for an ulcerated thuwt tu ,i miiNinu «oin,in. it ruiod 
the throat and nearly dned up the nulk. 

After two doses of c. m lapul dot'i<MM> in •.i/e id Inrasts 
and quantity of iinlk in a hid\ who w.uiti-d to \u\m Inn rhild. 

Heat in ovarian and uterine lepion i, with men-es-. uul.un- 
matory and congestive condition id ov.iiies hefui’e nienscs; 
especially of r. ovary, with extreme soreness .md sensitiveness, 
which makes every motion and position, even hnMtli, painful. 
11 Pain in abdomen principallv in i. ov.ui.in regiun. 

11 Sharp pain in r. ovary. 

1 In afternoon, sharp pains inr. ov.in.in region, md eonst.int 
but intermittent 

I Severe pain in r. ovarian region, > In* tlow ot Inmln i-si 
blood 

I Pam in 1. ovarian region; across Imvei pan of .ifidomen. 

II Constant burning pain la I. ovarian legion, extending lioin 
1. leg even to foot. 

I Inflammatory and congesteii conilitiou (d iitems, with ex- 
treme soreness and tenderness, that made every imdioii, posi- 
tion, and even breath painful. 

I I Parenchymatous metritis itwo cases), in one. uterus three 
times as large as natural, round as a ball, and body vety haul, 
cervix obliterated by altered form of bodv; uterus sensitive. 

11 Much pain before and after menses, severe headache and 
entire prostration for first day or so. 

11 Pain in uterine region, passing down insiile of thighs, half 
way to knees, and r. leg feels numb. 

I Pains m uterine region, all day, no particuiai tiirectioii ex- 
cept down inner side of thigh half way to knees. 

II Severe pain in entire uterine region, with profuse dis- 
charge of yellow, brown and bloody leucorrhea, two weeks 
after menses, intense pain and enlargement of 1. ovary, which 
could be seen protruding. 

I Blood bright red and stringy, hot as fire, coming in gushes 
and clotting easily; constant bearing down pain, as if every- 
thing would come out of vulva. 

II Uterine hemorrhage for six weeks; ovanan pains alter- 
nated sides, as did the chronic headache. 

1 1 Retroverted uterus. 



LAC CANINUM. 


85 


III Menses, 14 days too soon, profuse, seven days too soon, 
flow came in gushes, scanty, intermittent, bright red and 
stringy, preceded by much flatulence from bowels; very stringy 
and sticky, cannot get rid of them 

III Great engorgment of breasts, with sensitiveness to touch, 
precedes menses, 

II Menses nearly ceased, at menses much pain in r. thigh 
and uterus, constant desire for stool, very low spirited. 

I Dysmenorrhea, abdomen sensitive even to weight of cloth- 
ing, flatus from vagina 

I Membranous dysmenorrhea. 

I Sore throats are very apt to begin and end with menstrua- 
tion. 

I Leucorrhea, very profuse during day, none at night, dis- 
charge whitish and watery, pain in small of back; very irri- 
table, < standing or walking. 

II Bearing down as though everything would fallout through 
vagina, with very frequent desire to urinate, and smarting in 
urethra. 

II Great swelling of 1. labia and terrible pain while urinating; 
from gonorrhea, 

II Foul smell from genitals. 

11 Pressure on labia causes a slight flow of blood; menstrua- 
tion commenced entirely normal 

II Great irritation about vulva and rectum. 

1 Urination causes intense pain in vulva, when even least 
drop of urine comes in contact with it. 

I Itching of vulva. 

1 Breasts very sore, sensitive to least pressure; dull, constant 
aching pain in them all evening. 

I Breasts very painful, but no lumps; pains are caused by 
least jar, has to hold breasts firmly when going up or down 
stairs; breasts < towards evening, pressure of her arm, in na- 
tural position, caused considerable pain. 

I Breasts very painful and sore; feel as if full of hard lumps, 
very painful when going up or down stairs. 

I I Soreness and enlargement of breasts. 

I Breasts seem very full. 

I Constant pam in nipples. 



86 


1,A<' ( AMVI M. 


Afterpains very severe, ami .><h<HiliiiK (iuwn thighs. 

Knots and cakes in breast, after tnisr.ui i.iue. 

Galactorrhea. 

Loss of milk while mirsniK, without known eause. 

Serviceable m almost all cases wheie u is lequiictl u* diy 
up milk 

Given for an ulcerated throat to a nmsmn woman, it nued 
throat and nearly dried np milk. 

RESPIRATOKY ORGANS. — Slight hoarseness, with now ami 
then a change of voice, aftei walking, hut soon passing away. 

Cough from tickling in uppei anterior pait of laryn.\, v 
when talking and also when lying. 

Cough from tickling under middle of stermiin. 

Cough with pain and opiiression of chest; it jar.s hei all over. 

Loss of voice, cannot speak in a whi.'.per i pharyngitis i. 

Marked soreness on touching larynx Cliphtheua K 

Sensation as if the breath would leave her when lying down 
and trying to sleep; ha.s to jump up and stir aunind for an 
hour or so every night. 

1! Loss of voice. 

|j Throat troubles her much if she reads aluuti or talks more 


than usual, it seems almost as though it was stopping up, and 
she feels very hoarse, but has no soreness; there is a feeling of 
fulness and choking. 

11 Unable to speak loud; distressed feeling while speaking, 

11 Respiration was hoarse, crying was whispered and broken, 
often no sound at all. 

11 Excessive hoarseness, and tickling, choking .sensation, > 
moving about. 

11 Voice hoarse and husky; interrupted by weakness and 
hoarseness. 

1 1 Larynx sensitive to pressure. 

II Constriction in lower part of larynx, like a finger across 
throat, feeling as of a bar across back of throat, 
spelk*^^'^^^ breathing; during evening had severe suffocating 

nf" dyspnea immediately after sleep, first on I side 

ot chest; dyspnea compelled her to be lifted upright with vio- 

eacb^Ste °k 



LAC CANINUM. 


87 


1 1 Breathing hoarse and croupy, and at times an entire stop- 
page of breath, when it would resume with a violent effort 

1 1 Breathing often snoring only possible through mouth 

11 Short breath 

11 Great difficulty in breathing, could not he down flat. 

II Breathing very labored. 

II Loud snoring during sleep. 

II Sensation as if breath would leave her when lying down 
and trying to sleep, has to jump up and stir around for an hour 
or so every night. 

I Tickling sensation in throat, causing cough; in afternoon 
quite hoarse 

I Cough from tickling in upper anterior part of larynx, > 
talking and lying down 

II Cough caused by irritation in upper part of throat, < ly- 
ing down at night, also after eating and drinking and after 
talking; with soreness of 1. side of throat and constant desire 
to urinate. 

II Cough on taking a long breath, not when swallowing. 

II Hard metallic cough. 

II Croupy cough, a dry, hoarse bark, penetrating through 
closed doors all over the house 

II Cough and dyspnea. 

II Constant cough, accompanying soreness. 

II Expectoration of profuse, sticky, tough, white mucus in 
masses, with coryza. 

CHEST. — Terrible dyspnea immediately after sleep, first on 
1. side of chest, the dyspnea compelled her to be lifted upright 
with violent exertion to get breath; there was sharp pain m 
region of heart with each of these attacks, after the medicine 
had but one attack of dyspnea, and all the pain was referred 
to r. side of chest (acute rheumatism). 

Lungs feel as though fast to chest, < while writing. 

Clavicles sore to touch. 

Stabbing pain in r. lung just below nipple, preceded by 
pain in stomach — pit as of a stone or undigested food. 

Sharp pain in r breast at 4 p M 

Feeling of oppression and tightness behind sternum, with 
desire to draw a deep breath. 



8H 


I \( I VMM M 


11 Sharp, ina'5ivt' pain hi-twi’M! •» ipnlt, |M"inu thi vsiKh 
sternum, with a siuisatmn nf m iioi-ljui! m at chest 

in afternoon. 

11 Tremblinst, jmkinii! .ui.l llutti-tin.; hin..-,. with 

numb, prickhn ‘4 sc'ns.ition .t!l “Vi'i !> >4', .m i nm.> 

11 Pulse so rajuii it rouM mmic fh In* > minti'ii 
11 Pulse KJb. 

Palpitation of heait, irii-iiul.ti. sin m ness nt tntMth, 

11 Heart beats rapidly slmln «Mn>'»-' 

I Pulse quick, full and •'Irnni;, with p uii-- in .ind thioat. 

II Pulse of little voluino. 

II Pulse 181), wiry, wtMk. 

11 Pulse, quick and feeble, I*"*. 11*', 17t', i:jn 1 b*; alniost 
gone. 

II Pulse 111 
11 Pulse rapid, <}uick. 

NECK AND BACK, li N.aik slitf. 

Sharp neuralgic pain undei r. sr.tpiil.t 
Lameness and cutting pain midnr 1. siMpitl.i, ttiniing in 
bed 

Sharp, cutting pain under 1. scapiil.i, ^ho«JtlJlg forwards 
through lung 

Backache nearly all day between scapul.e, aftui becom- 
ing warm, somewhat > by leaning back. 

Pain m sacrum < by stooping, • by leaning bark, with 
weakness, this pain extended around 1. side of pelvis i leaving 
the back) to inside of thigh, foiloweti by a bloody lencorrheal 
discharge after six hours, which came all at once, leaving labia 
extremely sensitive. 

Spine aches from base of brain to coccyx t pharyngitis ). 

II Pain in back of neck. 

Weakness in muscles of upper part of back. 

11 Wandering pains in nape, with stiffness. 

Stiffness and soreness of the muscles of the neck. 

II Neck aches, making her want to bend head forwards; en- 
tire spme sensitive. 

Paralysis of muscles of the neck, causing head to fall foi" 
wards, so that it rests on upper part of sternum. 

1 1 Spme aches from base of brain to coccyx. 



LAC CANINUM. 


89 


II Heat, pam and beating in small of back 

1 1 Pam in back 

Wakes with severe pam in lower part of back, it is often 
five minutes before she can straighten, pam leaves her when 
she has been about work a short time, not returning till morn- 
ing 

II Intense, unbearable pam across supersacral region, ex- 
tending to r. natis and down r sciatic nerve, pam so severe 
as to prevent sleep or rest, at same time diphtheritic sore 
throat on r side, with sensation of a lump, could not swallow 
solid food 

UPPER LIMBS.— Painful swelling and hardness, with suppur- 
ation of 1 axillary gland; menses came on at same time 

Pams down right arm and m fingers, which feel cramped, 
•does not seem to have the same power m r hand 

I From draught m evening, sudden, violent pains m r. shoul- 
der, so much that when retiring she could not raise arm to 
hmsh toilet, as if disabled by dislocation 

II Two warts on little finger 

Right wrist lame and painful. 

Sharp, shooting pains m ball of r. thumb. 

Sharp pam round 1. arm, as of a cutting instrument; felt 
principally at the vaccination cicatrix, passed from thence to 
1. elbow and disappeared; (forty-five minutes after first dose). 

Trembling of 1. hand as in paralysis agitans. 

Woke at night feeling very chilly, with sharp pain in 1. 
hand, and sensation m 1. arm as if asleep; lasting fifteen 
minutes 

Palms and soles burning hot. 

II Two warts on little finger noticed to be leaving 

Painful eruptions on axillas, like moist herpes, exceedingly 
painful on washing them. 

Veins m hands look bluer than usual, they are swollen 

Sensation as if an insect were crawling on shoulders and 
neck, occasionally on hands 

Perspiration m axillae, stains linen bright orange color, no 
smell. 

I Very fetid perspiration in axillae, staining linen brown. 

Wrists very lame, esp. r , which has sharp pains passing 
from thumb to little finger. 



90 


l.AC CANIM VI. 


II Neuralgic pains in shonkitus. 1. llien !. ; tht-n v um* veisa. 

II Pain m one or other shoukier 
1 1 Shoulders and arms ache. 

11 Partial paralysis of 1. aim, tinahlf t«> r.use h.viul ta iusid; 
on attempting to do so was seized vvitli sharp pains in anu be- 
low shoulder. 

11 Left hand bloats and is numb, with treinhling, leiking and 
fluttering through lungs, numb, pricking sens.itu>n all over 
body, arms and legs. 

I Sharp pam in 1. hand, 1. arm as if asleep. 

II Trembling of 1. hand, as in paralysi.s agitans. 

II Fingers extremely cold but not rest of hands. 

Severe pains in all the bones. 

Pains m joints of 1. hand, 1. ankle, I. knee: e.vtremel.v pain- 
ful, swollen and red. The day previous, hati similar pains 
and swellings in r. ankle and r. knee; pain was sharp, darting, 
erratic, now here, now there and by any motion. 

II Pam in 1. shoulder extending across to r. ; could scarcely 
move arm. 

LOWER LIMBS. — A few days before menses, inside of both 
thighs became raw and painful when walking, they then broke 
out with large, flat, red pimples; the soreness soon left; but 
the pimples remained. 

Vancose veins on outer r. thigh, from hip to knee. 

Sensation of numbness in 1. leg with great heat as if burn- 
ing, but cool to touch, brought on by pressure. 

Stiffness through thighs, < on attempting to move after 
sitting 

Veins of feet and ankles very much swollen. 

Feet swollen and very sore, causing considerable pain while 
walking. 

Numbness and paralytic feeling in inner side of both knees, 
extending to both big toes. 

II Pain in r. hip and leg while walking, with a trembling of 
leg, and slight feeling of uncertainty, esp. on going down 
stairs. 

II Articular rheumatism in r. hip and knee joints, especially 
former, she was seated in an arm chair, unable to move, com- 
plaining of bruised, smarting, lancinating pains m both joints 



LAC CANINUM. 


91 


and in lumbar region with swelling of affected joints, pains < 
by slightest motion at night, by touch and by. pressure of bed 
clothes; next day pains and swelling had gone to 1. hip and 
knee joints, leaving r. almost free, the ensuing day they had 
almost entirely disappeared from 1 hip and knee joints and 
had again attacked r hip and knee, complaining, moaning, 
and sighing on account of her sufferings and probable termina- 
tion of her illness 

I Rheumatic pains in 1. hip and along sciatic nerve; wander- 
ing pains in nape of neck, with stiffness, pains in one or other 
shoulder, pain above 1. eye and heaviness of eyelids, sensitive- 
ness to light. 

I Intense, unbearable pain across supersacral region, extend- 
ing to r. natis and down r. sciatic nerve, pain so severe as to 
prevent sleep or rest (sciatica) 

II Partial paralysis of r. leg from miscarriage; has to use a 
cane; leg numb and stiff, but cannot keep it still any length of 
time; feels "> flexing it on abdomen. 

Right ovary sore by spells and pain darts down leg some- 
times to foot 

Numb pains chiefly in ankles, < while quiet, with swelling, 
veins of ankles distended; > while extreme heat is applied 
(rheumatism). 

Ecthyma, on r. leg. 

1 1 Aching pains in limbs and back. 

Staggers m walking. 

Rheumatism beginning in soles flying from joint to joint and 
side to side, < every evening and by movement and touch; 
numb pains in ankle 

Burning of hands and feet at night (ovaralgia). 

II Cannot walk any distance; trembling through r. thigh, 
and feeling as though entire lower portion of body was giving 
away, felt as though something was strained across lower part 
of bowels. 

1 1 Sciatica 

1 1 Limbs cold to knees. 

1 Bruised pains m soles of feet, stiffness of ankle, knee and 
hip joints, and occasionally intense pains which move up- 
wards; pain in ankle joints as of a dull plug pushing; joints 



92 


L.V(' CAVISl M 


Stiff and sore, tender to touch: from and least motion; 
later knees and then hips beciinu* nnohed, at lir-t the !. ankle 
was attacked, and then, aftei some hums siiffeiiim the i. with 
relief to 1., and so on with knees aiul hijis, ehi'-'t atfei ted, tei- 
rible dyspnea coniinu on iininediatelv .iflei sleep, on 1. 
side; compelled hei tube lifted upnvtht with \iolent eseition 
to get breath, sharp pain in canliac remon, mine MMn|\ and 
dark, pain in r. side of throat, geiuTaily . at b I’ \t. 

1 1 After exposure to cold night air when diunk, shaip. dart- 
ing pains, < by any motion, with swelling in r. knee and r. 
ankle, next day joints of 1. knee and 1. ankle and 1. hand ex- 
tremely painful, moderately swollen, slightly red; ensuing «lay. 
1, ankle and knee better, but r. shoulder ami elbow simihiily 
affected. 

I Numb pains, chiefly in ankles, whili' qui<*t, w itli swelling; 
veins of ankles distended; > while extreim* he.-tt is applied. 

II Almost constant pain in r. hip. 

11 Ecthyma: a sore breaks out in r. leg, exces.sive itching; 
inflammation then swelling, blisters form ami sui>pnrution sets 
in; afterwards clear lymph, then discharge of imitter; then 
scabs and scales, turning eventually into a bnui-like tiesquama- 
tion; scars have left discolored skin. 

1 1 Restlessness in legs. 

1 1 Cramps in feet 

I Pams in limbs as if beaten. 

II Bruised pains in soles making it difficult to walk: in twelve 
days pains suddenly left soles and appeareii in r. knee joint, 
being smarting, lancinating, with light swelling of joint; could 
not move affected limb, as least motion •>. pains, as diii touch 
and pressure of bed clothes; on following day 1. knee joint 
affected in same way, r. >; on ensuing day r. again affected, 
with relief to L; afterwards hip joints attacked alternately 
with same symptoms, alternating like these in pains and swell- 
ing, 1. joints one day with > of r., and vice versa; also lanci- 
nating pains in 1. side of chest; after four days wrist joints 
affected, first r , with same symptoms as those of lower ex- 
tremities, symptoms of one side of body alternating with those 
of the other; not able to move himself in bed, lancinating 
pains made him cry out; constipation, sleeplessness, no fever; 



LAC DEFLORATUM. 


93 


pains and swelling < every evening, night, by movement, 
touch and pressure of bed clothes, numb pains chiefly m 
ankles <. 

11 Burning of hands and feet at night. 

Cramping pain in calf of r. leg at night. Was compelled to 
get up and rub it, which < , had this cramping every night for 
a week 

A knot (objective subjective) in calf of r. leg when cramp- 
ing, sensation as if some one had a stick in muscle and was 
twisting it around, (Never had cramp except when pregnant 
several years before. ) 

Sore aching, with throbbing in the outer side, and along 
sole of r. foot, excruciating pains coming and going by spells, 
unable to stand on foot during the pain 


LAC DEFLORATUM (Skimmed Cow’s Milk). 

CHARACTERISTICS. — Diseases with faulty and defective nutri- 
tion with reflex affections of nervous centers. 

Despondent; does not care to live, has no fear of death but 
is sure he is going to die. 

America7t\§tck headache ■ begins in forehead, extending to 
occiput, in morning on rising (Bry.), intense throbbing^ with 
nausea, vomiting, blindness and obstinate constipation (Epig., 
Ins, Sang ), < noise, light, motion (Mag. m., Sil ); great 
prostration, > pressure, by bandaging head tightly (Arg n., 
Puls ) , copious, pale urine 

'N^obus hystericusj/ sensation of a large ball rising from 
stomach to throat, causing sense of suffocation (Asaf , Kal ) 

Vomiting ?s^incessany no relation to eating first of undi- 
gested food,"lhten'seIy acid, then of bitter pregnancy^ 

(Lac ac , Psor ) 

Constipation with ineffectual urging (Anac., Nux), feces 
dry and hard (Bry., Sulph ), stool large ^ hardy great strain- 
mg, lacerating anus (Nat., San.), painful, extorting cries. 

A woman had taken 10 or 12 enemas daily, often passed 4 
or 5 weeks without an evacuation; constipation of 15 years, 
standing. 



94 


tAC mn oK.vifM 


Menses: delayed :\suppa*sstnl^ / m' /«/////<.■ Z/.ftffA m roM 
tm}er (Con.) of inili-iai/ foomf^tiv sttpf<>,-ss 
ytmTuntil next /iiVvVf/lcoinpun! Phus. 

“^Great restlessness, extreme anti (irotiaeteti sti!ft‘iint> from 
\^ss of sleep (Coc., Nit. ac. ) 

Feels, completely exhiiusted, whetht'i she tines anythinjj or 
noT;’ great fatigue when walking. 

** Sensation, as if cold air was blowing on her, e\en while 
covered up, as if sheets were damp- 

\Propsyy from organic heart disease; fiom ehronir liver 
complaint, far advanced albuminuria, following intermittent 
fever 

\ Obe sity/ fatty degeneration. 
sjEinac’iatioiy both |ocal and geneial. 
iSIlations:' — Antidotes: Ign., Ntix. 

COMPARE; Lac can., Laq vac.. Lac. ac., Sac. lac., Nat. 
mur., diabetes, albuminuria, headache, constipation, men- 
strual irregularities and heart affections, especially .iT* cjl- 
maxis , Coc., car dr sea sickues.s and menstnul hcailaches; 
Cac., but It lacks the iron hand constriction; Nnx m.. heavy 
head but it falls to left; Cal., Kali c., Nat. s., Tub., child 
takes cold easily, is chilly, the hydrogenoid constitution, t'.al , 
Caps., Fer., Graph , Tub , tendency to obesity: Ars., Cliina, 
Graph., lod., Lyc., Nat m., Phos., Sil., Stan., Siiiph., Tub., 
general emaciation; Arn., Hip., in traumatism; C.oii., Phos,, 
suppressed menses. 

AG&RAVATION.- ^Lyin g down^e.Kternal heati mot iuiv espe- 
cially walking, or exfeliding arm's over head TfaintingL pre.s- 
sure (fainting), cold water (suppresses men.sesi'.^sjtting liowiv* 
(ever so gently) ~ 

AMELIORATION.— Pressure (pain in eye); bandaging head 
lightly. 



LAC VACCINUM DELFORATUM. 


95 


LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 

To Dr. Samuel Swan is due the credit of first recognizing 
the possibilities of this substance when potentized, from read- 
ing the reported successful use of it in the crude form by 
Donkin, in the treatment of diabetes, albuminuria and other 
affections of the kidneys. He potentized it and began the 
proving on himself and a lady patient whom he had cured of 
a chronic ailment with the m and cm. potencies. Subse- 
quently he induced Dr Laura Morgan to undertake it, 
who with her friends made extensive provings, and what is 
remarkable is that the genuine character of the original work 
has not only verified many of the claims of Donkin, but nearly 
every symptom in the pathogenesis has been clinically veri- 
fied, especially the peculiar headaches, obstinate constipation 
and the unusual and ^irregular menses. 

It is well known that the chemical constituents of milk con- 
tain an epitome of the salts and tissues of the animal which 
secretes it, hence we may conclude that its range of action is 
co-extensive with these tissue salts Here we find the ‘ ‘ men- 
tal depression and weeping.” the “thirst for large quantities 
and often,” the “ periodical headache increasing and decreas- 
ing with the sun,” the “obstinate constipation and fissure 
pain ” of Natrum muriaticum And so of other salts 

Grauvogl suggests that \ hydrogenoid^and \cold;# childrer^ 
\should not be givem.milk^and Burnett maintains that a milk 
diet, even skimmed milk, after the first year renders them 
susceptible to colds There is no doubt it prevents nutrition 
in many persons, both children and adults,’ developing ema- 
ciationXin some and obesitydn others^/ m other words, a con- 
stitutipnal diathesis akin to, or that tends toward, the tu- 
bercular. 

The deep-seated vein of\nervous phenomena^manifested in 
its “'pathogenesis and verified m the c^ife of many^phstinate 
\^ronic ailments warrants a more careful study of this little 
known and less used remedy. 

' MIND.-\ Loss)C of memorjryi, listlessness, /^^inclination f or^ 
\bodily or menta!^xertion.^ 



96 


LAC VACCINl-M HM.H»KA1 I si. 


l©epression of spirits; don’t cau; tu liv»-; qiu‘snnn as to 
quietest and most certain way of hastt‘nin« on.-'s death 

During conversation, headache and depicsMon of hjiuits •. 
1 Depression and weeping with palpitaliun. 

I Imagines that all hei tiiends will dn* and that slir must go 
to a convent, 
i^rofound melancholy. 

Does not want to see or talk to any one. 

Can remember what has been read only b\ a stiong effort 
of will. 


syacillatioi]^Qf mind/ 

ifeeat despoudency^on account ofSthe liisease, i.s siiie he is 
going to die in 24 hours. 

' Has no fear of death but is sure he is going to tiie. 
s^reat depressioiy«^f spirit.sp^^vith ij/stiong inclination to 
i ^weep. 

“"depression of spirits which is nut liiSMiiated In conversa- 
tion. 

Loss of memory, could not renieinber fioni one pitiagiaph 
to another what she had read. 

1 HeadJ^ight, with throbbing in temples 
hSSBT— lyertigo; on moving head from pillow; lying 
down and esp turning while lying, obliging to sit n|>. 
""Headache preceded by dimness of .sight. 

; VIntense vertigo/w hen opening eyes while lying, v when 
I rising u p, objects appeared to move swiftly from 1. to r.. at 
other times naoving as if tossed up from below ht evtry direc- 
tion (cured). 

.stepping upon Hour in morn- 
ing. 


[ Pain first in forehead, then extending to occiinit, very in- 
tens^ distracting and unFearable,^g^eat photuphobhyt^even 
Nbghyof candle ^ deathly sickness ail over, with nausea and 
vornitmgT'^by movement or sitting up: very chilly, ami ex- 
ternal heat does not >; frequent and profuse urination of 
very pale urine. 

K ^jjer injurMubiect to distres^in h ead/ severe pain in fore- 
head just above eyes; breath very offensive; appetite poor, 
nausea; at times sleeps for hours daring attack; great distress 
across back; urine dark and thick. 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


97 


I Nausea ^and sometimes vomiting^ which >, pain in fore- 
head as*"^!! head w6“uI3. burst, witli‘^ blindness; pain is > by 
bandaging head tightly, < by light and noise, constipation, 

. stools large; hands and feet, cold 

Headache: < during menses; < by speaking, alternating 
with tonsihtis. 

ll^^^robbmg^ |rontal headache /over eyesX nausea, vomit- 
\j^,^and obstinate con stipatio n, esp.^in anaemic women: 

Headache, with pains in eyes, as if full of little stones, < 
closing eyes, profuse urination 

fPim vision, as of cloud^before eyes; profuse urination; full 
feeling in head ; slight nausea at pit of stomach ; face pale; 
feet cold; coldness in back. 

I I Intense pain at point of exit of supra-orbital nerve, dif- 
fused thence over forehead, attack commences with chill, 
quickened pulse, flushed face and belching of wind from stom- 
ach (cured) 

1 Severe headache, with a sensation as if top of head was 
lifted off, raised about five inches and brains were coming out; 
head feels hot, motion < pain, face felt as if flesh was off 
bones and their edges were separated and sticking out, better 
in five minutes after taking Lac Defioratum, and next morn- 
ing was entirely relieved. 

1 Pam first in forehead, extending through occiput, making 
her nearly frantic. 

**^1 Intense headache in forehead and through head, < in ver- 
tex, afterward head felt bruised (cured). 

I In morning nausea and sensation of a round ball full of 
pain in centre of forehead (cured). 

II General sore pain of head produced by coughing. 

I At firsbasharp pain at apex of hear^ as though a knife 
was^'cutting up and c^wn; this lasts a few seconds and is fol- 
lowed by a strange feeling in head, forehead feels extremely 
heavy, with dull sensation over eyes, and considerable throb- 
bing, most marked on each side of head, rest of head feels 
very light, s ^imn esg.of vision; can only distmguishdighl^jiot 
^objects; at sameTirne^^lr eat loss of strengthi cannot stand, TTut 
falls backwards7"an5 remains entirely unconsciousXfor two or 
three minutes; weakness" passes off- gradually and is followed 



98 


LAC VACCINI'M in-IIoKArrM. 


by crying, palpitation of heart and great depre'^'^ion nf -spirits, 

imagines that all her friends will die and that she nuist 

go to a convent; she can produce an attack .it .ui\ tune hv ex- 
tending arms high above head, ni bv jaessine aioiiiid waist; 
spells come on at 7 30 p. M. 

I After light breakfast, pain in foiehe.id, with nausea, very 
pal^ace, even lips looked whiti*. vomiting of ingesta and 
afterwards of mucus and bitter water; d*'athlv siek teeling ui 
pit of stomach, < using up in bed, ptofuse nrmation every 
half hour; urine colorless as water; great thiist ; intense throb- 
bing pain in vertex. 

K Pen odical pai^n foreheadyas if head would hurst, .iccoin- 
panied'by violent effort to vomit, and more rarelv vomiting; 
hands and* feet cold; .diarrhea alteniating with constipation, 
\the latter- predominating; loss of appetite; smell o< thought of 
|ood causes nausea; tongue moist, co.ited while, thiistlessness; 
always < at menstrual period; menses .scanty and accom- 
panied with colic. 

I Attacks come every eight days; dining attack can neither 
eat HOT drink, nor endure light or noise; does not even like to 
speak; great prostration, ' during menstruation, when pains 
subsicie inflammation of tonsils appears; tongue white and no 
relish for food. 

1 Severe frontal headache; nausea and sometimes vomiting 
upon nsing m morning, or from recumbent position at any 
time, or upon moving;\great constijiationj; '.constant chilliness 
\evenjvhei|i^iearfirej; ^ne proTi^^ and wattTy, or^’ant>;;_and 
*^ain throughout wliole spina! column; 
excessive ihirstfor large quantities; great depression of spirits; 
sudden prostration of strength at 5 i*. M. ; skin eidor of red 
rose, with swelling of face, neck, arms and body, geniTally in 
morning and during day and evening. 

ejes/with intense throbUinp^in both/ 
^emplesy eyes feel as if Ml oi little stones; eyeballs intensely 
gam|K^an(i oh shutting eyes, pressure of lids increases pain; 
edges of lids feel contracted, and convey sensation as of a nar- 
row band drawn tightly across eyeball; pain over I. hip; con- 
stipation and profuse urination during paroxysm. 

I Pain commencing in and above inner end of r. eyebrow 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


99 


before rising in morning; soon after rising pain passed into 
eyeball, < until afternoon, at which time it became unbear- 
able; < by walking and particularly by sitting down, though 
done carefully, also by heat radiated from fire or stooping, 
> on pressure; pressure on temples disclosed strong pulsa- 
tion of artery; pain ceased entirely at sunset and did not re- 
turn till next day. Light did not < it. The eye had no un- 
usual appearance Lac Fel had no effect Partial relief by 
Sol and Oxygen (cured by Lac Defloratum cm ). 

I Pains so severe that she would bury her eyes m her hands 
and press them into pillow. 

[Severe headache for years, severe pam over eyes, intense 
throbbing in temples 

I General sore pain of head produced by coughing 

I Throbbing in temples 

1 Americaii^sick headache^vith gastric symptoms. 

Hurting or pressing headache, in different places at different 
times, generally worse in occiput. 

Pam in forehead. 

Severe frontal headache, with intense throbbing in the 
temples, during nausea, passing away with the nausea and 
heat, leaving a bruised feeling in the head 

Severe frontal headachd^in the afternoonXpassmg of^uring ' 
%^oonversationj-pain was just above the eyes. 

Severe frontal headache above the eyes < by suddenly mov- 
ing or stooping, with depression of spirits, and strong inclina- 
tion to weep, passed away during conversation. 

Headache all day, worse in the afternoon. 

Headache and depression of spirits, head feels heavy with 
\marked tendency^to fall- to the right. 

In the morning the head felt very heavy, and fell to the 
right side, the muscles of the neck being unable to hold it 
erect. 

Headache in the afternoon and heaviness in the evening. 

S^onstan-^ull pam/just above the eyes 

Pain in the head most marked over the left eye, and in the 
temples, occasionally extending into the eyes, and causing 
profuse lachrymation. 

Head feels large as if growing externally (cured). 



100 


LAG VACVIMM HI- 1 l.nKA I T M. 


Flashes of heat in head aiui face. 

Pain m"left foreheatl, over hdt e>v. 

Revere headache for vears, ■;even' jain tnoi wes, intense 
throbbing in temples (curetl). 

Forehead feels extremely hoax v. 

Heavy feeling in forehead ami e\ts. 

Headache with pressure on vertex, jmin ovei eve<. 

Dull, heavy pain all over temples and fuiehe.id and extend- 
ing to occiput. 

^Burning in the top of the head. 

Sensation in base of brain as if pressure would relieve hei. 

During the headache, feet and haiuls cold. 

Bruised sensation in head caused l>\ eoiighing. 

Intense, awful, nii.xed-iip, achiim, drawing, piilhnu, stabbing 
pains, with deliriiini after the Ini. 

Vertigo, with nausea and vomiting. 

Intense aching pain with soiuiu'ss .uu! heavinc'.s of the 
whole head; face deathly pale anti tirtMiHui weakness and 
prostration. After 10m. in water, repeute.l.n shoit inteivals, 
a singular sensation of iclief coinmenceii at ilu; he.nl ami .sen- 
sibly passed all through her botly, as it weie in her nerves, 
and out through her feet. The next inouiing, after a good 
night’s sleep, she felt perfectly well, but lu/v. 

NOSE.— °^ring headache, coryxa and an apparent tonsil- 
ditis/ S Sick headache. 6. 


Catarrh in r. nostril in afternoon, coming tm very suddenlv, 
gone before morning. 11 ( 11 ). 

both nostrils, d ( l:ij, 

pSxh of both nostrils lasted till inth ilay. :i. 

Painful pressure and tightness at root of nose, with ca- 
ta^h; the tightness was cured, but not the catarrh 
Painful dryness of nostrils. 

Wuish/ with ilark depressed 
Sick ffehdache. 7. 

sunniT^r”'^ ^ Headache from 

suppressed menses. 8. 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


101 


.Flushes of heatin head and^face, especially 1 cheek. 3 (7). 

During proving, deathly pallor of face, m morning, so 
marked as to cause inquiry as to the reason of it 3 

° Very pale, even lips looked white. ^ Sick headache. 9. 

® Face pale. ^ Sick headache. 9 

® Deathly paleness of face on rising m morning. ^ Sick 
headache 9. 

° Very pale, with vertigo. ^ Quininism 9. 

° Flushed face. ^ Suppressed menses from putting hands 
in cold water. 9 

Pale face in morning; lips and tips of fingers white ^ 
Constipation. 9 

^ Face feels as if the flesh were off the bones, and the edges 
separated and sticking out. ^ Headache. 9 

° Pimples on face and forehead. ^ Intermittent fever. 9. 

° Painful dragging sensation in face, or as if something were 
dragging down his cheeks. ^ Diabetes. A. A 

° Yellow pasty look of face. ^ Diabetes. A. A. 

° His extreme nervousness, sleepless nights, and general ap- 
pearance and expression pointed to some deeply-rooted cere- 
bral trouble. ^ Incipient softening of brain. 20. 

^ Twitching of muscles of face.* A. A. 

° JFczematous eruptionqn a dyspeptic sallow woman. A. A. 

Wasted, thin and excessively sallow, with dark stains be- 
neath the eyes 

Face, neck, arms and body generally flushed, color of a red 
rose, with swelling, but no itching or burning. 

Lips dry and parched. 

Face looked blue during the cold sensation 

Flashes of heat in head and face. 

Face flushed, color of a red rose, with swelling (cured). 

M0UTH.-H^^rigue dr^nd cleave^o the roof^f the mouthy? 
% ^hit e coatings all over tongue. 1 (4). 

Tongue thickly coated at first. 

^Tongue coated white, moist, no thirst. ^Sick head- 
ache. 6 

"^Tjongue coated white , \f eels tastelessy ^ Sick headache. 6. 

Tongue red and devoid oT^ithelium. 

° Bitter disagreeable taste in mouth. ^Sick headache. 10. 



102 


LAC VACCIM M l»H'LUKAU'M. 


'vSweetfiickening taste in nwuth. IJ t * *• 

^^th ferFdry. 1 
Breath exhales a sweetish odor. 

° Breath very offensive. ^ lic.ni.irhe i*. 

“Tongue coated whitish-yidhnv. ^inripient softennig of 
jrain. 20. 

Tongue and lining ineinbr.ine have a ihisky led Inu*, and 
;overedvwit h apht hie at a later peritnl. 

"Tonguriurred white and rough soinetinies. A. A. 

*J)r yness of montPl^vithout thirst/ 

Dryness of mouth, pharynx and nostrils, withyinsatiabl^ 


■hirst . 

’’Sweet taste in mouth lasted ail day. 

Nausea rising from the mouth to the stomach. 

Mouth clammy and frothv, especially during conveisation 
(cured). 

TEETH. — ^Apumssjjong^and riioth loose. ^ Diabetes. A. A, 
“Grinding oTteetn when asleep, with pain in stoinarh, head- 
ache and vomiting. 

gpon gy^.bleeding condition of the gums and teeth. 

' Looseiiess-of the'teeti^ especially of the incisors. 
fMAi . — Painful dryness of nostrils, pharynx, and mouth; 
with insatiable thirst for cold water, a second goblet-ful being 
required as soon as the first had been drunk. 2 (after t) hours, 
1st day). 


'*^iG^bns hysteriens'/ sensation of a large ball rising from a 
gointabout lower end of 'sternum to upper end of esophagus, 
causing very distressing sense of suffocation. JJ. 

^Spre throa1;<all around, worse when swallowing, with slight 
hacking cough. 

Painful dryness of the pharynx, nostrils and mouth, with in- 
satiable thirst. 

EYES.- \Som»fphotophobia / Sick headache. 10. 

Pain, with mtching in 1 inner canthus, worse by reading 
or sewing. 2 (1). 

Pain in eyes on first going into the light, soon passing off. 


to move swiftly from left to right, at other 
as if tossed up from below in every direction 

Ccured). 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


103 


Pain in eyes on first going into the light. 3 (4). 

Great pain in eyes on first going into the light, soon pass- 
ing off; on * closing lids on account of the light, pain *was 
felt in eyeballs as if from pressure of lids. 3 (15). 

Dim vision, as of a cloud before eyes. ^ Sick headache 9. 

%preat photophobiax^^ven to light|^{ candle./ ^ Sick head- 
ache. 9. 

‘^pper lids^eel very heavy, sleepy all day 

®Dim vision, can only distinguish light, not objects. 
^ Faint spells. 3. 

°Eyes feel as if full of little stones. ^ Headache 3 

° Eyeballs intensely painful; and on shutting the eyes, the 
pressure of the lids increases the pain, causing a painful pres- 
sure, and the edges of lids feel contracted laterally and con- 
vey the sensation of a narrow band drawn tightly across eye- 
ball. 0 Headache 3. 

SPhotophobia^^lor *sunlight/in both eyes;\eyes red^lachry- 
mation, 1 eye more sore than r. 16 

^Great dimness of sight. ^Diabetes 20 ^Bright’s dis- 
ease. A A. 

® Cannot endure light ^Incipient softening of brain. 20. 
^profuse lachrymation^caused by a paii^in the temples ex- 
tending into the eyes (cured) 

Pam in and above the eyes. 

Eyeballs sore 

Blurr before sight preceding an attacbof headache (cured). 

EARS. — ° Noise very annoying. ^ Sick headache 10. 

® Cannot endure noise or talking of others. ^ Incipient 
softening of brain 20 

Slight deafness in both ears, 2 or 3 evenings. 

Great paleness of ears, face, and lips, principally in morn- 
ing. 

STOMACH. — Appetite not so good as formerly, everything 
tastes alike 1 (3). 

""^Wa^unable to go down stairs or eat a particle when brought 
to her. 1(4). 

Felt hungry and faint, but could not eat from loss of appe- 
tite iN^e thou gh^f foo^l^auseated hei^ 1 (5). 

""" Nai^ea and gagging after rising, the nausea returning several 
times during day. 1 (8). 



104 


hAC VAa’INl'M I'l I I iiU \ It M 


S^iolent retchin^ml < amnn Mtn-ed/ 

indescribable nausea u'tutniny; f\ ft \ li hoiii'*, 1 I 

Empty retc hin}?. 1 ‘."K 

^'or a ions time the nauM'a .itii! iiiipt\ lett liinu ti'Inined 
every mornins aftei tisiiip. 1. 

“Nausea, with occasional vonutim: which lehcvcs. ^^ck 
headache. R. 

" Violen t retching^** seldom in In'.! attack could 

only vomit by putting finger f:u dov\n thtoat. Sick head- 
ache 6. 

* ^^085 of appetitej^he sinell>gr thoiightvrd fooii •uau.seates* 
Sic^ headache. 6. 

“Can neither eat nor drink duiing attacks. Sick head- 
ache. 6. 

“Deathly nausea and vomiting, the naiiMM usually lasting 3 
or 4 days. ^ Sick headache. 7. 

“Sense of deathly sickness, and fretjueiii vomiting of green 
watery bitter fluid and slime. Sick lu'atlaclie. 7. 

“Deathly sickness at stomach, t# Di.thvtes niellitns. H. 
“Vomits some, but retches more; nausea all the time, t* 
Sick headache. 10 
“ (^_eat thirst, Sick headache, U. 

“Slight nausea at stomach-pit. Sick hcatiache. 9. 

“ Deathly sickness all over, with nausea ami vomiting, worse 
by movement or rising up in bed. ^ Sick headache. 

“ Nausea in morning. W sick headache. 9. 

° Qy-Sa-t thirst ; wants to drink all the time, and takes a glass- 
ful at a dnnk. ’ 3. 

•? AppetitC'entirely gone, ^ Headache. 9. 

“Nausea. » Headache. 9. « Threatened {ireiuature la- 
bor. 9. 

“Nausea and sometimes vomiting upon rising in morning, 
or from a recumbent position at any time during day or even- 
ing, or upon moving. « Sick headache. 11. 

“ Excessive thirst for large quantities and often. ^ Sick 
headache. 11. 

“Deathly sickness, with or without vomiting, ^ Constipa-f 

9 . 

^nabihtyido drink millj^ithout sick headachq/ 9. 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


105 


^Voluminou|j(tasteless eructation^soon afteiKthe doseXlO 
m.). 19. 

® Intense thirst. ^ Diabetes A. A 

^Voracious appetite. ^ Diabetes. A. A, 

^Much dyspepsia, and a feeling as though he would burst 
after taking food ^ Bright’s disease. A. A. 

° Indigestion, with distressing flat ulencyy sev ere palp>itation, 
difficult breathing, and great giddiness, so that sKe could with 
^ffic i^ty*^alk across the room. ^ Bright’s "disease. A. A 

° Invaluable in functional derangements and diseases of the 
\gastnc and intestinal organs, especially in certain forms of 
s^diarrhea, hypochondriasis and diarrhea; also in cases of ca- 
tarrh, and ulceration of the stomach A. A. 

° Little or no appetite, but not much thirst. ^ Incipient 
softening of the brain. 20. 

° Sour eructations. * 

° Violent pain in epigastric region and left side below ribs. 
A A 

^ Incessant vomitings which had no relation to her meals, 
A. A. ^ 

® Cramps in epigastric region A A 

Syiolent paiil^n stomach-pit^ seldom lower, brought on by 
fatigue. A. A 

° Much wind and acidity of stomach, without tenderness, 
A. A, 

° Vomiting, first of ingesta, undigested, intensely acid, then 
of bitter water, and lastly of a browhish clot, which in water 
separated and looked like coffee-grounds, without odor, but of 
bitter taste 

^ De athly nause^cannot vomit^with groans'^and cnes/and 
great distress, greaf^restl^sness’with sensation of coldness, 
afilidugh the skin was hot, pulse formal. 

\Morning sickness \during pregnancy, deathly sickness at 
stomach on waking, vertigo and waterbrash on rising, consti- 
pation. 

S^hronic gastro-enteritis with chronic diarrhea and vomit- 
ing. A. A. 

° During headache, nausea some, retching more. 

° Nausea and frequent vomiting of greenish watery bitter 
fluid, during the headache. 7. 



106 


LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


” Bloating.in epigastric region, with asthmajj so that he could 
scarcSy breathe, followed by hard" pressive pam about the 
Jt¥”cervicai vertebra— had only been temporarily relieved by 
a movement of the bowels 9. 

Great thirst, wants to drink all the time, wants a goblet full 
at a time, dryness of the mouth (cured). 

Insatiable thirst for cold water, a second goblet being re- 
quired as soon as the first has been drunk. 

Sweet taste in mouth. 

.. it#n.ri ^ t. 

Nausea, or a deathly feeling of sickness at stomach, recur- 
ring every six hours, and continuing about one hour; the nau- 
sea rose from stomach to mouth, occasioning belching of bit- 
ter flatus which momentarily relieved it, eating did not pro- 
duce or affect the nausea, the periodical recurrence having 
apparently no reference to anything else; the periodical re- 
currence continued for three days, she described the nausea 
as a deathly sickness throughout whole body, she did not 
Vomit, it being extremely difficult to cause it m her even with 
an emetic, during the nausea there was great internal heat, 
also severe frontal headache with intense throbbing m tem- 
ples, the nausea, heat, and headache passed away simulta- 
neously, leaving a bruised feeling m head 2(1) 

Nausea was so unbearable that she discontinued the medi- 
cine. 2 (2). 

Faintness with the nausea. 2 (3). 

Great thirst, wants to drink continually, but little at a time. 
3(2). 

Great thirst, drinking followed by a chill. 8 (5). 

V ery little appetite. 3 (3). 

•^®ea*^mg ev^mg 3 (5). 

In morning, faint hollow sensation in stomach, attended 
with slight nausea; passing off on going into open air. 3 (14). 

^ Soon after being put to bed, vomited ingesta, and after- 
wards mucus and bitter water. 0 Sick headache. 9. 

without retching 

worse rising in bed. ^§ick headache. 9. 

GtSS mternaTheat during the nausea. 

During the nausea severe frontal headache, with intense 
throbbing. 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


107 


Deathly sickness, without retching or vomiting, so dreadful 
and unbearable that the proving had to be discontinued. 

Nausea momentarily relieved by belching of bitter flatus. 

Nausea and vomiting, and a sensation of deathly sickness, 
< by movement or rising in bed 

Nausea and vomiting, followed by a deathly sick feeling, 
without either nausea or vomiting, intensified by sitting up in 
bed. Sickness described as awful 

Dyspepsia (cured). 

Indigestion, and a feeling as if he would burst after taking 
food. 

Faintness and nausea when stepping upon the floor in the 
mc^rmng (cured). 

ABDOMEN. — Rearing down paiifin abdomeritand back/ ^ 
After suppressed menses. 8 

Sensation of weight and dragging in 1. side of pelvis, worse 
next day. 3 (9). 

eight ^jid draggings m 1. side^of pelvis/with a^ burning 
sensation of pain, ‘'relieved somewhat by leaning to r.“side, in- 
creased by pressure of the clothes, or even the hand or arm 
resting on it 3 (11). 

® Drawing pains, with heat, across lower abdomen and bear- 
ing down. ^ Sick headache. 9. 

° Cannot bear pressure of arm or hand on abdomen. ^ Sick 
headache. 9. 

® Great fatiguj^from walking,’, on account of heaviness as of 
.a strae in abd om en. ^ Sick headache 9 

^ vAbdo mej^ery sor^and^ensitive to touch/ 3. 

° Pain* over 1. hip. ^ Headache. 3 

° Sensation as if abdomen were full of water, catching the 
breath like a spasm. 5. 

^ Drawing pains across uterine region, with heat and pres- 
sive Taring-down in both ovarian region^; cannot bear pres- 
sure of hand or^arm on^ abdomen intense distress in lower 
paVtTf abdomei^^ing relieved by any position; 

violent inflammation in ilio-cecal region, with intense pain, 
swelling, tenderness, fecal accumulation, and violent vomit- 
ing. 

"^xChronic gastritis and enteritis. Symptoms, chronic diar- 
rheaT’nd vomiting. 



108 


LAC VACCINOM DEFLORATUM. 


° Severe pain across the umbilicus with headache. 

• Flatulence. 

Constant pain in frontal region, nausea in morning, deathly 
paleness of face on rising in morning; aching pains in wrists 
and ankles; pufiy swelling under malleoli, drawing pains, with 
heat across lower abdomen and bearing down; frequent scanty 
pale unne, pressing bearing down in both ovarian regions; can- 
not bear pressure of hand or arm on abdomen; slight yellowish 
leucorrhea, great .lassitude and disinclination to exertion; de- 
pression of spirits, does not care to live; questions as to quick- 
est and most certain mode of hastening one’s death. F or years 
l^sbeen subject to attacks of, bloating in the epigastric region, 
attended Jtwith asthma, so that he could scarcely breathe 
(cured). 

STOOL AND RECTUM. — ’'SNo stool for first four days. 1 
(1 to 4). 

*‘Rectum feels* impacted with feces, but is unable to eject 
them. 1 (4). 

Bowels partly moved; but with much straining and some 
\laceration of anus * stool being very large and hard. 1 (5). 
"^Bowels again moved, but with the same laceration as anus, 
stool * being very large and hard, the pain while passing stool 
extorted cries, passed considerable blood with stool. The 
constipation was so intense that she took one dose of Nmx 
vom. 15m (Fincke) with immense relief in 24 hours. 1 (6). 


°i^bitually costive j. stools large. ^ Sick headache. 6. 
° ^? rnate diarrhea^ and constipation, the latter predorni-' 
nating. ^ Sick headache. 6. 

Constipation for 4 days; stool dry, hard, and passed in 
small lumps with much pain, * smarting of anus after stool. 
2 ( 2 ). 


° Constipation. 2 ® Headache, 
labor 9. 


3 ® Threatened premature 


® Great constipation. ^ Sick headache. 11. 

Very severe constipation for 15 years; has been in the 
habit of taking 10 or 12 enemas every day, and often passed 
4 or 5 weeks without stool. 14. 


_potencie,yit ha^^ very powerful actionnsjon the/ 
'k^iver^as evinced by the .white fecesj< (Swan’s observation). 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


109 


Causes constipation in most cases of diabetes, rarely diar- 
rhea. A. A. 

Constipation set in and lasted a week. Stool dry, hard, and 
passed in small lumps, with much pain and smarting in anus 
after stool 

During the constipation was constantly cold, so that she 
looked blue, hands and chest felt cold as if ' dead, additional 
clothing or sitting by a stove failed to warm her. Was awak- 
ened in the night by the cold 

Constipation (cured) 

Is ge nerally constipated, and when it is most persistent is 
very chiTly^ and cannot get warm (cured). 

*"*Frequent but ineffectual urging to stooh had one natural 
stool daily without urging. 

Constipation with chronic headache. 

Constipation with extremely tough salmon colored stools. 

.^Constipatioi^imply jinconqueraldy^by any constant treat- 
ment. 

^^J^nstipation^^soSlj£fcerabjy^J^vincible^ neither enemas 
nor the most powerful purgatives were of any avail. 

Stools yellowish or salmon hue after 48 hours. 

Violent rectal and sciatic pains following every effort at 
defecation. 

Constipation, feces dry and hard. 

Occasional diarrhea 

Diarrhea and borborygmi caused by the treatment. 

%Stool larg^nd hardMpassed^ith great straimn^Jaceratmg. 
^he anusiiextorting crie^nd^assm^onsiderabie bloody 

w "Www 

Frequent but ineffectual urging to stool. 

C onst iga t ion y* with chronic headache^jmost powerful purga- 
tives were of no avail, feces dry and hard, passed with great 
straining, lacerating anus, extorting cries and passing con- 
siderable blood jSi ^ronic/ 

s,Q^tinual^persisten]^constipation, > only by cathartics and 
enemas, with -Solent attacks of sick headache, pain first in 
lor?1^^d, then extending to occiput, intense, unbearable, 
great photophobia, even to light of candle; deathly sickness 
all over, -with nausea and vomiting < by movement or sitting 
up; chilly, n ot >„by external heat, frequent and profuse uri- 
nation of very pale urine. 



110 


LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


Frontal headache, deathly sickness, with or without vomit- 
ing; pale face in morning, r ’so lips and tips of fingers white, 
coldness over whole body. 

Is ^ enerall)^ constipated, and when it is most persistent very 
chilljT'^iinot warm 

"""urine. — “E xcessive flqwpf^urme, either of high specific 
gravity, or colorless, watery, low specific gravity, but in both 
cases strongly impregnated with sugar. 9. 

° Urinates profusely every half hour, urme perfectly color- 
less,*a^cific gravity 1005, Trommer's test showed sugar * 9 
““’’‘Ifrequent and profuse urination (nearly a quart every half 
hour), colorless as water, odor natural, taste slightly salt, 
slight acid reaction, Trommer’s test showed large quantities 
of sugar, specific gravity 1010 9 

Frequent urination, urine scanty and very pale. 3 (5 to 7; 
more marked 10, 11) 

° Urinates profusely every half hour, urine colorless as wa- 
ter, after Im. during the night the urine became high-colored 
and scanty but without sediment, in the morning normal 
Sick headache. 9 (Mrs. P aet 71). 

° Profuse urination. ^ Sick headache. 9. ^ Headache 3. 

° Frequent and profuse urination of very pale urine. ^ Sick 
headache 9 

° Frequent scanty pale urine. & Sick headache. 9. 

°^nevery light-colored, Jhias no .control^ver the organs; 
mine*' comes awayyin drops, or gushes out with a sensation of 
over the parts involuntary urination, 

° Urine very dark and thick Headache. 9 

° Unne profuse and watery, or scanty and high-colored. 
Sick headache. 11. 

^ ^ ^p 9 .ooDt sca.nty mination. ® Threatened premature la- 

"*"®’Urine scanty, low sp. gr. and containing of albumen; 
small and large casts of urine, pus cells, epithelium, and oil 
globules. B Bright’s disease. A. A. 

SSugar in urine/sp. gr. from 1035 to 1040 , 8 to 10 pints 
daily. ^ Diabetes7 A. A. 

Produces profuse flw of urine in Bright’s disease. A. A. 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


Ill 


° Urine intermits in flow, has to strain. 9. 
o brown and muddy, "qn''^ntity nearly normal. ^ In- 

cipient softening of brain 20. 

Frequent urination A A. 

® Albumen in urine, sp. gr of 2 cases, 1014, 1016. A A. 

° Frequent and profuse urination, urine colorless, odor nat- 
ural, no headache but intense vertigo, worse on opening the 
eyes or raising up in bed 9. 

° Urine pale straw color with no sediment on cooling. 9. 

° Urin£^ very dark and thicjc 9 

mSEE^TEXUAL organs. — ° Power and function of reproduc- 
tion suspended. 9. 

Frequent and profuse urination of very pale urine. 
A.lbuminuna. 

Urine very pale, cannot retain it 

Urine comes away drop by drop, or else gushes out, with a 
sensation of very hot water passing over the parts; wetting ^ 
bed at night (cured). 

vConstant desir^o urinate/ mine scanty and very pale. 

Profuse, very pale urine. 

Urinates profusely every half hour, perfectly colorless; 
specific gravity 1005 (six hours after Defior Im urine became 
natural in color and quantity). ^ ^ , 

Profuse urination during hea.d ache^^yy;^^\<r\£^ ni TM ?ston !- 

Frequent urination lvla.a‘g^^d> 

Albumen in urine, several cases cured. Specific gravity of 

two cases, 1014, 1016. 

Frequent and profuse urination; urine colorless, odor nat- 
ural; no headache accompanied it, but intense vertigo, worse 
on opening the eyes or rising up in bed (Specific gravity 
1010, taste saltish, slight acid reaction, Trommer’s test showed 
sugar. ) 

.Constant pain^.^n ^he regiop of the kidneys, passing round 
eadi side above thTliips to' the region of the blacider, also 
downward from the sacral region to the gluteal, and from 
thence down the back part of the thighs. Pam was burning 
and was not relieved in any position; lying down intensified it. 

FEMALE SEXUAL 0RGANS.-~Menses, which are naturally 
\ sca nty^' and postponed,^ came nearer the usual time, and the 
quantity of the flux was increased for many months 1. 



112 


LAC VACCIN0M DEFLORATUM. 


° Menses-salways scanty ,Vand attende4\with cohc/ «^Sick 
heaCTe >. ‘ 

“Menses which had just commenced were stopped by wet- 
ting from ram. The medicine restored them with some grip- 
ing* pain for a short time, they had previously been pain- 
less. 8. 

Menses, which had commenced, ceased suddenly and en- 
tir^,^ though they usually last four days. 3 (2). 

"^Menses two days too soon, scanty, and attended with a 
feeling of intense distress in lower part of abdomen, not 
relieved by any position or by removing the clothes. 3 (27). 

Slight>^ellowish/leucorrhea, with slight itching of vulva, 

3 (^:' 

* Slight yellowish leucorrhea 3(6,7). ^ Sick headache. 9* 

Leucorrhea more marked 3 (10). 

Leucorrhea nearly ceased 3 (12). 

'^Pressive bearmg-down m both ovarian regions. ^Sick 
headache 9 

° Menses irregular, too frequent, scanty, ^^Faint spells/ 3. 

Alfen^eaving'off proving for three or four months, her hus- 
band (physician) said she was pregnant, she became very 
large, full bosom, later on milk ran out, she felt fetal move- 
ment, went a week over what she thought was full time. 
Examined and found os uteri hard, pointed, strawberry- 
shaped Gave one dose of 10m , she gradually decreased, 

I and the symptoms all disappeared. 2. 

° Threatened premature labor; parts tumefied, profuse glairy 
muc^s "discharge, os soft and dilated, vertex presentation, 
occasional irregular bearing-down pains, fetal pulse 158. 9. 

11° Menses suddenly suppressed by putting hands into cold 
wateF to rinse out clothes, with great pam in uterine region, 
intense headache, aching pains all over, fever, flushed face. 9, 

irregular menses/sometimes very d^k and scanty, some- 
time's co lorless water. 0 InTennittent f ev^.”*"* 9” 
second mon;^/ three cases. 17. 

^^^^enses delayed a week, with congestion of blood to head, 
^g^ldness of hands, <nausea^ and vertigo;;, after taking llac vacci^ 

commenced next morn- 
mg^scanty, with pain Tn back, sensation of weight and drag- 
ging in 1 ovarian region. 9. 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


US 


°Sore pain m 1. ovarian region. 9 (cm. cured; 

Slight exaltation of sexual instincts, 3. 

° Menses five days too soon. 

Flow bright red. 

Morning sickness during pregnancy; deathly sickness at 
stomach on waking; vertigo and waterbrash on rising; consti- 
pation. 

Decrease in size of breasts. 

*)sBreasts feel sore/ worse hanging loose. 

HTHas never failed -to bring back milk in from 12 to 24 * 
hours ) 

Pj.minished secretion of milk. 

Drinking a glass of milk during menstruation will promptly 
check the flow until next menstrual period (Mrs. B., a medi- 
cal student, brunette, 33 years of age). 

Menses suddenly and entirely cease on the second day, the 
usual time being four days. 

Itching of the vulva, 

illDecrease in the size of the breasts, which after the proving 
resumed their original size and firmness. 

Weight and dragging^Jin the left sid^f pelvis^X ovarian re - 
gion7*witira’ burning sensation relieved somewhat by leaning 
ToThe right, increased by the pressure of the clothes, or even 
the hand or arm resting upon it. 

Drawing pam across th e uteri ne region, with h e at, and pres - 
sive beanng down in both ovarian regions. Cannot bear the 
pressure of the hand or arm bn the abdomen. Intense distress 
in lower part of abdomen during menstruation, not relieved by 
any position. Violent inflammation in the ileo-cecal region, 
with intense pain, swelling, tenderness, fecal accumulation, 
and violent vomiting (cured) 

Power and function of reproduction are suspended/ 

ifMenses suppressed by putting hands in cold water, with 
greaF'^pain in' the uterine region, intense headache, aching 
pains all over, fever and flushed face. After Im In water, one 
spoonful af "flight, headache left and she slept all night. Next 
morning slight flow; took another spoonful, and by 10 o'clock 
flow all right and she was free from pain. 

[kPiminutionVof the breasts, and .diminished secretion\of 
9 



114 


LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


, -milk ,in nursing women, never has failed to bring back the 
* milk in from 12 to 24 hours. 


Mrs. Y , aged 42, blonde, sometimes before, at other times 

just after, this time at about the close of her menses, she has 
a “hurting headache,” involving the whole head at different 
times. It does not hurt all over the head at once, but m dif- 
ferent places at different times Generally the pressure or 
hurting is worse when in the occiput, at which time she gets 
sick at the stomach and feels sick all over. More frequently 
the pain is in the forehead, but it is only unbearable when in 
the occiput. She cannot describe the pain, it seems like a 
severe “hurting” or pressure It leaves the eyelids sore. 
Lasts about 24 hours. She knew yesterday that she would 
have it today, but cannot tell why. She had it this time for 
four or five hours. Flow bright red. Breasts feel sore, worse 
hanging loose Constipation marked No other pams and 
not sick in anv other way. 


Lac vacctnum defloratuvi ^m m ,None dose, dry on tongue. 

Within a very short time, just a few moment's, she “felt big 
all over,” the veins filled up and felt full Became quite chilly 
(very characteristic of the remedy). Head very mu^ relieved 
during the first few minutes, when she arose the head was 
worse, with immediate relief on lying down The whole 
trouble was entirely gone in one and one-half hours Bowels 
moved normally about one hour after the single dose. Ring- 
ing in her left (deaf) ear. No trouble at her next period. 

MAMMiEr-l^easts decreased in size two-thirds, and became 
^byj with loss of flesh. 4 

Diminution of breasts and diminished secretion of milk in 


numing women. 

nii%n the breastS;^f a full breasted girl.,' 

^ throat/:aus- 

g^j^onstant desire to cough, . 

Constricted sensation in throat, causing constant hacking 
cough, no expectoration. 3 (11). 

"During day, short dry cough with dififlcult expectoration of 
a small lump of mucus which relieves the cough 

® Apyrexia of intermittent fever. 9. 

a^ruised sen sation in the head. 


11 . 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


115 


CHEST. — Respiration affected on lying down, prolonged in- 
^rations, and short quick expirations 3(3). 

On lying down, inspirations long, expirations short 3 (4). 

^^en and violent palpitation of heartj^with flushes of 
heat, caused by th_e__lea^st unusual sight^r sound? feels some- 
times extremely nervous. 3(19). 

° Palpitation of heart, and flushes of heat, especially in 1. 
face and cheek. 3. 

° ^harp PAin at apex of heart, as if a knife were cutting. jup 
and down, la^ng a few seconds. & Faint spells. 3." 

Subject to attacks ' of bloating in epigastric region, and 
with them always an attack. of asthma so that he can"^carcely 
breathe; then would have hard pressive pain at about 4th 
cervical vertebra, pressure round the breast (but not like the 
grasping of Cactus') with the dyspnea, always constipated; 
their symptoms were all relieved by purgative medicines. 9. 

Some palpitation of heart, with flashes of heat in head and 
face. 3 (5, 6) 

® Soreness of chest with great pressure. 

° In a case of hypertrophied/left yentricl^ with palpitation 
of heart, it lowered the pulse knd quieted the heart. A A. 

deposit in apices of both lungs. A A 

Short dry cough, with difficult expectoration of a small lump 
of 'mucus, which > cough. 

Pressure around heart (not like gra.spin g of Cact^y with 
dyspnS’^anTa^ of certainty that he is“*gomg to die in 
twenty-four hours 

Sharp pain in apex of heart, as if a knife were cutting up 
and down; this preceded by a heaviness of head, dulness of 
eyes, throbbing in temples and palpitation of heart 


vPaloitation of heart/an<k flushes of heatXespecially in left/ 
»>^ ide^f facei^nd neck/ 

11 Sensible decrease' in the breasts which after the proving 
returned to their original size and firmness. 

Pulse rapid and feeble. 

BACK. — “Chills running up and down between shoulders. 
& Sick headache. 7. 

“ Chills creeping along back and between shoulders. ^ Sick 
headach^ 



116 


LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


^Considerable panj^n back/a little below a line drawn 
across it from crest of ilium. 10. 

Painful aching in small of backj extending up to and between 
scapula, wprse while sitting, slightly relieved while walking; 
wnSnued for two days. 2 (12 hours after last dose on third 
day). 

° Coldness in back. ^ Sick headache. 9. 

Sn^nstant pairj^in small of backy commencing in region of 
kid^s, passing rovind”each side above hips to region of blad- 
der7 also' downward from renal region to gluteal, and thence 
down back to thighs, this pain is intense burning, relieved by 
no position, lying down intensified it. 3. 

A symmetncal patch- of » herpetic eruption on each side of 
'^eckTitching and burning after scratching. 3. 

® Great distress across back. ^ Headache. 9. 
spreat weakness- of the muscles of the neck left side, allow- 
ing the head to fall to the right. 

° intense pain throughout the whole spinal column. S Sick 
headache. 11. 

Pain in small of back. ^.Threatened- premature labor. 9. 

” Bonng pain, sore as if bruised, and throbbing in r. kidney, 
extending as a dull aching to r. hip, to spine, up to r scapula, 
and across r. side of abdomen to bladder, afterwards the bor- 
ing aSected the 1. kidney also, with a little aching there; back- 
ache across sacral region, much worse in the centre, a break- 
ing pain, all the worse from movement 5. 

Hard pressive pain at fourth cervical vertebra; chills creep- 
ing along back between scapulae. 

Intense burning pain in small of back and sacrum, com- 
mencing in region of kidneys, passing around on both sides 
above hips into groin, also downward from renal region 
through gluteal region, down back part of thighs; pain, burn- 
ing, and > by no position. 

regio^f frequent occurrence,^ 
With maefinable ind i sgositio ^ - ^ 

° During cS^TbaSusu^y feels cold. ^ Apyrexia of inter- 
mittent fever. 9. 

Dull hea vy aching pam over loins. 0 Diabetes. A. A. 

\^^Qi^stan t pairfMn small of tiaj^^^^red) '*******'*^ 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


117 


UPPER EXTREMITIES. — ^ During the proving, of fingers^ 
col<^nd look white/^est of hands warm/ 3. " * 

pains in wrists and a’nkles ^ Sick headache. 9. 
Ends of fingers icy cold, rest of hand warm. 3 
^eat on palnis, especially r (no name). 

'sCold hand^and fee^during headache/ 

Coldness and numbness of the limbs. 

Aching pains in the wrists. 

Ha^ds cold as if dead . 

LOWiK'EXTmilTIES . — Itching of knees at night. 3 (3). 
After the weak sick feeling suddenly left, both heels com- 
menced to ache. 3 (13) 

iCorn on r. little toe became\very painful and sore when put- 
ting on the shoe in morning;%soon passed off. 3 (19). 

° Feet cold, ^ Sick headache. 9 
° Puffy swelling under malleoli. ^ Sick headache 9. 
°Pains passing down under side of thighs to heels, pains m 
top of feet as if the bones were broken across instep, these 
pains in legs and feet come on as soon as she steps on them in 
the morning, when she becomes faint and nauseated and has 
to he down; has to lie down three or four times before she can 
get dressed. 9. 

° Loss of sensation on anterior surface of things. ^ Diabetes. 
A. A 

Aching pains in wrists and ankles 
° Cramps in legs at night. ^ Bright’s disease. A. A. 

® Legs much swollen. ^ Bright’s disease. A. A 
After the attack of debility had passed off, both heels com- 
menced to ache. 

Weaknesf^and aching^in ankles, puffiness under the malleoli 
(cured). 

^Skin thickened^at the edgesmf the feet /cured) 

Numbness and loss of sensation over the outer and anterior 
surface of the thighs (cured). 

' Edem^^f lower extremities /cured). 

.^nesttiesi^pf the limbs^ cured). 

Coldness and numbness of the limbs. 

Numbness and loss of sensation joy er outer and anterior sur- 
faces of tfiighs 



118 


LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


Cgl^hands or feet during headache. 

FEVER. — Felt cold all day; sat near the fire, but with no 
permanent relief. 1 (3). 

^^eneral coldness of body, and finger nails looked blue as if 
from ague; a heavy shawl did not prevent her from shivering. 
1 (4). 

Was cold, and had forebodings all day 1 (5). 

Had a restless night, feet did not get warm the whole night, 

1 ( 6 ). 

The natural warmth returned after several weeks. 

®'lHands and feet< generally cold. Sick headache. 6. 

° Cold hands and feet. ^ Sick headache. 6, 7. 

° Coldness and pallor of whole surface of body. Sick 
headache. 7. 

°Now and then chilly sensations, hands cold. » Headache 
from suppressed menses. 8. 

° Hands and feet very cold ® Sick headache. 10. 

Durin g last J:hree days of the constipation is constantly * 
S&®°JL^?#®”looked blue, hands and cheekslelt cold a£if 
’'yprc a shawl and sat near a fire, which 
iS,“ ^ .^Qwarm her, was awakened' in' night by feeling ^Id. 
fcTtoS). ~ ‘ • 

Chill following dnnking. 

Two chills during evening; no fever. 8 (4). 

During evening felt very chilly, and cold inside body as 
though It were filled with ice. 3 (14). 

not relieve her. » Sick 

° Constant chilliness even when near the fire. B Sick head- 
ache, 11. 


Constantly cold dunng the constipation, so that she looked 
blue; hands and cheeks felt cold as if dead; could not get warm 
with extra clothing, or by sitting near a hot stove; was awak- 
ened at night by the coldness. 


^ Suppressed menses from putting hands in cold 

Wonwer, y. 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


119 


® Coldness over whole body, ^ Constipation, 9. 

° About 7 or 8 P. M. becomes so sleepy that she cannot re- 
sist, and has to he down, about 9 p. m a very hot fever comes 
on, during which she sleeps, the fev^ continues till near 
morning, when she awakes m^a profuse sweat which stains the 
fmen yellow, and is very difficult to wash out. 9. 

"'^""Fell asleep after each dose m ten minutes, and woke m an 
hour in a profuse perspiration 18 

^ Is generally constipated, and when it is most persistent is 
very chilly and cannot get warm. 9. 

® Temperature 100. ^ Incipient softening of brain. 20. 

Alternate flashes of heat and cold (no name). 

FeVWishness and thirst (no name). 

In malignant typhoid, A. A. 

°Rhazes recommended it m all hectic fevers. A A. 

Hot fever 9 P. M., continues until near morning, wakes in 
profuse sweat, which stains linen yellow, difficult to wash out. 
Hectic fever, malignant typhoid. 

Sensation as if the sheets were damp. 

^Flushes of heatyn the headland fac^jsspeciallyj-^the left 
',cheet^ 

"^""Burning sensation in pelvis with sensation of weigM. 

Great internal heat during the nausea. 

Sweat in the palms of the hands, especially the right 
Pulse rapid and feeble. 

\ Chilliness, 

Extreme coldness^ of the tips’*of the fingers ^ which looked 

N. 

white. 

SLEEP.— ? Feels sleep^^all the time/, but isymuch disturbed ■* 
by unpleasant dreams. ^ After suppressed menses. 8. 

° Sleep s bu t little ^ Sick headache 10. 

Falirasleep*whiire going upstairs or standing up. 4. 

° Sleepy all day long. 3. 

®!St1ffines'sleeps1or hours during attacks of headache. 9. 
Most absurd dreams 12 (1st week). 

=^ddm'531£Stmiad to go on a journey and was in danger 
of lo'iTnTtreTmn^TItrknd 6thTiiKt5T""^ ^ 

“^"DreWed’that herself and daughter started for the Grand 
Union Depot, a mile and a half distant, and were told they 



120 


LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


had only ten minutes' to get there; that they ran most of the 
■way, and arrived in time to see the train moving off, and 
awakened as much fatigued as if it had been a real experience. 
9 (This, based upon above symptom, was the keynote of a 
case cured) 

“Sleepless, restless at night, from incessant intolerable 
thirst. ® Diabetes. A A. 

\Slee pless at night,iirand drowsjvby day^ Diabetes. A. A. 
° No sleep at night, but occasionally sTept towards morning. 
^ Diabetes A. A. 

“Almost complete loss of sleep. ^ Diabetes. A. A. 

“Quite nervous and sleepless. Incipient softening of 
brain 20 

Intense sleepiness. A. A. 

Sleepiness well marked for two weeks A. A. 

Sudden waking, wide awake without cause, soon went to 
sleep again (No name ) 

Sleeplessness in the first part of the night, little sleep near 
morning. 

time^an with difficulty ikeep awake, 

(No name.) 

Great somnolency. (No name ) 

Wakened by a se nsation of coldness. 

At times will sleep for hours (cured). 

. ^^£221 r®®t^®®®“®ss/and extreme and protracted suffering 
sleep>H^t m^ht (cured) 

the^c^of a red rose, wth swelling of face, 
b ody genera lly, in th e morning, and’ during 
lay and evening, no itching or burning "(S^^k headache. 11. 
3.S if the sh^ts were damp. 9. 

Sei^ation as ff cold air was blowing on her, even when cov- 
ered up warm 9. * 

""^^ipiedrskin.,' » Diabetes. A A. 

Shallow complexior^J^ith eczematous eruption disappeared, 
^ clean spotless skin; she was dyspep- 

i^t, was well after eruption left. A. A. 

Wasted, thin, and excessively sallow, with dark stains be- 
leath eyes. A. A. 

Skin became beautifully clear after use of skim milk. 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


121 


Itching of both knees at night. 

Itching of the vulva. 

Cofh^^'on^the right little toe was very painful and sore every 
morning during the proving. 

A symmetrical patch of herpetic eruption on each side of 
the neck, itching and burning after scratching, disappeared 
during the proving (cured). 

Dry> parched skin. 

Numbness and loss of sensation over the outer and anterior 
surfaces of the thighs. 

NERVES — I [Great lassitudOvand disinclination to exertion. 

1 Great restlessness and extreme and protracted suffering 
from loss of sleep at night, 

I Feels completely tired out and exhausted, whether she 
•does anything or not;., great fatigue from walking 

1 Great loss of strength, commencing with a sharp cutting 
pain in apex of heart; forehead feels heavy, with a dull sensa- 
tion over eyes and throbbing, principally in temples, rest of 
head feels light 

GENERALITIES. — Some of the symptoms lasted upwards of 
SIX weeks after the cessation of the medicine. 1 

Formerly slender,* became stout after the medicine. ^ Sick 
headache. 6. 

° Feels so tired and languid that she is hardly able to turn 
over in bed; limbs almost tremble on trying to use them. 

0 Headache from suppressed menses. 8 

Inclination to lean continually to r. side. 3 (10). 

%ln eveningJfeuddenlyleMery sicl^could no|^it up/no par- 
ticmar pain, but felt very weary. 3 (12). 

"*^11 Wemng at 8 p. M., the same weak sick feeling came on 
as on 12th day, but did not last so long, and ceased suddenly. 

3 (13). 

At 8 P. M , the same symptoms of weakness appeared as on 
12th and 13th days. 3 (15) 

About 7:30 p. m ^ feels^a tired weary sensation creeping over 
her, gradually increasing till it results in^complete exhaustion^ 
so that it IS impossible to stand or sit up; at the same time, 
head feels very heavy, and falls to r. side, ^e alsdsjvants to^ 
^ JleAQn r. side, with the b ody straight, whenlt commences to 



122 


LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


pass off, it does SO jery rapidly in an hour, leavingr no disa- 
^f^ble sensation whatever, but she feels perfectly well and 
strong 3(i7to26). 

the proving, loss of flesh, most marked in the 
* shrinkage ^ of the breasts, which have since resumed their 
natural size and firmness. 3. 

° Cannot he on L side. 3. 

^I^eels "completely tired out and exhausted/ whether she 
does anything or not. 3. 

Faint spells from one to three times a week, at first irregu- 
lar as to time of day, now coming on at 7:30 P. m. , can pro- 
duce an attack any time by extending her arms high above 
head, or by pressure round waist. 3. 

\Grea t loss^f strength j^cannot stand, but falls backwards, 
and remains entirely unconscious for two pr three minutes;, 
the weakness gradually passes off m half an hour. Faint 
\spells 3. 

° Sudden prostration of strength at 5 P. M. ^^Sick head- 
ache. 11. 

® Aching pains all over. ^ Suppressed menses from putting 
hands in cold water 9. 

Cannot walk more than one-fourth mile without resting.. 
^ Diabetes A. A. 

® As soon as she steps on feet in morning, she becomes faint 
and nauseated, and has to he down; must he down three or 
four times before she can get dressed. 9. 

° Languor , lass itud e, impaired sensibility. ^ Diabetes. A. A. 

Q ener g y^ and fatigue on exytion, alw ays feeling 

dull, heavy, and languid . ^Diabete^ "A.'/A. 

° Coldness and numbness of limbs. ^ Diabetes. A. A, 
and inclined to obesity. 0 Diabetes. A, A, 

^ Great fatigue on the slightest exertion. ^ Diabetes. A. A. 

^ery sto ut^X^with much difficult:^>n breathing^ ^BrighFs. 
disease. A. A. ' ^ 

/"Very anemic. ^ Bnght^s disease. A. A. 
?^tJ.^ssitj^§iiLndlidisinclinatioii^ exertion 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM 


12a 


Loss of durin^he^ particukrly of the breasts^ 

but they resumed their natural size afterlhe' proving 

Great depression of spirits, with strong inclination to cry. 

Twitching of the muscles^ of the body^ 

Occasionally felt extremely nervous 

Loss of weight in various cases. 

Great los^s of strength, commencing with a sharp cutting 
pain in the apex of the heart, followed by a strange feeling in 
the head, the forehead feels heavy with a dull sensation over 
the eyes, and throbbing, principally in the temples — rest of 
the head feels light — dimness of vision, can only see light, not 
objects. Loss of strength, falls backward and is unconscious. 
Attack soon passes off, followed by weeping, palpitation of 
the heart and great depression of spirits. Attack can be 
brought on at any time by raising the hands above the head, 
or by pressure around the waist. In a young girl of 17 whose 
menses were irregular (cured). 

^ Indefinable’ indisposition, not usually associated with local 
suffering, except a dull aching paimin the lumbar region^ 

Great debility/ or prostration of muscular power;\as well as 
of nervous energy. 

Fatigued and exhausted after moderate exertion, unable to 
walk even a short distance without being obliged to take a 
r^t 

llistlessness and disinclination for either bodily or mental 
exertion. 

Great restlessness and extreme and protracted suffering 
from loss of sleep at night. 

*Jncreasec|^emaciation, which ultimately becomes extreme. 

Perversevand deficient nutrition. 

Loss of energy. 

Enormous obesity in a lady (cured). 

Ability to walk a long distance without rest or fatigue. 

A woman who could not drink milk without its causing sick 
headache (cured). 

Recommended by Hippocratea^in phthisis^v in grouty affecr 
\tions^/ particularly where the articulations are involved, also in 
\^iaticaAnds|eucorrhea-/ 

^onsidered<the best and surest remed:^^jn all dropsies^ in 



124 


LAC VACCINOM DEFLORATUM. 


^sthm ^hen the result of emphysema an(Jiyeulmonary catarrh/ 
i ^bs tmate neuralgia/ when its cause lies in the intestinal 
caiSi^n diseases'Sgf^Ae liver, simple hypertrophy and fatty 
degeneration, and generally in diseases when there is\fault^ • 
^ntntioq/pften a consequenc^ipf obscur^ubacute\inflamma 7 
^lo^fThe stomachT^r intestines^ followed by affections of the 
nervous centers. 

Found to be sovereign remedy m dropsical cases^ with 
^ hypeftropTiieii liver and following intermittent fever. 

^IJarked improvement had been seen in cases where the 
dropsy is the result of organip heart disease, or of old standing 
iTvercomplaint, or of far advanced Bright’s disease. 

"***^dise very annoying 

II ]^m commencing across the upper sacral region, passing 
around either side over the hips down to groins and down 
thighs inside, sometimes to the feet — cured several cases. 

Bell Barnum, age 13, dark hair: For the last year has had 
severe headache at times, and great pain across the umbilicus^ 
a l so p ains passing down the under side of thighs to the heels. 
Pains in the top ofleeFas'ir the bones were broken across the 
instep. 

These pains in the legs and feet would come on as soon as 
she stepped upon them in the morning, upon which she 
would be faint and nauseated and have to lie down. Would 
have to he down three or four times before she could get 
dressed (cured). Three or four months after the headache 
returned, and was again cured by il^florati^ 

Judge Martin ^or year^as hadL^"bldVting^-a ^^^ in the 
\ epigastric rpgio J a S 'with i^^ 

o^sthm^^tK could sca rcely breathe: then he wouS 
have a hard pressive pain at about 'th^fouHlTcervical vertebra. 
These sy-fflPl ggs^wer^ by takmg pills, which 

would cause a free ev acu^ ion of the bowels Was always 
constipaledTcured . 

Caroline Betz, German, aged 18. About 7 pr^8 p. M. be - 
c gni^s, so sle epy that she cannot resisr^and ha^ to he down 
about 9 p. M. A very hot fever comes on during which she 
sleeps; the fever continues till near morning, when she wakes 
in a profuse sweat which stains the linen yellow and is very 
difficult to wash out 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


125 


During the day her back usually feels cold; short dry cough 
with difficult expectoration of a small lump of mucus, which 
relieves the cough. Irregular menstruation, sometimes very 
dark and scanty, and sometimes colorless water. Pimples on 
face and forehead. Nov. 8, gave ^eflor. Im. ’ Was entirely 
relieved of all the symptoms after the first dos^. Nov. 14^ 
The menstrual period is not yet due. 

“Sore aching,” with some throbbing in the outer side, and partly along 
the sole of r. foot, very excruciating pains coming and going by spells, 
walking did not seem to affect it The pain would come quite often, per- 
haps every half hour, last a few moments, then pass away. It gave her a 
good deal of trouble and caused her to suddenly drop to the floor to hold 
the foot; she could not stand on the foot during the pain. The pain would 
come on suddenly and go away rather suddenly, but leave the part sore 
for a short time. Lac caninum cmm. in water, a spoonful every three 
hours, relieved. 

After the first dose a decided aggravation, pains going more to the sole 
of the foot, and much more severe. Shortly after the second dose there 
was entire relief She took but two doses and continues entirely free from 
the trouble. 


SKIN. — Sensation as if an insect was crawling on shoulders 
and neck, occasionally on both hands. 

Herpetic eruption' in both axillae, with light brownish scab, 
extremely painful when washing, eruption most in r. axilla, 
and m both instances appeared previous to pain in labia, 
which was followed by a discharge of blood from vagina 
Every scratc h/ gets sore / 

Ichthyosis,' withsb ranlike*desquamation»of skin . 
fSliiningr glazed, and red appearance of ulc^s on shin and 


wrist 


Erusts on skin^' under which peyish yellow matter formed 




ana was squeezed out 
‘*§light roughness of skin of forehead, as of numerous pim- 


ples 

II On face, hands, neck and chest, bnght scarlet eruption,, 
exactly like scarlatina. 

‘^'Ttliroat full of large foul, grey yellow patches; deglutition 
espea^Iy painful after sleep and from swallowing fruits 
(acid); lumpy sensation felt in the middle of the throat; un- 
rest, delirium with undefined fears, considerable bright red, 
fine eruption on face and chest, with djgr^^^ 



126 


LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


II Bright scarlet redness on chest and around neck; next day 
all ovCT body except legs,' which were, however, covered that 
night, skin in large patches assumed dark red color bordering 
on purple, as seen in malignant cases, while body seemed 
swollen. 

"ll Diphthena with or following scarlatina. 

I ichthyosis, with branlike desquamation of skin. 

i’^er£smal^lotche^ike flea-bitesy 

I SmaU* blotches on chest, wrists and r. knee. 

I I Several boils on 1 side. 

II Crusts on skin, under which greyish yellow matter formed 
and was squeezed out. 

SLEEP. — II Great desire to sleep. 

II Cried out*anS' talked m sleep. 

I Cannot find any comfortable position m bed, there is no 
waj that she can put her hands that they do not bother her, 
falls asleep at last on her face. 

j 1 Dreamed a large snake was in bed. 

. II Got to sleep late; profuse sweat during sleep; felt fever- 
ish all night, m morning > m every way. 

I I At night lies with leg flexed on thigh, and thigh on pelvis ; 
restless, < after sleep 

Symptoms < after sleep. 


ll^leeplessness from emotional strain, with entire nervous 
'debihtj^. 

^ij ^ery restles |> i^at n ight/ very difficult to get into a comfort- 
able position, generalTjvgoes to sTeep^iymgLon” backsSivith handsj^ 
vover head./ 


IbTee^isturbed, very wakeful, limbs cold all night. 

II Sleep prevented by being very cold for one hour after re- 
tmng^ with^great nervousness. 

IVery restless all night, could not keep clothes over her. 

I i Sleepless and crying continually 

Itsgestless slee^at night,‘.|)ad dreams./ 

Got to sleep late, profuse sweat during sleep; felt feverish 
all night; in morning > m every way. 

I fr equently that she is urinating, and wakes to find 
li^ei^lf on point of’ doing so, requiring immediate relief. 

II Dreams of going on a journey, and was separated from 



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


127 


party, and had to walk a long distance, and arrived at station 
just in time to see train start off. 

1 1 Aggravation of symptoms after sleep. 

FEVER. — Chilly feeling lasting all day. 

Internal chilliness with external warmth. 

CT^'afiiis' run down back, han ds as cold as ice (on enter- 
ing house 4 p M. , 6:30 entire > after a good dinner). 

II Fever and chills for a few days, and up and down every 
few hours 

I Intense fever on waking in morning, with perspiration. 

Dry, hot skin. 

I Exhausting sweats, after sleep. 

Wakes at night in cold perspiration, with fearful foreboding. 

Perspired considerably through night, sweat having a rank 
smell. 

If Severe chills 

I Feels feverish. 

II Fever and bathed in warm perspiration, especially about 
face, neck and hands 

II Intense heat. 

II Moderate fever. 

II Fever. 

1 1 High fever 

1 1 Dry, hot skin 

If Fever returning^ every afternoon* 

11 Temperature, 102, 102^, 103, 103K- 

II Sweat all over. 

11 Skin clammy 

II Wakes in night in cold perspiration, with fearful fore- 
boding. 

1 1 Perspired considerably through night, sweat having a rank 
smell. 

Feverish in evening/ 

Flashes of heat, commencing in chest and extending up 
over face and head, when she would break out in sweat, which 
would dry up in a short time; face would become moist first, 
and become dry first. 

Sensation over whole chest as if dripping with sweat when 
only slightly moist. 



128 


LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM. 


NERVES.— 1 Restlessness. 

|‘No inclination for least exertion, would like to do nothing 
but sleep; much lassitude. 

|j»peaviness, weakness, general languor. 

II Profound depression of vitality. 

I General weakness and prostration very marked. 

II Great exhaustion, with “poisoned” feeling. 

II Profound prostration, to extent of refusing to make effort 
to take a dose of medicine 

II In morning so much prostrated_^that she could not turn in 
bed] so tired. 

'HfVery weak. 

II Sinking spells every morning, attended with great nervous- 
ness . 

li'bften feels as if she would lose use of limbs. 

II Childvpartially paralyzec^fter diphthena: could not walk; 
pain all over, cough, aphonia, loss of appetite, emaciation. 

II When walking seems to be walking on air; when lying 
does not seem to touch bed. 

I'^ufEering fronMyery unpleasant nervous symptoms; not in 
low spirits, but weak, and nerves so thoroughm out of order 
tnatshe cannot bear one jinger to touch the other, and often 
leSs as though she should lose use of her limbs; sensation as 
if throat were closing, sensation is between throat and nose; 
fe els as if someth ing in throat was either enlarged or relaxed, 
and has a desire to* keep mouth open; talkine difficult: dispo-^ 
s sitionxto talk:^hrough nose ;- sometimes^ cannot swallow, be- 
cause there seems to be a kind of/ muscular contraction In 
sleep restless, frequently wakes with sick heada^e, 
which seems to commence at nape; wakes with severe pain at 
lower part of back; pain leaves when about work a short time, 
does not return until next morning; nerves very much over- 
wrought, afraid of being unable to perform duties. 

'**The prejudice held by many honorable men against the use 
of this remedy, like that meted to Lachesis — because they 
could not obtain the tincture — would soon yield to gratitude 
i fs^Qx cellent workif^wen bedside test in some terribl\|,/ 
Two^ remedies in the materia medica excel 

^ ^ pathogenesis in symptoms of eye strain, un asthenopia/ 



LAC FELINUM,, 


129 


and ^Ciliary neuritis It vies with Onosmodium^n affections/' 
eye strain*, in children/and with Spigelia%jn neuralgia^^f the 

It was introduced and proved by Swan with the 17th, 30th 
and 200th potencies Its complete pathogenesis was pufe- 
lisheSTn’the Medical Visitor in Aug , 1893, and m the Homeo- 
pathic World, Vol. 18, p. 151, from which this record is taken 


LAC FELINUM (Cat’s Milk). 

MIND. — Great depression of spirits. 

Very cross to every one 

Fear of falling down stairs, but without vertigo. 

Morbid concientiousness, every little fault appeared a crime. 

Mental illusion that the corners of furniture, or any pointed 
object near her, were about to run into eyes; the symptom is 
purely mental, the objects do not appear to her sight to be too 
close (asthenopia). 

HEAD. — Dull pain in forehead in region of eyebrows. 

Heaviness m forehead. 

Heavy pressure in sides of head and vertex. 

Pulsations in head, with sensation of heat in forehead, and 
constriction across bridge of nose 

Acute pains on vertex. 

Acute pains in frontal region 

Intense pain early in morning on vertex, and 1. side of head; 
it commences just in front of vertex, with a flush of heat which 
extends front about an inch, and is followed by the intense 
pain, the heat and pain then spread, never crossing median 
line, down 1. side as a veil, taking half the nose and jaws, and 
entering ear, causing her to close the eyes from its intensity , 
during the pain, head drawn down so that chin pressed heavily 
on chest, and her agony was so great that she had to hold the 
head firmly in her hands, and rush through the house from 
room to room screaming (from the 17th potency). 

Acute pain 

?am in K*ea 


ove ^b 

d < from reading. 


lO 



130 


LAC FELINUM. 


Sharp lancinating pains passing zig-zag down 1. side of head 
about every ten minutes from vertex toward 1 ear. 

Pain commencing with a chilly sensation at root of nose, 
also a cold pain passing up median line to vertex, and passing 
up to ear (.like the previous symptom). 

Headache over eyes (1). 

Pam in forehead, occiput, and 1 side of head, with rigidity 
of cords of neck (splenius and trapezius), and heat in vertex, 
the pain in forehead is heavy pressing down over eyes (head- 
ache) 

Intense pain from head along lower jaw, causing mouth to 
fill with saliva. 

Crawling on top of brain (asthenopia). 

Weight on vertex (asthenopia). 

Terrible headache penetrating 1 eyeball to centre of brain, 
with pain in 1 supra-orbital region extending through brain to 
vertex (headache). 

Burning in 1 temple near eye, < at night (keratitis). 

EYES. — Sharp lancinating pain through centre of 1. eyeball, 
leaving it very sore internally, and causing profuse lachryma- 
tion (from the Im. ). 

Heavy pressure downwards of eyebrows and eyelids, as if 
the parts were lead. 

Inclination to keep eyes shut. 

Eyes feel as if sunken m head, and left eye occasionally 
waters 

Twitching of outer end of 1. upper lid, inside. 

(Twitching of eyelids r. and 1 ) 

(Ciliary neuralgia.) 

Sharp lancinating pain in centre of r. eyeball extending ex- 
ternally to temple and frontal region over eye, with intense 
photophobia, redness of conjunctiva, and lachrymation; < by 
reading or writing, the pam appears to be in interior of eye- 
ball, and extends thence to posterior wall of orbit, and then 
to the temples with throbbing, dim sight when reading; also 
constipation, loss of appetite, lassitude in legs (choroiditis). 

great success with it\in eye cases, esp. where 

pam,in bacfc^f orbit/ indicatmg\choroiditis/- 
Sron.) ■ ' ' ^ " 



LAC FELINUM 


131 


On looking fixedly, reading, or writing, darting pain from 
eyes nearly to occiput, much* < in r eye (asthenopia) 

When reading letters run together, with dull aching pain 
behind eyes, or shooting in eyes, the confused sight and shoot- 
ing" being < in r eye, sympfoms excited by catching cold or 
'Ey over-fatigue (asthenopia). 

Pain in eyes, back into head, extremely sharp, with a sensa- 
tion as if eyes extended back, great photophobia to natural or 
artificial light, any continued glare results in this pain (im- 
proved) 

Darting pain going backwards in centre of r. eye, < at night 
(keratitis) 

If she lies on 1 side, r. eye feels as if it were moving about 
and too heavy, with great pain. 

(Ulceration of cornea) 

Photophobia 

[L. eye feels hot and adheres m morning 
White spot on outer edge of 1 cornea, with red vessels run- 
ningiriTtVit from conjunctiva, and shooting pains from the 
spot to occiput 

Pam in r lower orbital border as if sore, with tenderness 
there on touch, and shooting in r eye 

R eye inflamed with shooting backward where the white 
spot is; 1, eye also inflamed, but without shooting. 

Stye on 1. upper lid. 

Two styes on r. lower lid. 

Eyes get bad every September, 

Eyes ache by gaslight. 

(Cured in various cases of ulceration of cornea )] 

Whitish ulcer in r cornea over 
swoTleh, lachrymatijori of^^F.^eye Darting pain goin’^'^BsSt- 
^V3"in centre of r. eye ,, < at nigh t If she lies on 1 side, r. 
^e feels as if it were m^ovm^aSout and were too heavy, with 
severe pain. With the r. eye everything seems m a white fog. 
Photophobia of r eye. Always feels weary, 

Mr E , aged 28,^hronic iritis/in the last three years had 
SIX attacks alternating in either eye First attack lasted five 
weeks, intervals between attacks from five to eight months 
Had been told he was incurable. 



132 


LAC FELINUM. 


March 26, ’88 Right eye much inflamed; dull aching pam 
at night, shooting from right eye to temple and eye-brow, 
worse between 3 and 5 A. M. Sight very hazy, his looks red. 
A black spot before right eye, moving with the eye when in 
sunlight. Lac felinum cm. Gradual and certain imprbv'e- 
men?', “sight less hazy, eye looks clear; sensation of sand in 
right eye on waking, black specks have disappeaied, can read 
pnnt now — Berndge 

Right eye inflamed, dull aching pain at night 
Shooting from r. eye to temple and eyebrow, between 3 
and 5 A. M 
Sight very hazy 
Ins, red 

A black spot before r eye, moving with the eye when in 
sunlight 

"^Sensation of sand in r eye on waking 
NOSE.— Cannot bear the smell of clams, of which she is nat- 
urally very fond, and cannot eat them. 

TEETH. Pams in all the teeth as the hot pain from head 
touched them 

MOUTH. Sensation as if tongue were scalded by a hot drink 
Redness under tongue, on gums, and whole buccal cavity" 
Soreness and sensation of ulcers on tongue and roof of 
mouth. 

of mouth seem to stick together, reciuiring an in- 
air or saliva Fo^'seukrate^them. ' ' ' ' 

~ Loss of taste. 

Brassy taste in mouth. 

Salivation, tongue enlarged and serrated at edges by teeth. 
Small white ulcers covering tongue and whole buccal cavity. 
E longa tion of palate. 

Very sore mouth 
(Dryness of mouth.) 

THROAT. — Tough mucus in pharynx. 

Stringy, tough mucus in pharynx, cannot hawk it up and 
has to swallow it, when it can be expectorated it is yellow. 
Mucus in pharynx between head and throat is thick, yellow, 

'^ith difficulty, and has a sickish 

sweet taste 



LAC FELINUM. 


133 


Posterior wall of pharynx slightly inflamed, with sensation 
of soreness. 

STOMACH. — No appetite 

After eating feels swollen, has to take oS her dress and 
loosen clothes. 

Great desire to eat paper. 

Stomach sore all around just below the belt, < 1. side. 

(5ccasionaily very slight nausea 

Heat in epigastrium. 

Great soreness and sensitiveness of epigastric region. 

ABDOMEN. — Pam in abdomen and back, as if menses about 
commencing 

Pam in bowels. 

At midnight, sensation of a cold bandage over lower part of 
abdomen. 

Great weight and bearing down in pelvis, like falling of the 
womb, as if she could "not walk, < when standing. 

Pam in pelvis through hips on pressure, as when placing 
arms akimbo. 

STOOL AND RECTUM.— Natural stool, but very slow m pass- 
ing, at 2 A. M. 

Stool long, tenacious, slipping back when ceasing to strain; 
seeming inability of rectum to expel its contents, 

URINARY ORGANS.— Frequent desire to unnate, urine very- 
pale. 

(Obstruction in urinating, has to wait. ) 

FfiMALE SEXUAL ORGANS.— Leucorrhea ceased on third and 
reappeared on fourth day. 

Furious itching of vulva, inside and out, yellow leucorrhea. 

(Dragging^ pain in 1. ovary.) 

I^lPiRATORYlORGANS.'— Dryness of nm of glottis. 

CHEST.— Very much oppressed for breath, continuing for 
several days; it is a difficulty in drawing a long breath, or 
rather that requires the drawing of a long inspiration, for it 
seems as if the breathing was done by upper part of lungs 
alone. 

UPPER LIMBS.— Pain in r. side of 1. wrist when using index 
finger 

LOWER LIMBS.— L. foot feels cold whe n tou ched by r. foot. 



134 


LAC VACCINUM. 


Legs ache 

SLEEP.— Dulness, sleepiness, gaping. 

Heavy, profound sleep, not easily awakened. 

Dreamed of earthquakes. 

FEVER.— Cold and heat alternately, each continuing but a 
short time. 

GENERALITIES. — Entire r. side from crown to sole felt ter- 
ribly weak, heavy, and distressed, so that it was difficult to 
walk. 

(Constant nervous trembling, esp. of hands, as in drunk- 
ards.) 


LAC VACCIIfUM (Cow’s Milk). 

Introduced and proved by Dr. J. C. Boardnian, of Trenton, 
New Jersey, who used Swanks 200th. Many persons are very 
intolerant of milk, in whom it produces headache, ** bilious- 
ness, ’^lntestlnal flatulence and obstinate constipation. These 
ejects of milk were developed in the proving, especially the 
characteristic headache and constipation, and have been clin- 
ically verified, is also well to remember that it develops or 
aggravates the uric acid diathesis, thus increasing the rheu- 
matl c tendency, while\the ^thirst and polyuria should call our 
atte ntion to it as a remedy to study in diabetes. 

In some highly sensitive women the effect on the function 
of the sexual organs is pronounced; the menstrual flow being 
suppressed by putting the hands in cold water, drinking a 
glass of milk will promptly suppress flow until the next period, 
mark the idiosyncrasy. Burnett remarks as a clinical fact 
children who drink much milk after their teeth are fully 
grown become very liable to colds. 

Like Natrum muriaticum, the potentized remedy will pro- 
duce its characteristic symptoms, even when the prover is 
using it in the crude form at the same time. 

nervousness/with depression of spirits, feel- 

Tiental confusion, lasting a iong tinie after proving. 

* prostration^ came on so suddenly, was unable to 

collect her thoughts or write her symptoms. 



LAC VACCINUM. 


135 


Mental confusion, could not express her thoughts. 

Dull, weak, confused, witb^fj^J^^Wing^f whole body^^ 

HEAD. — Vertigo:, falls backwards if she closes her eyes. 

A creeping sensation, or screw-like or vertical motion, be- 
gan over 1. eye, and continued upwards to vertex, next the 
same motion or feeling began two inches behind 1. ear, and 
likewise went upwards to vertex; also a pressure on vertex, 
with a sensation of heat when hand was applied (1 h ). 

Sensation like a fire-ball in each temple simultaneously 
(20 m.). 

All these symptoms passed away except pain on top of 
head, which feels as though something heavy were laid there, , 
and occasionally a sharp pain simultaneously (3/4 h.). 

Woke in morning with an aching pam all over head, most 
severe in occiput. 

Fullness of head as if too large and heavy. 

Vertigo. 

EYES. — Dull pain over r. eye, and very slight dull feeling 
over 1 eye 

Eyes have a blur, or dimness, or obscurity of sight, off and 
on for a few moments at a time. 

Blindness of both eyes, which came on three or four times 
in**^ccession, lasting only a second at a time, then passing 
entirely away, leaving a pain in each temple, on top of head, ^ 
1. ear, and below 1. ear in the neck (2j4 L). 

EARS. — Ears felt stopped up, felt deaf in both ears, although 
she could hear as before, 

MOUTH. — Had a dirty, yellow-coated tongue, which felt 
xp, arched/ 

Sour taste. 

Acid saliva staining handkerchief yellow. 

Ulcers on tongue, flat, white, sunken, tongue swollen, ex- 
ceedingly sensitive, covered with white, slimy mucus on the 
parts not ulcerated; breath extremely fetid, sores extend to 
inside of cheeks and tonsils, deglutition painful. 
’“TOmOAC^ensation of plug m throat or larynx. 

APPETITE.— Thirst for cold water in quantities; drank three 

.Caw*.' - ' 

tumblerfuls during evening. 

STOMACH,— ]^d a^ellmg/oiS^loatin^f stomacy;3d d ). 



136 


LAC VACCINUM. 


At 10.30 A M sour taste; nausea, but no rising or vomiting 

(1 h.) 

Contractive, pressing pam in stomach-pit, > by external 


pressure. 

< >^Er nctationsy 

aSDOMHJ.— P am proceeding from sternum, extending across 
abdomen about an inch below umbilicus 

Constant intolerable flatulence, begins an hour after drink- 
ing milk for lunch and lasts all the afternoon 
\Borb orygmus,,.-with loud, noisy rumbling (200). 

ST8&L*. — ^Obstinate constipation; stool hard, dry, in im- 
pacted balls; can be passed only with great straining. 

Passage of ^Unking flatus/ in large quantity, which relieves. 

URINARY ORGANS. — Urine was not increased in morning, but 
was dark red, without sediment. 

Filled a large iron spoon with the urine and boiled it for 
twenty minutes; it left quite a mass of albumin, about a quar- 
ter of the whole, specific gravity 1030. 

Yesterday the urine turned blue paper red, to-day it turns 
the red paper blue (13th d.) 

In afternoon was obliged to urinate every fifteen minutes, 
in ^^e quantity each time; was afraid to go across the street 
to a store for fear it would overtake me before I could return ; 
it all passed ofi the same night. 

The density of urine vaned during a few days from 1,018 to 
1,028, color clear, odorless, acid reaction. 

!^<^uent discharge of clear urine, nearly colorless, no sedi- 
ment. 


^MALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — White watery leucorrhea; pain 
in sacrum. " --- - 


"^WESeT watery leucorrhea; pains in sacrum. 

Dr inking a glass of milk will promptly suppress the flow 
untTnext ihensfrual period. 

Reuses, suppressed, delayed by putting hands in cold water. 
N^sea of pregnancy with desire for food > by drinking 

mii£fr - ^ 


"IffiSPIRATORY ORGANS. 

&T. — sharp pain 


— Sensation of plug in throat or 
appeared in a spot the size of a shil- 



LAC VACCINUM. 


137 


ling on each side of sternum and about middle of chest, with 
a sense of suffocation. 

Later a burning sensation m same region 

Same pain extends across abdomen about five inches lower 
down (about an inch below umbilicus), it did not seem to in- 
volve the bladder, no rumbling or passing of flatus 

Sharp pains in 1 lower chest, or in region of lower lobe of 
1. lung, the pain was momentary and did not return (5th d. ). 

Sharp pain began in r. chest, about three inches below clav- 
icle; it passed upward to top of r. shoulder, then down arm 
and forearm to thumb, and then passed off. 

BACK. — Pains in sacrum 

Severe, dulF, aching pains in lumbar region, prover often j 
exclaims, '‘Oh, how my back aches 1” 

""Upper limbs. — Fmgers of both hands, esp. when stretched 
out, tremble and quiver as from extreme weakness 

A clammy sticky coldness in both hands and both feet simul- 
taneously 

Sharp pain under 1. scapula, about three inches down from 
top; it then passed upwards to top of 1. shoulder, then down 
-arm and forearm and hand to the four fingers of the 1. hand, 
and then passed off. 

Soon afterwards an aching pain was felt in 1. hip-jomt, 
which soon passed off. 

LOWER LIMBS. — Rercing or lancinating pain in each hip- 
joint, not severe. 

****^^*^^ along both thighs on outer side and terminat- 

ing in both knees. 

Aching pains in both knees like a rheumatic pain; they be- 
gan^ simultaneously in both knees, but the r. was most severe 
(5th d.). 

On going up stairs the knees trembled or quivered or were 
extremely weak, so as to be unable to take a step forwards. 

Aching pains in bones from both hip-jomts to both feet 
sirnultaneously; also burning sensation in both feet 
~Alfthrjomts^ the bo^,^esp. knees, feel weak and power- 
lessTas" when half drunk. 

""^ort rheumatic pains in knee and tarsal joints when walk- 
ing. 



138 


LAC VACCINUM. 


SLEEP.—Slept well all night, and woke in morning free from 
pain (8 30 A M ). 

Head feels all over heavy, dull, aching, drowsy, wants to 
go to sleep. 

Gajit IS unsteady. 

Must force herself to keep awake. 

Must force herself to keep her eyes open, for if she shuts 
them she cannot avoid falling backwards and down to the 


floor 

In seven hours said she still felt sleepy, and could have fab 
len asleep in a minute at any time during the whole day. 
General restlessness and bad dreams 
Dreams of trying to lay out a corpse, etc. 

FEVER, — Hands became hot and dry, a decided fever heat 
of hands. 

Also pain on 1. side of head, extending from neck to top of 
head, and a chilling sensation with it 
A slight fever over the entire body with a moisture in both 
hands, and aching m legs from thighs to knees, both sides 
simultaneously. 

Fever at night, followed by profuse sweat all over, the fever 
was preceded by chilly feeling, commencing at shoulders, and 
then running up from feet to head, headache. 

SKIN.-'si^own crusts, having a greasy appearance, especially 
corners of mouthy similar to what are called “butter-sores.’" 
Miss H. took one dose Im (Fmcke). It caused frequent 
profuse discharge of clear urine, no sediment, and nearly col- 
orless. White, watery leucorrhea; pains in sacrum, sensa- 
tion of plug in throat or larynx; sour taste in mouth, acid 
saliva staining handkerchief yellow; contr active pressing pain 
in stom^hjpih relieved by ^external pressure. 

iS^^ALITIES. — ^The pains in chest, abdomen, hips, thighs,, 
and knees were all felt on r. and 1. sides simultaneously. 

mentally and bodily that 
1 ^ j unable to collect herJ:hou^ or use a pencil t o w rite 
her^mptoms, I was therefore compelled to witness and asic 


questions and record them, after the proving was nearly over 
she said she ha d so inuc h rnen tal confusion that she could not 
^uUlTy clear enough to fe el her*^ tlTouglits^or excess 



LYSSIN. 


139 


them; she could only give direct short answers to questions, 
a^tor writing her symptoms, she had no physical power to do 
it. In two hours all symptoms subsided gradually, but still 
there was a general trembling or quivering of whole body as 
well as the fingers In six and a half hours nearly relievedT 
except great physical prostration; mind is again normal. 


LYSSIN (Hydrophobinum ; saliva of a rabid dog). 

Introduced and proved by Hering in 1833, fifty years before 
the crude experiments of Pasteur with the serum 

The toxic or non-toxic property of animal saliva has long 
been a question of scientific discussion. Trevinarus found 
that the human saliva became red by the addition of tincture 
of iron; and Gmelin discovered that this color was caused by 
Sulpho-cyanate The question in dispute appeared to be that 
Cyanic acid being a poison, Sulpho-cyanate also must be one, 
and of course its combination with alkalies, and being poisons, 
they could not be in the saliva. Years before this discovery, 
Oken had declared that ‘‘saliva is poison.” But the discov- 
eries of Liebig and other chemists have demonstrated that 
Sulpho-cyanic acid is to be found in sheep, dogs and many 
other animals 

The experiments of Bernard and others, in Virchow's 
Archives, 1858, have decided that Sulpho-cyanate of Potash 
found in saliva of animals, acts as a poison under certain con- 
ditions. Bernard considered that it acted only by application 
to cellular tissue. In this he was, no doubt, m error, being 
misled by the analogy of the snake poison But, Weir 
Mitchell in his “Researches on the Venom of the Rattle- 
snake,” page 34, says, he “could not discover any in the rat- 
tlesnake poison, notwithstanding repeated experiments.” 

Livingston, the African explorer, has reported the bite of 
the lion as poisonous; and the same claim is made in the East 
Indies regarding the bite of the tiger. From time immemoriab 
It has been known m every country village that the bite of an 
angry cat is poisonous, and the effects often severe, even fatal. 
This is also true with the bite of all other animals, human 
beings included, when in a fit of passion. 



140 


LYSSIN. 


Hering reports a case taken from a French journal in which 
a healthy farmer, aet. 19, while holding a duck m his lap was 
bitten on the lip by the angry drake. The same day he felt 
sick, grew rapidly worse, and a few weeks after died. He 
also says, that ‘‘after the bite of a dog not rabid difficult heal- 
ing ulcers will follow.’* It is further known, that after the 
bite of a rabid dog not only the wounds made by the teeth 
heal in an unusually short time, but several physicians have 
observed that even the usual cauterizations are not inclined to 
inflame, rather more inclined to heal quickly We may take 
this for a pathognomonic symptom of the slumbering poison of 
Lyssm, the same thing is true of leprosy before it breaks out. 

Now comes the work of Pasteur, in 1878, 1879 and 1880. 

His experiments furnished evidence that the malignant dis- 
ease, splenic fever, was caused by bacteria. 

An animal inoculated with a few drops of a liquid contain- 
ing this bacteria, develops the disease with astonishing rapid- 
ity and dies within one or two days. But, he claims that 
chickens are an exception to this rule, because when similarly 
inoculated they remain in perfect health. Pasteur’s explana- 
tion of this strange fact is based on a higher bodily tempera- 
ture of birds than any other warm blooded animals. The 
temperature of animals most readily affected by splenic fever 
ranges from 33 to 35C , while the blood temperature of chick- 
ens is from 42 to 43C. degrees. Now, by reducing the tem- 
perature of the chicken after inoculation, Pasteur found it had 
died of splenic fever, the same as any other animal. Further 
experiments by Pasteur convinced him that propagation of 
bacteria is arrested by a temperature of 44 or more degrees. 
These facts called Pasteur’s attention to radiate heat as the 
best local application to prevent the generation of bacteria. 
And the same principle has been applied m domestic practice 
for the cure of a snakebite by killing a chicken, cutting it 
open and applying the warm surface to the bitten limb, re- 
placing it as soon as it became cold by another, and in this 
way it is claimed that on the plains of the West, where the 
bite of the rattlesnake is so common, that nearly every case 
has been cured; the 10 degrees of greater heat seemed to be 
sufficient in the bite of the rattlesnake as well as of the bac- 
teria of splenic fever. 



LYSSIN. 


141 


In June, 1831, Hering published a letter in Stapf s Archives^ 
Vol 10, which was dated June 18th, 1830, in which he says. 
“The proving ot snake poison might pave the way to the pre- 
vention of hydrophobia and variola by the proving of their 
respective morbific poisons ” And on page 30, of the same 
volume, he says “ Same is said of psora ” 

It will be remembered that Hermg’s immortal proving of 
Lachesis was begun in 1828, and experimented with for three 
years, when it was finally published, hence the experience 
which Hering obtained in the proving of the serpent poison 
was evidently the inspiration for his suggestion that the prov- 
ing on the healthy of L 3 ^ssin, Variolmum, Psorinum and other 
nosodes would form valuable remedies in the treatment of 
many of our obstinate diseases Hering no sooner became 
firmly convinced of the truth of his suggestion than he at once 
set to work to put it into execution. 

But, the first thing to do was to find a mad dog. The op- 
portunity occurred on the 27th of August, 1833, when a Ger- 
man baker invited him to come to his house to examine a dog. 
The following description of his capture of a rabid dog and 
obtaining the saliva for a proving is taken from a paper by 
Hering m the North American Journal of 1878. 

It was a middle-sized, chestnut-brown terrier, not more than two or three 
years old, a female, with puppies of two or three months old It had been 
bitten ten days before (17th August) in the street by a running dog, which 
was biting all around, and had been killed soon afterwards as mad The 
owner, in trying to save his terrier, had beaten the strange dog with a stick 
alter it had killed one of the puppies, and had already taken hold of an- 
other The mother, in defending her young ones, had received three 
bloody wounds She carried the dead one in her mouth from the street 
home into the yard Since that she was somewhat changed, but continued 
to nurse the remaining puppies, one of which had received a bite She 
had been otherwise true to her nature until the previous day (Aug 26th), 
when she had commenced snapping and biting her young. The master 
had then suspected her, and kept her in the yard, tied by a rope, and sev- 
eral times she had been biting and trying to loosen herself. She soon 
grew worse and commenced to bite at everything Her voice was entirely 
altered On the 26th of August, 111 the evening, she had commenced to 
howl 111 a peculiar way and to run against the doors She shook her head 
a great deal, and scraped the ground with her fore feet, and afterwards 
turned her head in a strange way She put her mouth into the water 
placed before her, as if she was trying to swallow but could not. 



142 


LYSSIN 


When seen on August 27tli she was furious, snapping and biting, had a 
wild look, injected red eyes, frothy saliva around the mouth, and seemed 
evidently to be in the last stage of the disease An empty flour-barrel ’was, 
from behind, put over her, and, in order to make it possible to secure some 
of the saliva, the barrel was lifted on one side until the dog, m trying to 
escape, put out her head, bet\ieen the edge of the barrel and the ground 
She seemed to be m convulsive motions, as from anger or fury, but while 
a quill was used to get as much of the saliva as possible out of her month 
and from her teeth (part to be put into milk sugar and part into alcohol), 
the motions lessened and the dog lay quiet and exhausted, breathing quick 
and short, with eyes closed While the quill was still held in her mouth, 
and while the baker had hold of the barrel, the dog suddenly sprang up, 
snapping and trying to get on to its feet, but the ow ner prevented its 
escape After enough had been collected, the dog was allowed to with- 
draw Its head, and by a heavy weight was secured under the barrel After 
a box had been prepared, the dog was brought into it by means of the rope, 
and thus transported, with both puppies, to my house 

Next morning the mother was dead, and no pennission given by the in- 
mates to make a post mortem. Both the young ones were returned to the 
master, and even the bitten one remained well They were given to in- 
hale in the evening some of the 6th centesimal potency, just prepared Of 
course, a true Hahnemannian never draws his conclusioiib, as the slanderers 
have said post hoc ergo propter hoc ^ nor even the equally foolish; it fol- 
lowed, but could not have been caused by it 

The saliva obtained in the aforesaid way was on the same day triturated, 
one drop with one hundred grains of milk sugar, and, exactly according to 
Hahnemann’s method, carried to the 3d centesimal, and, by the aid of 
some water and alcohol, further by alcohol alone, up to the 6th centesimal, 
and later to the 30th. 

From the tincture of the saliva put in alcohol, some weeks after, one 
drop was also potentized in the usual way tor the purpose of comparative 
experiments All the rest, collected on split pieces of qiull for inocula- 
tion, was one night clandestinely taken by the lady of the house and 
thrown into the fire 

All this has been related in its particulars as an advice to others who may 
have a chance to get saliva from another dog It might be of some use to 
get It from a male for comparison 

Symptoms were observed during the hours of trituration, as there had 
been triturating the Tachesis poison, and they were afterwards corrobor- 
ated by provings with the lower, the very peculiar feelings of apprehen- 
sion became so intolerable that the higher were preferred in further prov- 
ings Nothing was written for publication in the Archives until May, 
1834. This was printed in the beginning of 1836, Archives^ 15, 1 , p 33 

To the provings of Schmid and Behlert^ were added those 

* An enthusiastic student in Allentown, a Mr Schmid, made a very good 
proving; and one of our nearest friends (an experienced prover, a former 



LYSSIN. 


143 


of John Redmond Cox, in 1853, when a suggestion was made 
that, in order to remove the stigma of cowardice in the pro- 
fession, their shrinking from their first duty of proving reme- 
dies on themselves was made in a public meeting Dr Cox 
not only offered to prove it on himself, but on his entire 
family and his friends besides, and furnished us perhaps the 
best provings that have ever been made of Lyssin, he also 
furnished the day-books in which the symptoms were re- 
corded 

Many of the most valuable symptoms were from provings 
by Hering, on himself, but he was prevented from continuing 
by the most terrible feelings of apprehension 

Dr Knerr made some valuable provings, in 1869, on a 
woman bitten by a dog in the fleshy part of right arm. 

Dr Lippe cured an important case in which he was guided 
by a symptom produced only from bites, but never observed 
any provings But Lippe’s observation was confirmed by 
many other good observers. Some symptoms from bites of 
rabid dogs have been added. 

Pasteur’s method of administration is very different from that employed 
by homeopaths, but he is working on homeopathic lines in seeking to neu- 
tralize a virus in the system by introducing a modification of the same 
virus His experiments led him to produce the rabic poison in a highly 
intensified form in the spinal cords of rabbits He then modified its in- 
tensity in different degrees by exposure to air for a longer or shorter 
period Patients who come to the Institute are inoculated first with the 
least potent, and later with the most potent “ vaccin,” after which they are 
pronounced “cured.” The “cure” is, however, extremely uncertain, as 
the degree of susceptibility to the poison is unknown in any case, and 
many hundreds of the patients subjected to the inoculations have died of 
the disease Pasteur’s first method was admitted to be too strong, and was 
soon modified, a number of patients having died from the inoculations 
One of these cases I investigated, and the symptoms were suE&ciently strik- 
ing to deserve recording 

The patient was Arthur Wilde, of Rotherham, aged 29, and I received 
the account from his mother, who nursed him through his illness He had 
been bitten severely by a man suffering from hydrophobia, and was per- 

engraver, Behlert, by name, at that time a paralyzed man) persuaded all 
his acquaintances, a dozen of women and girls, and some boys, to prove 
the higher preparations None of his pro vers knew anything of the origin 
of the drug, and they were examined every day with great care, according 
to the advice of Hahnemann. 



144 


LYSSIN. 


suaded, much against his wish, to go to Pasteur This he did a few days 
after the bite, returning on October 19, 1886, after undergoing the course. 
On Saturday, October 30th, he complained of a pricking sensation below 
the ribs in the right side, in the part where the injections had been made. 
Pressure relieved the pain somewhat That evening he vomited, and the 
vomiting continued, and he became very prostrate On Monday the pros- 
tration was intense, vomiting continued, restless, skin cool, perspiring, 
quite conscious The spots where the inoculations were made were dark 
and livid Twitching occurred every few hour&, sometimes more violently 
than others, most marked on the abdomen From Monday through Tues- 
day he was making a peculiar loud noise, something like a, waggoner driv- 
ing horses, “bis,” “whoo,” though he had never had to do with horses 
He seemed completely helpless On Tuesday night vomiting ceased and 
he began to froth a great deal Karly on Wednesday morning he began 
to talk thick. His breathing, which had been peculiar all through — he 
would hold his breath for a long time when making the noise, and then 
breathe rapidly for a few breaths— -became very bad at 3 A m. on Wednes- 
day He died shortly after 12, having been apparently conscious to the 
end, though unable to speak for the last hour The frothing had increased 
up to the time of his death and he seemed to choke with it 

This case was paralleled by that of Gofii, an attendant at St Thomas’ 
Hospital, who was bitten by a cat and sent to Pasteur On his return he 
was taken ill, and his case was at first diagnosed as Landry’s paralysis, 
but finally proved (by experiments made with his spinal cord) to be 
“ paralytic, rabies,” the result of inoculation It was after the occur- 
rence of these and similar “accidents” that the intensity of the “ vaccins ” 
was reduced — Clarke 

Thus, nearly fifty years after the experiments of Hering 
with the virus of hydrophobia, Pasteur^s work began. But, 
on account of the crude preparation, like Koch’s experiments 
with Tuberculin, many of Pasteur’s cases were fatal. No bet- 
ter illustration can be found m medicine of the scientific ac- 
curacy and its successful clinical demonstration than is to be 
had in the results of the labors of these two men The homeo- 
pathic methods have been demonstrated to be not only accu- 
rate and scientific, but safe and efficacious. 

The following case is from El Siglo Medico 

Finally swallowing was impossible, restraint had to be used to prevent 
him biting his nurses in the hospital, when, as a last resource, a piece of 
Agave was offered to the boy by the doctor in attendance, cut from a hedge 
of the plant with which the hospital grounds were fenced To the aston- 
ishment of all, the boy reached for it and ate it greedily, almost without 
chewing By evening a decrease in the violence of the nervous attacks 
was manifest, though they remained as frequent as before The improve- 



LYSSIN 


145 


ment was slow but continued. On the fourth day he took some nourish' 
ment, but also continued chewing Agave and swallowing the juice On 
the fifth day he recovered consciousness, but still demanded Agave On 
the eighth day he said he did not want any more, as “ it tasted too bitter*, 
and caused a burning in the mouth. ’ * 

Fagus Dread of liquids; profuse salivation, swelling of the 
mouth; intense frontal headache; trembling, convulsions with 
periodic spasms, stiffness and coldness; pointing to the same 
kind of nerve irritation as caused by the poison of rabies 
Lachesis is closely allied « from sun, bluish discoloration 
of wounds and ulcers, irritability, < from warm, damp air, 
from touch and a pressure, < after sleep, and Clarke adds, 
“though the late evolution of Lyssm is in striking contrast 
with the lightning like rapidity of the effects of snake venom ”)• 
CHARACTERISTICS.— The sight or sound of running water or 
pouring water aggravates all complaints 

Lyssophobia; fear of becoming mad, exceedingly apprehen- 
sive. 

Bluish discoloration of wounds (Lach ) 

Complaints resulting from abnormal sexual desire (from 
abstinence, Con,) 

Mental emotion or mortifying news always makes him worse 
(Gels ) 

Cannot bear heat of sun (Gels., Glon , Lach., Nat ). 
Convulsions, from dazzling or reflected light from water or 
mirror (Stram.), from even thinking of fluids of any kind, 
from slightest touch or current of air 

Headache: from bites of dogs, whether rabid or not; 
chronic, from mental emotion or exertion, < hy noise of run- 
mng water or bright light. 

Saliva: tough, ropy, viscid, frothy in mouth and throat, 
with constant spitting ^'Hydr.). ^ 

Sore throat, constant desire to swallow (Lac c., Mer.). 
Difficulty in swallowing, even spasm of esophagus from 
swallowing liquids; gagging when swallowing water 

Constant desire to urinate on seeing running water (Canth., 
Sulph. ) , urine scanty, cloudy, contains sugar. 

Prolapsus uteri, many cases of years’ standing cured. 
Leucorrhea, profuse, running down the legs (Alum., Syph., 
Tub.). 


II 



146 


LYSSIN 


Sensitiveness of vagina, rendering coition painful 
RELATIONS. — Compare. Agave, Bell., Canth., Fagus, Hyos , 
JLach., Stram., in hydrophobia 

Antidote. For overaction of potencies, Agave, Coc., Nux. 
Lyssin antidotes effects of bite of non-rabid animals 
Agg stooping, heat of sun, slight touch; draft of air or 
electric fan, warmth, damp air 
Lyssin is an analogue of many animal and nearly all the 
serpent poisons, especially Lachesis and Vipera 
Compare. Apis, Bell , Gels., Glon., Nat. c , Lach. , heat of 
sun or summer, Lach ; bluish color of wounds or ulcers, sen- 
sitive to pressure or touch, rapid, light ning-like action, Coc., 
Con , Gels , symptoms of ascending paralysis, Adren , Bell , 
Gels , Sol n m , paralysis of respiration, Coc , Sanic., bad 
effects of car, carriage-ndmg and sea-sickness, Canth., Sulph , 
desire to urinate on seeing running water, Stram., convul- 
sions from dazzling light, Helen , consciousness of a womb; 
Hell , Hep., Hyos., hurried speech and drinking, Gels , mor- 
tifying news. Agar , Arg. n , Lil., Sep., prolapsus uteri, in- 
ternal coldness, Camp , Helod , Ver. 

It follows well Arg n , Con., Gels., Hyos , Stram., Lach. 
Is followed^by Gels , Nat. c., Nat m. and serpent poisons. 
AGGRAVATION, — Sight or sound of water , bright, dazzling 
light (Stram.); carriage-nding (Coc, Same.; better from. 
Nit ac.). 

AMELIORATION. — Bending head backward, > pain in neck, 
heat, hot steam or hot water; warm bathing; cold air > 
headache, 

MIND. — Loses consciousness for a moment 
Loss of consciousness sometimes at an early stage, but not 
generally until a short time before death. 

Does not see nor hear persons around him. 

I Memory for single words much improved. 

Strange sensation in head, with loss of memory. 

Does not converse as well as usual, but plays chess better; 
more inclined to reflect than talk; not at all lively. 

Thoughts of something terrible going to happen come into 
his mind against his will, feels impelled to do reckless things, 
such as throwing child, which he carries in his arms, through 
the window, and the like. 



LYSSIN. 


147 


Could not get nd of the indescribable tormenting feeling 
that something terrible was going to happen to him 

Fits of abstraction, takes hold of wrong things, often does 
not know what he wants, says wrong words which have but a 
remote similarity of sound 

They appreciate the formidable character of the disease and 
speak frequently with a remarkable quick and sharp articula- 
tion of the impending fatal results. 

During the tranquil intervals responded correctly to ques- 
tions put to him, recognized those around him, and with a 
presentiment of impending death begged them to pray for 
him and not to leave him alone. 

The majority of patients have no adequate conception of 
real origin of their malady, and affirm in decided terms that 
the scar is of no significance whatever and causes them no 
pain 

Most commonly the mental faculties are in a superior state 
of excitement, shown by quick perception, amazing acuteness 
of understanding and rapidity with which they answer ques- 
tions 

Is astonished in his dream at the readiness with which he 
can express himself in elegant Latin 

It seems to her as if two entirely different trains of thought 
influenced her at the same time 

A certain confusion, unsteadiness, weakness of mind. 

It is very difficult for him to think, sometimes impossible 
Weary and incapable of mental exertion, school tasks, which 
before had been a pleasure to her, had to be laid aside 

Range of ideas extremely limited, if left to himself is occu- 
pied continuously with the same thing, bringing frequently 
forward same ideas within a short space of time and always in 
same manner. 

Dulness and stupidity, at night restlessness 
During convulsions, mental illusions and hallucinations, in 
intervals of consciousness mental faculties are retained. 

Believe that they are reduced to their present wretched 
condition by the instrumentality of those about them. 

Imagine that they are being abused, and energetically de- 
fend themselves against attacks and ' insults, which in reality 
are products of their own fancy. 



148 


LYSSIN 


Fancies he is being blown at by several persons, some of 
whom are not present. 

Raved about the dog that had bitten her, imagined it to be 
near her and fought as if to drive it away. 

Thinks he is a dog or a bird, and runs up and down chirp* 
ing and twittering, until he falls down fainting 

They fancy that they see objects, animals and men that are 
not present. 

Complains bitterly that a fire has been lighted and that the 
stove is smoking, although there is no fire, another continu- 
ally directed a window to be closed, which was not opened 

I Strange notions and apprehensions during pregnancy. 

Slight fits of delirium occur (in advanced state); patients 
frequently forget their friends and relatives; delirium attended 
with constant talking 

Some delirium and illusions, fancied doctors were two 
young girls who had come in to see her 

During night delirium < 

Makes speeches in his delirium, thinks he is a man of great 
authority 

Insane ideas enter his head; for instance, to throw a glass 
of water, which he is carrying in his hand, into some one's 
face, or to stab his flesh with the knife he is holding, and the 
like. 

His mama takes a gloomy character , 

I Mania spermatica, stallions. 

Inclined to use insulting language, scold his friends, beat 
and abuse those near him. 

1 Inclination to be rude and abusive, to bite and strike. 

A kind of savageness in his temper. 

A strong and uncontrollable impulse to do certain acts; to 
spring at and bite any moving object that came within reach,, 
dog. 

Is continually tempted to bite her pillow at night. 

Deny, with great obstinacy, that they have ever been bit- 
ten. 

Incessant talking during night. 

Speech, labored, short and pathetic 

Wrote to doctor. I am waiting with impatience that you 
give me and my young ones something 4o eat. 



LYSSIN 


149 


After fainting spell he wrote on paper I am forsaken by 
all; even the birds of heaven, they do not look at me, do not 
feed me if hungry, I hunger with the young ones and am 
thirsty with their she ones, my nest is made out of dirt, not 
gotten by my own exertions, but by driving them out of their 
nests and sitting there with the females and the young 

Sang more than usual, but involuntarily, she did not feel 
at all happy or cheerful. 

Goes about house all day singing, moves with greater alac- 
rity and precision than ordinary. 

Sighing with oppressive breathing; with pain in heart. 
Declares amid violent sobs that she is suffering the torments 
of hell. 

Lament with greatest anxiety their inability to relieve thirst 
which afflicts them, and by various contrivances endeavor 
eagerly to drink. 

Had a good cry before going to bed 
Weeps bitterly on account of headache 
Before and after as well as during paroxysms, shrieks or in- 
articulate sounds expressive of utmost despair. 

During fits, snapping motions of the jaws, of an involuntary 
and spasmodic character 

Quiet patients spit into provided vessels, more excited ones 
discharge saliva upon all sides 

Biting, snapping, with convulsions. 

Ordered her husband to go away, as she wanted to bite him, 
and joining act to threat, she bit herself in arm 

Pieces of carpet put into kennel for dog to he upon were 
torn up until they became heaps of loose wool. 

Desperate efforts were made to break chain; dog 
i Break out of their stables furiously and run and jump over 
ditches and fences Lyssa of sheep 

He cautioned people around him not to inhale his exhaled 
air, it was spoiled, stinking like rotten eggs, worse than 
cholera, and could injure. 

Does not answer questions. 

Disinclination to change position of head; two distinct 
trains of thought existing at one time in her mind, the idea 
that she was unable to move her head (when lying down), 



150 


LYSSIN 


With the positive conviction that she has only to make up her 
mind that she will do it to achieve it 

1 Not afraid of do^s, but dislikes to see them because their 
sight renews her fear. (Lissophobia, after bite by non-rabid 
dog.) 

Cannot bear to hear others sing, or eat apples 

I Exhilarated, felt as if he had received joyful intelligence. 

Occasionally exhilarated, then again morose, both feelings 

going off very readily upon conversing 

Pain in head makes him very uneasy. 

Feels depressed and very weak all day. 

Depressed, as if something would happen. 

An attack of mental depression and indifference quite 
strange to him, feels as if he could do nothing, if he forces 
himself he lacks mental power 

To such as had continual apprehension respecting their 
safety it appeared a shorter time since bite 

Feels as if something disagreeable would happen, when 
thinking the matter over, the feeling passes off 

He feels as if he had heard unpleasant news, or would soon 
hear it, until 4 p, m 

Felt as if she was going to get a fit, at 11 p. m. 

II Lyssophobia, fear of becoming mad 

1 Feels as if he cannot physically endure his fears much 
longer, and shall be compelled to go into an insane asylum 
Lyssophobia. 

I Mary M., aet 17, had been bitten several years previously 
by a dog, and reading of several cases of hydrophobia as re- 
ported in papers, was found m following condition, crouched 
in corner of sofa, dark red bloated face, expression of terror 
in face, eyes glistening, conjunctiva injected red; was brought 
into this condition by endeavoring to take a drink of water, 
and could not hear water mentioned without a shudder of fear,, 
could not swallow, pulse very high, tongue dry and coated 
red, Lyssin 200 one dose, she \vas better next day, but had 
several slight attacks afterwards, always induced by running 
of water, but always yielding to remedy; has not had an attack 
in nearly a year 

Felt as if she was going to die, as if she was going to sink 
away. 



LYSSIN 


151 


She has been unable to sleep a wink for several nights, is 
driven from bed by indescribable anxiety, can but sit and 
walk, or find momentary peace m prayer. 

Anxiety of mind, restlessness, with great prostration; with 
pain in heart; with headache, fear of being alone. 

I A musician received a bite from a small pet dog m calf of 
1 leg while walking through a dark entry, the bite was very 
slight, scarcely wounding skin, the animal was in a healthy 
condition and remained so, a pain in bitten place kept return- 
ing from time to time independently of mind dwelling on it, 
until it finally grew to a burning which extended through en- 
tire body, causing an indescribably strange sensation, in night 
trembling, and a tormenting fear that he would have hydro- 
phobia, was thirsty and drank water freely, it was two years 
after the bite when these and the following symptoms ap- 
peared, frequent spitting of saliva all through day, only ceas- 
ing awhile after taking strong tea in evening, disturbed 
dreams at night, finally could not partake of food or drink, 
and complained of pricking stitches under tongue, mental ex- 
citement now as all his life, affects him badly, hot vapor re- 
lieved burning pain m bite, and Lyssin 2C (Jemchen) im- 
proved all symptoms rapidly, m three weeks he considered 
himself cured, and started on a journey 

Indecision even in small matters 

I 111 humor. 

Fretful, hypochondriac mood in evening. 

Feels nervous and irritable. 

Very cross, so much so that his children expressed great 
surprise, he took offense at veriest trifles, scolding his wife 
and children, felt wretched, could not concentrate his atten- 
tion on anything, sullen, does not wish to see or speak to any 
one. 

After attacks of fury, evinces great regret at his behavior, 
making earnest apologies, warning those about him not to 
allow him to bite them * 

Implacable hatred against owners of dog that bit her, with 
inclination to utter maledictions which, by reason of her care- 
ful bringing up and sobriety of her parents, shock her dread- 
fully. 



152 


LYSSIN 


Hit oeser piyesnvessnfall the senses 

Exalted state of smell, taste and touch, with a feeling of 
anxiety and a fear of being alone 

Everything afiects him more powerfully, also tobacco. 

He knew exactly where his nurses, his doctors and acquaint- 
ances were, if at any distance from him. 

On a watch held to scorbiculum he sees the hour and min- 
ute hands 

He says he can see hands on dial plate of church clock. 

He could hear what was spoken in next room, and counting 
coppers in a room below him. 

He knows every one, and answers questions, also is in mes- 
meric rapport with his physicians Linen dipped in sugar 
water, put on pit of stomach, gives a sweet taste in mouth 

Copper, if in his room, makes him restless and full of pain. 

I Felt same rheumatic pain his brother complained of. 
Lyssophobia 

Before every spell of somnambulism he crowed like a cock. 

Very uneasy, mental disquietude, with headache 

Driven incessantly about without any definite aim 

Restlessness, driving him hither and thither, although weak 
enough to he down 

Restlessness and anxiety at precordia, frequent change of 
posture and sighing. 

I Restless, constant bleating in a hoarse voice. Lyssa of 
sheep. 

1 Sometimes he could control inclination to stool by a strong 
effort of will, but effort caused much nervous irritation. 

Showing him a bird, he got frightened and thought it was a 
mouse 

Was much frightened during attack, and began to pray; 
her husband had to sit up with her and hold her hand, did not 
get entirely over attack until 3 A. m. 

She feels as after night watching and great anxiety. 

Unusually exhausted. 

While reading and thinking, headache. 

Worse while reading or writing; headache; aching in lower 
jaw. 

Severe headache and noseache upon going to bed, after 
wntmg all her symptoms. 



LYSSIN 


153 


I Attacks of nervous headache become awful and insupport- 
able if he hears water run out of a hydrant 

Pressing headache, < while reading and thinking 

II When he hears water poured out, or if he hears it run, or 
if he sees it, he becomes very irritable, nervous, it causes de- 
sire for stool and other ailments 

The mere sight of a drinking vessel containing water is in- 
tolerable, they turn away their faces, shriek out loud, beckon 
anxiously with hands to have the water removed, for voice 
and breath fail. 

I Mental emotion always makes him worse 

Mortifying news affects him very much. 

A certain wildness of humor 

Disposed to get angry, flying into a passion 

Every offense she feels very much 

Excitability prevents sleep 

I Frequent gaping without being sleepy, most when he has 
to listen to others 

Thinking of fluids of any kind, even of blood, brings on con- 
vulsions 

The mere idea of drink, fluids, pouring out fluids, may cause 
a paroxysm 

Hyperesthesia, current of air, bright light, sight of any shin- 
ing object, slightest touch, even conversation in vicinity of 
patient, may throw him into a most violent agitation and bring 
on severe convulsions 

The mere thought of fluids, of drinking, of swallowing, or 
offer of anything to drink, is sufficient to bring on severe con- 
vulsions, the same effect is produced by other sources of irri- 
tation, such as a simple breath of air, the attempt to touch 
the sick, every hurried approach towards him, the light of 
shining objects 

Even the sight of water, or other fluid, or of anything hav- 
ing the least resemblance to it, such as a looking glass or 
white substance, whereby an occasion will be given for re- 
newal of idea of their former pain, occasions greatest distress 
and a return of convulsions. 

Such as were afflicted with grief from any cause were much 
sooner affected with the disease. 



154 


LYSSIN. 


A sudden fright starts convulsions. 

Nose pains from thinking 

Had no symptoms of disease for four months until after re- 
ceiving ill usage. 

HEAD.— 11 Peculiar lightness in head, lightness after nausea. 

Singular sensation in vertex, as if he momentarily lost con- 
sciousness, but only in that place, or as if a habitual feeling 
had disappeared from there, it is no fulness, no motion, but 
it causes a vacillating motion of head, in evening. 

II Dizziness; as if something was drawing around in a circle, 
and as if she could not hold her head straight, after lying 
down, like a shock in upper part of brain, with inclination to 
fall to r. when stooping, towards evening in upper part of 
head, as if she would fall, while walking, frequent and tran- 
sient, with dim sight while walking and sitting, and nausea, 
with cramps in abdomen, temporarily > by return of diar- 
rhea; < by teaching, ‘spelling, or being obliged to notice let- 
ters, after lying down in bed, shock in upper part of brain; 
dimness of vision on rising from stooping; on rising from 
chair, staggers; while sitting, on rising, cannot walk straight. 

A slow vacillation or wavering of head, from something be- 
ing loose in upper part of head 

Surging towards head is felt inwardly, deep in brain. 

Dulness: of head, in forehead, more to r. side; in middle of 
brain, where it surges, and stupidity at night, with restless- 
ness, amounting to pain in occiput 

Violent vertigo during morning, accompanied by a chill and 
an intolerable snappish headache. 

Headache, with dizziness, lasting all day, in morning, vio- 
lent, with vertigo (> by Tabac.), over eyes; in temples; very 
severe in afternoon, < from writing; > by cold air; from 
noon until evening; from 3 to 9 p m., from writing; > by 
cold air, alternating with hot flushes in face, with shooting 
pain in upper face; toward noon, with increase of saliva; and 
sore throat all day; <C on seeing water or hearing it run. 

Sensation as if a small leaden ball was rolling about in 
brain. 

I Rush of blood to head: while lying down; from chest up- 
ward, with toothache; during pregnancy, when rising 



LYSSIN 


155 


Throbbing headache in forehead, vertex and occiput, down 
to neck. 

Burning, surging towards head. 

Pain above 1. eye before going to bed. 

Pain m a small spot above r. eyebrow < while writing 
Pressing inward, throbbing or drawing above r eye 
Sharp pain above eyebrows, followed by burning in lids 
Sharp pain above eyebrows and up nose five minutes after 
walking, with headache. 

Severe shooting pains in head, above eyes and temples. 
Headache extending into r. eye. 

Aching in bones above eyes, particularly r , < by stooping 
A sensation in forehead as of something moving. 

Dull pain in forehead, with a stupid feeling afternoon and 
evening. 

Pressing or burning pain in forehead 
Tearing from middle of forehead towards 1 side 
Two p M., intense pain in head, extending back of forehead 
to organ of firmness; soon after to whole top of head and to 
eyes, lasting all day. 

Dull heavy pain in forehead and sharp prickmg in 1 temple, 
alternating at times with throbbing and jerking. 

Pre^^'sing in vertex and in forehead, particularly when stoop- 
ing or moving head, afternoon 

Slight frontal headache in morning on waking. < after 
rising. 

Passes hand across forehead. 

1 Maddening outward pressing pain in forehead, he presses 
his head against the wall. 

Pressing pain in forehead and top of head, returns 4 p. M , 
seventh day, with uneasiness of mind when reading or think- 
ing. 

Continual dull pain in forehead, principally on 1. side, with 
stupefaction, in afternoon and evening. 

Throbbing pain in forehead, vertex and occiput, extending 
into nape of neck 

Pressing in forehead, with slight sensation of heat, 6 pm 
H eadache at times very severe in r. temple. 

Severe headache in both temples and above eyes, beginning 



156 


LYSSIN 


at 9 A. M., so unbearable that he cries bitterly, violent jerking 
m limbs 

Violent headache from temple to temple. 

Tearing pain in r temple; from jaw to temple. 

Occasional stitches in r temple 

Sharp pricking pain in 1. temple, alternated with throbbing 
and punching. 

Boring in r temple very short, 5 p. m. , repeats every other 
day, but on fourth day m 1. temple, and m morning when 
getting awake 

II Beating, throbbing headache, most severe in r temple 
and above r. eye, each bone feels shattered and sore, from 
temple to temple 

I Violent headache, most in temples and forehead, < during 
day and from stooping and stirring about. Uterine disease 

Severe pressing pain in 1. side of head, occasionally boring 
stitches from without in, later pressing extends to 1. side of 
forehead and 1. orbit, 10 p m 

Dull weight, first on 1 side of head, then on vertex 

Pressing weight on r. parietal bone. 

Dull pricking pain in 1. side, from head to waist. 

Left side of head is now, and has always been, most severely 
affected. 

Headache most severe one and a half inches above 1 ear, m 
evening. 

Piercing pain in r. side of head, with sensation of stiffness, 
or as if part would become insensible 

Woke in morning with a burning, aching headache in 1 side 
of head and down neck 

In vertex: dulness and tensive sensation, stupefied feeling; 
vertiginous shocks; a peculiar sensation; pressing weight; 
pressing stinging; r side: pressing shooting, pressing beat- 
ln.g, pressing heaviness, r. side, strange pulsation; burning 
surging; throbbing. 

Pressure in upper part of head and forehead, < stooping 
or moving head, at 4 p. m., while reading and reflecting, with 
mental restlessness. 

II Frequent pressure on vertex, as if a cast, which fitted top 
of head, was pressing it down. 



LYSSIN. 


157 


Severe headache, extending from behind forehead to organ 
of firmness, soon after spreading over vertex and to eyes, at 2 
p M. , lasting all day 

Pressing from forehead to vertex and jaws. 

Pam on top of head and in teeth running into each other. 

Painful pressure, most on upper part of head, < when mov- 
ing head, later also in forehead, with considerable heat and 
prostration. 

In occiput, painful dulness, pressure in 1. side; tearing and 
stinging as if in bones, < after rising, aching, burning, pain 
in 1. side, < during wet weather; dreadful pains running up 
neck and down spine, < when lying down 

Sharp pain across eyebrows and up nose, while walking out 
doors, exceedingly fatigued and weary after a short walk 

Intolerable headache extending to ends of nose and into 
teeth, some pressure on head, and for a moment a feeling as 
of an invisible hammer striking upon back of head (relieved 
by Tabac ) 

Frequent attacks of headache, in which head, nose and 
teeth appeared to be soldered together 

Feeling of tension m head; much pressing pain m head. 

Head feels as if it would split with severe pressure on ver- » 
tex. 

1 Pain as if head would burst. 

At 3 P M ; headache very severe, dull heavy pain in head. 

I Afternoon, pain in head; sick headache. 

II Headaches from bite of dogs, rabid or not. 

In rare cases serous effusion in opaque subarachnoid tissue 
and lateral ventricle, and also increased adherence of mem- 
branes of brain to convolutions 

All morning severe headache which makes him impatient 

I At noon slight headache, lasting all day. 

Dull heavy pain in afternoon in head. 

Painful rush of blood to head after moving, turning around, 
or stooping. 

Unbearable headache for three days making her snappish, 
harsh and irritable; trifles annoy her, lower jaw feels stiff and 
aching, hands numb. 

Crying bitterly during headache. 



158 


LYSSIN. 


A peculiar sensation m head all day» as if something drew 
the head towards shoulders. 

Headache with nausea and sore pain in heart, in afternoon, 
> in cold air. 

Pam from mouth up through head and down back of neck 
II Burning aching from 1 side of occiput down neck 
I Violent headache and backache. 

Painful pressure on top on moving head, with fever and 
prostration. 

Horrible headache, accompanied by general weariness 
Headache in bones of skull 

On top of head, pressing heaviness, same in r. parietal bone. 
Tearing and stinging in occiput, as if in bones, < after 
rising 

Beating pain in forehead, parietal bone, occiput and nape 
of neck; > in neck when bending head backwards 
Irritable headache, touching head makes it ache, very sen- 
sitive scalp 

Right side of head feels stiff, as if it would become numb 
Numbness of 1. side of head 

Very annoying headache, more outside, near vertex, > by 
gentle scratching, or by rubbing, but it must be done by hands 
of others, thus by a kind of mesmerizing 
A darting from within outward to scalp, on r side of vertex, 
followed by itching 
Itching m locality of acquisitiveness 

Small pustule, painful when touched, on 1 frontal eminence, 
later same on right. 

Hair which is usually dry has become very oily 

Scalp feels contracted and pinched 

EYES AND SIGHT. — Sensitive to light 

Left eye exceedingly sensitive to light and water. 

I Sight of water, agitation; renews idea of pain, causes con- 
vulsions (pregnancy) 

Sparks before eyes 

Something moves to and fro before eyes while sewing, but 
always a little farther off the point at which she is looking 
False vision, dulness of sight, together with dilatation of 
pupils, sometimes actual blindness 



LYSSIM. 


-im^ 


Great weakness in eyes, without pain. 

1 Since five years could not read longer than a few minutes 
at a time, when she would see letters double and would read 
something else than the right words, had tried all sorts of 
spectacles without benefit, was often ashamed because she 
could not sign her name properly 
On looking up eyes are very weak 

Dimness of vision with vertigo, dizziness when walking 
and sitting 

Vision much impaired or absent, lasts twelve hours. 
Vanishing of sight 
I Could not see or hear 

Drawing, beating pain over r eye, extending into eyes 
Aching over eyes, as if in bone, < r side and stooping 
Pam over r. eye, pressing inward 
Pressing sensation in upper part of r. orbit 
Drawing, beating pain over eyes and into balls 
Throbbing over r eye. 

At 9 p. M . severe shooting pains in head, over eyes and in 
temples, also very violent aching pain inside of and all over 
chest 

Pain over 1 eye previous to retiring 

Sharp pain across eyebrows, afterwards burning in eyelids. 
Pam in small spot over r eyebrow, < writing. 

Soreness in eyes and above them, pam in forehead 
Pressing sensation in orbits 
Headache extends into r eye 

At 9 p M felt a curious stinging pam in 1 eye, extending to 
forehead, over r eye, painful. 

Eyes feel very bad, severe pam in them and in all his joints. 

Eyes ached intensely; feeling of soreness 

Burning of eyeballs 

Eye draws heat from nape of neck. 

Itching heat in eyes 

If mental anxiety is great, pupils are in some cases dilated, 
while face and conjunctiva are injected. 

During period of tranquility, m last stage, pupils are con- 
tracted or of unequal size, eye fixed, strabismus 

Pupils were a little dilated and eye had a somewhat wild 
and restless appearance. 



160 


LYSSIN 


Eyes are wild, rolling, staring and livid. 

Disturbed look, or eyes firm and penetrating. 

Lachrymal glands evince increased activity. 

Eyes red and cornea somewhat inflamed 

Eyes congested and painful. 

1 Sore eyes and some fever after a bite in nose. 

Dulness and inflammation of eyes, dogs. 

I Inflamed, dim, watery, staring eyes, with very much dilated 
pupils, upper lid drawn up, and diminished sight. 

Eyes somewhat red and inflamed (cornea) 

Eyes bloodshot and painful 

Eyes slightly red, and occasional stitches in r temple 

I Great inflammation in an eye from which gushes foamy 
pus, pustules around eye, m morning lid puffed up like an 
eggshell, small pustules on one finger Dog-bite. 

Eyelids fly open involuntarily. 

Pressure m 1. side, shooting to eyes in evening 

Burning in lids 

Eyelids feel paralyzed on awaking in morning, and appear 
to be more firmly closed, as if glued together. 

li Swelling of eyelids after bite of dogs In sheep, 

I Extreme ulceration of eye, lids closed and puffed up by 
pus. In sheep, 

EARS AND HEARING. — Conversation m vicinity of patient 
may throw him into a most violent agitation. 

Ringing of church bells makes him anxious, and causes a 
sharp, salty taste, with stitches in heart. 

Water poured into a basin, with splashing noise, caused 
paroxysm to be reproduced, with convulsion and agitation 

Sudden noise causes involuntary startings. 

II Hearing water poured out in next room makes him very 
irritable and nervous. 

On crossing ferry, soon after eating, noise which water 
made caused unspeakable torture in her back. 

Convulsions excited by barking of dog, from great sensi- 
bility; any other sudden noise, shutting a door or a blast of 
wind, produce the same. 

1 During his attacks of chronic headache, which come after 
mental emotion or excessive mental exertion and last a day or 



LYSSIN. 


161 


two, he cannot bear to hear running water, if hydrant is 
allowed to run in an adjoining room, or even if water is poured 
into a basin, his headache increases to an insupportable de- 
gree. 

[After the pam following an evacuation had lessened, and 
he was sitting at open window, the large street waterplug was 
opened to cleanse the streets, and as soon as he noticed water 
running down gutter in front of his house, he was seized with 
violent pains and had to go at once to the watercloset Dys- 
entery. 

I If, during night, or in morning before rising, he heard 
pouring out of water in next room, he was immediately obliged 
to rise and have an evacuation. Chronic camp diarrhea 

1 Hearing water poured out brought on convulsions 

Sensation as if blood rushed to r. ear, then a pressure as 
from a dull knife, interiorly and superiorly 

Sound as of rushing water in 1. ear. 

Buzzing in r. ear. 

Hears various noises in night. 

Temporary stoppage of r. ear, about two hours afterward 
while thinking upon it, ear commenced aching, pain extends 
into teeth and through head. 

Tearing pam from lower jaw into ear. 

Bending pam m r. ear. 

Shooting stitches in r. ear, from without m 

In morning, pressing in forehead and drowsiness, with 
stitches passing inward m both ears. 

Stinging pressure behind ears; afternoon. 

Rush of blood to r. ear, after pressure like from a dull point. 

Pressive burning in r external ear. 

Burning and heat m ear. 

Earache extends into teeth. 

Tearing pain a few inches from r ear. 

Pressing from nape of neck into ear. 

Above 1. ear, headache most severe. 

Pressing burning in r. concha, in evening. 

The ears feel stiff. 

Ear tickles, after rubbing pain. 

Itching in a small spot in upper part of both ears, disap- 
pears after scratching. 

12 



162 


LYSSIN 


NOSE AND SMELL— Strong odors may start spasms. 

During three days her sense of smell, which is always ex- 
tremely acute, became painfully so, particularly in reference 
to unpleasant effluvia, action of nostrils extremely painful 
The greatest sensibility to smell of tobacco; taste of snuff 
while box IS one foot distant 

Frequent bleeding from nose, repeatedly some clotted blood 
in nose 

Tickling in nasal cavity causes sneezing. 

Itching in nose all day 

Repeated sneezing, which stops on being interrupted 
Frequent sneezing, mostly early m morning or late in even- 
ing, as if a coryza would begin, also when looking at some- 
thing bright, and from every little dust 
Fluid discharge from nose 

Coryza, with tickling in roof of mouth and in front of nose 
(relieved by Phosphorus) 

Thick green mucus runs out of nose (horse) 

Pam in nose 

Sensation of stiffness in nose, m r. side of neck, and princi- 
pally in jaws 
Nose feels bruised 

Nose, r neck and side feel very stiff, more about jaws. 

Nose extremely sensitive to touch. 

Headache extends into nose. 

Nose itches all day 

FACE. — Jawbones feel quite sore. 

Both jaws feel stiff, tingling m cheek bones. 

Gnawing and crawling sensation in r zygoma 
Transitory drawing in L side of face, from cheek bone 
toward nose, as if m muscles, in evening. 

Tearing in r. upper jaw extending into ear, same in temple. 
Shooting pains in upper jaw and violent headache. 

Darting pains in r side of face. 

Burning neuralgic pain down 1. side of face. 

A sensation moves about in r. side of face and goes across 
forehead 

Slight twitchmgs in face and hands 
Quivering in face. 



LYSSIN. 


163 


Facial muscles become variously contorted, countenance 
changes its aspects frequently 

Spasmodic affections take place in muscles of face, occasion- 
ing violent contortions and most horrid assemblage of features; 
m muscles moving lower jaw, inducing involuntary gnashing 
and a grinding of teeth, which some have construed into a 
desire of biting, during convulsive attack expression of face 
indicates great anxiety and alarm 
Disturbed look with dyspnea. 

Expression of face quite variable, reddening countenance 
often exhibits reflections of utmost mental and physical misery, 
of most horrible agony 

Face flushed, complained of his head, said they were run- 
ning needles into his brain 

Heat in r side of face and r ear, followed by headache m 
vertex and forehead, as soon as headache gets >, heat returns, 
heat comes from within and spreads from back of neck to ear 
and into eyes and face, accompanied by constant pain m nape 
of neck, which increases after heat and headache disappear. 
A feeling of heat and soreness m middle of 1 cheek 
Heat in face, with soreness of 1 cheek, from thinking 
Heat in r side of face, and particularly m eye, where it 
causes a tickling, returns after drinking coffee 
Face sweat, with sensation of heat, with flushes. 

In morning (6 a m ), tickling in 1 cheek. 

Heat and redness of face 

First heat m r. side of face and m ear, then a quiet aching 
in front of upper part of head, this headache lessens, the heat 
increases. 

Heat in face in morning, with redness, at times very deep 
Complexion pallid and cyanotic, and expression stupid 
Flushes and headache alternately. 

Pale face with squeamishness and nausea 
Face pale and yellowish, almost brownish 
I Appearance peculiar, skin sallow, pale or anemic, bloated 
all over, but no ‘‘pitting ” Chronic camp diarrhea. 

Sensation as if she had been bitten in 1 side of face near 
mouth. 

Tickling on 1 cheek, at 6 A M. 



164 


LYSSIN. 


The scratches on cheek became red, thirty-three days after 
bite, and on following day looked quite fresh, as if they had 
been made only a few hours before, but were a little darker m 
color than newly made abrasions. 

Pimple on eminence of forehead, painful to touch, later one 
on right cheek 

On 1 cheek near nose, towards eye, a pain, < when touched, 
a pimple with soreness around. 

Painless hard nodules on cheek, where a pimple seemed to 
have appeared, on ninth day a little scurf on it and redness, 
if picked or pricked, a very disagreeable kind of pain, but not 
violent, is felt in cheek even a distance from nodule, and here 
and there deep in upper part of jaw, cheeks bluish red and 
soft, discharges after the scurf is scratched off, lymph and 
blood 

Slow maturing bluish pimples on face 

I Pain in 1. cheek near nose, from fifth to seventh day, fol- 
lowed by a hard, painless swelling of size of a pea, turned red- 
der on thirtieth day, and became covered with a small scab, 
on thirty-second day it grew soft and turned bluish red, par- 
ticularly around edges, on puncturing, a disagreeable yet not 
severe pain at some distance from swelling and more inside of 
cheek; a small quantity of blood and matter was discharged, 
on fortieth day the place ceased to discharge and healed. 

The jawbones feel sore, aching m lower jaw. 

Violent jerking pains in lower jaw. 

Tearing in r. lower and upper jaw up into ear. 

When reading or writing, felt a pain in lower jaw; the longer 
she read the < it got. 

II Masseter muscles not affected by spasms. 

During phrensical fits, snapping motions are made with jaw 
of an involuntary or spasmodic character, bearing some re- 
semblance to motions of biting. 

Attempted to bite her fingers before death 

Biting snapping with convulsions. 

Jaws feel stiff; crawling in zygomatic arch. 

Lower jaw stiff and painful, with inclination to yawn; with 
headache; imagines he cannot open mouth. 

Jaws feel sore and stiff, a great disposition to press hand 
against lower jaw. 



LYSSIN, 


165 


Sensation as if she would have mumps. 

A chilling, biting, burning sensation on inner side of r. upper 
lip, as if a corroding acid had touched spot; sensation passes 
up and back, m a lesser degree, to r nasal cavity, where it 
produces tickling and sneezing, subsequently increase of saliva, 
after several hours. 

Lips cracked on inside of middle line 
Spasms with froth before mouth 

It seldom happens that froth is observed around outside of 
mouth. 

TEETH AND GUMS. — 1 Grinding of teeth 
Painful sensation of coldness shoots into teeth, it passes 
from lower posterior part upward and into jaw 

Teeth hurt more on r side, it is a kind of aching dulness 
Sensation in r lower jaw, in bone as it were, it shoots into 
root of a decayed tooth 

Shooting pain in r eyetooth, preceded by burning, passing 
down esophagus 

Frequent shooting pain in teeth, all the teeth ache 
Aching m carious root of a molar 

I Toothache and other complaints during pregnancy, with 
internal ebullition of blood from chest to head, head feels as 
if filled with air to bursting. 

Teeth very sensitive, feel as if on edge. 

Headache and earache extend into teeth 
Chilling painfulness starts m teeth of r side behind and be- 
low in bone of lower maxilla and passes upwards 
Neuralgic pain in gums, principally in front 

I Aching in swollen gums on r side. 

Drawing in gums, most in front 

TASTE AND TONGUE. — Food does not have right taste. 
Scrapy taste, with much saliva 
Bitter taste in morning, on awaking. 

Salt victuals tasted too strongly of salt, other food seemed 
to lack salt. 

Speech is labored, short and pathetic. 

II Difficult, incorrect speech. 

1 Impediment in his speech, would begin a sentence with 
difficulty after several fruitless attempts; some palatal vowels 
he could not pronounce, others but incorrectly. 



166 


LYSSIN. 


A cool feeling on tongue like after peppermint 

Pam in root of tongue and 1 side of throat 

Peculiar pain at root of tongue as if it was swollen. 

Tickling, queer feeling in throat and root of tongue 

Tongue usually moist and clean, frequently slightly coated, 
more seldom dry and thickly coated. 

Tongue coated with thin layer of yellowish white fur. 

Tongue coated with foam 

Tongue dark red on sides, coated in centre. 

I Tongue large, pale and flabby. 

I Pricking sensation under tongue 

Ranula returns periodically, with dryness of mouth, < m 
afternoon, soreness when chewing, with hemorrhoids and 
constipation. 

MOUTH — Feeling of coldness, like essence of peppermint. 

Severe pain passing from mouth upward through head and 
down into neck. 

( Constant sensation of intense dryness of mouth and throat. 

Dryness in mouth, in afternoon, with thirst. 

Sore mouth, feels as if there were lumps m it. 

Much tenacious mucus in mouth and throat. 

I Tough, short frothy phlegm in mouth (horse). 

Frothed at mouth, attempted to spit out with much diffi- 
culty (before death). 

Saliva more viscid, constant spitting, feeling of general 
malaise. 

Saliva runs together in mouth, without occasion, flows back 
and is swallowed. 

Saliva in back part of mouth like after sugar, or when 
liquorice is swallowed 

Mouth full of saliva, total disinclination to drink. 

Great flow of saliva and difficulty in swallowing liquids. 

Accumulation of foaming saliva, with inflammation of 
throat. 

Saliva more plentiful, but thin and of yellow color 

Secretion of a thick and frothy saliva, but without any mor- 
bid repulsion toward drinks. 

Ejected saliva is frothy, slimy and ropy. 

Much tenacious saliva, with sore throat. 



LYSSIN. 


167 


1 Large quantities of tough saliva m mouth, with constant 
spitting. 

Saliva IS not ejected, but runs from open mouth 

Quantities of saliva are collected in and about mouth, pre- 
sents a frothy appearance, patient is constantly endeavoring 
to get rid of it by wiping it with a handkerchief, or spitting 
it out with great force 

I Spits all the time small quantities of a frothy saliva, with 
pain in limbs 

II Frequent spitting 

1 At 10 A. M began to spit a great deal, continuing all day 
till supper. 

Dark, coffee colored fluid oozed from mouth (before death) 

Much mucus m throat and nose, hanging in posterior nares. 

Scraping sensation on palate where cool sensation had been, 
slight coughing does not reach spot, hemming and hawking 
does occasionally. 

Fauces and pharynx pervaded by an equally diffused purp- 
lish scarlet blush,* no pain in throat, except when patient 
attempts to swallow 

Follicular enlargement is common, involves also pharyngeal 
follicles and lymphatic glands m neighborhood of jaw, similar 
swelling upon inner side of epiglottis, pretty firm and charac- 
terized by abundance of lymph corpuscles found m gland sub- 
stance. 

Hyperplasia and recent swelling of tonsils and follicular 
glands of tongue, flat, roundish swellings at root of tongue, 
in middle of each one of which was seen dilated opening of a 
follicle. 

Sensation as if uvula was too long, it is slightly inflamed 
but not elongated 

Mucous membrane of pharynx and epiglottis of a deep red 
color and injected, soft palate frequently reddened and swol- 
len. 

Entire mucous membrane of mouth and pharynx was of an 
equally distributed pink without any swelling. 

THROAT. — 1 Slight redness of palate and throat, with spasm 
of esophagus and difficult speech, 

I Sore throat, as after swallowing red pepper. 



168 


LYSSIN. 


Quite a sore throat, constrictive sensation much < when 
attempting to swallow liquids, which he could not do without 
pain, solids not painful 
At 11 A. M soreness in throat till noon 
Sore throat, very severe, all day, in forenoon, > at 6 p m , 
after supper (7 p m.) , not able to swallow without great pain, 
as if swelled, as if raw, aches, on r side, with headache, 
with soreness in eyes, with increased tenacious saliva 
Cooling sensation in esophagus. 

Throat quite sore, headache in both temples, numbness in 
both arms, slight pain in lumbar region all day. 

Fauces and pharynx as far as one can see are slightly in- 
flamed, there is inclination to swallow, and increase of saliva 
Painful sore throat, throat much inflamed, headache <, 
tenacious mucus in mouth and throat, great weakness with 
aversion to move 

Inflammation of throat with foamy saliva 
Violent spasm m throat as if he would suffocate, from 2 
p M. to 9.30 P M. 

Great heat m throat and about heart 
Sudden jerks going from esophagus to heart 
II Sore throat, constant desire to swallow, much saliva and 
feeling as if beaten. 

I Periodical spasm of esophagus, continual painful inclina- 
tion to swallow without being able to swallow anything, con- 
striction is most severe when taking water into mouth, if he 
tried to swallow it forcibly, he had burning and stinging pain 
in throat, cough and retching which forced fluid from his 
mouth, difficult speech. 

I Difficulty in swallowing, particularly fluids 
Dryness in throat and difficult swallowing, with slight ery- 
sipelatous redness m pharynx. 

Stinging sensation when swallowing. 

Sore throat at 2 o’clock, with difficulty in swallowing fluids, 
felt as if epiglottis was paralyzed. 

Sore throat with great inflammation, could only swallow 
with difficulty, fluids returned through nose 
A peculiar sense of constriction in back of throat at 3 P. M,, 
<C at 4 p. M , could not swallow without pain, disappeared at 
6 p. M., but returned at 7 and lasted until bedtime. 



LYSSIN 


169 


Sore throat with constriction, particularly when attempting 
to swallow fluids, which is painful 
Terrible pain in throat, particularly when swallowing 
Constant inclination to swallow, or remove phlegm which 
seems to stick between nose and throat. 

I Constant desire to swallow, painful and ineffectual 
Some will drink water without difficulty 
Activity to drink is restored before sudden death. 

Warm drinks, milk, soups and wine are often more easily 
taken than water. 

Imagines that he cannot swallow anything 
Difficulty in swallowing can, at first, be overcome by firm 
resolution 

Declared he could not swallow for something in throat that 
interrupted the passage. 

Swallowing more difficult at 5 P M than in the morning 
(after Bellad ) 

Solid food sometimes consumed with great difficulty. 
Absolute impossibility to swallow anything, whenever at- 
tempt IS made, attacks of suffocation and spasms of respiratory 
muscles as well as of muscles of face, neck and rest of body, 
with great mental disturbance 

After some days patient equally abhorred solids as well as 
fluids, when importuned to eat, he was thrown into convulsions 
Any attempt to swallow bread occasioned greatest agony 
Often happens that they succeed in drinking after those 
who were around them have retired, or when attempt is made 
with closed eyes and with aid of a straw. 

No disgust for fluids until difficulty m swallowing came on; 
when fluid touched fauces it seemed at the peril of his life 
At 3 p. M felt a strange constrictive sensation in back part 
of throat, never experienced before, < at 4 P m., could not 
swallow without great pain, went off at 6 p m ; returned in an 
hour, lasting until 10 P. M 

I When taking water into mouth, constriction was greatest. 

I Periodical spasms of esophagus 
Attempt to drink water starts convulsions. 

1 Had difficulty in speaking, a connected sentence could only 
be uttered after making several fruitless attempts; palatic let- 



170 


LYSSIN. 


ters could not be pronounced at all, all were pronounced 
wrong 

At 10 A M. felt a soreness and suffocation m back of throat 

Violent spasms of throat at 2 p M , feeling as if he was about 
to be suffocated, went off at 9 p m 

A ball, as it were, rises from stomach up to throat, seems to 
threaten suffocation 

Sensation of a lump in throat with desire to swallow. 

A terrible pain in throat all day, and great pain on swallow- 
ing. 

Pam extended upwards from wounded arm toward throat. 

Stitching sensation when swallowing 

Burning stinging in 1. side of chest, with palpitation in after- 
noon 

I Burning stinging in throat. 

I Trying to swallow water forcibly, it caused burning and 
stinging in throat, besides cough and gagging, which forced 
out contents of mouth Spasm of throat. 

Burning down esophagus 

Great heat m throat and around heart 

I A slight redness of affected parts 

Intense and deep seated inflammation of mucous membrane 
of mouth, gums, throat and larynx, with smarting pains on 
swallowing. 

Feels as if he had swallowed a small quantity of red pepper. 
APPETITE, THIRST, DESIRES, AVERSIONS.-I Appetite good, 
but digestion deficient; a portion of nearly everything he ate 
passing bowels in an undigested state. Chronic camp diar- 
rhea. 

Voracious appetite, swallowed wheat without chewing. 

Little appetite m morning, want of appetite, headache, de- 
pression. 

I Want of appetite. Hydrophobia of sheep. 

1 Could take no nounshment (with spitting), could not re- 
main at table. 

Symptoms of digestive organs ei^tremely variable, excessive 
thirst, vomiting, constipation. 

Thirst and disinclination for food. 

1 Felt very thirsty and had no aversion to drink, on contrary 
drank large quantities of water. 



LYSSIN 


171 


Thirst much increased, complains of burning pains in throat. 

Thirst and desire to drink, but is prevented from doing so 
by spasmodic constriction of throat, attempts excite most dis- 
agreeable sensations, even spasms 

I Had not been drinking any water for some time, only 
some hot tea. 

I Drank some strong tea at supper, after which salivation 
discontinued until 8 pm, then commenced again. 

No appetite, except for sour things 

Called for burnt brandy and drank it, next day a strong 
rising in his stomach and an impossibility to drink. 

I Excessive desire for salt. 

First days, smoking unpleasant; after first week, a crazy, 
insatiable desire to smoke, he does not allow pipe to cool 

Picked up bits of cotton and shreds of cloth, bits of chips 
and coal were devoured whenever getting near, anything that 
was within reach and could be grasped by the jaws was 
gnawed away very quickly; a dog 

Urine and feces were frequently devoured as soon as they 
were voided, a dog 

I Abnormal cravings during pregnancy. 

Aversion to water; imagines he cannot swallow, says he is 
thirsty, but cannot look at water or hear it poured out. 

1 Aversion to water of place he arrived at 

1 Aversion to drinking water, but can take small quantities 
of chocolate. 

Aversion to fluids, great sensitiveness to every breath of air 
and reflection of light. 

Since bite she has a frightful aversion to water; at first she 
could wash herself by dint of great self-control, but later not 
at all. 

Wine tasted poorly and affected him more than usual 

Aversion to fat food and drink; there remains a long greasy 
aftertaste, < after mutton. 

EATING AND DRINKING. — Before dinner a very strange sen- 
sation, a strangeness of whole body. 

Warm drinks, such as milk, soups and wine, are more easily 
taken than water. 

Inability to take solid food, or else it is consumed with 
greatest difficulty. 



172 


LYSSIN 


At times ability to drink is restored before death 
After supper, 7 pm, feels >, less sore throat, no difficulty 
m swallowing. 

After eating all cooling, burning, wavelike sensations dis- 
appear, also congestion, pressing inward in epigastrium; las- 
civiousness with sexual excitement, lewdness with a sensation 
of weakness in parts, but inclined to an emission of semen; 
increased lassitude and drowsiness, slept an hour without 
making it any better 

After meals very ill disposed, every noise irritates him, if 
others eat apples, or hawk, or blow their noses, it brings him 
beside himself, passes away after siesta and coffee. 

After dinner and in evening disinclined to think. 

After supper pressing m spleen 
Nausea after eating eggs or fat food 

After cofiee. more frequent beating of pulse, heat in face 
Tobacco affected him more than usual 
HICCOUGH, BELCHING, NAUSEA AND VOMITING.— Squeamish 
sensation; a want of appetite m evening, followed by great 
lightness of head. 

Nausea, with giddiness, headache and pale face, with pale 
face after diarrhea, food does not taste right, and loss of ap- 
petite in evening, at 10 to 11 p. m 
Hiccoughing 

Continual belching of wind, convulsive eructations. 

Belching m afternoon, sour, in afternoon 
1 Gagging when he forcibly attempts to swallow water, 
forces it out of his mouth 

Rising of bile into throat during day, at same time an un- 
usual quantity of tenacious saliva in mouth and throat. 

Nausea and vomiting, after diarrhea. 

Vomiting, of food, of fluid while drinking, followed by 
faintness; of what was eaten at supper, at night in sleep. 

Nausea and vomiting of a foamy, mucous, dark colored sub- 
stance resembling coffee grounds 
SCROBICULUM AND STOMACH. — Pressure m epigastrium after 
eating. 

Suffocating pain at pit of stomach. 

Distress in epigastrium and precordial region with dyspnea. 



LYSSIN 


173 


In epigastric region sensation half coldish, half burning 

Pam in epigastric region, deep in, as if in or behind duo- 
denum. 

Aching, with coldness in stomach 

A cooling pain m stomach, with here and there a sharp and 
pointed pressure. 

A sensation of motion in stomach 

Loud gurgling in 1. side of stomach, becomes more continu- 
ous, like water from a bottle 

A loud cooing noise in stomach, to 1 , and after a while re- 
peated as a quick croaking. 

Great oppression in stomach, has to open her clothes 

A slightly hot, quiet, aching sensation below chest, some- 
times lower down, often m entire abdomen, as if in intestines 

Stomach empty, or may contain a dark, opaque substance, 
frequently resembling coffee grounds, in mucous membrane 
of stomach and intestines, decided injection of blood-vessels, 
upon former frequently hemorrhagic erosions 

HYP0CH0NDRIA.-A pressing pain in r. side, near last ribs, 
with breathing, in hypochondria, after quick walking. 

Shooting in r. side of abdomen. 

Pain in region of liver and r. kidney. 

Pain from within outward in r. side. 

Fatty degeneration of liver 

In upper part of abdomen, 1 side (region of stomach and 
spleen), a continued gnawing pressure in forenoon. 

Aching from below waist to feet. 

Pain in 1. side at 8 A. m. 

Pressing pain in region of spleen when walking fast. 

1 Painful throbbing as if an abscess was forming in region of 
spleen, but very deep in, exact locality is half way between 
median line and outline of 1 side, it lasted eight days, with it 
departed remnant of a similar affection in this locality, against 
which eleven years of allopathic treatment had proved of no 
avail. 

Under mamma hot sensation, quietly aching, sometimes 
same lower down or in whole of abdomen, as if in intestine. 

Tearing from I, hypochondriac region to right. 

ABDOMEN. — A rending pain across abdomen from 1 to r., in 
evening when in bed. 



174 


LYSSIN. 


Pain in r. side of abdomen proceeding from uterus 

Pain down 1 side of abdomen. 

Pressing in abdomen. 

A. drawing in abdomen below navel 

Cramp in lower part of abdomen. 

Painful sensation deep m upper portion of abdomen, as if 
behind duodenum; in forenoon. 

Colicky pain in abdomen, when it subsides, stinging in 
small of back 

Severe bellyache, lasting an hour, awoke from sleep at 
11.30. 

Violent bellyache. 

Sticking, in r. side of abdomen, when taking a breath, in 
abdomen above hip, with feeling of motion in lower part of 
abdomen 

Stitches: in r. side of abdomen, in belly, an inch from crista 
ilea. 

Shooting in abdomen 

A sense of motion, with slight stinging m middle of ab- 
domen 

A burning, waving and surging, proceeding from abdomen, 
spreads through entire chest to head 

After cooling sensation and scratching m esophagus had 
subsided, there appeared a half cooling, half burning sensa- 
tion in entire upper part of abdomen 

I General soreness m whole of lower abdomen 

Distension of abdomen, every evening. 

Rigidity of muscles of abdomen 

From both loins a drawing downward, followed by cramps 
in lower abdomen. 

Aching in loins; into back, down to feet. 

Dull pressing pain above r. inguinal region on a defined 
place 

Pain in r. groin, with some swelling. 

Drawing, dragging pain in groins; heavy, bruised feeling in 
thighs. 

* Drawing from groins downward, then cramps in abdomen, 
accompanied by dizziness. 

Aching from groins to feet, in evening. 



LYSSIN. 


175 


Pam m both groins, m r , two small kernels under skin, 
very painful 

Inguinal glands very much swollen, they pain for two hours. 

STOOL AND RECTUM. — | Tenesmus during and after stool 

II Dysenteric stools with tenesmus, renewed as soon as he 
hears or sees water run 

I When in morning some water was poured out from pitcher 
into basin, pain and desire to stool returned. Dysentery. 

I When he sees or hears running water, violent pain and 
tenesmus return; m a case of dysentery in Summer, of six 
weeks’ standing, m which stools were most frequent in night, 
consisted of bloody mucus and were followed by pains in rec- 
tum and small of back, which forced patient to walk about in 
spite of great weakness, could neither stand nor he down, 
had drank no water whole time, only hot tea occasionally 

i Stools watery and profuse, with severe pains in lower 
bowels, frequency of stools not uniform, some days five or 
six, others fifteen or twenty, usually more frequent in morn- 
ing Chronic camp diarrhea 

Diarrhea, with much pain, most during day, eighteen hours 
after dose, lasting twenty-four hours, with pain in lower part 
of bowels, < in morning, followed by nausea as if she would 
have to vomit, attended with violent pains early in morning, 
after stitches m side 

I Chronic diarrhea contracted in Southern camps 

Difficult passage of flatus as if anus resisted expulsion. 

II Stools of bloody mucus 

Involuntary stools. 

I Straining to evacuate, causing a violent pam m small of 
back and in rectum, afterwards compelling him to walk about, 
although weak 

Bowels constipated, stool very dark in color. 

Stool became dark and thickish in appearance, mingled 
with shreds of wool or cotton, bits of wood and coal that had 
been swallowed, a dog* 

Passage of bright red blood from anus, with terrible burning 
and pricking in it as from thorns. 

Difficult stool, piles protrude 

Hemorrhoidal troubles, passes blood ftom anus during cata- 


menia. 



176 


LYSSIN 


Throbbing in anus externally 

Darting into anus causes contraction 

URINARY ORGANS. — Dull pressure in region of 1. kidney. 

Flying pains increase, seize urinary organs, create a diffi- 
culty and heat in discharging urine. 

Some pain about neck of bladder in evening. 

A cooling, burning, congested feeling in region of bladder, 
m evening. 

Profuse watery urine, in evening. 

In morning and evening urine is yellowish brown, turbid 
and diminished in quantity, reddish sediment 

Urine dark, brownish, with whitish sediment, visible when 
urinating upon snow 

Brighter colored urine and in larger quantities, but not more 
frequent. 

Urine scanty or muddy, often of a dull, greenish yellow 
color; dog 

A whitish yellow sediment in urine 

Urine scanty, no albumin, dark, cloudy, frequently contains 
sugar, evidently the result of lesions in medulla oblongata. 

1 Urine too scanty and high colored 

Urging to urinate after a slight accumulation. 

1 Constant desire to urinate on seeing running water, uri- 
nates a little at a time 

Tickling burning in urethra near orifice after urinating. 

After passing feces and urine there is an urging to urinate 
again, it moves slowly several times from above downward 
without succeeding in passing a drop. 

Prostatic juice passes after urinating. 

Since fourteenth day after bite says she has passed no 
water; passes daily from time to time a little dark blood from 
uterus, difiering in quantity and quality from menstrual flow. 

If he passes but a small quantity of urine his sense of weak- 
ness is increased, weakness after urinating as if he passed his 
strength away 

MALE SEXUAL ORGANS-— Inclined to lascivious ideas, although 
there is not much sexual desire. 

Lasciviousness; after eating, with feeling of weakness in 
parts; with erections* in afternoon. 



LYSSIN. 


177 


Erections with but little desire. 

1 Strong erections, without sexual excitement or thoughts, 
in evening while undressing in cold room. 

Sexual indifference with erections, even during act of coi- 
tion, which is perfectly performed. 

i Increased sexual desire. (Dropsy of spine with sheep. 
Hydrophobia of sheep ) 

Priapism, with frequent seminal emissions 

1 Satyriasis m a stallion; hot breath streamed from nostrils. 

Insufficient seminal discharge 

I Semen is discharged too late or not at all during coition. 

During a very strong and warm embrace excitement dimin- 
ished at its height, and there followed no emission. 

No emission during coition, but afterwards semen escaped 
unconsciously in sleep. 

A seminal emission with dreams, quite unusual 

Without being preceded by an erection there is a discharge 
of prostatic fluid, smelling salty and musty, the glans penis is 
dry. 

Feeling of weakness around and in sexual parts. 

After coition, with difficult and tardy emission, there is a 
sensation of emptiness and discomfort m parts, lasting all of 
next day 

Painful urging in penis, as after excessive coition, accom- 
panied by lasciviousness. 

Itching and burning on corona glandis, with tickling and 
discharge of greenish pus, in afternoon 

Gians is dry and sticks to foreskin. 

Burning and tenesmus as if in prostatic gland and in ure- 
thra; in afternoon. 

Itching on os pubis, 1 side, extending to root of penis. 

Increased peristaltic motion of scrotum, all afternoon and 
evening, motion of testicles also increased. 

Scrotum tightly drawn up for two or three weeks. 

Hanging down of scrotum on eighth day, while before and 
after it was contracted. 

Painful sensation in testicles 

Pam in testicles on day after an embrace, particularly felt 
towards noon and first afternoon hours. 

1 Hydrocele 
13 



178 


LYSSIN. 


I Atrophy of testicles, testicles diminish in size, first L, then 
right. 

II Complaints resulting from abnormal sexual desire. 

FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS.— Aphrodisiac sense deficient. 

Pain extending from uterus into breast and r. side of abdo- 
men 

I Insatiable heat, with cows 

Pam in 1. ovarian region, uneasiness there 

Bearing down in uterine region 

Sharp pain in uterus, shooting down to labia 

Occasional acute pam in and below uterus, at times a vio- 
lent shooting pain in 1. of vagina, extending upward, so severe 
as almost to cause her to scream 

Increase of uterine sensitiveness, conscious of having a 
womb. 

I With a painful sensitiveness of womb, slight degree of pro- 
lapsus, so that after any considerable effort there would be a 
strong conviction that it was prolapsed. 

I Considerable pain in lower part of back, with a soreness 
felt through pubic region, which was clearly proved to be m 
neck of womb by an increase of pam from pressing finger on 
neck, principally at point where finger came in contact with 
womb. 

1 Womb high up in abdomen, enlarged m fundus. 

1 Abrasion about os tmcae (treated with caustic) some tume- 
faction of cervix and walls of vagina remained, showing a low 
degree of inflammation. 

1 Speculum showed os tincse of size of a small goose quill, 
smooth and normal, except that there was a string of bloody 
mucus of size of os hanging from it, so tough and viscid that 
it was difficult to wipe it away with a sponge. 

I Swelling of womb in all its parts, extending somewhat into 
vagina. Prolapsus, 

1 Bright redness of vaginal portion of womb. 

I After menses found that prolapsus uterus, a case considered 
incurable, was in its proper position, and continued so after 
an interval of two months, though she has done much to test 
the cure, lifting a heavy child in and out of bed at night, when 
she was necessarily without her supporter. 

1 Prolapsus uteri of seven years' standing. 



LYSSIN. 


179 


1 Metritis, prolapsus or induration of uterus; in cows 

A girl, aet. 14, and another aet. 21 took the 30th after their 
catamenia had ceased for three days, next day it reappeared. 

Catamenia appeared (after a few globules of 30th) two 
weeks before time, and very copious 

! Menstruation, with hemorrhoids, pulsations in anus and 
weakness of back 

I Menses rather frequent, protracted, dark, and at times 
fetid. 

1 During interval of menses “a show” that seemed quite 
obstinate. 

1 Anemia in consequence of disturbed sexual function. 

Continual discharge of offensive mucus from uterus for sev- 
eral months 

White discharge like leucorrhea, which weakened her; never 
had leucorrhea 

Slimy leucorrhea. 

I Severe leucorrhea, with pains in back and lower part of 
bowels, sore vagina. 

II Sensitiveness of vagina rendering coition quite painful. 

1 Menses too profuse, at times a little too frequent 

Discharge of blood from rectum during menses. 

I Weakness m back, with copious catamenia. 

1 Tearing, followed by pressing downward, could not make 
a hard step during catamenia. 

PREGNANCY. PARTURITION. LACTATION.— 1 1 During preg- 
nancy: strange notions, desires or cravings; rush of blood from 
chest upward; toothache, backache and other complaints; 
great sense of bearing down, intense pain from inflammation 
of os and cervix (formerly treated with Caustic.); great sore- 
ness in lower part of back and bowels. 

1 All changes of position that tilt or rotate to a moderate ex- 
tent the os uteri cause much pain. 

I Spasms excited whenever she attempts to drink water, or 
if she hears it poured from one vessel into another; sight or 
sound of water affects unpleasantly, even though desiring 
water. 

1 Since childbirth more pain with coition and a dislike to it. 

1 Since cessation of lochia a severe leucorrhea; pain in back 
and lower part of bowels, soreness of vagina. 



180 


LYSSIN. 


Both breasts swollen when waking in morning, she can 
hardly get up, three mornings in succession, same swelling of 
breasts at night when opening her dress 
VOICE AND LARYNX. TRACHEA AND BRONCHIA -Voice ah 
teredmtone; tones much suppressed; hoarse; rough; harsh 
and weak (last stage) ; shrill, inarticulate sounds, shrill sounds 
of utmost despair, or occasioned by violent expirations; very 
shrill and piercing bark, changing near its termination into a 
distressing, continuous howl (dogs). 

Epiglottis crisp and dry. 

Inflammation or redness in superior part of trachea 

I Pam next to larynx, on r. side, felt on turning neck and on 
pressure. 

RESPIRATION. — The breath is hot, sulphurous. 

Hot breath streams from nostrils Satyriasis in a stallion. 

On inspiring a cooling sensation, stinging on 1. side. 

Can scarcely speak from weakness. 

Weakness of chest, tired from talking or reading. 

When breathing, stitches in r. side of abdomen. 

Breathing accelerated or rattling m last stage. 

Asthmatic sensation, air going through larynx makes a kind 
of wheezing. 

Sighing and groaning respiration, may be occasioned by 
violent expiration. 

Frequent sighing and sobbing. 

A general feeling of discomfort in chest forces him to deep 
breathing or to emit sighs, which alleviate. 

II Sighing with pain in heart. 

Now and then he has to take a deep breath, with coldish 
feeling far back and deep in throat, followed by great relief. 

At 9 A. M. suffocating feeling in chest, had to sigh several 
times, lasting till 10:30 P M,, when he fell asleep. 

Breathing laborious and difficuh, quickly repeated, and at- 
tended with a constant and peculiar kind of hawking, in order 
to expel breath, which has been taken for an imitation of bark 
of a dog. 

1 Dyspnea: with flatulency, cough and rattling in chest, 
with sighing, groaning respiration; from cardiac pain; < lying 
down. 



LYSSIN. 


181 


Constriction about breast and difficulty m breathing become 
so extreme, that on a blast of air blowing on them they are 
seized with greatest distress, cover their mouths, seem ready 
to expire, as if struggling for breath. 

On attempting, at request, to drink a little water; a violent 
spasm of muscles of neck and throat came on, preceded by a 
deep sigh or gasp, as if she might just have plunged into cold 
water. 

Difficult breathing and spasmodic sensation in trachea. 

Suffocative spasm in throat. 

Convulsive breathing and spasm in muscles of throat, either 
come together or breathing precedes throat spasms. 

The convulsive breathings during paroxysms are very similar 
to those produced by a sudden cold water bath, and are always 
combined with spasms in throat muscles. 

Oppression in breathing before a severe suffocative attack 
occurs, induced by spasmodic contractions of respiratory 
muscles, combined with spasmodic, alarming constriction of 
pharynx. 

Breathing during paroxysm gasping, irregular and usually 
quite rapid, often with decided dyspnea. 

COUGH. — Barking like a dog, with a sort of noisy cough, 
headache. 

I Coughing when attempting to swallow water forcibly, 
forces it out of mouth. 

1 Cough and gagging. 

fflNER CHEST AND LUNGS.— Chest and abdomen feel ex- 
panded; expanding chest seems to invigorate him, though 
usually it fatigues. 

Pressing in chest; between tenth and eleventh ribs, r. side. 

Rheumatic pain across chest when drawing her breath. 

Pain as if in nerves, from side of chest up to throat. 

Cramplike pain and stitches in 1. side, followed by diarrhea 
and afterwards nausea and inclination to vomit. 

Pinching pain: at fourth rib on r. side. 

Stinging in lower part of chest. 

Stitches under 1. mamma, going towards left. 

Shooting between 1. mamma and last ribs. 

Shooting, flying pains through 1. chest. 



182 


LYSSIN. 


Burning, surging through chest. 

Burning stinging in L side of chest when taking a deep 
breath. 

Burning like heartburn in r. side of back, in region where 
ribs end. 

Blood mounts from chest to head. 

Extending to chest, pain in uterus. 

Great weakness in chest, particularly when walking and 
reading aloud, chest feels fatigued; some deep pain in 1. side. 

Upon pleura is often seen a soaplike deposit, as in case of 
cholera. 

I Gangrene of lungs, caused by pneumonia and sexual excite- 
ment. Satyriasis in stallion 

HEART, PULSE AND CIRCULATION.— Pain in 1. chest on a 
small spot in region of heart; more backward and to 1. m chest. 

Dull pain in heart all day, with a pinching pain about fourth 
rib, r. side. 

Constant pain in lower part of heart. 

A very strange and unusual feeling m heart, something like 
bands compressing it, in middle of chest, and as if needles 
were sticking in it, a dull kind of stitching pain, very painful, 
alarming and disagreeable. 

•Pain in heart entirely gone, but every two or three hours 
has a twitch there. 

Painful shock or jerk from lower or hind part of esophagus 
to heart and front chest 

7 p. M., slight, dull shooting pam in heart, lasting till he 
went to sleep at 10.30 p. m. 

Considerable pain in heart, and a corresponding pam in r. 
side; a severe sticking and shooting pain, producing shortness 
of breath and Sighing. 

At 11 A. M. two or three stitches of a shooting kind in heart, 
lasting a few minutes. 

Stitches in and around heart. 

Pricking sticking pam in heart. 

Stinging, sharp pam in heart. 

Sticking pains at intervals in heart. 

Sharp, shooting pams m region of heart, lasting four hours. 

At 9 P. M., violent pain of a sticking character m heart and 
to 1, of it. 



LYSSIN. 


183 


Stitches in heart from ringing of church bells. 

I Stitches in heart, more while walking, they would kill him 
if they continued. 

1 Heart had for three months not been free from a sticking, 
drawing, squeezing pain, result of an attack of rheumatism 
and cold, together with a palpitation and difficulty of breath- 
ing. 

Violent* pain in heart, as if it would burst or had needles 
running into it. 

Heat and burning in heart. 

Burning pain around heart and in forehead. 

Pam in heart: with headache, with sore throat and heavi- 
ness in legs. 

Sensation going from heart through to back, with sinking. 

1 Pain in cardiac region, to which he is subject, is < half an 
hour after, but much > in several days. 

While writing, a burning ebullition and gurgling from upper 
part of abdomen through chest and head, at first followed by 
a pain in ear; now a pressing stinging in inner upper vertex 
to r. ; as if a hot, wavelike stream was moving on and spread- 
ing outward, but not extending to spine or limbs. 

Heart palpitated violently and felt as if it was coming up 
into throat; drank several mouthfuls of water, which relieved. 

Palpitation causes anxiety. 

Feels beating of pulse through whole body, and from time 
to time like a slow rising wave through throat into head, fol- 
lowed by a sensation of a momentary rush of blood. 

Pulse: steady, but rather full and hard, about ten beats 
above normal standard (80) ; slightly accelerated and hard^ 
being more frequently small than full; quick and irritable; 
160; becomes gradually weaker and quicker, especially after 
paroxysm, 120 to 180; frequently irregular, becoming variable 
in its rate, and this variation takes place with great rapidity; 
unequal, some beats stronger, some quickened, weak, quick, 
intermitting; very small, irregular and very rapid (last stage); 
weak, quick and intermittent (latter period) ; becomes con- 
stantly more rapid and smaller, until at length it is threadlike, 
and finally no longer can be felt, 

OUTER CHEST. — The clavicles feel as if they would slip from 
their sockets; has to place arms akimbo. 



184 


LYSSIN 


Quivering about sternum. 

Spasmodic tearing under 1 ribs, at same time it runs to 
anus, where it causes a constriction; also at same time a tear- 
ing between skin and flesh down thigh to knee. 

Pressure on sternum between mammae; between last ribs 
on r side. 

Stinging in 1. breast (between mamma and last ribs). 

Chest as if beaten, m evening 

Soreness across chest, both breasts swollen, when waking 
m morning can hardly get u*p; three mornings in succession. 

NECK AND BACK. — Constant pain in neck. 

Going to neck: pain from head and from back. 

Pressing in neck and up back of head. 

From neck heat passes to ear and face. 

Pressure and drawing pain m neck. 

A stitch in nape of neck. 

Muscles of neck and breast, frequently entire muscular sys- 
tem, contract spasmodically. 

With inward heat, pains in neck, < if headache is >, or 
heat in r. side of face. 

Burning pam in neck. 

Throbbing pain extending into neck. 

Neck feels stiff, r. side of neck stiff; muscles felt stiff m 
morning. 

Tearing, stinging and stiffness in neck. 

Stiff neck with rending and shooting. 

Pain in cicatrix and also some stiffness in muscles of neck 
and throat 

Pain in muscles of neck and along cervical portion of spinal 
column. 

From nape of neck a heat draws over r. ear into r. eye and 
face, seems to pass from within outward 

Neck feels stiff, held himself more erect than usual. 

All day difficulty in moving head. 

Stiffness in joints of neck; if she allows her head to hang 
awhile, it is difficult to raise. 

Neck feels more comfortable when, in sneezing, she throws 
head back. 

Emphysematous swelling of subcutaneous cellular tissue of 



LYSSIN. 


185 


lower part of neck; may extend along upper portion of breast 
and into mediastinum 

Sterno-cleido mastoid muscle on each side stands out like a 
thick cord, a look of mingled anxiety and terror on counte- 
nance. 

Head feels lopsided and as if something was drawing it to- 
ward shoulder. 

At 2 p, M. laid down, found his head twisted to 1. side; un- 
der ordinary circumstances would very soon have changed 
position, but to his surprise found it quite comfortable and 
fell asleep, woke at 4 p. m,, felt a numbness in 1 side of head, 
and flesh of lower part of body looked like goose-flesh. 

As if head was being drawn to shoulders. 

Cramplike pressure under r shoulder-blade and between 
scapulae. 

In back, near r. shoulder-blade, a pressing with heat, draws 
into nape of neck, thence into muscles of 1. upper arm. 

At 2 P. M., severe pain across back between shoulders and 
waist. 

A pain or ache in and between both shoulders, as if a heavy 
weight was there, lasting two hours. 

Pressing, running from between shoulders to occiput and 
across r. ear, in morning. 

Below r. shoulder-blade a pressure; not pressing from out 
inward or > by bending backward. 

Pressure in back, five inches below point of r shoulder, one 
inch from spine; had same sensation during each of her preg- 
nancies, always on r. side, inward from lowest rib to breast 
bone. 

Stinging: below r. shoulder-blade, in cervical vertebra. 

Severe backache all day, and numbness of h^nds 

Spine aches; r. side of throat sore. 

I Backache and headache. 

Pain in back across hips, lasting all day. 

Pam in back and both groins. 

Burning in back near last ribs, r. side, like heartburn. 

Pressing in region of kidneys, dull pressure in region of left. 

At 4 P* M. violent pain in r. kidney, lasting an hour. 

Pain from 4 a, m. till evening in both kidneys and across 
hips, severe and a little burning, > at 9 p. M. 



186 


LYSSIN. 


Back extremely sore, as if beaten, in evening. 

Pains with cutaneous hyperesthesia along vertebral column. 

Could not bear least touch along whole vertebrae; slightest 
touch produced an irritability akin to convulsions. 

1 Sheep turn and wriggle their backs because they cannot 
bear heat of sun; increased sexual excitement; symptoms 
pointing to madness; scratching their backs appears to be 
agreeable to them, as they remain quiet and make a peculiar 
motion with their mouths, which does not express pain. 

Going to back from heart, sensation with sinking. 

Want of strength in back, must lean against back of chair in 
sitting. 

Weakness in region of kidneys, loins and sacrum. 

1 Great weakness m back, as if it would split and fall apart. 

I A sore lameness in back, with some degree of soreness in 
lower abdomen. 

Pain in lower part of spine severe. 

1 Considerable pain in lower part of back, with a soreness 
felt through the pubic region, pressing finger on neck in- 
creased it. 

Pressing pain in sacrum, r. side; later it moves to middle of 
back (repeated eight times). 

Shooting through small of back. 

I Disease peculiar to sheep, termed the “gid;” dropsy of 
spine 

UPPER LIMBS. — Pain on top of r. shoulder joint. 

Pain in 1. shoulder joint, as if beaten and paralyzed; lame- 
ness m 1. axilla. 

All day a tearing, then a stinging in 1 shoulder joint, as if 
m middle of bone, down arm and into finger; and after getting 
up from bed, for one hour in r. arm, then all day in left. 

Ip. m., slight pain in r. shoulder joint, also in head. 

Has a lump in r. axilla 

Rheumatic pain, first in r. then in 1. shoulder. 

Feeling of great weight on shoulders all day. 

Stinging tearing pain in shoulders, passing down through- 
bones of arm to fingers. 

Sudden sharp, darting pain, in bitten hand, extending up 
arm to shoulder and base of brain. 



LYSSIN. 


187 


Pain down wounded 1. arm, generally in afternoon and even- 
ing, < 10 o’clock. 

Arm aches and is swollen. 

Aching in r. arm (the 1. is bitten) , feeling as if weather was 
going to change. 

Slight twitching in r. arm. 

A sting in sore arm once in a while, which makes her start 
all over (dogbite). 

Felt two shocks down wounded arm as from a galvanic bat- 
tery, clear to finger ends. 

Cramp in arms. 

The pain up arm was followed by cramps and drawing in 
back and limbs of bitten side. 

Numbness in r. arm at 4 p. m., lasting till bedtime 

At 10:30 p. M., soon after taking last dose, numbness m r. 
arm. 

Weakness in arms. 

Right arm becomes so heavy and inactive that writing is too 
great an exertion, and he allows arm to drop. 

After some pain in arm (finger had a small wound exposed 
during dissection of a mad dog, forty days ago), feeling of 
malaise and fatigue, followed by death. 

Ini. upper arm, about axilla, pain as if beaten and lame; 
the same near elbow, several minutes after in wrist; in even- 
ing. 

Her arm has felt very sore, although wound is almost healed. 

A cold flush goes down arm as if ice water was being poured 
upon it. 

Feels a chill strike her r. arm when she goes into open air. 

Burning pain down wounded arm. 

Felt as if fleas were running over r. arm. 

Arm itches all over; itching on arms appearing suddenly. 

Pain m r. elbow as if paralyzed, at noon, same at 2 p. M. in 
1,, > in a horizontal position and when allowing forearm to 
hang; soon after in 1. knee. 

To right of r. elbow a black and blue spot. 

Throbbing pain in r. forearm on flexor side. 

Muscles of forearm, as far as hand, painful when pressed, 
or taking hold of anything. 



188 


LYSSIN. 


Blueness in streaks down r. forearm. 

Wrists have felt some time as if strained, < m morning 
Lame feeling in wrist. 

At 10 p. M., straining pain m r. hand. 

Soreness in r hand. 

Quivering in hands. 

Hand trembles so much he can scarcely write. 

Trembling of 1. hand when taking hold of anything or press- 
ing it; muscles hurt most on upper side of forearm down to 
hand. 

Trembling of 1. hand. 

Right hand numb for a long time, clumsy, stiff. 

Hands numb with headache. 

Right hand swollen. 

The ball of r. hand hard, cramped and swollen. 

After counting copper coin, violent pain in r. hand, between 
third and fourth metacarpal phalanx* in some motions and on 
pressure. 

Smarting in palm of r. hand. 

Intense pain in forefinger of 1 hand. 

Pam in first joint of r. ring finger, as if it was going to gather. 

Stiffness of fingers and hand. 

Woke at 5 p. m. with stinging in forepart of r. index finger, 
nail turned quite blue. 

LOWER LIMBS —II A pressive pain in r. hip bone, goes from 
there to middle of sacral bone. 

Left hip aches in bone. 

Felt as if hip bones would slip out of their sockets; had to 
rest with hands on hips to > the feeling. 

Something runs round and round several times in flesh, m 
region of hip, then down leg to knee. 

Pain in thighs, particularly in anterior portion; as if fatigued, 
after going up stairs; < after sitting down. 

Along 1. sciatic nerve a dull pain, returning periodically; < 
when rising from sitting. 

Pain in anterior part of r. thigh, as from a bruise. 

Twitching in r. femur, as if some one was pulling from be- 
low; not painful, comes and goes. 

Cramps in thighs. 



LYSSIN. 


189 


Biting and itchmg^on thighs 

Laming pain inside of 1 thigh above knee joint, and extend- 
ing into it. 

Tearing pain from middle of anterior portion of r. thigh to 
knee. 

Tearing in 1 thigh to knee. 

Knees ache, tearing, drawing pain. 

Stinging in r. knee 

Knees tremble at every step. 

Laming pain in r. knee joint when getting awake m night; 
next morning same in 1. knee. 

Aching and heaviness in legs below knee. 

All day a feeling of weight in legs below knee, seemed as if 
there were several pounds of lead in tibia of each leg 

Numbness in r. leg below knee. 

Pam in all joints of feet, like pressure with a dull point, now 
here, now there. 

Pam in legs very troublesome, not able to walk. 

Legs feel as if he had rheumatism. 

Pam going down 1. leg. 

Twitching m legs. 

Legs tired and aching; feel as if beaten, m evening, feel sore 
and very heavy 

A pain in legs, as if thighs were too heavy, went ofi at night. 

Right leg falls asleep, after seven hours. 

After sitting awhile, lower limbs go to sleep; prickling sen- 
sation 

Weakness m legs when going up stairs. 

11 Ulcers on legs, with emaciation and coldness, 1. side; con- 
traction of hamstrings and relaxation of ligaments of ankle 
joint and flexors of toes. 

A curious feeling in legs, as if calf was heavier than usual. 

Cramp m r. calf. 

Cramp in calves of legs at night m bed, < from stretching 
out limbs. 

Calf of 1 leg ached as if it had been cramped, after waking. 

1 The pam in calf came even when he was not thinking of 
bite at all, lately much < and quite severe. 

Sharp, biting pain in 1. ankle. 



190 


LYSSIN 


Painful lameness m 1. ankle joint in night while lying in bed. 

Heavy feeling m lower limbs, as if a weight was attached to 
ankles. 

Pain from heel into thigh 

After going to bed, intense pain in back of r. heel. 

Pain in r. heel and in toes of 1 foot. 

Balls of heels so sore that it is painful to walk. 

1 Great swelling in heel of a cow from dogbite; very restless. 

Pain in sole of right foot extending to ankle Lyssophobia. 

Severe pain in r instep, < after being in bed during cata- 
menia, at times extremely painful to move foot, does not pain 
much when walking upon side of foot; 1 slightly troubling at 
times. 

Extending to feet, pain from groins. 

Pain extends from ankle bone to great toe. 

Shooting from fourth toe to foot 

Some pam in toe next to little toe of 1. foot; shooting into 
foot. 

Tearing m first joint of 1. little toe 

Toes of both feet troublesome, as if nails were too long and 
broken, pain in small of back and r. temple. 

Each dose he has taken has made him feel as if he was 
getting corns on every toe, his real corns felt remarkably well 
and did not pain him at all. 

Her corns have troubled her but on one occasion since the 
proving; where she felt as having corns, she had twinges. 

Pam like rheumatism; shooting and stinging from knees 
down; stinging in palm of r. hand to finger ends, as though 
she had fallen on it 

Aching in knees and shoulders. 

Shortly after pain in shoulder joint, afternoon third day, 
pain goes into knee joint of same side. 

Feeling of pressure on shoulders and weight in legs. 

Pains or aches in all his limbs; feeling of languor and ex- 
treme fatigue. 

Weight and heaviness of legs and shoulders. 

Heaviness of limbs. 

A convulsive trembling of limbs during attacks. 

When lying in bed, an unusual morbid contraction and toss- 
ing about of limbs. 



LYSSIN 


191 


Severe twitches m arms and legs, much resembling chorea. 

Shaking or convulsive trembling of limbs 

He felt a severe, bruiselike pain in shoulders, chest, back, 
arms and legs. 

All muscles feel bruised in morning, can neither sit nor lie 
down. 

Loss of power in limbs, gait unsteady, at times some stiff- 
ness of hind legs; dog. 

REST. — POSITION. — MOTION. — Moved quite briskly, though 
feeling fatigued. 

After moving, turning, or stooping, feels as if head would 
burst. 

Very little exertion wearies him, and he feels quite languid. 

All day had a disposition to straighten herself up. 

Had to rest with hands on hips to > feeling as if hip bones 
would slip out of their sockets 

Horizontal position: pain in elbows >, also when allowing 
forearm to hang. 

Lying down thinks she is unable to move head; like a 
shock in upper part of brain; rush of blood to head; pains up 
neck and down spine; impossible, pain in rectum and small of 
back, dyspnea; impossible in dysentery; could not sleep. 

Lying in bed. contraction and tossing about of limbs. 

Parts on which he lies, burning heat. 

Does not wish to rise. 

Can neither sit nor lie; all muscles feel bruised. 

Sitting: dizziness; must lean back, want of strength in back; 
pain in thighs <. 

After sitting awhile: lower limbs go to sleep. 

On rising from a chair: staggers; cannot walk straight; dull 
pain along sciatic nerve. 

When rising: rush of blood to head; tearing stinging in 
occiput <. 

Stooping: inclination to fall to r. ; aching in bones above 
eyes <; pressing in vertex and forehead; violent headache <; 
painful rush of blood to head; aching over eyes <; dizzy on 
r. side of head. 

On rising from stooping* dizziness and dimness of vision. 

Turning neck: pain in larynx 



192 


LYSSIN. 


Bending head backwards, pain m neck >. 

If she allows her head to hang awhile it is difficult to raise. 

Throws head back: when sneezing. 

Bending backwards, does not > pressure below shoulder 
blade. 

Standing: pain in rectum and small of back, impossible, 
dysentery. 

Standing still: on waking, head fixed. 

Change of position, disinclination to change position of 
head, continual change (dog), that would tilt or rotate os 
uteri would cause much pain. 

Stretching limbs, cramps in calves. 

Can hardly bend fingers; ^ifiness. 

Turning around: painful rush of blood to head 

Taking hold of anything, muscles of forearm painful; trem- 
bling of 1. hand. 

Least motion: all joints cracked 

Moving head < pressing in vertex and forehead. 

Aversion to move, great weakness. 

At every step: knees tremble. 

Could not make a hard step during catamenia. 

Walking, as if she would fall, dizziness, with dim sight; 
five minutes after, sharp pain above eyebrows and up nose; 
quickly, causes pressing pain in hypochondria; pain in region 
of spleen; enforced by terrible pain in rectum and small of 
back; great weakness in chest, stitches in heart, impossible 
on account of pain in legs; painful on account of soreness of 
heel, on side of foot, instep not so painful. 

Going up stairs, pain in thighs, weakness of legs, very 
weak 

After a short walk: exceedingly fatigued and weary. 

Stirring about: violent headache <, painful rush of blood 
to head. 

Swallowing, difficult, particularly fluids; stinging sensation; 
causes constriction of throat; causes terrible pain; bread 
causes greatest agony, stitching sensation. 

NERVES* — Until dinner time he felt so strangely in his whole 
Body as never before, without being able to define the feeling. 

In all motions of her body and in her looks is expressed a 
peculiar erethism. 



LYSSIN 


193 


All things affect him more, tobacco included. 

Irritability; violent agitations 

I He could neither he down nor stand up for any length of 
time 

Great restlessness, anxiousness, distress, tossing about. 

In afternoon whole body trembles, she can scarcely speak, 
stinging in one of cervical vertebra, when stooping feels dizzy 
on r side. 

Afternoon tremulous in whole body and very weak, can 
hardly talk 

I Continual trembling sensation through whole body 

I The strange feeling changed during night into a trembling, 
and he is full of fear 

Twitching of muscles throughout entire body (last stage). 

Twitching of tendons, with tendency to general convulsions. 

Severe nervous twitches in whole body all day 

Felt quivery all over 

If during great restlessness she attempts to sit down* and 
work, she has alternately twitching in arms and legs. 

Nervous twitching, with trembling of r. hand. 

Starts now and then. 

Muscular contractions appear with various degrees of in- 
tensity, from slightest convulsion to those of most severe and 
clonic form , frequently tetanic convulsions. 

Spasms of individual muscles, as well as of muscular system 
in general, clonic, rarely tetanic 

The spasms have the character of refiexed spasms; their 
proximate causes are attempts to swallow, speaking, a cur- 
rent of air, sight or idea of fluids, sight or sound of running 
water, coming in contact with another person; a bright light, 
sight of shining objects or of some strange person; a loud 
noise or strong odors 

Sensation of convulsive actions in different parts, distress 
of epigastrium, heaviness of limbs and general prostration. 

Exertion is frequently succeeded by convulsions. 

11 Attacks returned every few minutes, for five hours, until 
they were arrested; pain passing down spine to loins and hips, 
and from thence to knees. 

Convulsions conjoined with an exalted state of sense of 
smell, taste and touch. 

14 



194 


LYSSIN. 


Spasms of legs and arms, occasionally very severe 

Clonic convulsions, decided tetanus or trismus not observed; 
opisthotonos in rare cases. 

In quick succession violent epileptic attacks. 

Spasms so violent that four strong men could hardly hold 
him and prevent him from hurting himself 

Every day at 9 p. m , convulsive startings. 

She struck, snapped and bit at everything and every person 

Pain commencing in cicatrix of bitten thumb, producing 
slight spasm, and still greater disposition to snap and bite and 
to grind teeth, which were entirely beyond his control, caus- 
ing him to fall on floor 

Suddenly a severe pain in bitten thumb, after nine days, 
instantly passing up spine and thence into brain, producing a 
violent, nervous convulsion for a few moments, with a disposi- 
tion to snap and bite, passed off in two or three minutes. 

Convulsions came on and lasted for a short time, then per- 
fectly placid for some time before death. 

II Convulsions daily; rolls head from side to side; winking 
and rolling eyes; attempts to bite others; pelvis and legs are 
turned to one side as far as possible Child, aet 2, after 
scarlatina. 

Feels as she did when she got up from a nine day’s illness, 
feels so heavy and sore 

Great debility and disinclination to move about, lasting till 
2 p. M., gradually diminishing. 

Feeling of malaise and debility at 3 p. m., great disinclina- 
tion to move. 

Does not wish to rise. 

Very soon a sensation of weakness, a kind of flabby lassi- 
tude, like days after great exertion, or after a fever or other 
disease. 

Great weakness and restlessness, does not know where to 
turn, would prefer to lie down, but it affects his breathing. 

Such weakness that knees tremble at every step, and she 
feels as if she would fall. 

.Weakness: with sore throat; after urinating; of sexual 
organs. 

During exhaustion more nimble and active. 



LYSSIN. 


195 


Fatigue and heaviness in legs 

Great physical relaxation, whole body feels fatigued, tired 
all over 

Felt irritable, tired and nervous 

With numbness of paralytic symptoms the violence of all 
others increases. 

I At times a singular sensation, a kind of “die away” feel- 
ing, quite instantaneous, cannot describe it, seems to extend 
through heart to back; accompanied with quivering around 
breast bones and pain in nerves, from L side of chest to throat 
and 1 jaw; fluttering about heart. 

Felt stiff and tired, required an effort to draw his breath. 

After singing, suddenly falls down as if dead, with eyes 
shut, face red, quick breathing, pulse 100. 

A stage of general paralysis, an abatement of most distress- 
ing symptoms; a freer respiration, a diminution of reflex ex- 
citability; less impediment to deglutition; a rapidly increasing 
debility and prostration before death. 

SLEEP. — Inclination to yawn, with stiffness of lower jaw. 

Felt inclination to gape and stretch. 

Felt drowsy, in afternoon; irresistable drowsiness, 9 F. m. 

Sleepy after a meal, slept one hour without relief. 

Frequent yawning, without sleepiness, particularly when 
hearing others yawn. 

Did not sleep more than thirty minutes until after 2 A. m. 

Insomnia; sleepless in spite of narcotics. 

Passed most of his nights sleeplessly, walking up and down 
in despair. Lyssophobia. 

Restless night, with stupefaction in head. 

Sleep fitful, position continually changed; dog. 

Excited, cannot sleep. 

Felt as he did some years since, when sitting up with a sick 
relative three nights out of five, unable to sleep during day 
from nervous anxiety. 

When lying down could not sleep, eyes open, unless he pur- 
posely closed them, when they reopened involuntarily. 

Went to bed at 10:30 p. m. (as usual), could not sleep (a 
very unusual circumstance) ; dozed and heard various noises 
till 3 am., which caused him to get out of bed to ascertain 



196 


LYSSIN 


what they were; started frequently; slept soundly from 7 to 

8.30 A M. 

Went to bed at 10 p. m. in great pain all over, woke up at 

11.30 p. M with very severe pain in stomach, lasting one hour. 

After 10 P M., while in bed, all symptoms more severe 

Had a restless night, woke repeatedly and felt tired. 

Woke several times at night with pain in wounded arm. 

Starting in sleep, afternoon 

Has to scratch whole body, and has no sleep for it all night. 

Became more restless night before death. 

Dreams of influential persons to whom he occupies posi- 
tion of servant or subordinate, of a Latin debate with students 
of law, astonished at facility and fluency with which he spoke 
Latin, it being far greater than he was capable of in a waking 
state; of dogs all the time, but they are different dogs from 
the one that bit her, of fighting, of high places, of insane 
asylum, of churches, disagreeable, when she falls asleep, 
night or day, only m first half hour. 

Jumped up m bed. 

I During night slept but little; was disturbed by disagree- 
able, disconnected dreams; felt strangely. Lyssophobia. 

On waking stands perfectly still for a time, head fixed as if 
gazing at some distant object; a dog. 

Sleepiness when unable to sleep, and sleeplessness when 
she might otherwise have slept, generally restless at night. 

On waking is morose, inclined to be angry. 

Late getting awake, and difficult to recover from sleep. 

Slept from 4 to 6 P. M , woke up and felt dreadfully nervous, 
had a great fear as if something was going to happen 

In morning, after exciting dreams, much fatigued, feels 
tired in sacrum and back 

If inclined to sleep, it is short, disturbed, with frightful 
dreams, and on awaking is apt to fall into slight convulsions. 

On awaking from siesta, numbness in head. 

TIME. — 2 A. M ; did not sleep more than thirty minutes until 
after 

3 a. m. : became cold in bed for one hour. 

Morning: violent vertigo, with chill and headache, after 
rising, slight frontal headache < ; when getting awake, boring 



LYSSIN. 


197 


in temples, woke with burning, aching headache, severe head- 
ache; lid puffed up like an eggshell; on awaking lids feel para- 
lyzed before rising, on hearing water poured, obliged to have 
an evacuation, pressing in forehead early, frequent sneezing, 
(6 a. m.) tickling in 1 cheek; heat in face, bitter taste, swal- 
lowing less difficult; little appetite, stools more frequent, 
diarrhea, with violent pains; urine yellowish brown, both 
breasts swollen, muscles stiff; pressing across r. ear, wrists as 
if strained < , pain in 1, knee; all muscles feel bruised; much 
fatigued 

8 A. M . pain in 1 side. 

9 A. M ; severe headache begins; suffocating feeling in chest 
lasting till 10.30 p m. 

At 10 A. M : began to spit a great deal; soreness and con- 
striction in throat. 

At 11 A. M. soreness in throat till noon, stitches in heart for 
a few minutes. 

In forenoon: sore throat; belching, gnawing pressure in 1. 
side; painful sensation in upper part of abdomen 

Towards noon, headache with increase of saliva; pain in 
testicles < . 

At noon, slight headache, lasting rest of day, pain in r. 
elbow 

Until dinner time: felt strangely in his whole body. 

After dinner, disinclined to think; headache very severe; 
pressing in epigastrium , sexual excitement. 

Afternoon: very severe headache; dull pain in forehead, with 
stupid feeling; pressing in vertex and forehead; dull pain in 
forehead; sick headache; dull heavy pain in head, headache, 
with nausea and sore pain around heart; stinging pressure be- 
hind ears; ranula, with dryness of mouth < ; stinging in chest, 
with palpitation; sour belching; ‘erections, itching and burning 
on corona glandis; burning and tenesmus as if in prostatic 
gland and in urethra; increased peristaltic motion of scrotum; 
first hours pain in testicles < ; pain in wounded 1. arm ; pain in 
shoulder joint; whole body trembles; drowsy, starting m sleep; 
fever. 

1 p. M : slight pain in r. shoulder joint. 

2 P. M. : intense pain in head; sore throat; violent spasm of 



198 


LYSSIN. 


throat; laid down and found head twisted to 1 side, found it 
quite comfortable; felt numbness in 1. side; severe pain across 
back, pam in 1 elbow. 

3 p. M. : headache very severe, peculiar constriction in back 
of throat; feeling of malaise and debility. 

Until 4 p. M.: feels as if he had heard or would hear un- 
pleasant news; pressure on upper part of head. 

4 p. M. : constriction in throat < ; violent pain in r. kidney 
lasting one hour. 

5 p. M. : swallowing more difficult; woke with stinging in 
forepart of index finger. 

During day. rising of bile in throat; diarrhea, with pain < ; 
unable to sleep from nervous anxiety; disagreeable dreams 
when falling asleep, only first half hour. 

All day. felt depressed and weak; spitting of saliva, headache 
with dizziness; sore throat, intense pain in head, violent head- 
ache < ; a peculiar sensation of head; itching in nose, spitting; 
very severe sore throat; slight pain in lumbar region; terrible 
pain in throat; sensation of emptiness and discomfort in sexual 
parts after coition, dull pain in heart; difficulty in moving head; 
severe backache and numbness of hands; pam in back across 
hips; a tearing and stinging in 1. shoulder joint; weight on 
shoulders; feeling of weight in legs, severe nervous twitches in 
whole body; had to lie in bed, with severe pain in all bones. 

Evening: fretful, hypochondriac mood; vacillating motion 
of head; dull pain in forehead, pam above 1. ear, shooting m 
eyes; pressive burning m r. concha, late, frequent sneezing; 
drawing in side of face; disinclined to think, want of appetite, 
followed by great lightness of head, when in bed, rending 
across abdomen; aching from groins to feet; pam about neck 
of bladder, cooling, burning, congested feeling in region of 
bladder; profuse watery urine; urine yellowish brown, strong 
erections without sexual excitement or thoughts; increased 
peristaltic motion of scrotum; chest as if beaten, back ex- 
tremely sore; pain m wounded 1. arm, pam in 1. arm and wrist; 
legs tired and aching, late, less inclined to chilliness. 

After supper: pressing in spleen, lewdness, with weakness 
of parts, but inclined to an emission. 

6 p. M.: sore throat >. 



LYSSIN. 


199 


7pm: sore throat ; slight, dull shooting pain in heart till 
10.30 p. M 

8 P. M. : salivation recommended 

9 P. M. : severe shooting pain in head; curious stinging pain 
in 1. eye, spasm of throat > , violent pain in heart; irresistible 
drowsiness, a dripping, warm perspiration from wrist to nails 
of r hand. 

10 P. M.: pressing pain in head; pain in wounded 1. arm < , 
stinging pain m r. hand; pains severe until that time. 

After 10 P. M . while in bed all symptoms more severe. 

10 30 p. M : numbness in r. arm, went to bed, could not 
sleep; dozed and heard various noises till 3 A. m., started fre- 
quently 

11 p. M. : as if she was going to have a fit. 

11.30 P M. : awakes from sleep with severe bellyache. 

After going to bed: intense pain in back of r. heel; pain in 
heel. 

Night: delirium < , tempted to bite her pillow, incessant 
talking; disturbed dreams; stupidity with restlessness, on hear- 
ing water poured, obliged to have an evacuation, hears various 
noises; vomiting in sleep, stools most frequent, swelling of 
breasts, laming pain in r. knee joint when getting awake, pain 
in legs goes off, cramp in calves of legs; while lying in bed, 
laming pain in joint of 1. foot, painful lameness in 1. ankle 
joint, strange feeling changed into a trembling, generally 
sleepless, walking up and down in despair; stupefaction in 
head, woke several times with pain in wounded arm; sleepless 
on account of scratching of whole body; more restless; dis- 
agreeable dreams; itching quite severe, intolerable itching in 
lower part of body to feet, stitches in heart; pain in back; 
itching on lower half of abdomen. 

TEMPERATURE AND WEATHER. — 1 Burning sensation in bit- 
ten place > by hot steam striking against it Lyssophobia. 

1 Unbearableness of heat of sun. Dropsy of spine with 
sheep. 

The damp, warm weather oppressed him 

Expressed a desire to go into bath; after warm bath more 
irritable to external air, the most distressing symptom that 


occurs. 



200 


LYSSIN. 


Great sensitiveness to every breath of air. 

A very gentle stream of air projected from lips on to pa- 
tient’s forehead, and continued only for a few seconds, brought 
on a violent spasm. 

Asked her mother to beg him not to breath upon her face 
again, as it distressed her so much (after Bellad. ) 

Air, of agreeable temperature, feels cold and disagreeable. 

Continually directs a window to be closed which is not open. 

Draft of air, or opening or closing door, brings on spasms. 

Extreme sensibility to cold or least variation in temperature 
of air. 

Heat of sun. cannot bear it 

Warm drinks, more easily taken than water 

As soon as he gets warm in bed: itching in inner sides of 
thighs and knees; compelled to scratch. 

Open air. headache > , feels a chill strike r. arm. 

Breath of air sensitive to. 

Blast of air. causes greatest distress 

Wet weather: aching in 1. side of head < 

In cold room, while undressing, strong erections. 

Cold air. > headache; headache, with nausea and sore pain 
in heart > 

FEVER. — Paroxysms of intense coldness with pain in spine. 

During paroxysm, limbs cool and livid. 

Attacks of vertigo, chilliness, sometimes chills; at least one 
a day for several days, not always accompanied by vertigo, 
though always accompanying it. 

Late in evening less inclined to chilliness. 

Chilly feeling, more down r. (bitten) arm. 

Felt chilly and cold all over, shaking 
Desire for heat ” marked. 

Became cold in bed at 3 a m., although covered with four 
blankets; lasted about one hour. 

Chills intermixed and followed by cold sweat. 

A fever, sometimes preceded by slight shiverings, generally 
very mild. 

Face sweats, with flushes. 

Temperature of body 100 to 104*^ Fahrenheit, seldom rises 
to 105 or 106. 



LYSSIN 


201 


Cannot bear heat of sun 

Fever m afternoon. 

Slight fever, with flushes of heat. 

Fever every evening, commencing at dusk and lasting until 
bedtime (midnight). 

Sensation of burning heat in parts on which he lies. 

He feels the pulse’s beat through body; from time to time 
there is a surging through throat into head, like a slow wave 

Great fever, no chill, pulse 160, no appetite, thirst, drinks 
cold water very often, stupid and sleepy 

Feverish heat, with headache. 

Sensation as if a hot wave, fine, like vapor, surged through 
body, taking ati outward course, yet not reaching surface or 
extending into limbs. 

Heat, with pressure in forehead and back 

After drinking some coffee, a strong heat in r side of face, 
followed by aching in front of upper part of head; after this 
again heat from nape of neck up head over ears and r side of 
face, with heat in eye from within outward and tickling in ear. 

Sensation of heat felt internally and externally through en- 
tire body, no external warmth, it forces perspiration out on 
face as from weakness, and is accompanied by lassitude and 
aching in legs. 

At 9 P. M., a dripping, warm perspiration from whole r. 
hand, from wrist to nails; afterwards hands and fingers stiff, 
she can hardly bend them. 

Skin covered with clammy sweat (last stage). 

Skin moist, even covered with sweat, during spells, limbs 
cold and livid. 

Much better after perspiring. 

I Intermittent fever 

ATTACKS, PERIODICITY.— “Other diseases, when poison is 
absorbed, have their periods, the canine poison depends on 
climate and constitution and different periods, from first day 
till nineteen months.” 

Took several drops of 300, after having been bitten in nose; 
symptoms next day and the following, and well the third day, 
first symptoms returned on the twelfth day 

I First day >; next day <, on third day salivation returned. 
Lyssophobia. 



202 


LYSSIN. 


Irregular fits of backache and chills, increasing steadily. 
Paroxysm, combined with a feeling of suffocation, almost 
produces strangulation. 

Sudden convulsions of a paroxysmal character. 

I Periodically since two weeks Spasms of throat 
Attacks every few minutes, for five hours, pain down spine 
to loins and knees. 

Periodical: ranula; spasm of esophagus, dull pain along 1. 
sciatic nerve. 

Alternating, of heat and headache; twitches in arms and 
legs. 

Repeated eight times, pain from sacrum to middle of back. 
For one hour: pain m r. arm. 

For two hours: pain in and between both shoulders; pain 
in inguinal glands. 

Every two or three hours: has a twitch in heart. 

For four hours: sharp shooting pains in region of heart. 
After seven hours, r. leg falls asleep. 

From noon till evening: headache 

From 2 p m. to 9.30 p. m. : violent spasm in throat 

From 3 to 4 p M.: headache. 

From 4 A, m, till evening, pain in kidneys and across hips^ 
From 4 p. m. till bedtime, feeling of numbness m r - arm 
Daily passes from time to time a little dark blood from 
uterus. 

Every evening: distension of abdomen, fever commencing 
at dusk and lasting until midnight. 

Three successive mornings: soreness across chest, both 
breasts swollen. 

First days; smoking unpleasant, after first week a crazy, in- 
satiable desire to smoke 

Day after embrace, pain in testicles 
Every other day at 5 p. M. : bonng in temples. 

During three days: her sense of smell painfully acute. 

Lasted eight days^ painful throbbing in region of spleen. 
After nine days, severe pain in bitten thumb, thence to 
brain, nervous convulsion for a few moments, passes off in 
two or three minutes. 

Forty days ago: small wound exposed during dissection of 
mad dog, feeling of malaise and fatigue, followed by death. 



LYSSIN. 


203 


Two weeks before time: catamenia. 

For two or three weeks: scrotum tightly drawn up. 

In Summer, of six weeks’ standing, pain and tenesmus on 
hearing or seeing running water 

For several months, offensive mucus from uterus. 

For three months, sticking, drawing, squeezing pain in 
heart. 

For seven years, prolapsus uteri. 

TISSUES. — Affects principally the nervous system. 

Great blueness of veins and redness of arteries on wounded 
arm. 

Tearing and shooting as if m bone. 

Supraorbital bones feel shattered. 

Aching in bones; every bone seems bruised and sore; as if 
every bone had been broken or violently beaten, never had 
such pains, had to return to bed and he there all day. 

All his joints cracked on least motion, and pain was quite 
severe till 10 p. m. 

Lost flesh, getting thinner all over. 

Quick tendency of body to putrefaction. 

1 Chlorosis. 

TOUCH. PASSIVE MOTION. INJURIES.~-He cannot bear to 
ride in a carriage, feels generally unwell during or after it 

When water (in bath) was least ruffled, so as to touch a 
fresh surface, convulsions were excited. 

Faceache after puncturing a pimple on cheek. 

A lacerated wound on r. cheek, behind ramus of jaw, one 
and a half inches, and three lines of abrasion m front of same 
cheek. 

Local sensations of pain in wound or scar continue often 
after prodromic stage, in an increased degree in higher stage, 
but are in last scarcely heeded. 

Peculiar sensations are frequently experienced at seat of 
bite, or in adjacent parts; like a sensation of pricking, boring 
or burning, always proceeding from wound. 

Complained of a pain in r. arm (bitten part); no inflamma- 
tion or enlargement of glands of axilla could be discovered. 

Tearing pains often proceed from wounded parts, frequently 
attributed by patients to effects of a cold and to rheumatism 
thereby induced. 



204 


LYSSIN. 


Shooting out from bitten part towards trunk, less frequently 
extending outward from sensonum, or in some locality other 
than part injured. 

Wound in exceptional cases appears inflamed and swollen; 
of a reddish or bluish hue. 

Sensation of creeping and pain in scar 

Next morning wound red around edges 

Great redness of small bloodvessels around wound. 

Soreness in muscles around wound, which is now almost 
healed. 

The wound healed without irritation kindly in 'course of 
twelve or fourteen days. 

Some are without pain in bitten part. 

No pain, swelling or inflammation in lymphatic glands, be- 
tween bite and thorax. 

The wounds heal kindly and are characterized by a striking 
absence of inflammatory reaction 

The subsequent inflammatory reaction (after caustics) is 
generally slight, while pain thereby produced is moderated. 

Even after application of strong caustics, wounds manifest 
a strong tendency to skin over without granulating 

Never saw a wound more disposed to heal, he was abroad 
in five weeks, yet afterwards affected by hydrophobia. 

The ready healing of the wound made by the bite of a rabid 
animal is similar to the rapid healing of wounds in those af- 
fected with leprosy. 

Touching scar is said to produce peculiar sensations, a 
shuddering, feeling of anxiety, and sighing. 

Sensation of creeping and pain in scar. 

I A bite of an angry dog into r. thigh had not healed, turned 
into malignant ulcers; surrounding bluish red edges, raised and 
hard, bases badly suppurating and ichorous, with redness and 
hardness. 

I Scars from a bite in nose swollen and red for fifteen 
months. 

I Ulcers remaining after bite of evil disposed dogs. 

1 Pain on spot bitten became burning, and extended over 
whole body, and he felt very strangely. Lyssophobia. 

I Felt a continued pain in spot on r. calf where he was bit- 
ten, but without a lesion. Lyssophobia. 



LYSSIN. 


205 


1 Wounds from bite of dogs, in sheep 

1 A cow bitten by a dog in foot had a large swelling of part, 
and animal got very restless. 

1 Two puppies, bitten by their rabid mother, did not get mad 
after taking Lyssin. 

It may be a prophylactic to hydrophobia, but never without 
at the same time applying radiate heat to the part bitten, and 
frequent sessions in hot room of Turkish bath, during the at- 
tack remedies are to be applied according to symptoms 

Slightest touch, brings on convulsions; along whole verte- 
brie causes irritability akin to convulsions 

Touch, on head makes it ache, small pustules on frontal 
eminence; nose very sensitive; pimple on eminence of forehead 
painful, pain on cheek < 

Pressure, on neck of bladder, causes < pain in neck, causes 
pain in larynx, muscles of forearm painful; violent pain m r. 
hand. 

Disposition to press hand against lower jaw. 

Presses head against wall, headache. 

Rubbing: headache >, causes ear to pain. 

Gentle scratching, headache >. 

Scratching: itching in both ears disappears, scurf off pim- 
ple, discharge of lymph and blood; sheep’s back makes 
them quiet, < biting and itching in various parts of body; 
causes small red spots in a circle on inner side of thighs 

SKIN. — Quick tendency of the wound to heal (the same in 
leprosy). 

Many underwent smallpox subsequent to reception of bite, 
and after their recovery died of hydrophobia 

Biting, itching m various parts of body, < by scratching 

Very slight headache and biting itching all over body and 
legs. 

Itching quite severe during night. 

Had to scratch frequently, or rather rub. 

Through night intolerable itching in lower part of body 
down to feet 

Itching in r, hand, 1. foot, and in various parts of body. 

I Bluish discoloration of bitten place (after Laches.). 

Itching as soon as he begins to get warm m bed, particu- 



206 


MAGNETIS POLI AMBO. 


larly on inner side of thighs and knees, after scratching there 
appeared small, red spots in a circle 

When in bed he is compelled to scratch, cannot sleep all 
night 

I Pustules, on forehead; around inflamed eye, on finger 
(after bite). 

I Malignant ulcers from bite of a dog 
I Red scar from bite of a dog 
I Cancerous sores 

Herpes circinatus appeared on 1 leg, below knee and livid 
yellow complexion gave way to a healthy color 


MAGNETIS POLI AMBO (The Magnet). 

Symptoms produced by touching either pole of the magnet, 
indiscriminately, or by laying the whole of the magnetic sur- 
face upon the body. The potencies have been prepared by 
triturating milk sugar which had been saturated when ex- 
posed to the emanations of the magnet, a method Hahne- 
mann does not appear to have practiced. 

The pathogenesis of the magnet as a whole, and of each 
pole separately, is from Hahnemann’s Materia Medica Pura. 
It is to the original provings and observations of Hahnemann 
that we owe these valuable remedies, and no better or more 
logical introduction perhaps can be given than he has fur- 
nished in the Materia Medica Pura: 

To the ordinary mechanical, materialistic, and atomistic heads — ^and 
there is a vast number of such — ^it seemed not only paradoxical, but child- 
ish and incredible, that, according to the homeopathic medical doctrine, 
the administration of doses of only very minute fractions of a grain of the 
more powerful medicines could be of use 

I grant that it may certainly be more convement to regard all diseases as 
accumulations of gross impunties, and active drugs as rough levers and 
brooms, or as chemical reagents, consequently as palpable things. This 
may, I repeat, be more convement than to regard those alterations of the 
being of living creatures (disease) as pure dynamical affections of the 
vital force, and medicines as pure, virtual, tone-altenng powers, as they 
are in reality, and to set about curing according to these views. 

If we do not adopt these true views, but adhere to those ordinary mate- 



MAGNETIS POLI AMBO. 


207 


rial ones, the curative powers of medicine must be estimated according to 
their bulk and the weight of their dose, and hence the scales must deter- 
mine the efficacy of the dose But in that case we must first ascertain the 
weight of the disease, in order to be able to reckon whether a disease 
weighing so many pounds (it has, indeed, been hitherto not unusual to 
employ the phrase grave illness*’; could be pned out, as with a lever, 
by such a weight of medicine. 

I willingly abandon to those colleagues of mine such atomistic views, by 
which the business of treatment can be earned on very comfortably, even 
when half asleep, for, as we all know, to us poor mortals nothing is more 
easy of comprehension than the matenal, ponderable, palpable, and sensi- 
ble, because much thinking (and observing), as an Israelitish teacher says, 
IS a weariness to the body I cannot suppose them capable of regarding 
disease as immatenal alterations of the vitality, as pure dynamic derange- 
ments of our state of health, and medicinal powers as mere virtual, almost 
spiritual, forces It is impossible to disabuse them of the idea that for such 
and such a grave disease a dose of medicine of such and such a weight is 
required, seeing that they could point to the traditional practice of thou- 
sands of years, when palpable quantities of medicine must always be poured 
into the patient from large bottles, pots, and boxes, in order that any effect 
should be produced in serious diseases, and yet even tins dtd not usually 
succeed I can readily believe this, the effect of the ordinary treatment of 
all times fully corroborates it. But how can they reconcile it with the 
atomistic, materialistic notions they entertain respecting the action of 
medicines and their curative powers, that a single tmponderable spark from 
a Leyden jar gives a shock to the strongest man, and yet no ascertainable 
ponderable substance is communicated to his body > How can they recon- 
cile with their atomistic, materialistic notions the enormous power of 
mesmerism, when a powerful man with a strong will to do good approaches 
the point of his thumb to the pit of the stomach of a nervous patient? 
How can they, finally, reconcile with their atomistic, materialistic notions 
respecting the actions of medicines the fact that a carefully-constructed 
magnetic steel rod can effect such a powerful derangement of our health, 
even when it is not in actual contact with the body, but may even be cov- 
ered with some thick matenal (such as cloth, bladder, glass, etc.), so that 
we suffer therefrom violent morbid affections, or what is equally remark- 
able, that a magnetic rod can quickly and permanently cure the most severe 
disease for which it is a suitable medicine, when it is brought near the 
body, for but a short time, even though covered as above desenbed^ 
Atomist f you narrow-minded wiseacre ^ tell me what ponderable quantity 
of the magnet entered the body in order to effect these often enormous 
changes in its state of health? Is not the centillionth of a grain (a frac- 
tion of a gram that has 600 ciphers for its denominator) still infinitely too 
heavy to represent this absolutely imponderable quantity, the kind of 
sptrtt that emanated from the magnetic rod into this living body? Will 
you now continue to express your amazement at the homeopathic doses of 
powerful medicines of the sextillionth, octillionth, the decillionth of a 



208 


MAGNETIS POLI AMBO. 


grain, wlitcU are gross weights compared with this invisible magnetic 
power? 

Tlie subjoined symptoms occurred from various powerful magnets 
brought in contact with vanous sensitive individuals, without distinction 
of the poles They were observed in expenments conducted for half a 
year for the purpose of ascertaining the proper and most efficacious mode 
of stroking the steel with magnets, in which a horse-shoe magnet capable 
of lifting twelve pounds was held m the hands, which were in contact with 
both poles for an hour at a time 

MIND AND DISPOSITION. — 1| While attending to his business 
in the daytime, he talks aloud to himself, without being aware 
of it. 

He IS faint, but excessively solicitous to do his work properly 
Excessive exhaustion of the body, with feeling of heat and 
cool sweat in the face with unceasing, and, as it were, hurried 
and overstrained activity. 

Hurried zeal, afterwards a gnawing pain in the arm and in 
the head of the humerus. 

II Hurried heedlessness and forgetfulness, he says and does 
something different from what he intends, omitting letters, 
syllables, and words. 

I He endeavors to do things, and actually does things con- 
trary to his own intentions 
Wavering irresoluteness, hurriedness. 

He IS unable to fix his attention on one object 

The things around him strike him like one who is half 
dreaming 

Print seems to him very bnght, but he has a difficulty to 
comprehend what he reads. 

1 He inclines to be angry and vehement; and after he has 
become angry, his head aches as if sore. 

He is disposed to feel vexed, this gives him pain, especially 
a headache, as if a nail were forced into his head 
SENSORIUM.— Vertigo in the evening after lying down, as if 
he would fall, or resembling a sudden jerk through the head 

When walking he staggers from time to time, without feell 
ing giddy. 

The objects of sight seem to be wavering, this makes him 
stagger when walking 

HEm-Whizzing in the whole head, occasioned by the im- 
position of magnetic surfaces on the thighs, legs and chest. 



MAGNETIS POLI AMBO. 


209 


The head feels confused as when one takes opium. 

The head feels as if some one were trying to pull it off the 
trunk 

When endeavoring to think of something and fatiguing his 
memory, he is attacked with headache. 

Transitory headache, one single jerk, composed of darting 
and tearing sharp pain in the middle of one of the two hemi- 
spheres, like the pain that is felt at the moment when one re- 
ceives a blow 

In the morning on waking, he feels a horrid, diggmg-up, 
stupefying headache, going off immediately after flatulence 
begins to move about m the abdomen 

Headache, as is felt after catching cold. 

II Headache occasioned by the least chagrin, as if a sharp 
pressure were made on a small spot m the brain. 

I Pain in the region of the vertex, at a small spot in the 
brain, as if a blunt nail were pressed into the brain, the spot 
feels sore to the touch. 

Sensation on top of the head, as if the head and the whole 
body were pressed down 

FACE. — Cold hands, with heat in the face and smarting sen- 
sation m the skin of the face. 

Intolerable burning prickings in the muscles of the face, in 
the evening. 

II Sweat in the face without heat, early in the morning. 

EYES. — 1 Dilated pupils with cheerfulness of the mind and 

body. 

There was no dilatation of the pupils during the spasmodic 
attacks and the loss of consciousness. 

Burning, tearing, and sparkling in the eye. 

Burning, drawing, and constant sparks in the affected eye. 

1 Fiery sparks before the eyes, like shooting stars. 

Intensely painful stitches through the right eye, disappear- 
ing in the jaw, followed by a drawing through the same eye, 
down the neck, through the chest, abdomen and hips toward 
the right lower limb. 

Sensation in the eye as if the pendulum of a clock were 
moving in it. 

White, luminous, sudden vibrations, like reflections of light, 
at twilight, on one side of the visual ray, all around. 

15 



210 


MAGNETIS POLI AMBO. 


Smarting m the eyes in the evening after lying down, as 
from acrid tears 

1 Itching of the eyelids and eyeballs in the inner canthus. 

Dryness of the eyelids and the inner mouth, in the morning, 
after waking 

Sensation as if the eyelids were dry 

Twitching of the lower eyelid 

EARS. — The external ear feels hot to him, but is not hot. 

Itching or itching burning in the meatus auditorius, early in 
the morning when in bed. 

Fine whistling in the ear, coming and going like the pulse. 

Loud strong whizzing in one of the ears, accompanied with 
headache of the same side, as if a foreign body had lodged in 
the brain; the pupil of this side is very much enlarged. 

Whizzing before the ears 

Noise as of seething water in the ear 

Electric shocks in the ear. 

Hard hearing without noise in the ear. 

NOSE — Burning pain at a small spot under the wing of the 
nose. 

Illusion of smell: smell of manure before the nose, from 
time to time he imagines he has a smell before the nose such 
as usually comes out of a chest full of clothes which had been 
closed for a long while. 

TEETH AND JAWS. — Near the vermilion border of the upper 
lip, not far from the corner, a white pimple, or a red inflamed 
little tubercle, painful like a sore, in a state of rest, but most 
painful when moving or touching the parts 

Little ulcer in the centre of the inner surface of the lower 
lip, painful to the touch 

Painful sensitiveness around the margin of the lips. 

Metallic taste on one side of the tongue. 

Tearing pain in the periosteum of the upper jaw, coming 
with a jerk and extending as far as the orbit; the pain con- 
sists m a tearing, boring, pricking aud burning. 

Darting-tearing pain m the facial bones, especially the an- 
trum Highmorianum, in the evening. 

When taking a cold drink, the coldness rushes into the 
teeth. 



MAGNETIS POLI AMBO. 


211 


Drawing pain in the jaws extending as far as the temple, 
with a crampy sensation in the muscles of mastication. 
Looseness of the teeth 
Toothache, excited by stooping. 

Beating or jerking pressure, only in single jerks 
Violent grumbling in the teeth, even without any apparent 
cause. 

The gums of a hollow tooth are swollen and painful to the 
touch 

Aching pain of the hollow, carious teeth. 

I Uniform pain in the roots of the lower incisors, as if the 
teeth were bruised, sore or corroded 

MOUTH AND PHARYNX.— Shocks in the jaws 
Shock in the teeth with burning. 

Pain in the velum pendulum palati, as when a large mouth- 
ful has been forced down the throat 

Pam of the submaxillary gland as if swollen, early in the 
morning, in the open air. 

Tensive pain in the submaxillary gland. 

Single dull prickings m the submaxillary glands, in the 
evening. 

Frequent accumulation of saliva in the mouth, almost like 
ptyalism, with pain of the submaxillary glands 

II Ptyalism every evening with swollen lips. 

1 Bad smell from the mouth which he does not perceive him- 
self, also with much mucus m the throat 

Swelling of the throat, redness of the face and increased 
palpitation of the heart 

I Continual fetid odor from the mouth, without himself per- 
ceiving it, as in incipient mercurial ptyalism. 

Burning of the tongue, and pain of the same when eating. 
TASTE AND APPETITE. — 1| Hunger, especially in the evening* 

1 He has an appetite, but the food has no taste. 

He has a desire for tobacco, milk, beer, and he relishes 
those things, but he feels satisfied immediately after com- 
mencing eating. 

I Aversion to tobacco, although he relished it. 

Want of appetite without any loathing, repletion or bad 
smell. 



212 


MAGNETIS POLI AMBO. 


Beer tastes like water. 

STOMACH, — Eructations, tasting and smelling like the dust 
of sawed or turned horn. 

The eructations taste of the ingesta, but as if spoiled 

Frequent attacks of unsuccessful or imperfect eructations. 

When stooping, an acid substance rises from the stomach 
into his mouth. 

Pam as from a bandage over the stomach, in both sides 

A sort of rushing through the stomach and the intestines, 
mingled with stitches. 

Pressure in the stomach with cramps m the direction of the 
upper parts; restlessness which did not permit her to remain 
at any one place, heaviness of the tongue, paleness of the 
face, and coldness of the body, the pulse being very small, 
tight, unequal. 

This series of symptoms appeared every day at the same 
hour, for ten days m succession, in three females, decreasing 
progressively. 

Crackling and cracking in the pit of the stomach, as when a 
clock is wound up. 

Sensation of an agreeable distention in the region of the 
diaphragm. 

Pressure in the epigastrium, as from a stone, especially 
when reflecting much 

Tensive aching and anxious repletion m the epigastrium. 

ABDOMEN* — The flatulence moves about in the abdomen, 
with loud rumbling, painless incarceration of flatulence in 
various small places of the abdomen, causing a sharp aching 
pain and an audible grunting. 

Loud, although painless rumbling, especially in the lesser 
intestines, extending under the pubic bones and into the 
groin, as if diarrhea would come on 

Emission of short and broken flatulence, with loud noise 
and pains in the anus. 

11 Loud rumbling in the abdomen, early in the morning when 
in bed; afterwards colic as if from incarceration of flatulence. 

Putrid fermentation m the bowels, the flatulence has a fetid 
smell and is very hot. 

11 Qualmish sensation and painfulness in the intestines, as if 



MAGNETIS POLI AMBO. 


213 


one had taken a resinous cathartic or rhubarb, with painful 
emission of hot, putrid flatulence. 

Every emission of flatulence is preceded by pinching m the 
abdomen. 

Tensive and burning pain in the epigastrium and hypogas- 
trium, followed by a drawing and tensive pain in the calves. 

Burning and diggmg-up in the abdomen like a heaving 

Itching of the umbilicus. 

STOOL. — Frequent but almost unsuccessful urging to diar- 
rhea in the morning, alternating with rumbling of flatulence 
in the abdomen. 

Diarrhea without colic. 

Constipation with headache for several days, as if there 
were something wrong m the brain; the head is uniformly 
affected, the mind feeling vexed and impatient. 

II Constipation as if the rectum were constricted and con- 
tracted. 

II Violent hemorrhoidal pain in the anus after stool, erosive 
as if sore, and as if the rectum were constricted. 

I Burning at the anus when sitting, as in hemorrhoids. 

II Itching hemorrhoids. 

II Blind hemorrhoids after soft stool, as if the varices on the 
margin of the anus felt sore, both when sitting and walking. 

II Prolapsus recti when going to stool. 

Pam on either side of the anus, consisting of itching and 
soreness, when walking m the open air. 

URINARY ORGANS. — Burning in the bladder, especially m the 
region of the neck of the bladder, a few minutes after urinat- 
ing. 

MALE GENITAL ORGANS. — Burning in the urethra, m the re- 
gion of the caput gallinagmis, during an emission of semen. 

II Early in the morning he feels a burning in the region of 
the vesiculse semmales. 

II Nightly emissions of semen. 

I Violent continuous erections, early in the morning when 
in bed, without any sexual desire. 

II Want of sexual desire, aversion to an embrace. 

I The penis remains in a relaxed condition, in spite of all 
sexual excitement. 



214 


MAGNETIS POLI AMBO, 


II The prepuce retreats entirely behind the glans. 

Swelling of the epididymis, with simple pain when feeling 
it or during motion 

Itching smarting of the inner surface of the prepuce. 

Burning smarting under the prepuce. 

Increased metrorrhagia in a woman advanced in age. 

II Menses had ceased a few days before, returned next day 
after imposing the magnetic surface and continued ten days. 

LARYNX, — Frequent fits of nightly cough which does not 
wake him 

In the evening, after lying down, he has a violent fit of dry 
cough, sometimes during sleep 

Violent but short-lasting attack of dry cough in the night 
and at other periods, followed by slight discharge of ordinary 
mucus from the trachea 

I Convulsive cough. 

II Mucus in the trachea which is easily hawked up, evening 
and morning. 

(I Violent fit of cough, with profuse expectoration of blood. 

CHEST AND LUNGS. — Asthma after midnight when waking 
and reflecting, occasioned by mucus in the chest, diminished 
by coughing. * 

Intolerable burning stitches in the muscles of the side of the 
chest, toward the back 

1 Spasmodic cough, with shocks in the chest and anxious 
breathing, and visible oppression of the chest 

Pricking in the chest, and a cold shuddering burning through 
the whole body 

A shock m the upper part of the sternum, causing cough 
and lachrymation. 

Violent oppression of the chest, tearing m the stomach and 
bowels, and beating in the shoulders 

Tearing extending from the right side into the inner parts 
of the abdomen, mingled with prickings and shocks, as if 
small pieces of flesh were being torn out, or as if fiery sparks 
were flying about. 

Four burning emanations from the middle of the chest to- 
ward either shoulder and side, back, and small of the back, 
with anxiety, and sensation as if the parts were being dis- 
sected. 



MAGNETIS POLI AMBO. 


215 


Burning emanation from the left shoulder through the chest 
toward the right side, as if the parts would be severed. 

BACK. — Painful stiffness of the cervical vertebra in the morn- 
ing, during motion 

Crackling in the cervical vertebra m the morning during 
motion. 

Pam in the omo-hyoid muscle, as if it would be attacked 
with cramp. 

Pam m the back when standing or sitting quiet. 

Burning m the dorsal spine 

Twitching of the muscles of the back, and sensation as if 
something were alive m them 

II Pam m sacro-lumbar articulation, m the morning when in 
bed lying on the side, and m daytime when stooping a long 
time 

Burning emanation from the stomach through the abdomen 
and back, separating m the small of the back and extending 
into the lower limbs 

I Shock or jerk m the small of the back, almost arresting the 
breathing 

UPPER LIMBS . — Pam in the humeral articulation, or m the 
ligaments, as if the head of the bone were dislocated, not only 
as if bruised, or sprained and twisted. 

Tearing jerkmgs m the muscles of the arm when staying in 
a cold place. 

Uneasiness m the sound arm. 

Drawing pain m the upper part of the lower arm. 

In the evening, between the sixth and seventh hours, he 
feels a tearing and bruised pain in the joints of the arm, more 
during rest than when bending the arm; the pain returns m 
twenty-four hours. 

Beating in the top of the shoulder with sensation as if torn. 

Shocks in the top of the shoulder which caused the arms to 
recede from the body with a jerk. 

Shocks in the arm-jomts and head, as if those parts were 
beaten with a light and small hammer. 

Drawing pain in either shoulder, and down the nape of 
neck, with beating m either arm 

Pulling m the joints and muscles of the arm. 



216 


MAGNETIS POLI AMBO 


Diggmg-up around the wrist, elbow, and shoulder-joints 

Pam m the muscles of the arm, as if they would be divided 
into fine parts 

Burning and cutting in the arms and chest, with cold shud- 
dering. 

Burning m the right arm, as from fiery sparks 

Burning pam in the surface of the arm in various parts. 

I Prickings in the arm. 

The arms are gently elevated, or even crossed as if by 
spasm; one of the arms is spasmodically tossed, either hori- 
zontally or vertically. 

I Beating and throbbing in all the joints of the arms and 
fingers. 

I Deep-seated pain in the arm, extending as far as the elbow, 
the arm going to sleep and trembling spasmodically. 

Painless shocks m the elbow 

Burning in the elbow joint, as if torn by hot pincers, with 
violent burning and sparkling of the eyes 

While removing the magnets from the arms, the fingers, 
hands and arms become curved and even entirely contracted, 
m a state of unconsciousness 

I I Drawing from the head down to the tip of the fingers 

The hands are icy cold the whole day, for several days, 

from touching the centre of the bar. 

Pain in the wrist-joint, as if a tendon had become strained, 
or as if an electric shock were passing through the parts. 

Arthritic digging up, and boring pain in a spot of the lower 
joint of the thumb during rest. 

Tearing in the joints of the thumb in the evening when in 
bed. 

Pain as if sprained and bruised, in the morning when in bed, 
in the lower joint of the thumb, when moving or bending it. 

Sudden bending, and sensation as if dislocated in the first 
and second joints of the thumb. 

Prickling and digging-up pain in the tip of the thumb, in 
the evening after lying down. 

Twitching jerking in the muscles of the thumb and in those 
of the chin. 

Continuous burning stitch, accompanied with sore feeling 



MAGNETIS POLI AMBO 


217 


m the thickest part of the muscles of the palm of hand and 
calf of the leg; afterwards in the lower part of the tibia. 

The lingers are liable to be bent and strained 

In the evening the legs and thighs go to sleep 

LOWER LIMBS. — Sensation in the upper part of the calf, when 
rising from a seat, as if it were too short. 

Attacks of cramp in the calves and toes after v^aking. 

Pam as if bruised in the fleshy part of the leg, on the outer 
side of the tibia, in the evening when walking. 

Pam from the hip down the limb, as if the parts were being 
divided by a fine instrument. 

Drawing from the hips to the feet, leaving a burning along 
that tract 

Violent shocks of the right lower limb, occasioned by a 
burning emanation from the chin and neck through the right 
side. 

Fiery burning in the upper and lower limbs; when the right 
limb touched the left one, it seemed as if the latter were set 
on fire by the former 

Painful going to sleep of the thighs and legs when sitting, 
disappearing when walking. 

Burning teanng m the left leg, mingled with creeping. 

Pricking from the knee to the feet 

Stitches in the leg 

Shocks m the knee, causing the leg to be stretched spas- 
modically. 

Throbbing in the left knee. 

In the morning after rising and when attempting to walk, 
he feels a pain in the tarsal-jomt and beyond it, as if sprained. 

Stitches in the ball of the heel. 

Tearing pain in the heel, setting m with a jerk, passing off 
immediately, but returning from time to time. 

In the evening, prickings with burning in the soft parts on 
the side of the heel. 

Painful sensitiveness and soreness m the region of the root 
of the nail of the big toe, and m the skin over the root, even 
when merely touching it. 

Sore pain under the nail of the big toe of either foot, as if 
the shoe had pinched him, and as if the nail would come off 
by suppuration. 



218 


MAGNETIS POLI AMBO. 


Burning and sore pain of the corn, which is generally pain- 
less when commencing to walk. 

Pam in the upper part of the tarsal joints, as if the shoe had 
pinched him, and as if a corn were there 

SLEEP. — Coma vigil early m the morning for several hours; 
after sunrise, sopor or deep sleep set in, full of heavy, passion- 
ate dreams, for instance, vexing dreams, the sopor terminates 
m a headache as if the brain were sore all over, disappearing 
after rising 

Sleep disturbed by dreams full of oppression and anxiety, 
resembling nightmare. 

i Vivid dreams, as if he saw the thing taking place in his 
waking state. 

I Dreams full of feasting, boasting, and bragging. 

II He wakes at three o'clock in the night, in a few hours he 
falls into a sopor full of dreams; afterwards, feeling of heat in 
the limbs without thirst, the limbs requiring to be uncovered 
at first, but afterwards covered carefully 

He wakes at three o’clock in the morning; at sunrise his 
eyelids close again, and he lies m a sort of stupor full of heavy 
dreams. 

II Early in the morning he sleeps on his back, one of his 
hands lying under the occiput, the other over the region of 
the stomach, the knees being apart, with moaning inspira- 
tions, half-opened mouth, and low muttering, dreaming of 
amorous things and emissions, although no emission takes 
place; headache in the occiput after waking, as after an in- 
voluntary emission of semen, with asthma, and bruised pain 
in all the joints, going off after rising and during motion, with 
copious expulsion of catarrhal mucus. 

1 Lascivious dreams, even during the siesta, with discharge 
of the prostatic fluid 

Wakeful drowsiness in the night, toward morning, he hears 
every noise and has some power of thinking; after sunrise the 
drowsiness increases to a stupor, during which he hears or 
feels nothing, except violent pain as after a long journey on 
foot, and a bruised feeling m all the joints, obliging him to 
change the position of the limbs constantly, accompanied with 
loud grumbling in the abdomen, which is interrupted from 



MAGNETIS POLI AMBO. 


219 


time to time by emission of flatulence, and a disagreeable feel- 
ing of warmth in the body, during which time he generally 
lies on his baek with the mouth open. 

The pains in the limbs soon decrease after waking, but m 
exchange for those pains he is attacked with as painful a head- 
ache, increased after rising to a headache such as is felt when 
a dry coryza is setting in, but disappearing again by sudden 
sneezing and discharge of mucus from one nostril. 

Sweat without heat, early in the morning while asleep, or 
mild copious exhalation of the whole body, which is not ex- 
hausting, and disappears after waking. 

When asleep he snores during an inspiration, and wheezes 
through the nose during an expiration. 

Tossing about in bed during sleep. 

In the evening before lying down, he is attacked with symp- 
toms of a catarrhal fever; the long bones are painful as if 
bruised in the middle; accompanied with dull headache caus- 
ing a cloudiness, he is hoarse, and the chest is lined with 
tenacious mucus. 

In the morning, after waking, the flatulence increases in 
the abdomen, with loud grumbling; there is emission of flatu- 
lence, violent sneezing, copious discharge of mucus from the 
nose and yawning, all this soon goes off again. 

Early in the morning when waking, the mouth is covered 
with thick, almost dry mucus, and the eyelids are dry; both 
these symptoms disappear after sneezing and after a discharge 
of mucus from the nose. 

FEVER. — Shuddering over the whole body, partly cold, 
partly burning, and causing an intense pain. 

Hot and creeping sensation in the affected part. 

Profuse sweat with shuddering. 

Slight sweat m the night, especially where the magnet lay. 

Sweat in the region of the stomach. 

Fever after midnight, no shuddering; disagreeable sensation 
of heat in the whole body, especially in the palms of the hands 
and soles of the feet, with dryness m the throat and sweat in 
the face, nape of the neck or over the whole body. 

Dry heat, early in the morning when in bed. 

Heat without thirst in the night, requiring one to lie un- 
covered. 



220 


MAGNETIS POLI AMBO 


Disagreeable, troublesome warmth in the whole body, with 
sweat in the face, without thirst 

Imperceptible exhalation of the whole body, having a strong, 
pungent, though not disagreeable smell, resembling the exha- 
lation which is perceived from a healthy man while sweating. 

General sweat after midnight. 

Sweat over the whole body, especially in the back, early in 
the morning while asleep 

SKIN. — The recent wound commences to bleed again 

The wound, which is almost healed, commences to pain 
again like a recent wound 

Boils break out on various parts of the body, passing off 
soon. 

Corrosive pains in various parts, for example, below the 
ankle. 

Itching of the affected parts, the pain is increased by 
scratching; it is like a sort of burning in a sore place. 

Simple, continuous itching of the soft parts, remaining un- 
changed after scratching 

Burning itching below the joints, after lying down, even for 
the mere purpose of taking a nap, it cannot be appeased by 
scratching 

A continuous itching-prickmg, here and there, terminating 
in a burning. 

Burning stinging pain in various soft parts of the body, not 
in the joints; it is more or less continuous. 

Single stitches m soft parts, here and there, for instance in 
the ball of the thumb 

In the evening, after having got warm in bed, he feels single 
burning stitches here and there, terminating in a smarting 
sensation. 

Pricking, moaning, fluttering sort of a pain at a small place, 
for instance, in the sole of the feet, as is felt m a limb previous 
to going to sleep. 

, Creeping, and sensation as if all the fluids were accumulat- 
ing in the region where the magnet is applied. 

Small pimples on the chest. 

Extremely itching eruption where the magnet lay. 

The skin under the magnet is painful and corroded, and is 
surrounded by itch-like pustules 



MAGNETIS POLI AMBO 


221 


Red eruption, red spots 

Red eruption in the palms of the hands resembling watery 
vesicles. 

Burning itching where the magnet lay, obliging one to 
scratch until blood came out; the skin is red, and round about 
small pimples are visible, passing off soon. 

Large pimples around the place where the magnet lay. 

Deep, lentil-sized ulcers at the place where the magnet lay. 

Wide-spread eruption of pimples and blisters, with drawing 
and pricking pain, also, red spots here and there. 

Secretion of a reddish humor from the wound 

GENERAL SYMPTOMS. — Early in the morning, w-hen lying on 
the side, he feels a continuous, intolerable, simple or bruised 
pain in all the joints, where the cartilages of the two bones 
touch one another, the pam abates as soon as one turns on 
the back, with the head bent backward, and the knees bent 
and at a distance from one another. 

Bruised pain m the joints of that side on which one rests, m 
the evening when in bed. 

Bruised pam of all the joints, or rheumatic pain of the liga- 
ments of the arms and of all the joints of the chest, back, and 
nape of the neck, during motion and during an expiration. 

Paralytic pam in all the joints, especially those of the small 
of the back, loins and chest, or pain as if the joints were 
crushed, broken and bruised, worse during motion and when 
standing, accompanied with a drawing and tearing sensation, 
especially in the ligaments and tendons, where they are in- 
serted in the bones, particularly early m the morning after 
rising, and in the evening before lying down, the parts are 
painless when touched; the pains are relieved by emission of 
flatulence; an increase of pam obliges one to close the eyes. 

The joints are painful when moving the limbs, as if they had 
been sprained. 

Sensation m the limbs during motion, as is felt in the arm 
when knocking the ulnar nerve in the region of the elbow 
against anything hard. 

The limbs go to sleep, especially when standing or walking, 
after rising from a seat. 

In the morning, when lying m bed, and resisting a desire 



222 


MAGNETIS POLI AMBO. 


for an embrace, he is attacked with a kind of arthritic pain in 
the small of the back, knees and all the joints, the pains are 
bruised or weary pains 

Burning emanation from the head, down the right side, im- 
mediately after, the whole body is covered with sweat 

Burning emanations through every part of the body in every 
direction 

Intolerable burning from the head to the feet, with pain as 
if the limbs were being torn and divided 
Burning and pricking pains 

During the burning pains there was neither external heat, 
nor redness of the parts 
Sensation as of flying sparks over the body. 

Sensation in every part as if cut up 

Heaviness in all the limbs, and palpitation of the heart from 
omitting the usual imposition of the magnets 
I Dull, numb pain. 

Drawing and pricking pain, mingled with itching 
il Shuddering movement through whole body. 

I The joints are painful when touched 

The places on which the magnets he, burn as if hot coal 
were lying near them 

I The place where the magnet had been imposed goes to 
sleep, becomes numb and insensible 

I Jerking shock, causing the trunk to bend violently upward 
and forward as low down as the hips, with cries. 

II The trunk, while in a recumbent position, is jerked up 
spasmodically as it were, the head being jerked forward upon 
the bed, and then again backward upon the cushion. 

I The upper part of the body is spasmodically lifted and 
jerked forward, and then again backward on one side 

Violent shocks causing a general tremor of the body, burn- 
ing m the chest and through either arm, and sweat all over. 

None of the convulsions excited by the magnet after the 
pulse. 

A sort of starting through the body, afterwards sweat on 
either hand 

Paralysis for ten days, with loss of sensation, the limb hav- 
ing its natural temperature and being moist. 



MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS 


223 


Shocks deprive him of consciousness 

The spasmodic risings and jerkings of the body forward, are 
followed by a long-lasting loss of consciousness, followed by 
blowing with the mouth as when one experiences a great heat; 
after which consciousness and cheerfulness return. 

Loss of consciousness with staring eyes, open mouth, almost 
imperceptible inspirations, and a movement in the chest 
which IS almost like palpitation of the heart, the pulse re- 
maining unchanged and having its ordinary quality. 

During the loss of consciousness the fingers are moved one 
after the other, after the return of consciousness a profuse 
sweat breaks out 

Languor in all the limbs, accompanied with a swoon, which 
lasts but a short while and returns several times. 

Fits of fainting, palpitation of the heart, and suffocation 

Long-lasting swoons, in which she retained her conscious- 
ness. 

Swoon, during which she feels her pam, but is unable to 
complain on account of an inability to speak or move. 

Insensibility and deadly sopor 


MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS (North-pole of the magnet). 

MIND AND DISPOSITION. — Out of humor and weary. 

Weeping mood, with chilliness and a disposition to feel 
chilly. 

I Sadness, m the evening, he had to weep, contrary to his 
will, after which his eyes felt sore. 

He felt in the evening as if it were difficult for him to com*- 
mence the execution of his designs, and it was long before he 
made a beginning; but as soon as he had commenced, he car- 
ried out his designs with great promptness. 

I Indolent fancy; he sometimes felt as if he had no fancy 
at all. 

When sitting, he felt as if he had lost all powers of motion, 
and had grown fast to the chair. 

II Indolent mind. 



224 


MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS. 


Anxious, desponding, inconsolable, self-reproaching mood. 

Sleep ceased at three o’clock in the morning, and he be- 
came anxious, he became solicitous about his health, as if he 
were dangerously sick, he became gloomy, he grudged every 
word he was obliged to utter 

Exaggerated, over-scrupulous solicitude. 

Irritated and vexed mood, he does not like to be inter- 
rupted m his work, and, nevertheless, he does not accomplish 
anything 

II While attending to his business, he talks aloud to himself. 

1 1 He makes mistakes easily in writing. 

He would like to work a great deal, and does not satisfy 
himself; he thinks he does things slowly. 

He IS alternately sad and cheerful. 

Acts as if he were frightened and timid (immediately). 

Despondency. 

Anxious scrupulousness (immediately). 

I Hasty, bold, quick, firm. 

II Calm, composed mood, devoid of care. 

Alternately cheerful and sad, the whole day. 

Cheerfulness and feeling of great strength, alternate, with 

want of courage and weakness. 

SENSORIUM. — (Vertigo, sensation as if she would fall in 
every direction. ) 

Vertiginous motion in one side of the head. 

After having gone up stairs, she feels a motion from the 
centre of the brain towards either ear like the pendulum of a 
clock. 

Sensation as if his understanding were arrested, and as if 
something were pressing his brain down, and the eyes out, a 
sort of fainting turn. 

Sensation of intoxication, like a humming m the head, 

Dulness of the head with desire for open air. 

Weak memory, but he feels cheerful. 

HEAD. — Two days m succession he wakes from his siesta 
with a violent headache, as if the brain were bruised and ob- 
tuse, the headache decreases after he is fully awake, and dis- 
appears gradually after rising. 

Headache, consisting in a sore and bruised pain in the sur- 
face of the brain, in the sinciput and in one of the temples. 



MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS. 


225 


The head feels bruised and as if dashed to pieces in one of 
the hemispheres 

A shock in one side of the head m the morning in bed 

1 1 Sensation as if the head were pressed down by a load. 

Pressure as from something hard m several parts of the 
brain 

(A good deal of heat in the head ) 

1 Disagreeable, compressive sensation in the head, and as if 
one part of the brain were pressed in 

The head is concussed by the sound of a hammer. 

Headache, especially when raising or moving the eyes. 

Tensive sensation in the brain behind the forehead, extend- 
ing down to the root of the nose 

Stitches in the upper part of the forehead, in the morning 
after rising, until afternoon. 

1 Headache, as if the temples were pressed asunder. 

I Violent headache the whole afternoon, as if the brain were 
pressed asunder. 

II Rush of blood to the head, and suffusion of heat in the 
cheeks. 

I Drawing-boring pain m the right temple, accompanied 
with a spasmodic pain below the right malar bone. 

Pressure in the right temple, when walking in the open air, 
causing a dulness of the head 

I Aching pain over the left temporal region, externally. 

Tearing in the head behind the right ear, with sensation as 

of a shock, gradually moving to the front of the head, when 
walking in the open air. 

II Pushing tearing in the head behind the left ear when sit- 
ting. 

Tension of the scalp as if firmly adhering to the skull, caus- 
ing a dulness of the head (for several hours). 

Pressure in the articulation of the condyles of the occiput 
with the atlas from within outward, obliging him to bend the 
head forward constantly. 

Aching pain in the left side of the forehead. 

Aching pain in the outer parts over the right eyebrow. 

Tubercles on the hairy scalp, painful when touched. 

Smarting itching of the hairy scalp 

i6 



226 


MAGJ^^ETIS POLUS ARCTICUS. 


EYES. — Cold movement as of a cold breath m the eyes. 

I The eyes protrude 

II Staring look. 

Fine prickings in the left eye. 

Burning, continuous stitch in the upper eyelid. 

Vesicle on the margin of the upper eyelid, pressing on the 
^ye. 

Painful sensitiveness of the eyelids when reading. 

II Itching in the inner canthus and m the margin of the eye- 
lids 

1 1 Painful feeling of dryness in the eyelids m the morning on 
waking. 

II Jerking and drawing in the eyelids. 

I j Drawing in the eyelids with lachrymation 

II Pricking in the eyelids 

Agglutination of the eyelids in the morning 

I Lachrymation early in the morning 

II Excessive lachrymation, the light of the sun is intolerable. 

Dilatation of the pupils, they contract but little in the light 

(immediately). 

Contraction of the pupils during the first hours. 

Stinging in the canthus and the left cheek. 

Sensation as of sand in the eye 

Itching m the eye. 

1 1 Burning in the weak right eye; it became red and filled 
with water (the magnet being held in contact with the weak 
right eye for a quarter of an hour). 

1 1 Coldness in the weak eye for three or four minutes (the 
magnet being held in contact with that eye for two minutes). 

Coldness of the weak eye, as if the eye were a piece of ice; 
as the coldness passed off a long-continued pricking was felt 
in the eye. 

Pricking sensation in the eye, resembling the tick of a 
watch. 

I Uneasy motion of the eye, with a good deal of water accu- 
mulating in either eye. 

II Sensation as of a cobweb in front of the eyes 

Glare in the eye as of a shooting star. 

1 Formication between the two eyes. 



MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS. 


227 


1 1 Strong drawing over the eye, m the surface of the cheek, 
ear, extending into the upper maxillary bone (the magnet be- 
ing in contact with the eye ) 

EARS. — Stitch darting from the Eustachian tube to the in- 
terior of the ear (when stooping). 

I Fine ringing in the opposite ear (immediately). 

A few tearmgs in the interior of the right ear, resembling 
otalgia 

I I Whizzing and a drawing sensation in the ear. 

Tightness of the tympanum. 

Crackling in the ear as of burning, dry wood (when holding 
the magnet in the ear). 

Warmth and roaring in the ear, as when water is boiling 
and bubbling (holding the magnet in the ear) 

I Ringing in the ear of the same side 

Heat and pecking sensation in the ear (holding the magnet 
in the ear) 

I A kind of deafness, as if a pellicle had been drawn over the 
right ear, after which heat is felt m the ear 

NOSE. — 1 1 Illusion of smell he imagined the room smelled of 
fresh whitewash and dust, he imagines the room smells of 
rotten eggs, or of the contents of a privy. 

I I Violent bleeding at the nose, for three afternoons in suc- 
cession, increasing every afternoon, and preceded by an ach- 
ing pain in the forehead. 

Sore pain in the nostrils, even without touching or moving 
them. 

1 1 Redness and heat of the tip of the nose, followed by hot, 
red, circumscribed spots on the cheeks. 

Pimples on the right wing of the nose, with a stinging-itch- 
ing sensation. 

FACE. — Intensely-painful tightness in the face, extending as 
far as the tonsils 

Drawing in the left cheek. 

Innumerable prickings in the cheek, with feeling of heat, 
without any heat being perceptible to others. 

Suffusion of heat in the cheeks, with rush of blood to the 
head 

Tubercle in the face, near the nose, feeling sore when 



228 


MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS 


touched; when not touched, a few rare slow stitches are felt 
in it. 

JAWS AND TEETH.— Crampy-aching pain in the left sub max- 
illary gland. 

Crushing-aching, or pinching pain in the submaxillary 
glands, without the glands being either touched or moved, as 
is felt in acute swelling of the throat. 

Tearing pain in the cervical muscles, as if too weary. 

Painful cramp in the cervical muscles, from one ear to the 
other. 

Drawing in the left jaw and the left cheek. 

Tensive pain in the left upper jaw, early in the morning on 
waking. 

Painful drawing in the articulation of the lower jaw when 
moving It, as if it would be dislocated by force. 

1 Drawing-aching pain coming from the temple, below the 
mastoid process, between the stern o-cleido-mastoideus muscle 
and the ramus of the lower jaw. 

Tensive pain in the left submaxillary gland. 

Cramp-like toothache in the right lower jaw. 

I Toothache as if the tooth would be torn out, worse after a 
meal, and when sitting or lying down, improving when walk- 
ing. 

II Toothache in the direction of the eye, a very quick suc- 
cession of peckings in the hollow tooth, with swollen inflamed 
gums and a red and burning cheek; the toothache increased 
very much immediately after a meal, improved when walking 
in the open air, but aggravated in a smoky room. 

I Throbbing in the hollow tooth (immediately), followed by 
a pressure in the tooth as if something had got into the tooth, 
with drawing in the temples. 

II Throbbing in the tooth, with burning in the gums, and 
swollen, red, hot cheeks, with burning pain and heating in 
the cheeks, in the afternoon. 

11 The toothache ceases when walking in the open air, and 
returns in the room. 

Aching in the hollow teeth, with swelling of one side of the 
face. 

Toothache with jerks through the periosteum of the jaw, 



MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS. 


229 


the pain being a dartmg-achmg, digging-tearing, or burning- 
stinging pain. 

I The toothache is worse after eating and in the warm room 

Numbness and insensibility of the gums of the painful tooth. 

Drawing pain in the hollow tooth and fore teeth, increased 

by anything warm, with redness of the cheek during the pain 

I I Swelling of the gums of a hollow tooth, painful when 
touched with the tongue. 

Toothache, as if the gums were sore or cut, increased by 
the air entering the mouth 

MOUTH — Sore pain in the left corner of the mouth, when 
moving it, as if an ulcer would form 

Slow, extremely sharp and painful prickings in the lower 
hp 

Small pimples on the inner surface of the upper lip. 

Itching in the forepart of the tongue, obliging one to rub 
and scratch 

Accumulation of saliva in the mouth (immediately) 

Pain in the left upper incisors, as if something hard were 
pressing upon them, breaking them 

Pam of the incisors on inspiring air 

Toothache when eating, the teeth feel loose, and as if they 
would bend over. 

i Painful humming in the hollow teeth of the lower jaw, 
worse on the right side, the toothache ceases during eating, 

APPETITE AND TASTE. — Long-continued rancid heart-burn. 

He does not even relish the most palatable kind of food, at 
supper 

When smoking, he feels a scraping sensation in the throat 
as if he would have heartburn, or had had it 

Sourish taste in the morning, as if one were fasting. 

When smoking, he has a bitter taste on the posterior part 
of the tongue. 

Tobacco IS disagreeable to him. 

She felt so replete at dinner that she was unable to eat. 

Greedy appetite at supper. 

Chocolate had a fiat, disagreeable taste, as if impure water 
had been added to it. 

He relishes his supper, but soon after he has a flat taste in 
the mouth, and feels a heat in the lobules of the ears. 



230 


MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS. 


STOMACH. — Eructation, with a sort of painful jerk, 

II Frequent eructations of mere air. 

The magnet seems to favor acidity of the stomach. 

The tongue is very much coated and covered with mucus; 
aversion to milk. 

Stomach feels as if deranged, food weighs heavily in his 
stomach 

Sudden griping in the pit of the stomach. 

Throbbing in the pit of the stomach (immediately). 

Sensation in the epigastric region and in the stomach, as if 
the walls of the stomach were sensitive to pam 

Drawing in the pit of the stomach, extending into the right 
chest 

ABDOMEN. — I She is waked m the night by a pressure in the 
abdomen as from a stone 

Drawing pain m the abdomen 

Warmth in the umbilical region, causing an anxiety; fol- 
lowed by a sensation as if vomiting would come on. 

Coldness in the abdomen (immediately after touching the 
magnet). 

Shocks and jerks proceeding from the abdomen and extend- 
ing through the chest into the throat (immediately). 

A few jerks in the abdomen, like a sort of rumbling, as if 
something were falling down in the abdomen at intervals (im- 
mediately). 

A few stitches in the side of the abdomen, and movement 
m the abdomen as if diarrhea would come on. 

1 Spasmodic contractive sensation in the hypogastrium, ex- 
ternally and internally, early in the morning. 

Pinching, especially in the epigastrium, directly after sup- 
per. 

Violent, continuous pinching, as from incarcerated flatu- 
lence, at a small place in the left side of the abdomen. 

I Flatulent colic immediately after supper; sharp pressure 
in every part of the abdomen from within outward, as if the 
abdomen would burst; relieved when sitting perfectly still. 

Flatulent colic early m the morning, immediately after 
waking, the flatulence was pressed upward toward the hypo- 
chondriac region, with tensive pains m the whole abdomen. 



MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS 


231 


causing a hard pressure here and there, accompanied with a 
qualmishness and nausea which proceeded from the abdomen, 
and was felt both in motion and when at rest* 

Continuous aching-pmchmg pain in the whole hypogastric 
region, like a sort of colic, but without any perceptible flatu- 
lence, It disappears neither by motion nor rest, or eating and 
drinking, but is excessively increased by reflection and mental 
exertions, and is in that case accompanied with nausea, the 
colic IS somewhat diminished by strict rest, but it disappears 
entirely in the space of an hour by touching the zinc. 

In the evening and morning he feels a pressure as from flat- 
ulence in various parts of the bowels, resembling a pressure 
on a bruised spot, accompanied with a similar pressure in 
vanous parts of the brain; both the headache and colic disap- 
pear immediately after the emission of flatulence; the head- 
ache and colic return with the return of flatulence, which 
makes one moreover feel ill-humored, the flatulence has a 
fetid smell. 

(The south pole removed the painful uneasiness in the ab- 
domen, and the headache, within the space of an hour.) 

He wakes in the night with a violent colic; it is a sort of 
continuous, intolerably hard pressure m the pit of the stomach 
and the hypochondria, continuing to rise in the chest, and in- 
creasing in violence up to the pit of the throat, where the 
breathing threatens to be arrested (this condition was soon 
relieved by the hands being imposed on the chest with a 
strong will — a sort of self-mesmerism), the spasm abated, and 
rest and sleep were restored by a strong but easily emitted 
flatulence. 

II Gurgling m the abdomen as if a quantity of flatulence 
were incarcerated, causing a writhing sensation, which rises 
up to the pit of the stomach, and causes eructations 

Severe cutting stitches, when walking in the open air, in 
the middle of the hypogastrium, from below upward. 

Stitches in the right lumbar region 

Stitches in the left groin from within outward, in the region 
of the superior spinous process of the ilium (immediately). 

Cutting pain m the left groin, m the region of the abdom- 
inal ring, with a feeling of weakness in that region. 



232 


MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS 


1 Relaxed condition of the abdominal ring, increasing from 
day to day; hernia threatens to protrude, especially when 
coughing 

I Sore pain m the abdominal ring, when walking 

j Boring pain above the left abdominal ring, from within 
outward, as if hernia would protrude. 

II Inguinal hernia. 

STOOL. — 1 Drawing, almost dysenteric pain in the hypogas- 
tnum, early m the morning, followed by difficult expulsion of 
the very thick feces 

Blood comes away with stool twice a day 

Sharp pressure m the rectum 

I Stmgmg-pinchmg m the rectum 

Aching-pressing pain in the rectum (not m the anus) after 
midnight, while slumbering, lasting for hours and disappear- 
ing after being wide awake. 

DRINARY ORGANS.-Dark urine 

The secretion of urine decreases in the first hours, but in- 
creases after the lapse of twenty-four hours 

Copious emissions of urine 

(Relaxed condition of the neck of the bladder from one 
o’clock at noon until eight o’clock in the evening, the urine 
dropped out involuntarily. ) 

GENITAL ORGANS. — Continuous smarting pain m the raphe 
of the prepuce, after urinating. 

Itching smarting of the inner surface of the prepuce, oblig- 
ing one to rub at night when m bed 

Sharp stitches in the left testicle when laying the thighs 
across one another. 

I [Nightly involuntary emission 

Excessive erection, with excessive desire for an embrace 
and an emission of semen. 

Relaxation of the penis and diminished desire for an em- 
brace. 

Strangulating pam in the right testicle 

Sharp drawing and cutting in the testicles. 

The menses, which ought to have appeared immediately, 
appeared after the lapse of twenty hours, increased within 
twenty-four hours beyond the quantity in which they usually 



MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS 


233 


appeared, and which was less than ought to have been, until 
the quantit}^ became normal, without any secondary symp- 
toms (curative effect) 

RESPIRATORY ORGANS. — Dry cough causing a painful raw- 
ness m the chest, especially m the night after getting warm 
in bed, having been chilly first 

Racking and spasmodic cough while falling asleep, hinder- 
ing sleep. 

Suffocative, spasmodic cough about midnight. 

The desire to cough is seated in the finest and most remote 
bronchial ramifications, where nothing can be got loose by 
the cough, the mucus which is thrown off is secreted in a 
higher region, the titilation remaining the same, inasmuch as 
it has its seat lower down, hence the cough is very fatiguing 
and racking, even the head is concussed, and the whole body 
becomes warm, after which a general exhalation sets in until 
morning, when the cough abates. 

Unceasing (not titillating) irritation, inducing coughing, in 
the evening, in bed, immediately after lying down, the cough 
being short and dry, the irritation is not momentarily dimin- 
ished by the cough, as is the case m other kinds of cough; this 
unceasing irritation can only be removed by suppressing the 
cough, even by a firm, determined will 

He was obliged to breathe spasmodically with deep and in- 
termittent inspirations, as if his breathing became arrested, at 
the same time he felt a desire to inspire as much air as possi- 
ble, and was covered with sweat all over 

Momentary violent turns of cough; three or four. 

When walking in the open air the cough becomes much 
worse, and assumes a suffocative character 

CHEST. — I Sudden oppression of the chest, with anxiety. 

Itching of the nipples. 

A few violent beats of the heart 

Burning or sharp stitches in the region of the heart. 

Burning stitches, first in the region of the dorsal muscles, 
afterwards in the side of the chest, and lastly in the fore part 
of the right chest. 

11 Pressure in the region of the heart (immediately). 

Sharp stitches in the left muscles of the chest, on moving 
the arm. 



234 


MACNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS. 


Stitches m the left side of the chest. 

Crampy contractive pain through the chest, causing a trem- 
ulous anxious breathing, especially the inspirations, when 
leaning over upon the arms and looking out at the window. 

Anxiety and qualmishness about the chest 

When walking m the open air he imagines that heat is en- 
tering the chest, passing through the pharynx 

When walking in the open air, he feels a pricking in the left 
side of the chest 

Continuous stitch in the left side of the chest in the evening. 

BACK.— Crackling or cracking m the cervical vertebrae, espe- 
cially in the atlas, during motion. 

Pam as if bruised m the middle of the spine, when bending 
the spine backward. 

I Gurgling and creeping sensation between the scapulae 

Twitching in the posterior lumbar muscles 

I Pain as if bruised in the left shoulder-jomt both during 
motion and rest, painless when touching it 
UPPER EXTREMITIES.— Trembling of the arm, the hand 
whereof is touched by the magnet. 

I Cramp-like sensation m the arm, and as if it had gone to 
sleep. 

The left arm is much heavier than the right. 

The upper arm which is not touched by the magnet is very 
heavy. 

Itching above the elbow, consisting in a fine stinging and 
smarting, not diminished by scratching, as if a mosquito had 
bit him there; the scratching causes a burning. 

Jerking in the affected upper arm (the arm and foot seemed 
to him dead). 

Sensation of stiffness in the elbow-joint. 

Audible cracking in the elbow-joint during motion (immedi- 
ately). 

Pleasant feeling in the arm-jomt, as if it enjoyed rest after 
great weariness. 

Heaviness in the upper limbs, as if the veins contained lead 
(immediately). 

Feeling of heaviness in the arm which touches the magnet. 

1 Violent coldness in the arm over which the magnet had 



MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS. 


236 


been moved (in a female in magnetic sleep, after being touched 
with the north pole magnet). 

I Prickling pain in the arm as far as the shoulder, especially 
in the long bones of the forearm. 

I Sore pain in the right shoulder when walking m the open 
air. 

Sensation in the arm and hand as if they had gone to sleep 
(immediately). 

Stitches in the forearm near the wnst-jomt. 

Pressure in the left radius, in the evening, as after a blow. 

Pressure and drawing m the wnst-joint, with uneasiness in 
the forearm, obliging him to bend the arm continually 

I Stiffness and rigidity in the right tarsal and carpal joints, 
at night when in bed. 

Trembling of the hand which touches the magnet, and of 
the foot of the opposite side. 

1 Painful and almost burning itching in the dorsum of the 
middle phalanx of the little finger, as if the part had been 
frozen, the place was painful to the touch. 

Fine, frequent prickings in the affected spot, and the tip of 
every finger; worst in the evening after lying down 

Drawing in the fingers from below upwards, with creeping 
in the fingers immediately; directly after he felt somewhat 
desponding. 

' Pain in the finger joints, as if they had been strained by 
bending them over 

Buzzing in the finger which is in contact with the magnet. 

Twitchmgs in the finger in contact with the magnet, after- 
wards extending into the arm, with a kind of heaviness in the 
arm. 

Stitches in the muscles of the hollow of the left hand, when 
walking m the open air 

The fingers go to sleep. 

Creeping in the tip of the left index-finger. 

Jerking in the thumb which is touched by the magnet, as if 
there were pulsations in the thumb. 

LOWER EXTREMITIES. — Bruised pam in the hip-joints, aggra- 
vated by contact. 

Tearing, with pressure and a sensation of strangulation m 



236 


MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS 


some parts of the muscles of the thigh when walking or sit- 
ting. 

I Tearing with pressure in the outer side of the knee down 
to the outer ankle. 

Painful sensation in the skin of the calf when walking 

I Burning pulsative stitches in the calf. 

Great languor of the lower limbs 

The left leg goes to sleep after sitting, when rising, and 
especially when standing 

Weariness and numbness of the lower limbs as if they had 
gone to sleep, without tingling. 

I Excessive weakness of the lower limbs, when walking, as 
if they would break. 

Drawing in either knee and m the right lower limb 

Stitch in the anterior muscles of the right thigh, from above 
downwards 

I Voluptuous itching of the left thigh, on the anterior and 
internal surface, but more on the former. 

Stitches in the tendons of the left thigh, toward the bend of 
the knee. 

I Rigid tension in the hamstrings, when rising from a seat, 
as if too short. 

Painless buzzing in the left leg, with sensation of heaviness, 
as if the leg had gone to sleep. 

Pam in the upper part of the toes, as if they had become 
sore by walking. 

1 Sore pressure in the corns, which had been painless here- 
tofore, when pressing the feet ever so little. 

Sore pain in the heel. 

Occasional pain in the heel, like pressure. 

Violent pressing around the ankle of the ulcerated foot. 

I Sudden lancinations in the heels, big toe and calf when 
sitting. 

1 Painful crawling in the toes of the right foot. 

Voluptuous itching under the toes of the left foot. 

SLEEP. — I Excessive spasmodic yawning with pain in the 
articulation of the left jaw, as if it were on the point of being 
dislocated. 

Sopor: several times he was attacked with a sudden sensa- 



MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS. 


237 


tion as if he ought to shut his eyes, and as if he were going to 
fall into a pleasant sleep; an irresistible sensation which 
threatened to deprive him suddenly of consciousness 

In the evening he fell into a deep sleep, all his limbs felt 
paralyzed or bruised. 

I Constant drowsiness in the day-time. 

Deep sleep toward morning. 

Slept on his back m the night 

She sings m the evening during sleep, wakes by her singing, 
recollects that she ought not to sing, falls to sleep again, sings 
a second time and is again waked by her singing. 

Vivid, but innocent and impassionate dreams about events; 
he is unable to recollect them on waking 

I Lascivious dreams the whole night. 

She dreams about midnight that she is falling from a height; 
this startled her and caused her to tremble all over. 

About midnight she dreams of murder, which causes her to 
weep and cry. 

I She saw a person in a dream, and next day she saw that 
person in reality for the first time. 

He has vivid dreams the whole night about objects which 
are not disagreeable but have no connection with one another; 
on waking he is unable to recollect any of them 

He is unable to go to sleep before a couple of hours m the 
night. 

1 At two o’clock in the morning he is half awake, his internal 
consciousness being very intense, his memory very vivid and 
his mind filled with ideas; he composes in the very best style 
in a foreign language which he neither spoke nor wrote flu- 
ently, as if he had been in a magnetic sleep; but is unable, 
when waking, to recollect distinctly what he had thought. 

He suddenly wakes m the evening after going to sleep, with 
a violent jerk in the muscles of the head and neck, as if the 
head had been pushed back. 

He wakes about midnight from a violent pressure across 
the abdomen, directly over the umbilicus, and remaining un- 
changed either by motion, or rest, or by changing one’s posi- 
tion. 

Violent pain in the pharynx in the evening when m bed, as 



288 


MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS. 


when one has swallowed too large a morsel; the pain went off 
when turning to the left side. 

He tosses about in his bed in the night, half waking 

He wakes in the night with a good deal of troublesome heat 
of the whole body, and has to uncover himself from time to 
time, his mouth being dry, without any thirst 

II Restless sleep; he tosses about and his bed feels too 
warm 

Warmth in the night as if sweat would break out 

Very vapory night-sweat, without heat. 

He waked m the night, feeling very warm; he felt still 
warmer after drinking a glass of cold water. 

Frequent shudderings m the night while in bed, and jerks 
in the arms causing them to start. 

Frequent waking as if in affright. 

He frequently wakes in the night with a burning heat of the 
whole body, and is sometimes obliged to uncover himself. 

FEVER. — Chilliness with yawning, early in the morning. 

(Chilliness the whole day, over the whole body, but espe- 
cially along the back ) 

I Sensation of coldness or coolness over the whole body, as 
if she were dressed too lightly, or as if she had taken cold, 
without shuddering; immediately after she had a small loose 
stool which was succeeded by pressing 

I Shuddering all over at the moment when the north pole 
was touched by the tip of the tongue. 

Sensation of coldness in the tip of the finger which was in 
contact with the magnet, accompanied with drops of sweat on 
the fingers of this hand and the dorsum of the hand (immedi- 
ately). 

Sweat in the palms of the hands, the hands being cool. 

I Cool sweat all over. 

Towards morning he is covered all over with a strongly, 
but not disagreeably smelling, vapory, slight sweat. 

Sweat about two o’clock m the morning, all over, even in 
the face, mostly on the chest, except the hair on the head and 
those parts of the hairy scalp on which he was resting, only 
while asleep; the sweat disappeared entirely on waking, and 
was not accompanied with thirst. 



MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS, 


239 


Heat in the face. 

In the evening the blood rushes to the head and the face 
feels hot, accompanied with chilliness of the lower limbs, 
especially the feet. 

1 Heat in one of the cheeks, accompanied with a feeling of 
internal heat, irritable disposition and talkativeness. 

Sensation of warmth in the feet. 

Feeling of heat over the whole body, with quick and strong 
pulse, without any external warmth; even the hands are cold, 
although they feel hot to him, without thirst 

Fiery redness of the face, oppression, stronger pulse. 

Heat over the whole body m the evening, with anxiety driv- 
ing him to and fro. 

Heat, especially down the back and over the whole body, 
with an anxious, unsteady appearance 

(Fever chilliness in the small of the back, along the back, 
from noon till evening without any perceptible coldness and 
great thirst, at nine o'clock in the evening, he has a good 
deal of heat in the face, without thirst; after midnight she is 
covered with a profuse fetid sweat, lasting until morning and 
disappearing on waking.) 

Fever: frequent flushes of heat in the afternoon, only in the 
head, with a red, hot face (for two or three minutes) , accom- 
panied with some drawing in the head. 

Fever, at three o’clock in the afternoon there came on a 
small burning spot on the foot for one minute, disappearing 
suddenly, and succeeded by a sudden heat in the head, with 
redness of the cheeks and sweat in the face, for some minutes. 

Fever frequent shuddermgs in the back lasting a few 
minutes, followed by an equally short heat spreading from the 
back over the head, the veins of the hands becoming dis- 
tended, without sweat. 

Flush of humid warmth over the whole body (immediately). 

SKIN. — Stitching in a steatoma. 

] Crawling over the skin. 

Burning pain in the existing herpes. 

Crawling itching, as of a fly or flea, terminating in a sensa- 
tion of soreness, first in the inner, then in the outer side of the 
limbs, in the evening when m bed, and in the morning after 
waking. 



240 


MAGNETIS POLUS ARCTICUS 


GENERAL SYMPTOMS— | Continuous diggmg-up stitches in 
various parts, becoming sharper and more painful, m propor- 
tion as they penetrate more deeply into the flesh. 

Darting jerks in the part touched by the magnet (immedi- 
ately) 

Tremulous, vibrating, numb sensation 

Sensation as if the blood were rushing to the place touched 
by the magnet, as if the blood would come out there 

Twitching in the adjoining parts 

Twitching and beating near the part touched by the mag- 
net. 

I Tensive sensation in the adjoining parts. 

I Bruised pain m the adjoining parts, and as if one had car- 
ried a heavy burden 

Creeping m the adjoining parts as if they were going to 
sleep. 

I i Tremulousness through the whole body, especially in the 
feet. 

il Tremor in the part touched by the magnet (immediately). 

Nervousness with trembling, uneasiness m the limbs, great 
distension of the abdomen, anxiety, solicitude, and great nerv- 
ous weakness 

II Sensation of coldness m the part which was touched by 
the magnet 

Warm sensation in the adjoining parts. 

Drawing m the periosteum of all the bones, as is felt at the 
commencement of an intermittent fever (but without chilli- 
ness or heat). 

In the right side of the tongue, in the neck and across the 
foot he feels a sudden drawing, or a movement to and fro, and 
j'erks resembling stitches. 

Heaviness m single limbs (with a sensation as if their 
strength had increased) 

Sensation of dryness and tightness in the body, with want 
of strength. 

He is very faint, had to rest himself while walking in the 
open air, and was melancholy and desponding. 

The faintness, the bruised and painful sensation in the 
limbs were worse in the open air. 



MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS. 


241 


In the morning there was a general faintness with a sweat 
as of anguish; want of appetite at dinner; he had to he down; 
afterwards diarrhea. 

In the morning she felt so languid that she was scarcely 
able to drag herself along, as if oppressed by a sultry atmos- 
phere 


MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS (South Pole of the 

Magnet), 

MIND AND DISPOSITION. — After walking in the open air he 
feels quarrelsome and peevish 

After an evening nap he feels exceedingly peevish and ill- 
humored. 

He IS liable to start when touched. 

Want of cheerfulness; he is low-spirited, as if he were alone, 
or as if he had experienced some sad event, for three hours. 

Weeping immediately. 

Despondency (the first hours). 

Great discouragement, dissatisfaction with himself. 

Want of disposition to work, and vexed mood. 

Taciturn, he is not disposed to talk 

He wants to be alone, company is disagreeable to him. 

Cheerful faces are disagreeable to him. 

Violent anger excited by a slight qause; he becomes trem- 
bling and hurried, and used violent language. 

Wild, vehement, rude, both in language and action (he 
does not perceive it himself) ; he asserts with violence, revil- 
ing others, with distorted countenance. 

Feeling of warmth, gradually increasing to heat (in a woman 
in the magnetic sleep, after touching the south pole of the 
magnet). 

Great quickness of fancy. 

SENSORIUM. — Unsteadiness of the mind; he is unable to fix 
his ideas; things seem to flit to and fro before his senses; his 
opinions and resolutions are wavering, which occasions a kind 
of anxious and uneasy condition of the mind. 

This mental disturbance is removed by touching the metal- 
lic zinc. 

17 



242 


MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS. 


I Vertigo as if intoxicated, as if he were obliged to stagger, 
some vertigo even while sitting. 

HEAD, — 1 Rush of blood to the head, without heat 

I Heaviness of the head, with a sort of creeping or fine dig- 
ging in the head 

I Fine crawling in the brain as of a number of insects, ac- 
companied with heaviness of the head. 

Creeping in the vertex, as if something were running about 
there, and a sort of tearing. 

Shocks in either temple. 

Pam in the right side of the forehead, composed of tearing 
and beating. 

A few beatings over the forehead, accompanied with a tear- 
ing pain. 

Tearing at a small spot on the left temple 

1 Drawing-tearing pain in the left brain, resembling a slow, 
burning stitch 

I Pressure m the occiput, in alternate places. 

Headache, pressure on the top of the head, or in either tem- 
ple, an intense violent pain, as is felt in a catarrh, being vio- 
lent when sitting straight, more so when shaking the head or 
when reflecting, diminishing when walking, and disappearing 
almost entirely when bending the head forward or backward 
(in the first hours). 

Headache in the occiput, most violent in the room, but dis- 
appearing m the open air (in the first hours). 

Creeping, mixed with prickings, in the anterior and middle 
part of the forehead, in the evening 

Sharp, pointed, aching pain in the left side of the head, 
with pressure from within outward, continuous stitch accom- 
panied with pressure (relieved by the north pole). 

Simple and tensive pain over the whole brain, commencing 
while walking in the open air, and speedily going off in the 
room. 

Pulsative beating in the right side of the head, when lying 
down. 

Jerkin gs in the head 

Spasmodic contractive headache in the region between the 
eyebrows. 



MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS 


243 


A certain spot m the hairy scalp is painful as if bruised, still 
more so when touched 

A glandular tubercle in the nape of the neck becomes sud- 
denly inflamed, the skin all around was painful as if sore, and 
the least touch was unpleasant to it 

The skin on the forehead feels as if dried fast to the skull. 

FACE, — Sensation in the face (and in the rest of the body) 
as if cold air were blowing upon it. 

Blunt stitches in the cheek 

EYES. — Slow, burning stitch in the margin of the eyelid. 

II Watery eyes from time to time. 

Erosive pain, morning and evening, especially in the outer 
canthus, and when touching the eyelids, as if a hair had 
lodged in the eye, a sort of inflammation of the margin of the 
eyelids. 

II Painful, smarting dryness of the eyelids, especially per- 
ceptible when moving them, mostly in the evening and morn- 
ing 

Swelling of the Meibomian glands of the lower eyelid, m 
the morning, as if a stye would form, but the pam was merely 
aching. 

Smarting in the inner canthus (in the morning). 

Pressure and dull sticking in the left eye. 

Spasmodic contraction of one of the eyes, in the morning. 

The skin around the eyes is sore. ^ 

When holding the magnet to the eye, he feels a little cold- 
ness in the eye for a short time, but a severe itching in the 
eyelids. 

The eyes feel agglutinated in the morning. 

Beating and itching in the eye. 

I Deficient sight; things looked dim, also double, when 
touching the nape of the neck. 

Faintish sort of cloudiness, with disposition to sit down; 
the objects seem veiled, afterwards they become much more 
distinct and much brighter than before, accompanied with an 
ecstatic mood. 

In the commencement the dilatation of the pupils is easier, 
and their contraction more difficult 

EARS. — An almost painless drawing behind the ear from be- 
low upwards, and extending into the head, almost continuous. 



244 


MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS 


I Tearing pains in the cartilages of the outer and inner ear, 
extending very nearly as far as the inner cavities. 

I Roaring in the ears, which he felt more in the upper part 
of the head. 

I Noise m the ears, like the motion of a wing 

1 Sensation as of the whizzing of the wind in the ears, early 
in the morning, he feels it as far as the forehead. 

I Inflammation of the outer ear, the grooves of that portion 
of the ear assuming the appearance of sore rhagades. 

I Occasional stitches and ringing in the ear. 

Painful jerk in the eai as if its parts would be pressed asun- 
der. a sort of otalgia. 

Sensation as if a cold wind were blowing upon the ears. 

Sensation as of warm breathing upon the outer ear. • 

Two painful vesicles on the right side of the neck below the 
ear. 

JAWS AND TEETH.—Pain of the submaxillary gland, as if 
swollen 

The skin under the chin is painful, as if sore. 

Toothache, aggravated by warm drink. 

1 Tearing jerking in the upper jaw towards the eye, in the 
evening. 

Dull pain with intensely painful stitches in hollow teeth. 

MOUTH. — Single stitches in the left margin of the tongue. 

Sensation of swelling m the tongue, and heat in the organs 
of speech. 

THROAT. — Sore feeling in the throat during and between the 
acts of deglutition. 

Putrid smell from the throat, early in the morning (the 
mouth being clean), not perceptible to himself. 

I Burning in the pharynx, a sort of strangulation from below 
upwards, with a feeling of heat. 

Heat m the organs of speech, with difficulty of speech; sen- 
sation as if the tongue were swollen. 

Accumulation of a quantity of watery saliva from the 
mouth, flowing out of the mouth when stooping. 

APPETITE AND TASTE. — Slight appetite, without loathing or 
abnormal taste, the general health being good. 

Indifference to eating, drinking or smoking; he relishes the 



MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS 


245 


food, but he has no desire for it, and is satiated before begin- 
ning to eat 

I Indifference to milk, bordering on aversion, early m the 
morning. 

Food and coffee taste bitter to him 

Food has no bad, but too little taste. 

Metallic taste, partly sweetish, partly sourish, now m the 
upper, then in the lower part of the tongue, with a feeling of 
coldness, as from saltpetre 

He loses his taste while eating warm food, the taste returns 
after eating. 

White wine has an acrid taste to him; after taking a swal- 
low he feels a violent aversion to it. 

Canine hunger, in the midst of his feverish chilliness 

Canine hunger, noon and evening. 

Want of hunger, immediately. 

NAUSEA AND VOMITING, — Inclination to vomit, early in the 
morning after waking. 

Inclination to vomit, shortly after dinner. 

Fits of nausea when stooping forward, apparently in the 
stomach. 

Eructations of mere air. 

Emission of flatulence after dinner 

STOMACH. — Pam in the stomach, as when one presses upon 
a bruised spot; after eating, this pain gradually passes into 
the intestines. 

A kind of violent aching pain in the pit of the stomach, oc- 
casioned by a continued exertion of the mind. 

ABDOMEN. — A kind of griping, directly over the umbilicus. 

I Loud rumbling in the abdomen. 

Flatulent colic, early m the morning when in bed. 

Pinching in the abdomen, brought on by a draft of air. 

The flatulence is pressed upwards, below the short ribs; 
flatulent colic in the hypochondria, in the evening. 

Colic after supper: sharp pressure here and there through- 
out the bowels; during motion the colic becomes intolerable, 
and passes off suddenly while at rest without emission of flatu- 
lence. 

I Flatulent colic at night: portions of flatulence seem to 



246 


MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS 


spring from one place to another, which is painful, and causes 
a disagreeable grumbling sensation, or a sore pinching pres- 
sure from within outward m many places, depriving him of 
sleep, short flatus goes off now and then with pain, but affords 
no relief. 

Flatulent colic early in the morning after rising; the flatu- 
lence IS pressed toward the diaphragm, causing intensely pain- 
ful dull stitches 

I Drawing pain in the right side of the abdomen, scarcely 
permitting him to walk. 

1 Tearing colic occasioned by (reading and walking, and 
appeased by sitting, especially in the epigastrium (early in 
the morning). 

I Distended abdomen in the evening immediately before 
going to bed, with colicky pains. 

Feeling of repletion in the abdomen, while affected with 
shortness of breathing 

I I Emission of a quantity of flatulence. 

A few stitches m the left side of the abdomen. 

Continuous stitch in the abdomen, toward the cecum, not 
going off till one turns to the opposite side. 

Sensation as if the left abdominal ring were enlarged, and 
as if hernia protruded, every turn of the cough causes a pain- 
ful dilation of the ring. 

STOOL. — Frequent desire for stool, causing nausea, but she 
is unable to accomplish anything. 

Sudden desire for stool, which nevertheless is expelled with 
difficulty. 

Cutting in the abdomen, with chilliness, followed by diar- 
rhea. 

Involuntary discharge of thin stool. 

Continual contraction and constriction of the rectum and 
anus, permitting scarcely the least flatulence to be emitted. 

The tough stool is mixed with mucous filaments. 

Itching of a hemorrhoidal tumor at the anus. 

Itching creeping at the anus, while walking 

A few long stitches in the region of the right kidney (im- 
mediately). 

URINARY ORGANS. — Stitch in the fold near the genital organs. 

Aching pain in the fold near the genital organs. 



MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS 


247 


Relaxation of the sphincter vesicae (immediately) 

1 1 Incontinence of urine. 

1 Smarting pain m the forepart of the urethra, during the 
emission of urine, as if the urine were acrid or sour. 

MALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — 1 Drawing in the spermatic cord, 
early in the morning when the testicle is hanging down, as if 
pulled or distended, the testicle is even painful to the touch. 

1 Jerking in the spermatic cord 

I Slow, fine, painful drawing in the spermatic cord. 

Tearing in the spermatic cord. 

I Spasmodic drawing up of the testicles, in the night. 

Tearing, strangulating jerks in the testicles, they swell. 

Fine itching in the scrotum. 

Pain in the penis, as if several fleshy fibres were torn or 
pulled backwards 

I Red spot, like a pimple, on the corona glandis and on the 
internal surface of the prepuce, without sensation. 

1 The glans is red and inflamed, with itching and tension 

Blood dropped from the sycotic condyloma. 

The temperature of the genital organs increases in the night. 

Creeping and tickling of the glans; semen seemed to be 
emitted without the person being aware of it. 

I Nocturnal emission (in a person affected with hemiplegia) ; 
it had not taken place for years past (Note by Hahnemann. 
— After this emission the paralysis became worse, the sick 
limb seemed dead to him ) 

Emissions two nights in succession, with much talking dur- 
ing sleep. 

During the first two days, the genital organs were greatly 
excited. 

Violent excitement of the sexual desire after dinner. 

I Impotence, embrace with the proper sensations and erec- 
tion; but at the moment when the semen is about to be 
emitted, the voluptuous sensation is suddenly arrested, the 
semen is not emitted, and the penis becomes relaxed 

FEMALE SEXUAL 0RGANS.—I The menses, which had already 
lasted the usual time, continue to flow for six days longer, 
only during motion, not when at rest , every discharge of blood 
is accompanied with a cutting pain in the abdomen. (Note 



248 


MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS. 


by Hahnemann —This woman held the south pole, touching 
at the same time the middle of the bar. The south pole ap- 
pears to excite hemorrhage, and especially from the uterus, as 
its primary effect, the north pole seems to act in the contrary 
manner ) 

The menses, which were to appear in a few days, appeared 
four hours after the south pole had been touched, but .the 
blood was light-colored and watery 

Heat and burning in the pudendum, with fine stitches. 

RESPIRATORY ORGANS. — Coryza, and cough with expector- 
ation of green mucus, and short breath 

Several turns of fetid cough, at night when asleep, not 
occasioning a complete waking 

Oppression of breathing, along the lower rib 

Deep inspiration, resembling a kind of sobbing, and accom- 
panied with involuntary deglutition (as is generally the case 
when sobbing) 

i Shortness of breath in the pit of the stomach. 

In the evening after getting into bed, he is scarcely able to 
recover from the shortness of breathing 

Oppression of the chest, as if the breathing were tremulous, 
and as if the breath which he inspires were cooling (im- 
mediately). 

Pam in both sides of the sternum, consisting in pressure and 
drawing, accompanied with an anguish which does not per- 
mit him to remain anywhere, as if he had done something 
wrong. 

CHEST. — Pressure in the lower region of the lower end of the 
sternum, with anxiousness and arrest of thought (immedi- 
ately). 

II Palpitation of the heart. 

Sharp stitches m the right chest, arresting the breathing. 

Pressure in the left chest, making her feel nauseated. 

Aching pain in the chest, afternoon and evening 

Dull pressure in the left chest, during motion and rest. 

Itching stinging in both nipples at the same time. 

A few sudden stitches in the surface of the scapula. 

Below the scapula she feels a fine, not entirely pointed 
stitch (immediately). 



MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS 


249 


BACK. — Heat commencing in the cervical vertebrae and ex- 
tending through the whole of the spinal column. 

Pinching in the muscles of the back. 

I Gnawing and smarting m the back 

Shuddering from the nape of the neck down the back. 

Aching, and at the same time burning pain in the small of 
the back, during rest and motion. 

Dull stitches in the small of the back. 

Pam, as if sprained, m the sacro-iliac articulation, after- 
wards pain as if bruised in that part 

After rising from his seat he feels stiff in the small of the 
back, hips and knees 

Violent smarting and stinging over the os sacrum and be- 
tween the lumbar vertebrae, arresting the breathing when 
stooping. 

UPPER EXTREMITIES.- Intolerable pain, as if bruised, at 
night when in bed, in the biceps muscle of the upper arm, 
upon which he does not rest, especially when lifting the arm 
upward and backward, going off immediately when turning on 
the affected side 

I Crawling in the left arm, from above downward, resembling 
small snakes 

I Sense, as of rumbling and gurgling, down the left arm 
(immediately). 

Rumbling up and down in the veins of both arms, for 
several hours. 

II Quick, painful jerking, in the arms, from above down- 
ward 

Stinging itching in the upper arm (between the joints), in 
the evening before and after lying down 

Sense of fullness and puffiness in the arm, as if the arteries 
m the arm were beating 

Painful stiffness in the elbow-joint of the arm which is 
touched by the magnet. 

Feeling of coldness in the left arm, as if ice were lying upon 
it, the arm had its natural temperature. 

Drawing-paralytic pain, early in the morning, first in the left 
arm when lifting it, then in the small of the back when be nd- 
ing forward, afterwards in the left hip, and m the muscles of 
he left thigh and leg when stretching the knee. 



250 


MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS 


Great languor m the right arm in the evening 

Sense of heaviness in the forearm, or as if one had worked 
too much 

Pam in the arms, as if the blood in the arms had been 
arrested, now in one, then in another place 

Stiffness of the elbow-joints (immediately) 

The left arm is much heavier than the right, accompanied 
with creeping in the tips of the fingers. 

Sensation m the arm as if it had been asleep. 

Sensation as if the hand had gone to sleep, with swelling of 
the veins and quicker pulse (immediately). 

Sensation as of a cold breath touching the hands 

Sensation of coldness in the hands, which, nevertheless, felt 
warm to others. 

Painful drawing in the fingers and finger-jomts 

I Jerking in the fingers which are touched by the magnet. 

Pain of the lower joint of the thumb, as if sprained. 

Jerk in the right index-finger, occasioning a visible twitch- 
ing. 

The tip of the finger which touched the magnet, became 
numb and insensible. 

Creeping in the tips of fingers. 

1 Sense of heat and jerking in the finger touching the 
magnet. 

I Beating in the finger m contact with the magnet. 

Beating in the tip of the thumb (immediately) 

Ulcerative, beating stinging pain in the root of the nails. 
LOWER EXTREMITIES. — Paralytic and bruised pain in the hip- 
joints, when lying on the affected side. 

The thigh and leg go to sleep easily in the morning, when 
sitting, not soon going off when rising. 

I Drawing, with pressure, m the muscles of the thighs, worse 
during motion. 

Paralytic drawing m the evening, from the middle of the 
thighs down to the feet. 

Stinging itching in the thigh, m the evening, also when in 
bed. 

Stinging jerking in the muscles of the thigh next the 
perineum. 

1 Sense of coldness in the right thigh. 



MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS 


251 


I Drawing pain m the outer side of the bend of the knee. 

~ Dull, bruised pain in the tendons of the bend of knee, beat- 
ing and jerking, the limbs being convulsively contracted, most 
violent during motion. 

Violent drawing jerking in the hamstrings, accompanied 
with a bruised pain, the legs were evidently contracted by the 
pain, especially during motion. 

When walking she felt a sticking in the knee. 

I Tearing with pressure m the patella (worse during motion), 
and aggravated by feeling the part 
The knees gave way in walking 
1 Cracking of the knee-joint during motion 
Very painful drawing in the hamstrings, sometimes ac- 
companied with painful jerkmgs in the calves 

Dull pain in the knee after dinner, aching and tearing, ag- 
gravated by touching the part 
Cramp- pain, extending from the left tarsal joint to beyond 
the knee, stretching did not relieve the pain. 

Beating in the muscles of the legs on sitting down after 
walking. 

Drawing or tearing with pressure, m the tibia. 

Cramp-like drawing pain in the calves 
Intolerably-painful jerking in the calves, accompanied with 
painful drawing in the hamstrings. 

His legs ache when hanging down while sitting, beating m 
the legs all over. 

i Itching-burning, slow stitch in the side of the calf 
Drawing or tearing with pressure, in both tarsal joints and 
ankles. 

Sticking below the ankles, followed by drawing in the ham- 
strings and painful jerkmgs in the calves 
The tarsal joint is liable to become strained on making a 
wrong step. 

Pam as if sprained in the tarsal joint, when making a wrong 
step. 

Cramp of the sole of the foot, when bending the foot back- 
wards. 

Stitches in the soles of the feet, especially during motion. 
Stinging in the dorsa of the toes, and in the sides of the feet 
(in the evening), as if they had been frozen. 



252 


MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS. 


Ill Soreness of the inner side of the nail of the big toe in the 
flesh, as if the nail had grown into the flesh on one side, very 
painful, even when slightly touched 

II Pinching occasioned by the shoes on top and on the sides 
of the toes, and near the nail of the big toe when walking, as 
from corns. 

Drawing from before backwards, in the middle three toes, 
only when walking (in the open air) 

Miss , Nov 8th, 1878 For three weeks, acht^ig in 

middle front of left lower leg (where she had varicose veins 
for eight months), when standing, or ivhen leg is hanging 
down removed by placing it horizontally; frequent feeling of 
hot water running down affected part, but only when leg is 
down, at times throbbing there, when leg hangs down, Mag- 
netis Australis, c. m , one dose 
1879, June 11th. Reports that the hot water feeling never 
returned, and the pain quite ceased in two days — Berridge, 
Mr. C. suffered two years from "an inverted toe-nail, had 
tried three of the best physicians and an endless variety of 
remedies without any relief. About a year ago he submitted 
to the painful operation of having his nail pulled out by the 
root, but m three months it grew in and troubled him more 
than before. He took Magnetis Australis Im, and m about 
five weeks was entirely cured. — Swan. 

Mrs. D., nervo-sanguine temperament, has suffered for five 
years from an ingrowing toe-nail, outer side of left great toe. 
During most of this time she has not been able to wear a shoe 
on this foot — and never without greatly increasing the pain — 
or even bear the weight of the body on it Any misstep 
would be followed by a discharge of blood and pus. The 
outer side of toe was very much inflamed and swollen, so that 
nearly half the nail was hidden No treatment, even cutting 
out half the nail, gave more than temporary relief One drop 
oi Magnetis Australis Im was given. Relief soon followed. 
The toe looked better, was less sensitive to pressure, and she 
could wear her boot without causing much pain. The swell- 
ing had nearly disappeared at the root of the nail, giving the 
appearance of a piece having been cut out. Gave three doses 
of the same remedy, one every night, and in a few days the 
toe was perfectly well. — Ballard. 



MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS. 


253 


Mrs. C. S., aged 31, blonde, complains of a pain m left lower 
jaw as if out of joint, worse in morning and on moving it, sen- 
sation as if the head of the bone were squeezed and crowded 
into the socket Magnetis Arcticus Im, three doses, one 
every night, removed all the symptoms — Conaut. 

A young married lady rapidly gained flesh and weight after 
her confinement, this, with the unnatural pressure on the ball 
of the foot, induced by high-heeled shoes, caused the flesh on 
inner side of left great toe to grow over the corner of nail. 
Through neglect and injudicious local medication, ulceration 
and large unhealthy granulations followed. The attendant 
pain was so great as to prevent the use of the foot. Magnetis 
Australis Im every night for a week. In ten days the toe was 
well, and has remained so — Ostroni. 

SLEEP. — Frequent yawning (with chilliness). 

I Sleepless and wakeful before midnight, and no disposition 
to go to sleep. 

Great desire to sleep at day-break, without feeling able to 
sleep. 

I Restless, frequently turns from side to side, in the night 
when m bed. 

Frequent loud talking during sleep, with a number of con- 
fused dreams. 

He starts in a dream; this wakes him. 

II Dreams about fires. 

He dreams that a horse is biting him in the upper arm, and 
is giving him a kick on the chest, on waking he felt a pain on 
the outer side of the chest. 

1 He quarrels and fights m a dream. 

He dreams about the same subject for a long time uninter- 
ruptedly, exerting his mind. 

Vexed dreams. 

Slow, whizzing expiration during sleep, before midnight. 

Slow, loud whizzing inspirations after midnight. 

Quick shaking of the arms and hands during the siesta. 

1 Unusual beating in the region of the heart. 

FEVER. — Disagreeable feeling in the periosteum of the long 
bones as is felt at the commencement of an attack of fever 
and ague. 



254 


MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS. 


Seems to predispose one for colds. 

Short shuddering in the afternoon 

In the afternoon he is frequently attacked with a short shud- 
dering all over, when walking in the open air, her sight was 
obscured, and when standing still, she had a shaking and toss- 
ing of the muscles of the limbs, being unable to hold them 
still, for several minutes, without feeling chilly; on sitting 
down he was attacked with heat in the head and face. 

I Chills in the room the whole day, especially after an even- 
ing nap. 

I Chilliness of the legs up to the knee, with ascension of 
heat and blood to the head 

Shaking chilliness, with feeling of coldness, for two hours, 
without being either thirsty or cold, followed by great warmth, 
even while walking in the open air, with thirst, and sweat on 
the forehead and chest, especially in the pit of the stomach 
(immediately). 

Feeling of coldness on the left arm, as if ice were lying 
on it. 

Feeling of coldness m the region of the knees (immedi- 
ately). 

Shuddering m the calves when drinking. 

Sensation of coldness in both arms and the left side. 

A good deal of itching of the back, during chilliness. 

Sensation as of a breeze blowing into the ear, during the 
chilliness. 

I Feeling of coldness all over, in the evening (without shud- 
dering), without thirst (except at the commencement of the 
chilliness), and without being actually cold, at the same time 
he feels out of humor, everything was disagreeable to him, 
even the meal; two hours after he was covered with heat and 
sweat all over, without thirst. 

Internal coldness in the affected part. 

The left hand seems to him much colder, but has the same 
temperature as usual, or it is even increased (immediately). 

Internal dry warmth, a few hours after the sensation of 
coldness, during a walk. 

Increase of coldness of the thighs, with feeling of coldness 
to the prover, and heat of the genital organs 



MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS. 


255 


II During the chilliness, or the feeling of coldness, he was 
quite warm, but he was obliged to lie down, and to cover him- 
self well, his mouth was very dry; afterwards he was covered 
with a profuse sweat all over, without feeling hot; on the con- 
trary, he felt a constant shuddering over the perspiring parts, 
as if they were covered with goose-skin, accompanied with a 
sensation as of a breeze blowing into the ears. 

Wakes in the morning with a violent headache, heat and 
alternate chilliness, and was unable to leave the bed 

Increase of internal warmth, without thirst. 

Heat in the face after a meal. 

Warm sensation in the region where the magnet was ap- 
plied. 

Hot hands after midnight, while in bed 

I Warmth all over, especially in the back 

Sweat during sleep, two mornings in succession. 

General sweat in the night 

Thirst for two days, without heat 

Great aversion to the open air, even when not cold, it pene- 
trates bone and marrow, accompanied with a weeping mood 
and ill-humor. 

Sensation as if cool water were poured over the hezd as far 
as the chest (immediately). 

Small, scarcely perceptible pulse. 

Uncomfortable, unusual warmth, accompanied with a pee- 
vish mood. 

Flush of heat from one part of the body to the other, at 
different times, for instance, from the thigh down to the tibia. 

Sensation as if the blood were jumping in the veins, when 
lying down, in the evening when in bed. 

SKIN* — 1 Corrosive itching in the evening, when in bed, on 
the back and other parts of the body 

1 Itching-stinging, tearing, here or there, in the evening, 
when in bed 

Fine Itching, here and there, in the evening, when in bed, 
and on waking, easily going off by scratching. 

Itching here and there (also m the nates), in the evening, 
when in bed, and soreness after slight scratching. 

During slight coldness of the air, his nose, ears, hands and 



256 


MAGNETIS POLUS AUSTRALIS. 


feet feel chilly and benumbed, m a warm room they feel hot, 
with creeping and itching in the parts (with pricking; 

GENERAL SYMPTOMS. — Creeping sensation m the left side 
and the left arm (immediately) 

A sort of anxiety m the limbs (immediately). 

Pinching in the flesh here and there. 

Pinching in many outer parts of the body, in the afternoon. 

Pinching and squeezing in various parts of the body in the 
afternoon. 

Pain in the limbs, as is felt when growing too rapidly. 

1 Darting pains here and there, disappearing again immedi- 
ately. 

Jerking sensation m every part of the body, as when one 
has been running fast, and feels moreover anxious and fidgety 

Stinging-burnmg pains here and there, in the body, espe- 
cially in the tips of the fingers. 

1 Bruised pain m all the limbs, so that he imagined he was 
lying on stones, on whatsoever side of the body he lay 

Bruised pain m all the joints early in the morning, when in 
bed, and on rising, even in the articulations of the pelvis, with 
a feeling of weakness in both abdominal rings, as if hernia 
would protrude. 

1 Stiffness of the joints. 

1 Cracking of the joints dunng motion 

Speedy increase of mobility of all the muscles, and quick- 
ness in all the movements, the mind being calm. 

1 Lightness of the whole body. 

Weakness of the feet, on going up stairs. 

When walking in the open air the legs feel bruised, and he 
is suddenly attacked with sleep. 

He becomes faint while taking a walk, and the faintness in- 
creased while sitting. 

1 Laziness and heaviness of the whole body, accompanied 
with a feeling of anxiety, as if he were threatened with paraly- 
sis, and as if he would fall, accompanied with a feeling of heat 
in the face and the whole body, mingled with shuddering. 

He was unable to he still m any position. 

Great rush of blood to the brain, early in the morning, in 
bed. 



MALANDRINUM 


257 


MALANDRINUM /(The Grease of Horses). 

T^e crusts vary m form and character, and the appearance 
differs as much in animals as many skin diseases of the same 
family do in the human Dr W P. Wesselhoeft reports a 
case in which ‘^The crust assumed a conical form, to thicl^' 
i^ jgy er of crusts/if allowed to remain without removal, neaped 
1 ^ one-half an inch. They weres|ragile,^ moist,* yellow, about 
the consistency of honey-comb When removed a raw sur- 
face remained with deep fissures and thick crusts reformed 
into their original size in 48 hours There was evidently no 
itching, but some soreness after removal of the scabs '' 

These crusts resemble some formAof eczema^nd rupia./ 
From Jenner we have it that the origin of cowpox is infec- 
tion of the udders of cows by contact with grass, on which a 
horse infected with grease has trodden, while the other his- 
torical origin from a similar source of infection, also from 
Jenner, is that it was from the unwashed hands of the stable 
neys who milked the cows after grooming the horses infected 
with grease These assertions are to some extent confirmed 
by the clinical experience of many homeopaths, who have 
successfully used Malandrmum against infection with small- 
pox, ancJ^for the bad effects^f vaccination/ 

John H Clarke says *‘It has been used on inferential 
grounds with great success iiTbad efiects of vaccination I 
have cured with it cases of^nhealth|^r 3 ^rougtmkin/-emain- ^ 
ing for year^after vaccination/ in small-pox^« measlesj^d im- 
^tigoT^" ' " * ’ ' 

^TSmnett cured with it a case of ^ knock-kne^in a child^who / 
^was constantly \handling * his penis./ His indications are: 
”Tjow^ half of body affected, greasy skin and greasy erup- 
tion. ^ ^ow pustulatioh^ever ending/ as one heals another 
appea rs^ 

^'**^* ferT h4.bad effect^rom vaccination/ The late Dr. Fellger, 
ofThHaHelphia. probably had a more extensive experience in 
treating variola and the efiects of vaccination than any other 
man of his time. He had given much thought and many years 
of study to the subject and came to rely almost wholly upon 



258 


MALANDRINUM. 


Malandnnum as a^prophylactiCF for vanolaiand as the thera- 
geutic remedy m acute cases. He used Malandnnum foi^on- 
\ jSuent^ mall~pox^ with great success. Where the skin has 'an 
unnatural color between the pustules, and small-pox takes on 
the ^confluent form/ it is always serious and often dangerous. 
WhenEe"^yeball becomes congested and red, it enables the 
physician to prognose danger 

Dr. Boskowitz, of Brooklyn, was the first to introduce and 
use Malandnnum He made the first potencies up to the 30th 
from the crusts of the ‘^grease of the horse ” To the obser- 
vations of Dr Boskowitz in the use of this remedy, both as a 
prophylactic and therapeutic remedy against small-pox and 
the bad effects of vaccination, are added those of Drs. Raue^ 
Carleton Smith, Wm Jefferson Guernsey, Selfndge, Wessel- 
hoeft, Burnett and Clarke. The potencies of Boencke & 
Tafel were obtained from Dr Raue, those of Fincke, Swan 
and Smith, of New York, came direct from Dr. Boskowitz. 
It is needless to add that these original preparations were 
hand-made, but we believe all are reliable The remedy has 
had an extensive proving by W. P. Wesselhoeft, H. C. Allen, 
Steere, Holcombe and students of Hering College, m 1900 
and 1901. The provings were made with potencies ranging 
from the 30th and 35th to the 200th. No prover knew what 
was being taken 

We consider deep^long actin^remedy/to be repeated 
noroftener than\once a fortnight / 

Impetigo, Vecthymy^f at, vgreasy looking^^pustular eruptions 
are especially a ffected by this reme^. A. L. Marcy, H R 
Vol. XIV, p. 530, relates a singular experience with Malandri- 
num 30. During a small-pox epidemic he vaccinated himself, 
taking at tEe same time Malandnnum 30 night and morning. 
The vaccination did not take. It was twice repeated and still 
<!i3"Wt taTcr,*'^nof was^^ contracted Called to vac- 

cinate four children in a family whose parents had small-pox, 
he vaccinated all and gave Malandnnum 30 to three of them 
at the same time; the remaining child was the only one whose 
vaccination ‘"took ” This was so severe that Malandrinum 
had to be given to modify its intensity, which it did effectually. 
The other three were re-vaccmated but none took,’ Of five 



MALANDRINUM. 


259 


children from six to seventeen years of age, only the eldest 
had been vaccinated, and he had a good scar All except the 
eldest were given Malandrinum, and were vaccinated and none 
of the four “took The eldest took small-pox. Malandn- 
num was then given, and in a few days he was convalescent. 
In another case of small-pox Malandrinum was given, and the 
disease only lasted a few days\the eruption drying upy*^ 

"*^Yhe only previous attempt at proving was made by Straube 
with the 30th potency, published in the H R. VoL XV, p. 
145, and the H W. Vol. XXXV, p 504. These symptoms are 
included 

MIND. — Confusion and lassitude of the mental faculties with 
a dread of any mental exertion and a lack of concentration, 
an entirely new and unusual experience which continued sev- 
eral weeks after stopping the remedy. 

II Comprehension difficult 

Hn|lernory weakene<|/and impaired/ great difficulty m remem- 
bering what was read. 

Confused feeling in head with severe pain in left temporal 
region, finally located in left eye and felt as if a saw was being 
drawn up and down vertically through globe, < by light and 
reading. 

Sharp darting pain first imje ft templ ^then in right. Con- 
fusion and lassitude of mental faculties; lack of concentration 
and a dread of any mental exertion. 

Melancholy with general fatigue, 

HEAD EXTERNAL.“^ust ular eruption^n scalp, / Sensation 
of weariness at junction of atlas with craniumT every morning 
on rising. 

^ching on scalg,' especially* ^ the^even ing y^ 

%Ex^^ve^iry dandruff/(an entirelv new experience) the 

-‘-jjinnr- T I- -I 

fourth week after pustules dried up. 

Prover contracted a digital chancre, from surgical infection 
in May, 1891; was treated homeopathically. Ever since a 
\^ndency tc^crusty pimple^on the scalp^chiefly on vertex/ 
discrete, scattered, entirelyifree from itching^neither painful 
nor sore, small at the base out considerably elevated m form 
(3 a dry crust Condition had existed eleven years. Malan- 
drinum 30>^ree times a day/^caused the eruption to disappear 
^tifely for mree months, after which it gradually re-appeared., 



260 


MALANDRINUM. 


Impetigo covenng head from crown to neck and extending 
befnnd ears 

“*Thick, greenish crusts with pale, reddish scabs, itching < 
in the evening 

Impetigo, covering back of head, extending over back to 
buttocks, labia and even into vagina 
HEAD.-\Frontal and occipitar' headache, backache, weari- 
ness and chiTImess, lasting one day 
Frontal headache, no appetite, bilious vomiting and weari- 
ness 


Dizziness^ 

■fSTible headache and backache. 

Splitting headache m the forehead, chilliness, salty taste in 
mouth. 

Frontal headache, backache and weariness. 

Temporal headache, dizziness, backache. 

Terrible headache, bone pains, vomiting (bilious), chilliness, 
diarrhea, malaise. 

,j Pa.in in forehead^s|eft after Malandnnumy 

Heaviness m the head. 

Pams all over head. 

Pam in back of head, no appetite, inability to sleep. 

Headache and backache, stiffness of neck, loss of appetite, 
constipation, and great weakness (following vaccination) 

Headache, worse in forehead, with pain m back and ab- 
domen, attended with general debility (following varioloid) 

lYES.- k-Red stnpe^under eyes.. Severe pam in left eye as 
if a saw was drawn up and down vertically through eye ball. 

NOSE. — Dry rawness in floor of left nares, more marked on 
left side 

FACE. Skin of face and neck chaps and smarts after shav- 


ing; must shave on warm moist days. 

^czema faciahs^ntense buming^much edema^oozing/;^is- 
ciaSind’. 

A yello wish^ honey-comb crus^'bn upper hp. 
ffiffil^Profuse* purulent, ^eenish yellow discharge, mixed 
with blood. 
s j^eft 



MALANDRINUM 


261 


MOUTH. — ^Tongue, coated yellow, with red streak through 
middle, cracked and ulcerating down middle; swollen 
\Horribly offensive »^breath/ 

Canker on left border of tongue, which spreads in all direc- 
tions, tongue sore, unable to speak. 

In one case in which I was using. Malandrinum SO/as a 
prophylactic of variola, it cured a very stubborn case/ of 
'^aphthse^,^^/* 5. Taylor, 

THROAT. — Sore and swollen < left side ^^Left tonsij/swol- 
kn^, yellow ulcer with clear cut, well defined edges persistent 
for several days, rough scraping sensation like a corn husk or 
a foreign body, which must be removed mechanically, pain- 
less swallowing 

January 24 commenced taking Malandrinum 200. 

Thursday, Feb. 6th, awakened with first sore throat, of my 
life. 

Left tonsil swollen and inflamed 

SJ-eft ea^ched and^gum^i^ left sidgi^f mouthVnflamec ^nd 
s^olfen^i marked salivTtTon/ 

These symptoms continued and severely < until March 5th, 
when they became so severe that he was compelled to seek 
^antidote ^Mer sMcm). 

Throat symptoms and pains m throat begirxon left side,/ 
and extend to right. 

\Ulcerative patches^grayish in color, on tonsils and fauces, 
with a tickling sensation on swallowing. 

^Ulcerated* sore throat /had tendency to extend downward, 
invading the larynx. 

Severe ulcerated sore throat beginning on third day, worse 
on left side. 

APPETITE; THROAT. — ^Thirstless, water nauseates 
\Entire absence of thir^ 

TEETH AND GUMS — Teeth covered with viscid mucus, must 
clean them with cotton several times daily. 

^ums swollen^ulcerated,l^eceding from teethj^bleed easily / , 
^hen touched, unable to brush the teeth from sore and bleed- * 
ing gums. 

A dark, brown, tenacious mucus mixed with blood and pus 
exu3S^rdm ulcerated gums. 



262 


MALANDRINDM. 


^ Sord e sj bn the t eeth. 

STOI^ACH.-\N"^sea after eating Jfvomiting of bilious matter / 

Very hungry 

Empty, famt, '‘all gone*’ sensation, with faintness and 
trembling, not > by eating, though desire for food is very 
marked. 

ABDOMEN. — Pams around umbilicus. 

STOOL.—I^Diarrhea/ yellow, bloody, slimy, very change- 
able, worse irT 'the morning, \acnd, excoriating/ child had a 
dried-up mummyfied appearance sleepless 4nd has not nursed 
for 24 hours. 

I Dark, thin, cadaverous-smelling stool. 

II Diarrhea: acrid, yellow, offensive, followed by burning in 
anus and rectum. 

11 Dark brown, foul-smellmg, almost involuntary diarrhea; 
pains in abdomen. 

II Dark brown, painless diarrhea. 

■^ B lac k^ foul-smellin^Kjiiarrhe^ weariness, nausea, dizzi- 
ness. 

I Yellow, foul-smellmg, almost involuntary diarrhea, and 
great weariness 

II Black, foul-smellmg diarrhea, malaise and weariness. 

\ Bowels inactive/ no desire; ‘move after enema, but leave 
sore bruised sensation in rectum for hours ;\dreads stool. 

URINE. — Great sensitiveness of bladderv on walking^ bladder 
irntable A^quei| t desir^to urinate/ 

MALE SmAL (JEXM! — ( Child \ constantly handles/ the 
,|>enisp 

\ Violen t erections^he seventh and eighth nights. 

Painful erections the seventh and eighth nights. 

Painful erections second night with great sensitiveness of 
bladder. 

FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — ^Vagina closed with thick impeti- 
ginous crusts; yellowish, greenish, brown m color. 

BACK. — Untense paii^cross small of bacy 

11 Pam along back as if beaten. 

jBackachej i^as intense'' m the ^sa cral region ^,m the dorsal 
regiSn^mSSr the’** shoulder blades^hiefly th 4(teft side ^ it was 
^most unbeara Me. (Dr. B, from’^hree dose^f the 200th.^ 



MALANDRINUM. 


263 


UPPER LIMBS* — Impetiginous crusts on extensor sides of 
forearms ^^hagadejln palms and fingers/ 

Had a case ol varioloid to treat; I took four doses of Malan- 
drinum 30, one dose a day, and had a sharp proving in the 
form of a severe backache for several days. 

LOWER LIMBS. — Pams especially in left tibia, with petechia- 
like patches on anterior aspect of left leg from knee to ankle. 
Petechia on both thighs < on left 
Knock-knee. 

^Weak ankles^ easily turn on making a false step. 

A" sore spot m r quadriceps extensor femons as eruption 
disappeared, later it changed to muscles of left leg with in- 
creased pam and tenderness 

Dull pam in crest of left tibia for several days before sore 
throat and headache began 

Left foot drenched with sweat, right foot dry Four days 
later (after dancing 2^4 hours) both feet drenched with per- 
spiration. 

\Toes /felt asjf^ scalded and ^tched terrib^underneath;/was 
cornpSfl^’to change hose twice a day, and bathed with cold 
water morning, noon and night, which gave relief. 

Jntense itching < by rubbing or scratching. 

Profuse foot-sweat with carrion-like odor; toes so sore un- 
able to walk; only > was when feet were bared and elevated. 
The itching or sweating would return on covering or letting 
the feet hang down. 

II Soles of feet bathed in sweat, scald and burn when cov- 
ered or warm. 

is^arge blister^n sole^f both feet^no change of shoes — 
skin exfoliated on both feet. 

[Feet ^*go to sleep'* upon least provocation, a sensation 
never before observed. 

Cold perspiration on soles of feet; sensation of a draft of 
air blowing on feet at night, must get up and tuck m the bed 
clothes which relieves. 

I jjBgg P rhagade^sore and bleeding, on soles of feet > in 
colowiather and atter'bathmg. 

^^"hin ^ih' the limlJsJfor several weeks, much worse when 
weary ^dur ing small-pox epidemic)/ 



264 


MALANDRINUM 


Sore in all limbs and joints 

SjRun arounds’x^on all nail^of hands and feet/ 

On" Oct 22, 1901, a man, 56, had three doses of Malandri- 
num 30, to be taken 24 hours apart. 

On Nov 11 complained of burning, stinging itching of face 
and scalp < at night. In a few days there was a well devel- 
oped eczema which continued four or five weeks despite anti- 
dotal treatment 

SKIN.— On the 6th day aVpustular eruption/coveringi^hest ^ 

and\ shoulders /with -hard, nodules and intense itching, erup- 
tion began to crust with little or no discharge from pustules. 
""Two ladies had taken the 200th, one dose, daily, on the 
third day with one and on the fourth day with the other, a 
slight pustular eruption appeared on the face and chest. The 
eruptions were similar in character and ran their course in a 
week 

A few small pustules appeared on the left arm near the site 
of infantile vaccination, some days after a dose of Malandri- 
num 200 . — Geo H Clark 

A sensation of rawness of the skin over chest and shoulders, 
after bathing, as if the skin had been scraped with burning 
acid, smarting by covering parts 

A nodular eruption over chest and shoulders, extended down 
the arm to elbows, with slight vesication, disappeared, leaving 
thin crusts 

I A bu rning itching sensation beneath the skin in the palm of 
] thiTtmnd, appeared upon contact, after the eruption had dis- 
J appeared, continued for several weeks 

^czemaj^fTac^nd scalpjff^with burning, stinging itching. 

Impetigo on extensors of forearms. 

Small dusky red spots on legs, not disappearing on pressure. 


Dry, rough, unhealthy skin_remainmg_^for years after vac- 
cination 

Skin rough, dry, harsh. 

\Palms and soles thickj/deeprhagades < in cold weather, < 
fr(m washing with any kind of soap. 
ySkin g reas y,^ oily eruption, and hair excessively oily. 
\^ Pustnl eKslow to developi^ntS^ever endii^ as one healed 
and^^ appeared. ' * 



MALANDRINUM. 


265 


Eruption in hollow of arms and knees, red, scaly with in- 
tense itching < when becoming warm. 

SLEEP*-v«Restless sleepy dreams of trouble, of quarrels 

Malandriniim 30, while being used as a prophylactic of vari- 
ola, cured a stubborn case of aphthae, which had resisted many 
well selected remedies 

Malandrinum 30, one dose daily for four days, produced a 
I severe backach^for a week or more 

***»Por the bad effects^^cf vaccination has been used with best 
results, 

Bach member, in a family of six, had been vaccinated, three receiving 
Malandrinum, and their arms were only slightly affected by the vaccina- 
tion and ran a short course of a few days, the other three, who did not re- 
ceive Malandrinum, were very ill, arms sore for weeks and required treat- 
ment 

Bad effects of vaccination A lady, with an ulcer as large as a silver dol- 
lar and three-fourths of an inch deep, which continued to suppurate and 
would not heal, but under the curative effect of Malandnnum, recovered 
promptly 

When used as a prophylactic for variola has proved protect- 
ive m many cases, and also prevented vaccination from “tak- 
mg.” 

**"’Skin symptoms produced in nearly all who took Malandn- 
num as a prophy lactic, ^tching rash^fon various parts^pf body 
^id^face^ plainly visible under cuticle, with a few scattered 
eruptions on surface 

Malandrinum was given to nearly 600 persons, many of 
whom had been exposed by personal contact with various pa- 
tients, before and after taking the medicine, only one case of 
so-called varioloid occurred, and this may have been a proving 
of Malandrinum. 

Malandrinum 30 given to many persons during small-pox 
epidemic as a prophylactic produced in a number of cases 
markedvpremonitory symptoms£headache, backache^ ^^^eneral 
sprenessri^aise,\thickly coated tongu^loss of appetite, and 
l^ore or less fe ver |^ 

%.Blood boil^ ^Malignant pustules^ .^Vaccinal ulcers-y 

* * The crust assumed a conical form, a thick layer of crusts, if allowed to 
remain without removal, heaped up one-half inch They were fragile, 
moist, yellow, about the consistency of honey-comb. When removed a 



266 


MALANDRINUM. 


raw surface remained with deep fissures and thick crusts reformed into 
their original size in 48 hours There was evidently no itching, hut sore- 
ness after removal of the scabs ” — WesselhoefU 


\Malandnnum 30: produced burning, stinging, itching of the 
face scalp, \ worse in the night/ a few days later a well developed 
^eczema. 

\j^Malandrinum 200/ produced a number of small pustules on 
the left arm, near the site of infantile vaccination 

Mr H , aged 42, American, youngest of ten children, father died at 

45, of pneumonia, a brother died at 20, of pneumonia, mother died in old 
age Two sisters complain of rheumatism 

Brunette, black hair, dark blue eyes, healthy and athletic, until 21 years 
old. Never used tea, coffee, alcoholics or tobacco, lived a chaste life, 
father and brothers the same 

From birth his skin has been rough, dry, harsh, one brother has the same. 
Skin of palms and soles thick, cracks in cold weather, deep rhagades, sore 
at bottom, < dry cold weather, < when using soap or any alkali, skin of 
face and neck chaps and smarts after shaving Must choose moist warm 
days for shaving 

At 21 had malaria, and was given very large doses of Quinine Never 
had another chill, but has been constipated ever since, and sciatic rheuma- 
tism then set in, < in cold weather, < before storms 

Was nearly crippled from it for ten years. 

Had sphincter dilated, papillae removed at two different times, but with 
no permanent benefit 

Bowels inactive, no desire for stool Move after an enema, but leave a 
sore bruised feeling in rectum, dread of stool. 

Thtrstless; water nauseates 

Was vaccinated Feb. 1901. A slight ‘^take 


\Lower bod:^afiectedl greasy skinJt greasy eruption/ 

\Slow pustulationAnever ending/ as one healed another ap- 
peared. — Burnett, 

^ga^ of vaccination/ has cured cases of unhealthy, 

dry, rough skin, remaining for years after vaccination in small- 
pSxTmeasIes and impetigo . — Clarke 


in cold air. — Thompson, 


In a family of eight persons, none of whom had been vaccinated, the 
oldest boy took small-pox. One of his brothers slept with him and broke 
out all over; the mother expecting to be confined in a few days, we sent 
him away, and I at once put the rest of the family on Malandnnum 200, 
with the result tha t no ne of th em took small-pox. The boy that slept with 



MALANDRINUM. 


267 


his brother had a light fe^er the twelfth day, but that passed off without 
any further trouble . — Bryant 


A yellowish honey-comb crust^on upper lip, would crumble 
off, leaving moist surface, which would soon reform. 

Sharp, stabbing pain through upper lip with occasional 
burning. 

Small pimples on chest and back, with intense itching ex- 
tending to other parts of body and limbs < by cold air, when 
undressing 

A large crust of a light yellowish-gray color on right side of 
forehead extending to the temple and borders of the hair. 

Eruption in thd^ophteal space^and^ollow of elbows^scaly, 
crusty, moisture under the crusts and intense itching. 


*^Malandnnum in small-pox The following symptoms are reported 
cured with Malandnnum 

*“ Aching in limbs, headache, pains in 1 side of head with great debility, 
pains in back, head and abdomen, pain in head and back, fatigue, chilli- 
ness and vomiting, stiff neck, constipation, inability to go up stairs from 
weakness, lazy, weak feeling, terrible itching after an attack of small-pox, 
\ fpu l smell ing diarrhea, chilliness, weak, tired feeling; great pain around 
&e navel, sore aching in bones, sleeple ssness durmg an a ttack of small” 
gox. Crying^ and ill^ temper of^ childre?*^uting^mall-^ox^ pain in back 
extending to heels, soreness of abdomen, every bone in body aches. There 
was n o smell from the ^ruption after M alffldn pmn — Straube 

“Malandnnum has been given to numbers of unvaccinated children who 
were (lirectly exposed to the^ contagion of vanola, and they have invanaHy 
esSped the disease. I have given it to many persons ^one close each)*, 
^^irecSy^ter vaccination^and been unable to make that or a re-vaccination 
with virus which had proven effectual with others who had not 
had the medicine. One girl who suffered terribly from pain and an enor- 
mously swollen and inflamed arm and forearm, following vaccination, I 
epft rely relieved of the pain in a few hours by two doses of Malandnnum, 
and with an almost complete disappearance of the objective symptoms in 
twelve hours ” — Guernsey, As therein stated, one or two dose^are given/ 
sM hours apart|i^and not repeatet^ntil a succeeding epidemic or “scare” — 
at all events it is believed to be sufficient for at least a year. 


^l ^mpetigQ co vering back of headj^xtendmg over whole bac^ 
Ito buttocks, t.nd even.into vagma/covermg labia^^nd extensors 
of forearms. 

^Bous.y 

\MaIignant pustules^ 

\SaT7^f7cts o^^cctnattonf 



268 


MALANDRINUM 


S Small dusky red spots, on legs/not disappearing on pres- 
sure 

PROVING 

Miss A W C , a large brunette, unusually well and strong; 
aged 50, a nurse 

Wednesday, Dec 6 Took twenty pellets of Malandrmum, 
the 35th, at 5 30 p m 

Thursday evening, Dec. 7 Toothache in right upper eye- 
tooth beginning about 8 pm and lasting for two hours until 
bed time 

Friday evening, Dec 8 Peculiar feeling oft snuffles in the 
«,noseVwithout discharge/ with an unusual feeling of apprehen- 
. Sion. 

Saturday, Dec. 9., 9 A M. A peculiar dull ache in my left 
chest near the heart lasting about two hours 

In the afternoon about 2 P m. a severe dull pain m ball of 
foot, under big toe, worse when stepping on it. This lasted 
all the rest of the afternoon 

Sunday, Dec 10 Felt very well today and with the excep- 
tion of the above sensations have felt an unusual exhilaration 
and have had an especially good appetite during the last four 
days. 

No more symptoms until December 19th, when I took ten 
pellets of the two hundredth in the morning before breakfast 

liad a dull, uncomfortable headache which passed oS after 
sundown. 

December 21. Back of head aches from early morning all 
day, after a sleepless night with a patient. 

December 22. Have had unusually vivid dreams and very 
unpleasant o nes. 

December 23. Dreams again vivid, but not as unpleasant 
(I very rarely dream). 

Felt very well otherwise except an unusual apprehension 
about patient, for no reason that I can account for 

December 25. Unusually vivid dreams. 

December 26. AU night ^ quar relsome dreams^ W oke in 
t he morn ing witl ^ l eft^ lame ^nd a peculiar restless- 

^^s^int'he a rm , vm idi w^^ 



MALANDRINUM. 


269 


Sudden pains in my right hand which come and go quickly 
and have continued during the whole afternoon 

Mrs G F S , widow, aged 58 Blonde, well developed, 
inclined to obesity Remarkably healthy woman, whose ap- 
pearance and vivacity would place her at the age of 40. 

Dec 6, 1905. Took fifteen pellets of the 35th potency at 
10 P M 

Before eleven o’clock began to feeB^creepy sensatio^in my 
s kin, particularly in the face, like tKe crawling of ants over it, 
^acco mpanied by itching 

^Tt was red, and I had to resist a desire to jerk my fingers 
and twist my hands, this continued and increased even after I 
had taken my warm bath 

Went to bed about twelve very sleepy, but could not get to 
sleep because I could not he still on account of creepy sensa- 
tion which spread over my arms, shoulders and upper part of 
my body,iwith jerking of the limbs/ 

I turned from one side to the other, but could not be quiet 
long enough to get to sleep Accompanying this was a ring- 
ing in my head,^ as it once_had when years ago I had taken 
qui ningj but it was not of long duration. 

At half-past one I got up and wrote this. My lower li mbs 
did not seet^to be affec te d by any of these sensations, but I 
kept scratching my arms and face, head and shoulders, and 
my hands and fingers felt particularly restless and nervous. 
Had no internal disturbance other than my head. Finally fell 
asleep at half-past two and slept soundly until six. 

Dec. 7. \woke with all the symptoms of the night before 
gone, but had a sharp headache, and a |bad taste in my mouth/ 
By seven o’clock these too were gone, and I arose feeling all 
right. 

While I was out walking I was taken with a severe pain in 
the back, or, rather, at the left side of the sacrum low down, 
with stitching pains m rectum. It lasted about an hour. 

* At two o’clock began to have a bad headache over eyes, and 
with a sense of fulness in my head 

My feet were somewhat swollen when I put on my boots in 
the early morning, but by twelve o’clock after walking (not 
without some pain) the swelling left By half-past three in 



270 


MALANDRINUM, 


the afternoon my headache was entirely gone (it lasted only 
one and a-half hours), also the sense of fulness in the head 
Have felt perfectly well ever since until Friday morning 

Dec. 8 About eleven o’clock when I suddenly had another 
attack of headache, and I find that I am liable to a return of 
these attacks, with the sense of fulness, at odd times, appar- 
ently without any reason 

Friday had three attacks, but they did not last long, from 
half an hour to an hour and a-half, not longer, also since 
Wednesday evening, when I took the pills, until Friday night, 
Dec. 8th, I have not had any discharge from my bowels. 

Dec. 9. When I went to bed last night, after lying down, 
my head had a sharp pain for perhaps ten minutes This 
morning when I woke T had that disagreeable taste in my 
mouth, but felt all right until about 9 o’clock, when I went 
out, and I did not have any vitality, and found it hard work to 
lift my legs I thought it might come from not taking coffee 
(which you have asked me not to do during the proving), as I 
have done for so long a time, so I went and had some rolls and 
omelet and drank a cup of weak tea, but did not feel any bet- 
ter My movements seemed to be uncertain. I was afraid of 
falling, or tripping It was difficult work getting in and out 
of the cars. I had occasion to go up two flights of stairs, 
very old, narrow and rickety, and was afraid that I should 
fall on my way down. 

I have had all day, not a headache, but a feeling that made 
me scowl, and keep closing my eyes. I felt as if I must get 
home as soon as possible. 

For two days, several times, I have been troubled by feeling 
\ ver y the facej^never cold Sometimes when the face 

felt^burning h ot I would perspire on the face and head 

This morning I had a movement of the bowels, the first since 
Wednesday, Dec. 6th. 

I have been troubled a great deal wit Arheumatism^in mv . 
right and,hjp/al^.iiirthr^n was 

not constant, hut since taking "the pellets on Wednesday last, 
f hav e not had any pain of this kind anywhere. I have had a 
slight e rupti on on my cheeks 'and sometimes a place larger 
than a dollar would be burning red and shining on my right 
cheek at the side of my nose. 



MALANDRINUM. 


271 


Sunday, Dec 10. No symptoms today until now, 7 p. m., 
both cheeks are burning and have the inflamed shiny look 
Perhaps it is also another symptom that I have been very irri- 
table all day 

Dec 11. The rheumatism has returned in right hand and 
hip. After I have been walking a very short distance, my legs 
pain me and get so heavy and my back and hips drag so that 
^ave to sit down, and when I sit down, all these feelings go 
away. Two or three times today my right eyelid has kept 
twitching. 

Tuesday, Dec. 12 \Twii^in^n left eye/^onlj^ 
trouble in my hips and legs and back, when walking. My 
sJomaSh ancf'abdomen have been much swollen for two days. 

Wednesday, Dec 13. Nothing more 

Thursday, Dec. 14. Nothing 

Dec. 17. Tool4 tw o hundredth potencji^n solution at eleven 
o^clock P. M. A tablespoonful of twenty pellets dissolved m 
four tablespoonfuls of water. 

At 12:30 A. M., my skin began to itch and\my legs*were very 
"^dgety, also alb* my body was very restless^ Arms and shoul- 
ders were not affected as before, however, with itching and 
restlessness. It seemed to be the lower part of my body this 
time, although my face felt some of the irritatmn, but m a 
much less degree 

Monday, Dec. 18, 7:30 a. m. Slept soundly from 12.30 to 
7:30 this morning, with all the symptoms of the night before 
one gon awaking 

At 4 p. M. began to have excruciating pain in my forehead 
over the left eye, which contmued until about midnight. 
Once it ran down behind my left ear for a short while. It left 
me as suddenly as it came. Took the last tablespoonful that 
night. Slept well without disturbance. 

Dec. 19. That day was without pain or other disturbances, 
except I felt in a state of collapse nearly all day. Had no 
strength in my arms or legs, and every little while was obliged 
to he down wherever I happened to be. Would almost fall 
asleep and my breathing was very deep and heavy, like puff- 
ing. My body felt heavy, and I had difficulty in lifting my 
legs and walking. Frequently low sighs would come. This 
was all much better by 6 p. m. 



272 


MALANDRINUM 


While taking the medicine this time, I have had no opera- 
tion of the bowels, and the last day there was more or less of 
an eruption on my cheeks and at the side of the nose, but not 
the red shiny look I had when taking the remedy the first time 
in pills (the 35th) 

Each time I took the medicine (the first time in pellets and 
this time in solution) I had a slight return of the breaking out 
round my waist which I had when afflicted with shingles years 
ago. I was not rheumatically affected this time as I seemed 
to be when I first took the pills Ever since I began taking 
the pills, from the first day until now, I have found that when 
I started out walking, however well I felt, after a short time I 
gave out all over, and especially in my bowels, thighs and 
Tegs, also the toes of my left foot, except the bigtoe, were 
affected in a way I never before felt, not like cramp or gout, 
and whereas I am always light on my feet and move quickly 
and easily, during these days it has been hard for me to get 
about and I have felt heavy and moved heavily, also a great 
deal of headache, a thing unusual for me, also often a short- 
ness of breath with an inclination to wheeze. 

Dec. 20th, 7 am. Woke with a bad headache (the bad 
taste which I had in my mouth when waking while I was 
taking the medicine in pellets (35th) I have not had at all this 
time). Since December 20th I have had no more symptoms. 

Mrs. J. F. C., aged 62; a large well developed woman, gray 
hair, former blonde, born in England, and has lived for 
twenty years m Munich, Germany. 

May 8, 1900. Has always been remarkably well until eight 
years ago whei^n er uptioE^ ppeare(%)n the ti pper liB/ which 
f ormed a yellowish, ^hon eycombed cr usty Portions wouU 
^mmble off^ ind leave a moist surface, which again would form 
a\similar c rust/ occasionally a burning and, at long intervals, 
sharp stabbing pains through the upper lip. 

Had received all kinds of external treatments by German 
specialists, without effect. Once after cautery, it remained 
absent for six months. Then Dr Jochner, of Munich, advised 
surgical interference, which was not acceded to. On her re- 
turn to America, further local experiments were tried with- 
out success. 



MALANDRINUM 


27B 


I could not elicit any symptoms of a constitutional charac- 
ter. Neither could I establish any connection with vaccina- 
tion, or revaccmation, as she told me she had never been re- 
vaccmated since childhood, which is a remarkable record for 
a life in Germany of twenty years 

The appearance was so unsightly that she had excluded 
herself largely from contact with society and was consequently 
mentally much depressed and anxious From May 8th until 
February, 1901, she received at long intervals of at least three 
weeks single doses of Sulphur, Arsenic and Kali carb. The 
latter remedy was given June 20th, 1900, and some improve- 
ment was noticed until February, 1901, during which time she 
was under placebo, when she reappeared with the condition 
as bad as ever 

The character of the eruption reminding me so strongly in 
appearance of the ^scratches ’i' of horses, led me to give her 
one dose of Malandnnum 24m., on February 3th, 1901. 

April 1st. There was on the whole a decided change in the 
diameter and elevation of the crust, but still there existed the 
sticky moisture under it Repeated Malandnnum 24m., and 
placebo, with slight improvement On April 27 she received 
Walandrmum cniji^ with gradual improvement during May and 
June*^"’^" 

July 15. The crust had decreased one-half, but still mois, 
ture underneath it,\Malandrmum cm/ 

October 26th She reappeared with an entirely clear lip- 
which has remained so to this date, Dec. 11, 1906. 

Miss M. N. H., aged 19, medium brunette. Student. 

Dec. 27, 1904 \ Eruptions^r st appeared three years ago^ ^ 
% chest and back.^ ^Sm all pimpleg^it^ntense itchingyfexte^ 
mg to other parts of the body and limbs, < when exposeS'to 
air and on undressing 

"For the last two months a different form of eruption has 
appeared on face, a very un^ghtly crust of a light yellowish 
^^yTolor,^ oh rigGt side of forehead extending to the tempk 
"and lunSer the hair on that side. Has used external medicinal 
appUcSTions more or less for the last three years without bene- 
fit. T^re is some irritation and itching of the eruption on 
the forehead , but less intense than that oh tfie boSy. 



274 


MALANDRINUM. 


Complains of faint, gone sensations in stomach without real 
hunger. This is especially evident since the previous July, 
and IS not > by eating All functions normal. 

Was vaccinated repeatedly before her twelfth year In that 
year the vaccination took f followed by a Hedious suppuration 
\at the point of vaccinationJ 

’^Sulphur cnftfin watei^o be taken during forty-eight hours, 
a tablespoonful^orning and evening^ 

'**^an 21, 1905 Has more eruption and more intense itching. 
No faintness. Appetite rather abnormal, craves hearty food, 
^sorinum cm|(in watei^||morning and eveningj^r two day^ 
Feb 18. Itching continues intense. Eruption has appeared 
in popliteal space and hollow of elbows. Thinks there is less 
moisture after scratching Placebo. 

March 15. No improvement whatever. All symptoms re- 
main the same, except the faintness at the stomach disap- 
peared. '^Malandrmum 24ni/^one dose dry/ 

April 15. Eruption on forehead appears to be less thick, 
but itching remains intense. ^Malandrinum 24m^^,one dose dryy 
May 13 Decidedly less itching, less moisture, both on face 
and body Chief discomfort on forehead. Crust less thick. 
\ Ma landrmum 24m,»^\one dose dry/ 

June 12. Decidedly better Placebo. 

July 10. Most marked improvement. Forehead entirely 
free from the crust, and all eruption. Skin normal, where the 
large crust was located. Eruption on body also much im- 
proved, no itching. Hollows of elbows and knees clear of 
eruption. 

Dec. 9. Has been free from eruption all summer. Since 
the cold weather slight reappearance on forehead and neck, 
but no crust. Small pimples with some itching Says her 
^air is falling ou^ ^alandrinum 24m J'^one dose AxjJ 

March 10. No eruption anywhere. Skin of body normal. 
No itching. No falling of hair. 

In November, 1906, received letter from a relative, who re- 
ports her as perfectly well, and the happiest girl in her town. 
Miss G. W., aged 40, light blonde, full habit, very healthy. 
Dec. 6th Ten pellets, 38th potency, at 12 m. Wednesday. 
While sitting at lunch at 2 o^clock momentary light-headed- 
ness lasting perhaps two minutes. 



MALANDRINUM. 


275 


Friday, 8th. Woke at 4 A. M , attack of sinking weakness, 
rose and walked about the room a few minutes; was chilly for 
half an hour after returning to bed 

Monday, 11th All day nausea, > after eating, uncertain, 
shaky feeling in stomach 

Tuesday, 12th. Same nausea continued < afternoon, with 
dull headache in forehead 

After dinner at 7 o’clock nausea with eructations tasting of 
food 

Wednesday, 13th Slept from 11 till 4 a. m., then an attack 
of eructation of gas tasting of food, no nausea to-day; took 
cup of coffee this morning, which relieved nausea. 

Feels week and exhausted all over. 

Has felt so ill that she declines to take more of the medi- 
cine, and begged me, with tears m her eyes, not to give her 
any more, as she knew she would have “nervous exhaustion,*’ 
which she had during a whole year, four years ago 

SLEEP J Restle ss sleep ;'^p^ams of troublejjCof quarrelsy" 


DAY BOOKS OF PROVING 
By W P Wesselhoeft, M. D. 


Miss E. M B , a strong brunette inclined to obesity, age 50, 
no menses for 18 months 

Dec. 6th Took ten pellets at Ip. m., 35th potency. 

Wednesday night, Dec. 6th. \Did not s l eep well/ w oke fre- 
quently||rnin#,un^leasant^ activ e ^darting^^ ide^to 

^^othery 

Wuisday, 7th, A M Feeling of fulness in head, ache in 
back of neck (joint at top of spine, running down into arms 
and up behind ears). 

Friday evening, 8th. Slight soreness and^swelled feeli^l 
around palate and\between nose and throa'tV 

Saturday, 9th. Little blisters crusti^t left angl^of 
* lipsa* larger one on lower lip came two days before, 

Saturday night wakeful. 

Sunday, 10th, A. m. Soreness and rawness between throat 
and nose continue, more prominent on left side. 

Seven p. m. Shifting pains in lower abdomen. Sudden 
urgent movement of bowels gives relief (twice during the 



276 


MALANDRINUM. 


evening), fulness and heaviness in lower abdomen with dull 
ache, but not very marked 

Monday, 11th, a m Mouth dry on waking, very thirsty all 
day. Sensation of large tongue, dryness succeeds soreness 
between nose and throat (left). 

" 7 P. M. Return of sensations in abdomen described yes- 
terday 

Tuesday, 12th. Dry mouth m morning Thirst and large 
tongue continue 

Wednesday, 13th. Dry mouth, large tongue continue. 
Feeling of soreness and lameness under jaw and chin when 
mouth IS opened very wide. ^. Soreness unde^r jaw/( almost half 
way back from point of chin) felt when pressed deeply on out- 
side, both sides. 

Dec. 18, 1905, 8 a. m. Took first dose of remedy in water. 
10 p. M., took second dose 

Dec 19th, 9 A. M Third dose. Four or five small red 
pimples on left forearm. No itching about them. 

10 P. M. Fourth dose. \ hch tn^Jon ba^, neck and shoul- 
ders, ^more marked^on left side^ ^ Very troublesome for m^re 
than an houi\on undressing/ and^ter going to bed./ 

than^a^ hour after breakfast. 
Intense discomfort in head, hard to describe. 

Feeling of lightness, yet of pressure on top of head; sensa- 
tions confined to region above ears. 

Sensation of motion in the eyes Vision not clear or 
steady. 

Quick pulse, conscious of its beat in ears and neck; quick, 
short breathing. 

Feeling of weakness in hands and wrists. 

Tingling sensation in arms and hands. 

Throbbing in top of head; hissing sound in ears, with 
rhythm of pulse. 

S J^hausted feehn^^as present all day ^ 

Decr''2ist, 'fletJirn^ ^f yesterday ^s symptoms, not 

quite so severe. 

10 P M, Great discomfort on lying down in bed, from heart 
beating very quickly with occasional skipping of a beat, hiss- 
ing in ears, weak feeling in arms. 



MALARIA OFF. 


More comfortable with head propped hi^h 

Heartbeat quickened by slightest movement. 

Foregoing symptoms continued for an hour or more 

Waked suddenly at 12 (by noise), first sensation a quiver- 
ing or vibration inside of or back of eyes. 

Sensation of great heaviness of body ^ bed seemed insufficient 
support. 

Dec. 22d. Did not sleep after 4 am. 

11 A. M Slight return of symptoms of previous days at 
same hour 

Depressed, worried, anxious 

Slept somewhat better 

Dec. 23d. Depression continued through forenoon, began 
to wear off towards evening. 

Dec. 28, 10-11 A. M Itching or pricklmg^on bacl^ arms 
and legs, less marked elsewhere on body; relieved by warmth 
rather than by scratching 

This has recurred at irregular intervals of one to four days 
up to to-day (Jan. 10) 

Dec. 31st Feeling of swelling and soreness in throat or 
between nose and throat, back of palate; pain running up 
into ears, left side Thirst 

Chilly feeling on changing clothes at night (the same on 
dressing next morning) ; headache 

Jan. 1st. Symptoms return at evening with sneezing, dry- 
ness in throat, left side. 

Jan. 2d. Some mucus cleaned from nose and throat afforded 
relief, and the trouble^^radually disappeared, though the dr: 3 ^- 
ness of nose and throat\ gn left side >^ontinues (Jan. 10). 


.MALARIA OFF. - 

We are indebted to the late G. W. Bowen, Fort Wayne, 
Ind., for this valuable remedy. 

Hahnemann had an extensive experience m Malarial Fevers 
in the valleys of the Danube, and the fevers of the Pontine 
marshes on the Tiber are historical. , 



278 


MALARIA OFF. 


Dr. Bowen lived on the Wabash River at that time, a noted 
malarial region, and for many years he was called upon to 
treat hundreds of patients suHermg from all forms of malarial 
affections. 

Malarial affections^ have beeqK^attributed td^arsh exhala/ 
^ons^^n summei^^and autumn^when thej water has been evapo- 
rated hy heat. These poison vapors of decaying vegetation 
Dr. Bowen had to contend with, Malarial fevers and their re- 
sultant diseases, intermittent, remittent, continued, typhoid, 
etc. , for years, not only in their acute, but in their suppressed 
forms, in which he found . aU form^.of chronic diseaseg^ very 
frequently, could be traced to maltreatment of the acute man- 
ifestation. He conceived the practicability of testing the 
effects of artificial toxin prepared from peat, or decayed vege- 
table matter, taken from a marsh during the dry season, when 
the malaria toxin was most active. This vegetable matter 
was placed m glass jars, filled with water and allowed to de- 
compose, which were numbered I, II, and III, according to 
the time, one, two or three weeks’ of decomposition. 

, At the end of each period, or stage, provings were made by 
inhaling the gases given off, just as the patient would naturally 
inhale the marsh miasm. Provers were paid so much per day 
to inhale the gas in its different stages of decomposition, and 
a careful record of its effects was made. This constituted the 
provings of the crude gases. 

For medicinal purposes a tincture was prepared by putting 
ten drops of No. II, in which the matter had been decomposed 
for two weeks, into 90 drops of alcohol; this formed the 1st 
dec. potency, and all Bowen’s reported cures were treated 
with this, 

Boericke & Tafel made a 30th from this tincture, which Ymg- 
ling inhaled, and resulted in his involuntary proving. Later 
Boericke & Tafel made a 30th potency of No. Ill, which was 
run up into the higher potencies by Gorton, and used by Ying- 
ling in his clinical experiences. 

The paid provers of No. I, which was not very offensive, 
obtained the following uniform results in from one to three 
hours after inhalation: **IlJH[eadache#, nausea/. distressed stom- 
^ach^white-coated tongue.” These symptoms passed off in 
two or three days. 



MALARIA OFF 


279 


Provers of No. II obtained results m from twelve to t went 3 ^- 
four hours, which were much more severe and long lasting. 
They were, i^^earful headacheXnausea>*woniiting/m some 
cases, aversion to food, distress m stomach, hypochondria, 
first in the spleen, then the liver and stomach, and on the 
third day pronounced chills, which were so severe that they 
had to be antidoted ” 

No. Ill, which was “fetid to a fearful degree,” produced 
little result except nausea within three or four days, but then 
symptoms began to appear, first, \extreme lassitud^chills4nd 
^ver^^ains>^nd achesj^^impeding locomotioi)/ 

When taken internally the results were much more severe: 

No I caused bilious colic, nausea, cramps, headache. 

No. II, the stomach, liver, spleen and kidneys became in 
volved, with quartan or tertian intermittent fevers 

No. Ill setting up a more profound type even, a genuine 
typhoid or semi-paralytic state, which compelled the provers 
to take to bed. 

On the day I received from Boericke & Tafel Malaria off* 
80 I was foolishly led to try Hahnemann’s inhalation. The 
thought just occurred to me on the spur of the moment, and 
without stopping to think I took three strong inhalations, with 
both sorrow and a proving resulting None of the symptoms 
were distressing, yet marked and clear cut The remedy 
commenced its work promptly and in the order following: 

A chin g in both elbows. 

A kind of slight concentration of feeling in root of nose, and 
just above, as though I have a severe cold, similar to that com- 
plained of by hay-fever patients 


A tired acheyin knees^and for a distance above and below. 
A feeling as thougKTshould become djgzy. 

Pain in top of left instep. 

A tired feeling in wrists 

Aching in an old (cured) bunion on left foot. 

Sensation on point of tongue as though a few specks of spice 
or pepper were there. 

SjtcWn^on ri|ht che el ^over malar bon^> by slight rub- 
bing or scratching. 


Achin 

XTirS 


n wrists./ 
acfie m hands 



280 


MALARIA OFF 


When leaning face on left hand, elbow on the table, per- 
ceptible feeling of the heart beats through upper body and 
neck 

Slight itching on various parts of the face and extremities, > 
by slight rubbing 

Sense of heat in abdomen 

Chilly sensation in left forearm Soon followed by chilly 
feeling in hands and fingers, feet are cold with sensation as if 
chilliness was about to creep up the legs A few moments 
later knees feel cold \ A s enses of coldn ess ^spending over 
body from the legs. 

Arms feel tired 

Belching several times, easy, no taste 

A drawing pain in right external ear 
***Lumbar bacl^feels tired^s though it would ache. 

Neck feels tired, with slight cracking in upper part on mov- 
ing the head 

Shallow breathing which seems from languor, with a desire 
to take a deep inspiration occasionally 

A kind of tired feeling through abdomen and chest 
\ A ge neral sensgi^oi^eariness ^ 

XTeehng about head as though I would’^ecome Axzzyy 

Pain m upper left teeth. ' " ^ 

A sensation as though I would have a very loose stool 
(passed away without stool). 


Feeling rather stupid and \sleep y/ 

AT sensation in the spleen asmough it would ache. 
>SaJliv^^more pr^fuse^han usual,’ keeps me swallowing often. 
Pain in abdomen to right of navel. 


Dull aching through forehead. 

Face feels warm, as if flushed, also head, becomes general 
over body, as if feverish. 

Aching across upper sacral region 
Legs very weary from short walk 
Pam at upper part of right ilium. 

\Gene ral sens^^f wp^^injess^rom a very short walJk, espe- 
ciauTy through pelvis, sacral region and upper thighs. I feel 
sfmn py inclined to lie down and rest. 

Qualmishness of stomach, as though I should become nau- 
seated. 



MALARIA OFF. 


281 


\General sense of malaises^andv^veariness becoming quite 
marked 

Aching above inner angle of right eye. 

A kind of simmering all through the body. 

Felt impelled to he down, and on falling to sleep a sense of 
waving dizziness passes all over me, preventing sleep. 

At Jimes I feel as ^though I should become cold or have a 
chill, then I feel as though I should become feverish or hot, 
though neither is very marked 
""F^yes feel heavy and sleepy 

tJneasiness in lower abdomen 

Gaping, yawning and desire to stretch. 

Legs are restless, feel like stretching and moving them. 

I feel very much as I did one time before having the ague, 
twenty-five 3^ears ago. 

Odor from cooking is pleasing, but I have no desire for din- 
ner Yet when I sit down I eat a good dinner with relish 
\gizziness^on rising from a reclining position. 

Feel generally Setter after eating dinner. 

Achingi^^in occiput/ 

During the afternoon leg weary 

Unusual hearty appetite for supper (the good appetite keeps 
with me for some days) 

A good night’s rest following, and have felt much brighter 
and generally better ever since the first day. (Healing.) 

“I know several localities in South America, Africa and 
Spain where the marsh miasma has unquestionably arrested 
and cured that fatal scourge of the human race^-^jphthisis pul-^ 
^onalis^ without any other treatment or restriction in food or 
drink. And why should not the climate of the fen lands of 
Lincolnshire, in the neighborhood of Spalding, prove as 
curative an agent for this disease as the climate of so many 
foreign regions where patients go and die, deprived of all the 
comforts of home ? Penzance, among the British localities, is 
reported to be superior to nine-tenths of the places to which 
patients are sent Penzance, then, and Spalding should be 
particularly studied by medical men and recommended to con- 
sumptive individuals who wish to enjoy the benefits and ad- 
vantages of a national place of relief, if not of cure.’* 



282 


MALARIA OFF. 


C. F , aet. 28, a Kansas volunteer, after a week or ten days 
of rainy and chilling weather in camp, came home sick Had 
a chill, followed by fever Aching all over body; nausea con- 
tinuous, vomiting bile and retching Wants cold drinks 
Can’t eat anything; vomits everything, except once he could 
eat raw tomatoes. Crav es sour. Tongue white and thickly 
coated. Lips parcheT3ry."^"Urin€\highly colored/like strong/ 
tea.,^ Retching and gagging from hawking mucus Ipe 9 ac cm 
Nausea some better. Vomited twice since yesterday. 
Thirsty, would like much cold water, but is fearful to drink, 
yet it does not sicken. Slight dizziness, especially on rising 
up or on raising head. No appetite; aversion to food, 
thoughts of it sicken Costive. Feels very weak and languid. 
^ou th very dr saliva pasty^ Skin dry all over, no sweat at 
all. Br y , 9m. 

No nausea; sight of food does not nauseate now, but the 
thought of his army life gags him. Mouth very dry, subjec- 
tively, but really moist Thirsty, but desires less quantity 
Very weak and tottering Great une^iness through abdo- 
men, a sense of heaviness Has eaten nothing, but drinks 
j some cherry juice. Throat dry and sense of slight drawing. 

^ Face^ eyes ^a]Qd\^ s ki n \very yello’^‘^%^Constipationy vomited 
i bile, -skin very dry. Aside from nausea seems better. ^Malaria 
I \ Oit., Im. 

*npeeliiig better generally. No nausea. Has eaten twice for 
the first time. Bowels sluggish, no sweat; skin dry and yel- 
low; feels weak, mouth less dry Sac. lac 

Much better. Less thirst. Has eaten with relish. Mouth 
less dry. Slept all night. No sweat, but skin some better in 
color. Sac. lac. 

Generally improving Had a good dinner yesterday and 
breakfast this morning with much relish. Feels like getting 
up. No nausea. Less yellow * 

Doing well.. Weak and totters yet. Appetite improved; 
eats with relish. Tongue cleaner. Bowels moved normally. 
\Mou th dryJCat times^ith plenty of saliva/ Skin yellow and 
no sweat, ^alaria off , Im. < 

Doing finely. "Walked a mile to the office. Yellowness of 
eyes and skin fading. Rapid restoration to better than usual 
health. 



MALARIA OFF. 


283 


R A., aet. 22, another soldier boy, with similar symptoms 
to the above, was promptly cured by Malaria off. ; no other 
remedy given 

Mrs S A H , aet. 63, sick for some days. Shooting pains 
all over in the muscles; bones ache. High fever during the 
night. Restless tossing about Thirsty for lemonadej not so 
much Jor water. Diarrhea, five or six stools this morning; 
no pain, weakness in bowels, tenderness in right iliac region; 
stools watery, thin, yellowish, somewhat foul. Bitter taste; 
mouth parched; tongue white. Ravenous appetite for some 
days past; none now. Dizziness on rising. Head feels badly, 
as though it would ache Pulse 98. Skin hot and dry. Rest- 
lessness most marked in the arms, tossing them about Very 
stretchy and gaping Malaria off., Im Relieved and up and 
about next day 

M. H , aet. 16. “ Dumb ague*’ a year ago. Last four days 
has been very tired and languid. Backache m lumbar region, 
shoots up the back; worse when first lying down, then gets 
better, worse after walking; better lying on the abdomen. 
Bowels loose yesterday, but no stool to-day. Aching through 
forehead and temples. Fe els wel^ on rismgj/tn the morning, 
<>^ aft er being abou^forawhiJe^<, to wards evening/ Last 
fall had slight chills and fever; no sweat. Yajraing Ma- 
larious feeling.” Poor appetite. Thirsty all the time Malaria 
6m. Improvement at once, and in a few days said she 
felt no further need of medicine. 

M. H., aet. 12, sister of above. Peevish for a few days. 
Last night had- severe frontal headache/vRestlessXtossing alH 
Ng ight^ Pam in ^est and upper abdomen; worse breathing; 
may be from indigestion Fever during the night and also 
this morning. Pulse 112, soft and yielding. Tongue white, 
with brown streak down the middle. \Malaria off , 6m/ Prompt 
cure. 

"^"M, B., aet. 13,. ^ch evenm^ atout dark, getting earlier 
e^h jiay^^he will be)^illy|fwith flusheg|j,^of heat^g reat^ de^r e/ 
Vor'^fresh a^and cannot breathe on account of pain m the 
Tn^r "worse lying down, must jump up; better from hard 
pressure on region of liver, during the day has no trouble and 
no tenderness. Seems entirely well, except that he is getting 



284 


MALARIA OFF 


weaker. \Sh^ht fevei^for a coupl^of hourjjm the evenmgy 
raves, sin^^and talks all night, Vestless/ "App^ffe variable, 
craves potatoes, apples and beefsteak Tongue about clean. 
JVlalaria off , Im The next morning ate breakfast with the 
family, the first time in several weeks, much better in every 
way, and had no trouble with the liver the next evening fol- 
lowing the remedy Cure rapid and remains 

G C , aet 28,\agu^£very other^^icy col^-^froni hips, 
down^^hilly all over^ < about the trunk, and general sweat, 
but slight^ Begins about noon Used to have ague often and 
long at a time when living in Missouri, and had it very hard 
on the Pacific coast, and is now run down Feels languid, 
weak and drowsy between attacks, unable to be up Pulse 
weak. Very poor appetite Foul breath. Flashes of heat 
all the time Very thirsty. Has taken much qumme Dizzy 
when up, with nausea Has taken salts \f or constipation 
\ Stool hard;> bleeding/after stool, at times. Intense headache, 
^ though it would burst »Malaria off , Irn 
No chill next day, except the soles of feet felt cold, almost 
numb. No fever, except very slight on back for a few mo- 
ments. Sweat over body. Dizzy when up, with some nausea 
‘‘Feels wonderfully better; did not think one could feel so 
much better so soon ” Head is heavy and aches some 
Thinks it is from the quinine he took. Bowels have moved 
twice, thin, watery, foul odor. Urine smells very strong and 
IS very red some days. Short, hacking cough for some days, 
better today; not so languid and weak. Is sitting up, which he 
could not do before Missed two or three chill days, and 
made general improvement, so as to be able to go home, hence 
went from under my supervision. 


; F. B., aet. 80, very active. Three times, one^week apart, 
bashad ‘Mumb ague^^^eeling bac^^ll over/ head feels thick 
; a nd mean, bones ach^^ ,no chilk but^^rofuse s weating 

Syeats^^yS^eagTl^^ profu selj^on least ’exertion / Righi 
knee weak and painful, wors^ when bending down to work 
and raising up, must help himself up \ T)izz^w hen getting up^ 
in the morning and on rising up. “ Tn^t" Ifke a hoSe. 
Slee"^, falls asleVp Yeading. Has had chUTs and f ever^ seweral 


times, yrfalaria off., 6my\Prompt relie£/ 



MALARIA OFF. 


285 


Three months after he came for help ‘‘ Feels bilious,” as 
though he was going to pieces” Feels tired, uncomfort- 
able xNo pain|(but very languidydon’t wan^o move^^istless. , 
Feels malarious.” No chill, no fever. Dizzy when getting 
up, must steady himself before starting to walk. \Sleepy and 
^owsy when reading or sitting quietly Malaria off , 6m. 
Prompt relief and no return in eight months 

L H., aet 50, for three weeks has had|paii>in the right side/ 
about the floating ribs (posterior aspect of liver), 
Gurting through the right side, aching, worse sitting, lying a 
long time, possibly in the evening, better from walking a little. 
Had something similar four years ago, and was sick for a long 
time Feels weak and languid Good appetite, eats a good 
deal without inconvenience. No trouble with the urine or 
bladder Constipation. Drawing or puckering feeling m the 
region of the liver, a kind of cramping. Tongue coated 
slightly yellowish-white. Had malaria and ague badly years 
ago; took lots of quinine Had ‘‘dumb ague” badly, took 
ironwood tea. Has used much Mercury and physic Malaria 
off., 6m Reports himself a great deal better, “The drawing 
feeling let go within three hours and has not returned.” Pain 
m posterior aspect of liver much better. 

Could hardly walk to office before, but now “feels as if he 
could walk all over town ” A month later, after hard work 
and picking up potatoes, he felt some trouble in the liver, 
which was relieved by the same remedy. 

Mrs. H. H., aet 36, is feelin|^‘‘ malarious^ '^f eels depressed/ 
van#lang uid./ Is sleep^ll the tim^can go to sleep standing 
Had a ^‘dumb chill” eight days ago, and again in one week 
Occasionally ha^ sudden/cold speiyat night.ABack seem^s 
^tTISSf^fwouId brS|75^ theffiipl Limbl^t 

nSmB and cold. "^’I^requent spells of headache, forepart of 
head. Malaria off., 6m. Soon feeling much better and over 
the trouble. 

Mrs. J. E G., aet. 25, for four days, about 11,30 A m., she 
\has great achin^ll overypommencmdm small of backithen 
hot lever, short of breath, headache all the time, day and 
mglit ;"^each day the trouble gets later. During the morning 
feels weak, head whirls, sense as if the head made the stomach 



286 


MALARIA OFF. 


sick; eyes feel heavy. When in the open air she feels cold 
and “shakes inside” till she “fairly cramps ” Dull and stu- 
pid. Aching under right scapula; cramping, and very sore and 
sensitive in the region of the liver, worse from pressure, and 
at times has sharp pains, sleepy and drowsy, but sleep does 
not rest her; wakes up tired and feeling bad all over No ap- 
petite; no thirst, breath seems very short, eyes burn like coals 
of fire Must urinate often, urine high colored, very strong 
odor, scanty, feels like a burden, she wants to urinate, but 
cannot In the morning feels as if getting over a long spell of 
sickness. Dizziness, feels that she does not have any sense, 
worse walking or turning around, rising up, stooping Cannot 
have the house closed up, for it aggravates the head and 
stomach, but fresh, cool air chills her Very bad taste, bitter, 
nasty. Tongue about clean; headache in forehead and down 
cheek bones. Malaria off , 6m Reported a very prompt re- 
lief. 

H. F , aet 35, a farmer; rumbling and burning in stomach/ 
\ and abdomen j^bur mngsof stomacl^ feels very weak and nerv- 
ous, frontal headache, going all over the head; face feels stiff; 
dryness at root of tongue; draws up like from green persim- 
mons; feels drowsy and sleepy, aching all over body, in arms 
and legs, chilly feeling, then breaks out in a slight sweat for 
a while, both come and go Sighing, takes a deep breath; 
restless and nervous Hands seem to be useless, but can use 
tlTem by force of will. Malaria off , 6m. Reports every symp- 
tom markedly and promptly relieved. 

G. E., aet. 15, chill every second day at 6 p m Thirst 
variable. Slight hot stage after chill. Sweats during the 
night, profuse; wakes up chilly and gets cold from the sweat 
3rymg up. Feels pretty well between times. Sleepy during 


day of the chill. Lips dry and parched. A constant hacking 
^ €OUgh|^balf m inute guns/, when talkm^and when turning over/ 
s in bedy Malaria off., 6m. Reports a prompt cure 

jEvW E , aet. 56, painsin right sid^m region obdiver^ 
isteadyidull acheMbettSTil&rllndatrngV f hmbbing in scro- 
biculum, lower part of stomach, worse lying down, ^er y/ 
scold hand^uring the da^y anckboth hand^nd feefefare cold/ 
night,/ Skin yellowish. kPile^or many years>: external J 



MALARIA OFF. 


287 


bleeding some, not painful, but unpleasant Worse using 
tobacco ^^Bowels inactiv^ Malaria oiff., 30m. Reports all 
symptoms greatly better, with continuous improvement. 

Dr. B reports that he has been^feeling tired^nd weak^or 
^several days/ No time of aggravation. Weakness as thou^ 
fc had been sick\with los$,.of appetite/ No other symptoms. 
Malaria off , 6m. Improvement set m m less than an hour 
after the one dose At the end of four days he was in usual 
health. 

Mrs B , wife of the above, chilliness, followed by fever. 
Pam in upper left chest through to scapula. Burning m left 
chest Bodily aching Malaria off., 6m. Better two months 
For the past six days has burning of external chest. Darting 
in left chest during fever. Burning begins about 10 A. M., 
lasting during the heat of the day Occipital pain begins with 
fever, worse at night, lying on back, lying on left side. Throb- 
bing all over. Malaria off , 50m.** All symptoms > for nearly 
five months, wSen she received a dose of the 5cm., with 
amelioration Soon after this the patient had la grippe. 

STOOLS. -For the past four days cramping^ m lower abdo- 
men, with urging, which comes on after rising in the morning. 
Four or five actions daily of thin mucus with bloody spots,*' a 
t^spoonful, no fecal matter. Urging and tenesmus each half 
Sour until bedtime Muscular stinging over body while strain- 
ing at stool when mucus passes. Desire for stool returns as 
soon as he sits down. Walking > pain and the desire for 
stool Stinging sensation all over at times, if he gets too 
warm from exercise, ‘^esire to bi^ear the fire./ 

STOMACH. — Faint, erhpty feeling in stomach at times, day 
and night, sensation as though he had not had food,"****^ 

ABDOMEN. — Pains are >\from walking abou^ 

BACK. — ^Pam m small of back, as though strained; > when 
sitting, < walking or lifting. 

NECK. — Pain in back of neck, as though head was being 
pulled forward. 

LIMBS* — Pam in legs, better from motion. Feet go to sleep 
while sitting. 

M0DTH."^ gitter taste / xDryness./ 

APPETITE. — None, u hirst for a little^ very hour/ caused by. 
\ drynes^n the mo uth./ 



288 


MALARIA OFF 


GENERAL,— W eakness as though from a spell of sickness 
‘ JJo desir^^to Tie^^wij^during dayy \Desire^to walk about,/ 
Rhus tox , 50m., was given two days ago, with no >, except- 
ing pains in legs. All other symptoms unchanged ^^dalarla J 
6m / 

In less than a half hour after taking the dose the bad taste 
in mouth, urging to stool and weak sensation were better 
Improvement uninterrupted, no more trouble with stool until 
the fourth day, he had some urging to stool while moving 
about, but the stool was normal. Another dose of same 
cleared up the case fully 

Mrs. R , aged 45, weighing 245 pounds;, could scarcely walk/ 
or get into a buggy for two years from the effects of rheuma- 
fisman her bact^nd hmbs^^ Malaria lx three or four times a 
day. In one week she could walk as well as ever and has no 
rheumatism or lameness since. 

Mr. S , foreman of a large saw mill, has been afflicted with 
^rheu matisrnjfpr years^ , stiff neck:, and right arm and shoulder 
n^T^lind painfffl. He wished to keep it from his chest and 
Heart Malaria lx, every two hours^ when better every three 
hours. In three days he was better and could turn his neck 
and use his arm fairly well. One week later gave him two 
drams more of Malaria, to be taken six hours apart. He has 
not had any rheumatic troubles since that time. 

Mr. C , proprietor of two large saw mills, one in Arkansas, 
where he passes part of his time (and frequently gets wet), 
has been afflicted with so-called^ gout/ I found it was of a 
k rheumatic nature/ (caused by'^malaria) and made < by Qui- 
/ > gin e ^ and: sgxternal applications, i gave him Malaria lx. In 
* three days he was better and did" not have half as many pains 
. o r aches. He took only four drachms, from three to six hours 
apart, and has not had any rheumatic or gouty pains since. 

Mr. I. S , aged 55, a veteran and pensioner of the civil war, 
emaciated, bronzed in color, had not been able to walk for 
years. After repairing his heart, chest, stomach, curing his 
piles and regulating his bowels he was content, yet he could 
not walk. His back had been injured in the army, and his 
limbs would not move at will and he could not walk alone or 
get o ut o f a chair. I gave him for a week Ruta graveolens and 



MALARIA OFF 


289 


Rhus tox,, of each the first cent., three hours apart This > 
for a time Concluding ^is trouble Was due tc%f^heumatism/ 
'paused b 3 %nalariay gave him lx three or four times a day. In 
one week he rode to my house and came up and down steps 
alone. I gave him two drachms more and m five days he came 
to my office, having walked nearly three miles that morning 
alone. I need not say I was surprised, could hardly believe it 
was all due to Malaria But it certainly was, as nothing else 
was taken or applied, has gained flesh and seems at least ten 
years younger 

MIND. — Feels stupid and sleepy. 

(Very thoughtful ) 

HEAD. — Feeling as though he would become dizzy. 

Waving dizziness on falling asleep. 

Dizziness on rising from reclining position. 

Dull aching through forehead and temples. 

(Dull headache, dizzy and drowsy ) 

Intense headache, as though head would burst. 

Vertigo on rising in the morning and on rising from stoop- 
ing; must steady himself before starting to walk. 

^Frequent attacks Of headache/ especially m the forehead. 

in occiput^egins with fever^i, worse at night, < lying 
OT back or on left side 

Throbbing pain all over head. 

^ertigc^ confused sensation, worse by walking, turning 
around, rising or stooping 

Headache in forehead and down cheek bones. 

Headache beginning m forehead, extending all over head. 

EYES. — Aching above inner angle of r. eye. 

Eyes feel heavy and sleepy. 

(Eyes weak, blurring, reading difficult/) 

^Eyes buriji^like 'cbal^of fire./ 

EARS. — Drawing pain in r. external ear. 

NOSE. — A kind oficoncentration>of feeling, at root of nose/ 

. ja* I wmiiiiin vr A. / "*( - *■ 

and just above, as though I should have a severe cold like nay- 
fever. 

XSatarrhlihard^ yellow lumpg^from posterior nares( nose 
\^stopp'S'*1i psfet times^bloody discharg^rom nos^^ornmgs/ 

FACE. — Ijching on r. cheek over malar bone (and various 
parts of face and limbs) ; > by slight rubbing or scratching. 



290 


MALARIA OFF 


Face becomes warm as if flushed, and spreads over body. 
MOUTH.— Pam m upper 1 teeth 

Sensation on point of tongue as if a few specks of pepper 
were there 


■%^liva^^ more prof us^ than usual^ keeps him swallowing 
o ften * 

Had a good night’s rest and felt better and brighter from 
that time (curative) 

Tongue coated slightly yellowish-white. 

(.Bitter taste^j^^rched mouth ^tongue white.*) 

Tongue white, with brown streak down the middle. 

Tongue white and thickly coated. 

Throat dry and sense of slight drawing. 


LipSii^arche(|^njd^ dry / 

Mouth very dry, subjectively/ but really moist. 

Mouth very dry, saliva pasty 
APPETITE. — Wants cold drinks 
Can’t eat anything, vomits everything 
^Craves sour^/ 
lETrsty,’ craves cold water. 

No appetite, aversion to food, thoughts of it sicken. 

Thirsty for lemonade, not so much for water 
Variable, craves potatoes, apples, beefsteak. 

Bitter, nauseating, bad taste in the mouth 
^ Dryn es^^ t root of j:on^ue|’ buccal cavity seems constricted 
ano^ntracted 

STOMACH. — Unusually hearty appetite (for supper). 

Odor from cooking is pleasing, bub^np desire lor dinner^ on 
s hting dowweats a good dmnej^with relish. 

Feels better after eating dinner 
Easy belching, several times, no taste. 

^/^ua lm ish,,^ 

t'^.ljTausea/ 

Rei^hmg and gagging from hawking mucus. 

Nausea contmuousyvomiting bile and retching. 


Throbbing in scrobiculum. 

%Rumblin§{and burnin^n stomachland abdomen./ 

ABDOMEN.^^^se of 

Tired feelingTKrou^Tabdomen and chest. 



MALARIA OFF. 


291 


^^nsation as though he would have a very loose stool (it 
passe"3 off without). 

**”Sensation in spleen as though it would ache. 

Pam in abdomen to r of navel 
Uneasiness in lower abdomen. 

Liver, spleen and kidneys affected 

(Cannot breathe on account of pain in liver, < lying down, 
> hard pressure. ) 

(Drawing or pricking in liver.) 

(Cramping in liver, pain under r. scapula ) 

Great uneasiness through abdomen, a sense of heaviness. 
Constipation. 

^Diarrheay no pain; weakness in bowels. 

Lam in upper abdomen and chest; worse breathing. 

Drawing or contracting feeling in liver, a kind of cramp. 
Steady, dull pains in region of liver > after urinating. 
Aching under right scapulay cramp with soreness and sensi- 
tiveness m region of liver, from pressure < by lying down. 
STOOL AND ANUS*-^Dijj|xhea/ 

Diarrhea m morning, stools thin, yellow, foul. 

URINARY ORGANS. — Urine highly colored, like strong tea. 
Urine high colored, with strong urinal odor, ammoniacal 
^Frequent urination/ urine high color, scanty, v^y strong 
odor, feels oppressed, desires to urinate but cannot. 

RESPIRATORY ORGANS. —Shallow breathing, which seems 
from languor, desire to breathe deep, occasionally. 

» Residence m malarial districts is said to cure phthisis. 

I A consumptive constitution is protected against malaria. 

* (Singing causes some irritation in the throat ) 

CHEST. — Tired feeling through chest and abdomen. 
Constant^acking cough^^half minute guns,* when talking 

anS turning ovei^in bed./ 

* Pain in upper left chest through to scapula; burning in left 
chest 

Burning m chest begins about 10 A. M., continuing through 
the heat of the day. 

Frequent sighing, takes a deep inspiration; restless and 
nervous. ~ 

HEART.^s^hen leaning face on 1. hand, elbow on table, per- 
ceptible feeling, of heart-beatff^through upper body and neck. 



292 


MALARIA OFF. 


NECK AND BACK. — Neck feels tired, with slight aching in 
upper part on moving the head. 

Lumbar region tired as though it would ache 
^Rheumatism pf back and limbs, with lameness.O 
^Stiff neck^ and r. arm and shoulders painful and helpless ) 
(Aching under r scapula, cramping m liver ) 

Back ache/ in lumbar region^ shoots up back; ^orse when/ 
do wn g\worse after walking j^betteriy mg on the jaby 

\^onien/ 

' ^Sn in right side of back, over the region of the posterior 
aspect of the liver and through the right hypochondrmm; the 
achmg is worse while sitting, > from walking slowly. 

Back seems as though it would break Pain goes into the 
hips. 

4packache commencing in small of back about 11 30 A, m. 
for four days; then fever with shortness of breath, headache 
all the time day and night, paroxysm postponing every day. 

UPPER LIMBS. — Chilly sensation m 1 forearm , soon followed 
by chilly feeling m hands and fingers, feet are cold with sen- 
sation as if chilliness were about to creep up the legs; a few 
moments later knees feel cold 


A sense of coldness absconding from body from the legs, 
.Gout# 

^Ximbs get numb and cold. 

Aching in both elbows. 

>^hin^ji^nd tired, feelin§(in wrists J^tired ach^n the hands^ 
Aras tired 

Han ds seem to be se mi-pa ralyzed, useless, but can use them 
by force of will. 

Very cold hands during the day, hands and feet very cold 
at night. 

LOWER LIMBS. — Pain, upper part of r. ilium. 

%Tired ach^n knees And for some distance above and below. 
Pam top of 1. instep. 

Aching m an old (cured) bunion on 1 foot. 

\Legs w ea r^yfro m a short wall^ 

^OCegs restlessyf^el like stretching^nd moving them./ 

Soles of the feet cold, almost numb. 


painfu&<yrorse^*rwheii ben ding/ apd 

ra ising up/ 



MALARIA OFF 


293 


GENERALITIES. -\General sens^of weariness from a very ^ 
^short walky esp rTirough pelvis, sacral region, and upper 
thighs, .strong desire^p lie down / 

A kind of simmering all through the body. 

Typhoidal, semi-paralytic condition (No. III). 

. Rheumatism, 

Rheumatic paralysis and emaciation. 

Feels very weak and languid, restless, does not want to 
move 

Great weakness as though he had had a long illness, with 
loss of appetite 
Great exhaustion. 

Must have doors and windows open, a close room iiead 
and stomach, and fresh, cool air chills her. 

SKIN. — (Skin, eyes, and face very yellow ) 

Skin dry all over; no sweat at ail 

SLEEP. — Impelled to he down, and on falling asleep a sense 
of waving dizziness passes all over, preventing sleep. 

Gaping, yawning, and desire to stretch. 

\Sleep>y jails aslee^while reading/ 

Sleep all the time, can go to sleep while standing. 
\^Sleepy/and drowsy/but sleep does not relieve, wakes up 
weary and unrefreshed. 

"TFEVER.— (When in open air seems cold and shakes inside 
till she fairly cramps ) 

" Coldness ascending over body from legs. 

Face feels warm as if flushed, also head; spreads over body 
as if feverish. 

A feeling as if he would have a chill, then as if he would be- 
. comeleverisli, though neither is very ma rked . 

^ 'Jfntermittent^ quotidian jistertian {No 11). 

Chills for one hour followed by fever for six hours (No. II 
give^^o a consumptive patient, whom it cured). 

"" (Ague every other dayT weak and drowsy between attacks ) 
^umb chillsjj^ 

Shooti ng pain^-^ll ove^injA^ muscles j^bones^aA^ 

\Hipi feve^uring nighy also in the morning. 

FtHse 'QS; sliin tot and dry; restlessness most marked in 
arms, tossing them about. %yery stretchj^nd yawning.^ 



294 


MALARIA OFF 


Chilly, With flushes of heat, and great desire for fresh air, 
unable to breathe on account of pain in liver < lying down; 

> from hard pressure over region of liver 
.Slight fever ^for several hours^n the evening,/ raves, sings, 
anTtalks all night, restless. 

yChill begins about noon, every other day. Icy cold from 
hips down, chilly all over; fever worse about the trunk, and 
slight general sweat 

Feels languid, weak and drowsy during apyrexia; unable to 
be up 

Flashes of heat all the time; offensive breath. 

Sweats very easily and profuse on least exertion 
Feels malarious, depressed and languid. 

Dumb ague, chills every week. 

Weakness in the morning, vertigo and nausea. Eyes feel 
heavy 

Coldness and internal chilliness in the open air. 
i^£hin^all over bod:^,especiall3^ m arms and legs^ chilly 
sensation, then breaks out in slight perspiration; frequent re- 
curring attacks. 

^Chilly every second day followed by heat; profuse sweat 
during the night; wakes up chilly and takes cold as perspira- 
tion ceases. 

STOOL.-^Hemorrhoid^or many years|,external b^eedin^; no 
j pam b ut vefjMinpleasant 

For past four years cramping in lower abdomen < after 
riding in the morning. 

N^iarrh£a^<^ur or five motion|^ail;^£f thii^bloodjj^streaked / 
^ucus^o fecal m attey 

LIMBS IN GENERAL.-^Sensatioi>ipf fatigu^in upper extremi- 
ties first; later extending to lower extremities and entire sys- 
tem. 

"Dull paiif^nthe muscles of the back; lumbar region/ uneasy; 
tired. 

Burning sensation, apparently nervous, which is associated 
with intense fatigue in the extremities. 

\Dull, aching pair^n left sciatic nervef^and on outer surface 

Sensation of burning flush, rising from knees to throat, but 
without sweat; relieved by lying down. 



MEDORRHINUM. 


295 


Dull pain in right hip with soreness and tenderness on pres 
sure in the sheaths of the muscles about the hip and tendons 
of muscles of the thigh. 

Waking at midnight, feet extremely hot with burning palms 
and soles, this was followed by profuse sweat on lower part of 
body, more marked on flexor surfaces and on the back. 

Drawing, shooting pain on left hypochondrmm, extending 
down left leg. 

Arms feel heavy 

Burning of hands and feet; aching of hands and arms. 

NERVES. — Great restlessness all night, worse towards morn- 
ing. ^Could not find a position in which he could rest/ 

HYtoCHDNDRIA.— D ull, throbbing pain m hepatic region for 
three days, relieved by pressure of corset and by lying on the 
painful side. 


MEDORRHINUM. 

Potencies made from the gonorrheal virus. There are two 
preparations; the acute and chronic From the virus of the 
acute stage to the chronic, or gleet stage, both of which are 
supposed to contain the gonococcus. 

Introduced by Swan. 

Provings by Swan, Ren Dell, C H Allen, Finch, Norton, 
Frost, Farrington, Cleveland, Laura Morgan, Berridge, Wil- 
der, Higgins, Ostrom, Nichols, Peace, Sawyer, Carr, Bigler. 

Macdonald, in Great Britain, and Ncegerath and Lydston, m 
America, have published fatal cases, and the effects of the 
poison The symptoms produced by the virus m acute cases 
have been included in the pathogenesis, just as the toxic symp- 
toms of Arsenic, Mercurius, Opium and Plumbum are included 
in the pathogenesis. The potentizing of the virus has devel- 
oped latent dynamic forces, which is just as effective in homeo- 
pathic practice, prescribed strictly on its symptomatological 
basis as any other remedy. If the symptoms of the patient 
call for this remedy it should be prescribed with the same con- 
Mence as any other in the Materia Medica, entirely irrespec- 
tive of the sycotxc history in the case. Like every other no- 



296 


MEDORRHINUM 


sode, It should be prescribed according to its strict indications, 
just as we prescribe Arsenic, Opium or Sulphur, irrespective 
of its origin or the diagnosis 

We append the following graphic description on the effects 
of 

MIND* — i Great weakness of memory 

II Dulness of memory and ^esire to procrastinate, because 
business seemed so lasting, or as if it never could be accom- 
plished. 

1 Entirely forgot what she had^read, even previous line. 

I Forgetfulness of names, later of words and initial letters. 

I Cannot remember names, has to ask name of her most in- 
timate friend, forgets her own 

Cannot spell right , wonders how the word ‘ ‘ how ” is spelled 

Reads a letter and thinks the words look queer and are 
spelled wrong. 

II Time moves too slowly. 

1 Dazed feeling, a far off sensation, as though things done 
today occurred a week ago 

Momentary loss of thought, caused by sensation of tightness 
in brain. 

I Loses constantly the thread of her talk 

II In conversation he would occasionally stop, and on resum- 
ing make remark that he could not think what word he wanted 
to use. 

I Seems to herself to make wrong statements, because she 
does not know what to say next, begins all right but does not 
know how to finish, weight on vertex, which seems to affect 
mind. 

1 ^eat difficulty in stating her symptoms, loses herself and 
has to be asked over again. 

Difficulty in concentrating his thoughts or mind on abstract 
subjects. 

Could not read or use mind at all from pam in head. 

Thinks some one is behind her, hears whispering; sees faces 
that peer at her from behind bed and furniture. 

Persons come in, look at her, whisper, and say “come.'* 

fT)ne night saw large people in room; large rats running; 
felt a delicate hand smoothing her head from front to back. 



MEDORRHINUM. 


297 


11 Fears he is going to die. 

Is sure that she is worse, knows she is not going to live, 
cannot see any improvement, even when it is pointed out; has 
no fear of death, speaks calmly about it, and gives directions 
as to the dispositon of her affairs 

I Sensation as if all life was unreal, like a dream 

1 Wild and desperate feeling, as of incipient insanity. 

I Cannot speak without crying. 

Tendency to suicide^, gets up in night and takes his pistol, 
but his wife prevents him 

II Is in a great hurry, when doing anything is in such a hurry 
that she gets fatigued. 

Strange exhilaration of spirits 

Alternation of happiness and gloominess. 

Spirits in the depths, weighed down with heavy, solid gloom 
> by torrents of tears. 

I Is always anticipating, feels most matters sensitively before 
they occur and generally correctly. 

1 Anticipates death. 

I Dread of saying the wrong thing when she has headache. 

I Everything startles her, news coming to her seems to touch 
her heart before she hears it. 

1 Woke at an early hour with a frightened sensation, as if 
something dreadful had happened; heavy weight and great 
heat in head; could not rest in bed, felt as if she must do some- 
thing to rid her mind of this torture. 

4 Fear of the dark,/ 

Feeling as if he had committed the unpardonable sin and 
waslgoing to hell. 

Pl word or look of seeming harshness puts her in despond- 
ency for hours. 

^Indisposed to work or make mental effort, desire for rest 
and dread of change; noise, confusion, disorderliness of sur- 
roundings distressing; depression and much anxiety, especially 
after sleep, irritable if the room is not light enough to make 
everything distinct, craving for stimula nts, but cannot endure 
the effects, for they *^use a wild, crazy feeling in brain after 
the first sleep, same^ effect from usmg eyes 
*“ \ljsually de£r^se<J|i^ easily tire(|H^isinclined to any exertioiy* 



298 


MEDORRHINUM 


and yet often unable to keep still, forgetful, unable to think 
connectedly; mind wanders from subject, even in reading; 
cannot think at all if hurried 

Always wakens tired in the morning, hates to do anything 
thSTmust be don^ even nice things, gets nervous and excited 
aboSTidmg ani 3riving"as soon as the time is fixed 

Constant state of anguish Always a feelmg^of impending 
danger, but knows not what. There is no cause for such feel- 
ings, as she is not obliged to do anything when disinclined, is 
so situated that nothing need cause her trouble 
Inability to think continuously, to talk or to listen to talk- 
ing when weary; vacant feeling in head. 

^I^orgetful^ cannot remember the least thing any length of 
time, writes everything down of any importance, cannot trust 
herself "to remember it, great irritability and disgust with life 
The impatience, excitement, wild feelings, the unreal, dazed 
condition, the gloom and fear in the dark, the difficulty of 
^eakingVithout tears, are marked evidence of functional de- 
rangenient of the nervous system 

"Tiedorrhmurn is forgetful of nam^s, words, etc., but instead 
of forgetting occurrences, during certain periods of time, like 
Syphihnum, i^ forgets what it is reading, even to the last line 
read, it cannot concentrate its attention; thinks words spelled 
wrong anh Have no meaning, etc. 

Medorrhinum develops a peculiar sensitivity especially in 
relation to occurrences affecting itself. 

It fe els the evil coming to it, and the bad news before it 
arrives, o f course it is selfish, and it is easily hurt by a fiairsh 
word . - - » ' 

'"TiT' is also'^ntrospective/^self-accusative#' remorseful / Time 
moves slowly to it, therefore it is hurried. 

We find a dazed condition from the loss of the thread of 
thought, which annoys and causes a dread of saying the wrong 
thing, and a difficulty in stating symptoms. 

It is always anticipating, fearing evil will happen, loss of 
re^on"br suicide. 

fea^^^ it Kas^ committed the unpardonable sin, and cares 
little for the result, because of TH^eetKing, restless, uneasy, 
unbalanced nerves. 



MEDORRHINUM 


299 


Feeling of desperation, did not care if he went to heaven 
or hell 

I Cross through day, exhilarated at nicrht yvants to play. 

1 frnta ted at little" things 

Nerve trembling, with worry 

[Very impatient,-^ 

Reading and writing make her nervous and enrage her. 

\Grea t selfishness/ 

Time" moves so slowly that things done an hour ago appear 
to have occurred a year since, asked the time of day, and in 
five minutes insisted that half an hour had elapsed and could 
not believe it had not till she had seen the watch. 

HEAD.~^ y|ert igo when stooping, several times during day 
sudden atta^CTeemingly in vertex, with danger of falling; 
things did not seem to go round, but there was a sensation 
and fear of falling, only slightly > lymg down, < on move- 
ment; always woke with it, as if intoxicated, walks zigz^ag; 
m occiput extending to vertex, with sensation of enlargement 
of occiput. 

Head light, not exactly dizzy 

Sensation of tightening m head, causing intense vertigo. 

Tensive pains m head, with a wild sensation as if she would 
go crazy, with a sensation as if she would do something des- 
perate in spite of herself, afraid to be alone. 

i Intense itching of scalp, 

(3reaFquan^^ 

Hair lustreless, dry and crispy 

firyne^ss and of hair; it will not remain 

Jirushed. 

Great deal of fugitive itching in scalp. 

Sharp I tching of scalp, whiskers and eyebrows. 

Severe pain at the base of the brain, running to the vertex, 
in two cases suffering from retroflexion. 

\ Frontal headache / with a , feeling of a tight band 
acrcis'"lore1iea^^^^^^^^^^ Tma3%rward , as if front half of 

brain would come through forehead, as if skin was drawn 
tight; with fluent coryza, with pressure back of eyes, as if they 
would be forced out; extending over brain to neck. 

^rain seems wear:^ y |lightes t sound annoys and fatigues her . | 




300 


MEDORRHINUM. 


Neuralgia first m 1 temple and parietal bone, then in r , 
next day in 1 eye 

Wakes with headache over eyes and in temples, < from 
sunlight 

Headache in r. temple, a good deal of aching over 1 eye. 
Nocturnal enuresis. 

Neuralgic headache in 1 temple and around middle part of 
cranium, at times terribly severe, with sensation of great 
weight and pressure in vertex, has lasted twenty-four hours 
and is gradually increasing in violence 

Pam in centre of brain, in evening sharp pain through 
temples, pains commence and cease suddenly. 

Heat and throbbing in temporal region both sides, 
rain exceedingly tender and all mental work irksome. 

Pam in 1. parietal bone when the wind blows on it 

Pam circling through head and around crown 

Terrible pains all through head in every direction, with con- 
tinuous and violent vomiting, followed by aching m sacrum 
and down back of legs to feet 

Constant headache, < while coughing, light (through the 
eyes) seems to hurt it. 

Intense headache for three days, with inflammation of eye. 

Headache and diarrhea from motion of ears. 

V He adache with menses./ 

tSITT^SElc^ m a broad ring around head. 

Intense cerebral suffering, causing continual rubbing of head 
in pillow, ’rolling from side" To side. "" -- * - - 

^^ull pain in cerebellum. 

Intense burning pain m head, <C m cerebellum. 

Tensive pain in 1. side of head as far back as parietal emi- 
nence and to middle of crown 

Tensive pains in head as if she would go crazy, could not 
read or use mind 

Sensation as of three points of tension in head, in centre of 
each hemisphere and cerebellum; as if large cords were drawn 
to each from every part of lobes and cerebellum; extremely 
painful, caused a disposition to run wildly through streets 
tearing hair; seemed as if tensive p ai ns would brea k, when 
sMderdy'*tbey*^^ sensaS^^'paS^ from 



MEDORRHINUM 


301 


centres to circumferences, when reached, the tensive pains 
began again 

Sensation of tightness and contraction, extending from eyes 
an’ST "meeting in brain, extends down whole length oFspine. 
*“^Achmg in occiput and medulla, pain sharp on motion, 
drowsy 

Aching and exhausted feeling m cerebellum and medulla, 
with a subjective tenderness of spine from cerebellum to kid- 
neys 

Aching pain in base of brain, with swelling of cords of neck. 

burning glow in cerebellum and down spine 

Head feels heavy and is drawn backwards. 

^Severe pain/’m, back of headh.s though it had been struck; 
pain spread over to front, with severe neuralgic pain in 1. eye; 
headache lasted all night, eye bloodshot. 

Pam in back of head and in r eye 

Simmering in head, does not know whether it is heard or 
felt 


Sensation as if occipital protuberances were enlarged. 

Hair lustreless, dry and crispy 

Dryness and electrical condition of hair, it will not remain 
brushed. 

Intense itching of scalp, quantities of dandruff. 

E^TaSB §IGfit:-When' eyes were ’stuCfelt as if pulling 
out of head to one side or other; when open all things seemed 
to flicker. 

A blur over things; numberless black, sometimes brown 
spots dancing over her book, sees objects double, things look 
very small; sees imaginary objects. 

Feeling as if she stared at everything, as if eyes protruded. 

^Aching in e^eballs^/ pressure and heat in vertex, a tendency 
to sKTeyesT***^^^^ 

1 Neuralgic pain in eyeballs, when pressing eyelids together; 
< when rolling them. 


.Continuous watering 


indn 


and sensation of 


sand unHeFIiHs" 


and irritation, and sensation of sticks in 
eyes, nds and especially inner canthi, redness and dryness of 
ii3s7cong"esti^b^^^^^ oT'scl erotic ahcfsensation of a cool wind blow- 
ing in eyes, especially inner canthi. 



302 


MEDORRHINUM. 


4 Ptosisj bf outer end of both upper lids, particularly I, re- 
qmSS^^ertion to open them 

I Swelling of upper lids, soreness and smarting of edges. 

I DeciSed tendency to irrit^ion of edges of lids 

I Pulling pain in 1 lower lid from outer canthus; could see 
lid twitch between these points 

Hardness of upper lid as if it had a cartilage in it 

Eyebrows itch, brows and lashes fall off 

Swelling under eyes 

Sometimes cannot raise lid of right eye after being asleep, 
cough when tired or nervous. ^ ~ 

Miss X , 23, hadii^chronic bl eghy itis^ince eleven. Her suf- 
fering was intense.'‘T:ight, especially gas-light, was intoler- 
abk, and^J:his prevented" her from going into socm^ She 
could not read in the evening, and in the morning the lids 
would be closed, and she suffered much on getting them sepa- 
rated There was much discharge Before coming under me 
she had been under strict homeopathic treatment all the time 
I remembered treating her father for go no rrhea before his 
marriage, and I suspected the taint had reappeared m this 
form Medorrhinum was given in high potency, single doses 
repeated as the effect of each wore off, and she was entirely 
cured. — Deschere, 

EARS AND HEARING.^Nearly total deafness^f both ears, 
with very little noise; ha3"^to use a trumpet 
^n*l^ r tial or tr ansi ent deafness; pulsation in ears. 

II Child hard of hearing for six days 

Singular sensation of deafness from one ear to the other, as 
if a tube went through head, while yet there was an over 
acuteness of hearing. 

Is sure he hears people m conversation, but on carefully 
watching, finds that sounds have reference to arterial pulsa- 
tion, but where he cannot discover. 

When whistling, the sound in ears is double, with peculiar 
vibration as when two persons whistle thirds. 

Noises seemingly in mastoid cells, frying and hissing. 

Pam passes up Eustachian tube and out of both ears with a 
ticking sensation. 

""^TlTter sleeping feels as though parchment was drawn over 
ear, on which she was lying. 



MEDORRHINUM. 


803 


Sensation of a worm about an inch long crawling in r. ear, 
and as if it commenced boring in anterior wall of auditory 
canal. 

"Etching, aching, or boring pam in 1 ear. 

Aching in cartilage of ear when lying on it at night 

Soreness to touch of r concha 

Quick, darting pains in r ear, from without inward, pains 
followed each other in close succession. 

Ringhole in 1 ear sore and almost gathered. 

NOSE AND SMELL. — In tens e itching in nose, internally near 
point, had to rub all the time. 

Very great burning in both nostrils when breathing through 
them 

Coldness of end of nose. 

Entir e los^of smell for several days. 

Sor^ess of outer wing (insid^"^f 1 nostril. 

\ Nose constantly running / 

^fasaTcal^rh, with continual running down throat. 

Sensation of action in bones, obstruction at root of nose as 
if mucous membrane was hypertrophied 

Nose goes to sleep. 

1 1 Epistaxis 

Nose inflamed, swollen 

Catarrh of posterior nares. 

Posterior nares obstructed, > by hawking thick, greyish 
mucus, followed by bloody mucus 

""Tl^av^ffueht coryza, with hard headache all day in frontal 
region, < 10 30 a m 

Soreness and crawling feeling as of a centipede in 1. nostril 
in morning 

Nose stopped up, cannot breathe through it m the morning; ^ 
^snuffles in children fiot relieved by other remedies. 

**T?iSLCE. — 1 1 Great palFor, yellowness^ of f ace, particularly 
around ey^es^as if occurring from a bruise (greenish yellow); 
yellow band across forehead close to hair. 

Greenish, shining appearance of skin. 

Blotches on face . 

neck. 

ever blisters/near corner of r. upper lip, sm all but very 
sore. 



304 


MEDORRHINUM. 


Enormous fever sore on lower lip near 1. commissure 
Sweat of face , on upperlip. 

ff Neuralgia of r. upper and lower jaws, extending to temple 
Swelling in region of 1 submaxillary gland, the size of a 
goose egg, whiskers over tumor came out, softened m centre, 
at times sharp, shooting pains, on being opened discharged a 
large quantity of thin, bloody pus, was opened several times, 
finally the aperture formed raised embankment-like edges, 
the pus burrowed until arrested by clavicle, where it formed 
an enormous swelling (> after Thuja 3m.), the tumors left 
fistulous openings which were a long time in healing 
Face covered with acne, dry herpes, freckles 
IfTendency to stiffness in jaws and tongue 
1 1 Rigidity of muscles of face, especially of lower lip, draw- 
ing it up tight to teeth ?^aws stiff/unable to open them, de- 
glutition nearly impossible; throat filled with saliva. 

Swelling of submaxillary glands. 

Sensation of constriction and aching in throat and jaws 
when weary 

TEETH MD GUMS. — 1| Teeth have\serrated edges/or are 
chalky and easily decay (Syphilinum; teeth are cupped, decay 
at edges of gums and break off). 

*Sore teeth, particularly eyeteeth, feel sore and soft. 
\Yel lowness of teetE/ 

n Hard swelling on r. upper jaw, as if in socket of a tooth 
gone since four years; intense neuralgic pains extending to 
whole head, causing sleeplessness, severe pains all over head, 
with external heat 
H Tale gums./ 

TASTE AND TONGUE. — Taste: coppery on rising, disagree- 
able; bad in morning 

Tongue coated : brown and thick, thickly in morning, with 
bad tas]^ white at base, the rest red; white, with papillae 
sEowmg through. 

^Tongue bhstered. ^ 

Srnair^^sTp^ules (canker sores) on edge, tip and under 
tongue, very painful; also inside lips and in throat. 

MOUTH. — Foul breath in morning 
Dryness of mouth; feels burnt. 



MEDORRHINUM. 


805 


II Very sore mouth, ulcers on tongue and in buccal cavity, 
like blisters. 

II Blisters on inner surface of lips and cheeks, skin peeling 
off in patches. 

Excitement of submaxillary glands, pouring out saliva pro- 
fusely. 

^rmgy mucus comes out of mouth during sleep 
THROAT. — Irritation in throat as if scraped 
Pharynx inflamed and feels very stiff and sore, swallowing 
painful 

Great dryness of throat, with swollen glands 
Back part of throat constantly filling with mucus from pos- 
terior nares. 

"'Sore throat and cold in head > by salt water bathing. 

Soreness of throat, hurts to swallow, sensation of lump in 
larynx, deglutition painful, raw, irritated, as if scraped. 

Expectoration greenish yellow, catarrhal cold of the head 
wi^lr burning of septum of the hose to bronchi, complete loss 
of taste and smell — cannot taste tobacco 
APPETITE, THIRST, DESIRES, AVERSIONS. Appetite in- 
creased; ravenous hunger immediately after eating 
i Absolute los^f appetitelfthirst./ 

Enormously thirsty, even dreams that she is drinking. 
Insatiate cravmgTor liquor, when before she hated it. 

II Great craving for salt. 

Craving for sweets, hard, green fruit, ice, sour things; 
oranges, ale 

Appetit e ppory Can digest but a limited amount of food. 
Belching, hiccougli^nausea and vomiting H Hiccough 
Nausea, with frontal headache; after drinking water;” after 
dinner, always after eating; before eating 
Vomiting of thick mucus and bil e, ^ with out nausea. 

II Violent r^chmg anS vomiting for forty-eight hours; first 
glaiiymucus7tEeh"frothy and watery, a1nd*lastly coffee grounds, 
accompanied by intense headache, with great despondency 
and sensation of impending death, during paroxysm was con- 
tinually praying. 

tasting bitter and sour, 


Vomiting black bile without nausea, 
witlTconsiSeraETem^^ 


21 



-306 


MEDORRHINUM 


SCROBICULUM AND STOMACH.— 1| Sensation in pit of stomach 
as of a paper of pins that seemed to force themselves through 
flesh, causing her to rise and double up and scream, pins seem 
to come from each side. % Abscess of liver J 

A sick or gnawing feeling, not relieved by eating or drinking. 

Trembling at pit of stomach. 

Sometimes a burning (like a flame) m pit of stomach, as if 
heart palpitated there. 

Dull pain in epigastric region, deep in. 

Feeling of a lump in stomach after eating. 

Throbbing in sides of stomach. 

Clawing in stomach, < drawing up knees 

II Cramps in stomach as from wind. 

11 Intense pain m stomach and upper abdomen, with a sen- 
sation of tightness. 

**§ensation of sinking and agonizing sickness at stomach, 
with a desire to tear something away 

Sensation of nausea from using eyes or when weary. 

After a hearty meal, sensation as though stomach pressed 
upon a sore spot at left side 

Hypochondria. Terrible pains in liver, thought she would 
die, they were so acute. 

Bilious coliywith frequent vomiting and nausea; diarrheic 
stools, chilliness and perspiration on face and neck. 

|( Congestion of liver. 

i Gas ping pain in tfver and spleen. 

II ISmmmg^fieat around the back, like a coal of fire. Abscess 
of liver. 

II Severe pain from abscess extending to r. shoulder and 
down elbow. 

II Throbbing and thumping in region of suprarenal capsule, 
seeming to come from abscess or sore spot just below fifth rib, 
r. side; creeping chills in region of r. kidney, throbbing, con- 
tracting, drawing and relaxing as if caused by icy cold insects 
with claws. 

ABDOMEN. — 1 Intense agonizing pain in solar plexus; surface 
cold; eructations tasting of sulphuretted hydrogen and, after 
eating, of ingesta; applied r. hand to pit of stomach and 1. to 
lumbar region. 



MEDORRHINUM 


307 


Pressure in lower abdomen as of a heavy weight 
A feeling as of a tumor m r side of abdomen 
Tensive pain in r side of abdomen, as of a hard, biconvex 
body, with heat and gnawing aching pain, continued a short 
time, it was between spine of ilium and recti muscles. 

Darting pain from centre of r ovarian region to lower edge 
of liver 

]1 Ascites, abdomen greatly distended, palpitation showed 
water; urine very scanty and high colored. 

Beating as of a pulse in abdomen vertically. 

Left inguinal glands sensitive and slightly swollen. 

Cutting in r. lower abdomen running into r spermatic cord, 
r. testis very tender 

\ Bearing-down sensation in abdomen and pelvis upon stand- 
ing or walking, and after movement of bowels 
^Sensation of ^want of poweiMn rectum Accumulation of 
fecal matter at times which seems impossible to pass 
STOOL AND RECTUM. — Bilious diarrhea, verging on dysen- 
tery, with mucous stools. 

Pams of most intense kind (threatening cramps) in upper 
abdomen (darting and tearing pains) coming on at stool, 
sTool diarrheic, thin and hot, but not copious, after "stool, pro- 
found weakness and mild cramp in 1. calf 

Profuse bloody discharges from rectum, sometimes in large 
elated masses, followed by shivering. 


41 Blackstool J 
llWriite diarrhea 


Stools tenacious, claylike, sluggish, cannot be forced, from 
a sensation of prolapsus of rectum 

[["Can only pass stool by leaning very far back, very pain- 
ful, as if there was a lump on posterior surface of sphincter; 
so painful as to cause tears. 

I Constriction and inertia of bowels with balMike stools . 

I I Cliild, aet. 15 months, brought on a pmowtoc^ ap- 
parently dead; eyes glassy, set, could not find pulse, but felt 
heart beat, mnning from anuS^reemsl||^ellow ^h in , horribly 

^offensive stooj^/ 

iTBaSyTa^ 7 months, after summer complaint, great ema- 
ciation, diarrhea green, watery, slimy, yellow, curdled, like 



308 


MEDORRHINUM. 


boiled potatoes chopped up with greens^ thin, cream colored, 
watery, smelling like rotten eggs, stools pass involuntarily; 
apparently lifeless, except that it rotates head on pillow 

Cholera infantum with opisthotonos, vomiting and watery 
diarrhea, profuse discharge of blood and pus^ 

Sharp, needlelike pains in rectum 

1 1 Painful attacks of piles, not bleeding, hot swelling of 1. 
side of anus, pin worms. 

Oozing of moisture from anus, fetid like fish brine. 

Sycosis of the rectum, seven cases, three in women and four 
m men, thin ichorous discharge from rectum, producing very 
mtense itching and burning, which prevents sleep, worse the 
first part of the night, on^case m a man hadTTo use Opium 
suppositories in order to sleep. The rectal discharge in one 
case produced b liste rs on healthy flesh where it touched, 
there is also a full, stuffed feeling in the rectum. 

Patient suffering withi^ infantile diarrhea which persistently 
relapsed despite most careful prescribing Remembering the 
father’s history whom he had treated for gonorrhea a year 
and a half before the patient was born, Medorrhmum was 
given with a perfect cure 

URINARY ORGANS.-^^Intense renal colicy^ severe pain in ure- 
ters, with sensation as of passage of calculus; during kidney 
attack, great craving for ice 

Dull pinching pain in region of suprarenal capsules at 11 
A. M.; fingers cold at same time; great pressure in bladder, 
greater than amount of urine warrants, urine scanty and high 
colored. 

II IP ain in renal region, profuse urination relieves. 

II Very distinct bubbling sensation in r kidney; sensation of 
three bubbles in r. renal region, moving like bubbling in water, 
causing faintness; deathly feeling in kidneys, with great de- 
pression of spirits, similar to effect of cold settling in renal 
region, prostration after urination. 

1 Urine high colored. 

'^ih- iii'in I iiiinr tin -'iriiinrr u r w i 

A child, severe attack of ^ystitis^ with light colored urine 
filled with mucus ; \^treme paT^ n ^^ urinatin g: ; ^ end 

of penis inflamed; analysis gave albumen, phosphates and 

U.W 1*4 111. H-wr-ir-- vv •- «« » « t. 

triple phosphates. 



MEDORRHINUM, 


309 


Urine watery, colorless 

After urinating, great coldness and shivering. 

Burning on urination, like incipient gonorrhea. 

I Strong smelling urine. 

II Urine covered with a thick greasy pellicle. 

II Nocturnal urination entirely ceased, the chamber empty 
in morning, a thing unknown for years. 

II Painful tenesmus of bladder and bowels when urinating. 

1 1 Passes an enormous quantity of high colored, strong smell- 
ing urine in bed every night, thinks it is m afterpart of night, 
as he IS always wet m the morning, overwork and too much 
heat, or being m cold, aggravates this condition 

Debility after prolonged or complete urination 

Syncope after urination. 

Intensely yellow urine. 

In urinating very slow stream, with sharp, cutting pains 
transversely across root of penis, once flow intermitted, no 
burning; pains come^ on just as last drops are voided. 
"nrfDTabetic condition; profuse and frequent urination. 

Almost constant desire to urinate; if there be any delay, an 
intensely nervous sensation, with sometimes burning and 
sometimes chilliness all over body. Urine dark and scanty. 

Frequent urination with slight burning at the meatus; dull 
heavy ache in the region of the prostate, marked m two cases; 
very sore in perineum extending to rectum; frenum red and 
swollen in three cases Red vesicles on the glans penis that 
have a burning itching sensation, very irritable. 

\ Urinate s 
worse at oT 

^ S ycotic warts cured by\one dose^ after nine months careful 
treatment had failed. He contracted sycotic gonorrhea De- 
cember, 1886, was nearly cured. In May, 1887, another 
sycotic attack, with chancroids The ulcers were all over 
prepuce, and as they improved the warts began to grow all 
over glans, back of corona, inside of prepuce and frenum; 
^normous seed wart^ the head of penis was two or three 
times natural size; the warts were very moist, and secreted a 
yellowish, stink ing flmH, and bled very easily, and the odor 
was very perceptible in a room with him, but his general 


every half hour/ urgent, \can’t wait a moment/ 

^ I 111. I ' ^ 

during the menstrual period. 



310 


MEDORRHINUM. 


health was much improved. From May 26th he had Merc, 
sol , Nit ac , Sulph., Coralhum, Cinnab , Silic , Thuj., Phos. 
acid, Sabin , Staphis — all m high potencies, but got no bet- 
ter March 7th, 1888, Dr W. P Wesselhoeft advised Medor- 
rhinum, gave cm. In a week he was better, discharge and 
odor gone In two weeks warts were about one-third their 
size on March 7th, and in six weeks were entirely gone 

MALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — Nocturnal emissions, followed by 
great weakness and miserable feeling all day 
^Emissions during sleep/ watery, causing no stiffness of 
linen, transparent, consistence of gum arabic mucilage, too 
thick to pour, and voided with difficulty, thick, with threads 
of white, opaque substance 

ll^Impotencej/ 

II Gonorrheal flow thin, transparent, mixed with opaque, 
whitish mucus, stains linen yellow. 

II Intense and frequent erections day and night. 

||\Pains along urethra while urinating, drawing burning. 

II Gonorrhea for ten months, during eight months mostly 
suppressed by drugs and injections; for past two months flow 
persists, watery, transparent, but acrid and abundant, mixed 
with creamy liquid, stains linen yellow brown, pain at end of 
penis during urination, since third month of infection had 
heavy, drawing, wandering pains in r. arm, r. hip and 1. calf, 
< damp weather. 

[| Gleety^ go norrheal discharge for twenty years, urine stains 
c j[oth e s^^^ a dirtv^ow n. discharges extremely slow, sometimes 
it takes hal f an hour to empty bladder, leaving him in a weak 
condition; during urination, painful rectaTtenesmus; chilliness 
when "btadder is too full, > by urination , if he urinates after 
getting warm in bed, has to unnate every hour rest of night; 
faint, indefinite sense of chilliness, followed by frequent calls 
to urinate, urine being hot, copious and followed by spinal 
chill and incontinence of urine on getting cold. 

II Burning in meatus during urination, and a feeling of sore- 
ness through whole urethra, also after urinating, a feeling as 
if something more remained in urethra. 

II Scjanty, yellowish, ^gleety discharge, of many months' 
standing, show ing most pTaTiily in morning, gumming up ori- 
SceT^^^ — ... ^ 



MEDORRHINUM 


311 


l|Profuse» yellow, purulent discharge from urethra, most 
copious in morning 

il Cannot retain urine more than an hour, after 5 or 6 p m, 

II Cannot retain urine through night 

Chancrelike ulcer on prepuce (never had syphilis or gonor- 
rhea), SIX months later there came for several months suc- 
cessive crops of vesicles on prepuce, very sore to touch, which 
soon opened at the tip, and left a little ulcerlike sore lasting a 
few days, a round, clean cut, sharp edged elevation with de- 
pression, however not filled with pus as in genuine chancre. 
Soreness, swelling and dragging of testes 

FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — 1| Great sexual desire after 
menses, in a single woman 

A great deal of pain in 1 ovary, with a sensation as if a sac 
was distended and if pressed would burst, sensation as if 
something was pulling it down, causing it to be sore, pam 
when walking passed to 1. groin, as if leg pushed something, 
with a great amount of heat. 

Left ovary seemed enlarged, with intense heat and severe 
aching pain, could not bear pressure, though it seemed as if 
she must press it, with a burning heat. 

Tense pains passing diagonally in r. ovary, followed by a 
bubbling sensation. 

Intense, excruciating, neuralgic pains in whole pelvic re- 
gion, extending downwards through ovarian region to uterus, 
cuttm^lil^ tears and groans 

*ni\Ulceration^f "necl^of uterus, which looked ragged and 
torn, inflamed and covered with stringy pus, had gonorrhea. 

Distinct soreness and nervous pain in one spot m lower part 
of uterus on 1. side < walking or moving 1. leg 

Pulling and pain m sacrum and pubic region, as if menses 
were coming on. 

’profuse menses^ dark clotted, also bright blood, with faint- 
ness and some j)ain. 

very dark^ stains difficult to wash out 
i^Intense menstrual colicycausmg drawing up to knees, with 
terrible, bearing down, laborhke pains, with pressing of feet 
ga inst support, as in labor. 

A burning pain in lower part of back and hips during 


menses. 



312 


MEDORRHINUM. 


11 After very profuse menses];, neuralgiayfn parox 3 ^sms m head» 
with twitching and drawing in limbs and cords of neck, which 
were like wires, pain in lower abdomen, with profuse, yellow- 
ish leucorrhea 

^Itching of vagina and labia^ thinking of it makes it worse 
Small chancres on edge of r labia (had no sexual inter- 
course for three years, never had venereal disease) 

Short, shooting pains, passing outwards, chiefly in breasts 
Breasts cold as ice to touch, especially nipples (during 
menses), rest of body warm 

Large but not painful swellin^of 1 breast^ 

Hippies sore, sensitive and inflamed 
Breasts and nipples very tender to touch, also inflamed. 
Soreness of nipples, a gummy secretion drying on orifice; 
when picked off nipple bleeds freely. 

Soreness of breasts, very sensitive to touch, at nonmenstrual 
periods 

Peculiar tenderness of breasts. 

A patient had convulsions at every menstrual period; com- 
ing on in the early morning. 

Ulceration and inflammation of os uteri, and chronic intra- 
uterine inflammation. 

^Leucorrheaj^ albuminous, white-of-egg-like consistency. 
Painful hypertrophy of uterus. 

A! ’burning, drawing sensation in uterus after driving, stand- 
ing on feet or when weary 

Dull, aching pain in pelvis from leaning over or if back is 
not supported. 

\ Membranous Dysmenorrhea/ Menstruation was accom- 
panied by terrible pains of a grinding character. SFJpw scanty^ 
and on th e se cond day there was a passage of a firmly organ- 
ize menibrane. The mental symptom was a constant feel- 
ing as if something was behind her. She could not get away 
from that sensation It was of nothing definite, simply some- 
thing terrible behind her, peering over her shoulder, causing 
her to look around anxiously. Under Medorrhinum I found 
many of her symptoms, including the peculiar mental symp- 
tom, and gave it to her. The next period was without pain 
and without membrane. Repeated the remedy and the third 
period was pamjess digzni.-— ‘Close 



MEDORRHINUM. 


313 


Sharp shooting pains like knives, much soreness and tender- 
ness to pressure — the slightest pressure causes her to suffer 
pains for hours, bearing-down sensation, especially in the left 
ovary, relieved by pressing upon abdomen, pains run from 
left ovary to uterus. 

Uterus, subinvoluted, sensitive to slightest pressure, a sen- 
sitive spot above and to the right of the cervix 
\L£UCorrhea/thin, acrid, producing severe pruritus, itching 
intolerable, worse by rubbing, also better by bathmg fre- 
quently with tepid water, it has odor of decayed fish; sharp 
^ins run from uterus to rectum 
Leucorrhea in a pure young girl, aet 13; thick, yellow, pro- 
fuse, running down the clothes to the feet, stiffening the linen 
Sycotic. 

VOICE AND LARYNX. TRACHEA AND BRONCHIA. --Hoarseness, 
especially while reading, with occasional loss of voice. 

Slight hoarseness with hawking up of mucus 
If Choking caused by a weakness or spasm of epiglottis, 
could not tell which, larynx stopped so that no air could enter ^ 
only > by lying on face and protrudifig tongue (Acet. ac.) 
{Asthma: Dr. Miller, Glasgow ) 

At night dryness, soreness and choking very severe; thrust- 
ing tongue in cheek brought on coughing and choking as if 
epiglottis was closed, a tearing sensation as if lining of larynx 
and pharynx had been torn off 

l^ryness of glottiSj^ery annoying, with pain during deglu- 
titi^* great hoarseness. 

****^uring day hoarseness, soreness and elongation of palate. 
Soreness in larynx as if ulcerated 
Larynx feels sore when coughing. 

Tenacious mucus in larynx. 

Sensation of a lump m larynx, severe pain on deglutition. 
I^ronchial catarrh/spreadmg into larynx, swelling of ton- 
sils and glands of throat extended also into ears, causing 
transient deafness 

"^Constricted and frequent swallowing, painful deglutition 
with dyspnea as if caused by something foreign in larynx. 
I ^Coifgh^ harsh, whistling, barkin| ^ croupyi. 

to 'brShe ' de’^^^ wakes gaspmgfor 

breath. 



314 


MEDORRHINUM. 


Difficulty in breathing, with momentary fai ntn ess , very 
marked stuffed feeling in chest made her gasp for breath. 

" "Great oppression of breathing every afternoon about 5 p. 
M. ; sense of constriction 

Has to till lungs, but no power t^ eject air 

Faint suffocative sensation when sitting up in bed, as if 
thorax was full. 

Spasm of glottis, with clucking m throat, air expelled with 
difficulty, but inhaled with ease 

Breath hot, feels so even when breathing through nose 

After a deep inspiration singular piping and croaking in 
bronchia 

COUGH. — Cough from tickling under upper part of sternum. 
Vincessant dry coughX< at night/wakes just as she is fall- 
mg asleep; < from sweet thin§^ 

'""'^^Scking cough, causing darting pains through scapulae 

Dry, hacking cough, with a weak, sinking sensation under 
sternum. 

Severe dry cough, < at night; sensation of a lump; dryness 
and excoriated sensation in glottis, with great hoarseness 
(relieved by Ipec.). 

Terrible, painful cough, as if larynx would be torn to pieces, 
and as if mucous membrane was torn off, with profuse dis- 
charge of viscid, greyish mucus, mixed with blood 
yCo ugb^eep and hollow^like coughing in a barrel; bronchial 
tubes appear to be very much enlarged and cough spasm 
causes a flabby feeling, as if lining membrane was a loose fold 
of tissue. 

S0reat rattlingiOf mucus/which appears to below down in 
chest, while cough does not seem to reach there, but only to 
throa t pit, consequently hard cough does not reach phlegm 
unless he lies on his face, when cough brings up a greyish yel- 
low, or a pale greenish yellow, gelatinous mucus without 
taste. 

When lying on back or either side when coughing, rattling, 
wheezing or whistling. 

Cough: with aching across kidneys; causes painful shock at 
base of each lung, with a peculiar shrill, barking sound, some 
expectoration; on entering a warm room; after eating. 



MEDORRHINUM. 


315 


11 Cough, < on lying down, > lying on stomach. 

11 Cough, < at night^causmg retching/ 

Hawking of tenacious mucus 

Expectoration yellow white, albuminous, or little green, 
bitter balls; ropy, difficult to raise, as if flecked with infini- 
tesimal dark spots 

A young French Canadian of delicate constitution, after 
working in a factory all winter, began coughing m spring and 
running down in health. He returned home and came under 
my care in May. The cough persisted and prostration in- 
creased, in spite of carefully selected remedies, and the 
patient took to his bed It was then observed by me that the 
cough and general condition was > from lying on the face. 
This, coupled with a knowledge of their being a syphilitic 
taint in the boy’s parentage, suggested Medorrhinuin, which 
was given The next day a profuse gonorrheal discharge ap- 
peared, and the cough and all threatening symptoms promptly 
disappeared Exposure to contagion had occurred several 
weeks before, but from lack of vitality the disease could not 
find its usual expression and was endangering the patient’s 
life. — D. C. McLaren 

Girl of twenty years of age had a\^mlent ^cough/for many 
months, that nobody could (or did) cure, until I learned that 
her father had had gonorrhea a year before her birth, then a 
few dos es^pf Medorrhinum worked like magic 
INNER CHEST AND LUNGS. — O ppres sion of c hest 1 sid^ 
with difficult breathing and a tendency to take a long breath; 
wakes gasping for breath. 

Hoarseness seems to be in chest; feels like an accumulation 
in chest, as if it was painfully contracted 

Sharp pain in bottom of 1 lung. 

Darting pain through lung, which makes her start. 

Chest sore to touch, at times burning extends over chest, 
cofTseems tcTmcrSase it, a piece of ice cools it for an instant, 
then it is hotter; lung feels as if beaten or bruised. 

Feels as if her breath was fanning a blistered sore in lung. 

Singular sensati 9 n through chest; bounded by a line drawn 
across lower end of sternum and another about middle; as if 
there was a cavity extending from side* to side, filled with 



316 


MEDORRHINUM 


burning air, which dilated in puffs in all directions and could 
be felt impinging on walls of cavity. 

Heat like a furnace in chest, with itching of ears. 

Pain in upper part of right lung when moving arm 

1 1 Pam in r shoulder as though it came from 1 , straight 
thro ugh. 

Chest feels sore throughout. 

Darting pain from centre of r. lung to lower edge of liver. 

Cold pain in r. lung and liver with coughing. 

Very sharp stitching pain in bottom of r. lung; also over 
surface of both lungs 

Aching m back part of 1 lung. 

An old sore spot in top of 1. lung aroused. 

Fatigue of 1. lung after talking, as if collapsed or paralyzed. 

Walking in sun, 1. lung becomes excessively hot, r. lung 
cold. 

Pam in 1. upper chest through to shoulders, cough arising 
from chest, incessant, dry cough, < at night. 

Aching in 1 lung under scapula, indescribable aching as if 
it was drawn up in hand and then let loose, < after walking; 
at same time aching m base of brain. 

Sharp pain along r edge of sternum, changing to 1. edge, 
and afterwards into 1. lung. 

Left lung very painful, feels drawn towards r side, 1. side 
of chest from top of lung to waist hot as fire, heart beat very 
fast and felt hot, too, heat spread over r. side, but was very 
mild, only a warm feeling, while 1 side was consuming, face 
pale grey, nose pinched and deathlike. 

Bottom of 1. lung sore to pressure (slight urging to cough 
from lower bronchia), afterwards slight pain in bottom of r. 
lung. 

II Constricted sensation at bottom of both lungs, finally dull, 
heavy pain at top of I lung. 

^Thtense boring pain in chest, but most below 1. scapula, a 
place, the size of a dollar, on outer edge extremely sensitive 
to touch; pain from upper lung to this spot. 

Coughing gives great pam in chest, as if it was painfully 
contracted. 

Sore spot size of silver dollar begins at top of 1 lung and 



MEDORRHINUM. 


S17 


like a red hot bolt extends through to lower part of back, chest 
sometimes feels as if something had grown to sore spot in 
front and was drawing back the chest; she feels for a cavity. 

Pain in heart and lungs, especially at night. 

1 1 Awful pains, in phthisis, m middle lobes 

H Incipient consumption 

Takes cold at the slightest exposure, begins in the head and 
^oes down on the lungs , severe burning in the base of the 
tongue extending down the bronchi as if he had inhaled hot 
steam, worse in the morning, a raw feeling extending from 
throat to lungs as if the mucous membrane was scraped with 
a knife, aggravated by breathing cold air, sensation as if the 
lungs were stuffed with cotton. 

Deep, hollow, rattling > by lying on the abdomen and face. 

During a maneuvre m the army in 1885, Dr V. got wet by 
a heavy ram coming into the tent during a whole night. From 
fills he got\a hacking cough^^on rising in the morning and in 
the open air. ^t sounded as if he would call some one, and 
people would turn and look at him with angry eyes His 
throat was thoroughly examined by a specialist, but nothing 
was found In 1901, after 16 years of coughing, he consulted 
Dr. Ide, one of our greatest homeopathic physicians. He 
ordered the doctor to take Medorrhinum one dose, and 
await the result. On reaching home he took the dose, and 
next morning had no cough, nor did he cough afterwards, even 
in the open air As an officer he had had a gonorrhea, of 
which he could not get rid. From this he always had an un- 
pleasant feeling and burning pain All this vanished like 
magic. 

HEART PULSE AND CIRCULATION.— Difficulty of breathing 
through oppression of heart. 

Fluttering about heart. 

Palpitation after slight exertion. 

Heavy heart throbbings. 

With heat in chest, heart felt very hot, beat very fast and 
felt large, accompanied by a bursting sensation. 

Soreness in heart in morning after having slept on 1. side. 

\\ Feeling of a cavity where heart ought to be 

Pain m heart: acute, sharp, quick, dull, quick. 



318 


MEDORRHINUM. 


Sharp pains around heart, passing thence to head, preceded 
by nausea 

Sharp pam at apex of heart; < on movement 

Intense pain m heart, seemed to radiate in different parts 
of 1 side of chest, < from least movement 

Pam from sore spot below 1 scapula to heart, with violent 
palpitation 

Dull pam m heart, with pam in 1. arm and sensation as if 
hand was swollen 

Burning in heart, went through to back and down L arm. 

Dull pam m 1 side of heart, with pam in left arm and a 
sensation as if the hand were swollen. 

Great pain in cardiac plexus, extending to left arm and 
throat, pulse 64; next day no pain, pulse 100. 

OUTER CHEST. — Pam and soreness through chest and 
mammae. 

Sensation of an abscess on 1. chest between pectoralis major 
and minor where they form anterior boundary of axillary 
space, hard and sensitive to touch, drawing pains in every 
direction, < motion of arm, great heat extending about three 
inches from spot and through to back of shoulder, no redness 
and very slight swelling. 

Great soreness to pressure of muscles of lower 1. chest front 
and back, soreness when moving of 1 shoulder-blade. 

NECK AND BACK. — Drawing in cords of neckj causing desire 
to throw^eadjiack. ***" 

^^J^w^ffii^of cord^of nec k/ w ith ac hing pai n m base of 
brain. 

Spasms of neck muscles, notably sterno-mastoid, drawing 
chin firmly down to breast. 

Sensation of an enlarged gland in r. side of neck under 
upper part of sterno-cleido-mastoid muscle, painful when 
moving head. 

]^in in nape and between scapulae, running to either side, 
shoulder and down to lumbar region ^ 

Contractive *pam from superior angles of scapula, passing 
to seventh dorsal vertebra and extending straight down spine 
to ninth vertebra, drawing shoulders back tight as if bones 
would be crushed; < moving shoulders, neck or arms. 

\Pam m back between scapula^ 



MEDORRHINUM. 


319 


Intense burning heat, commencing m back of neck and ex- 
tending gradually down spine, with a contractive stiffness ex- 
tending into head and seeming to thicken the scalp 

Pain under r. scapulae. 

1 Pain straight through from 1. to r shoulder 

Burning glow in cerebellum and down spine. 

Weak, stiff, aching back. 

I Heat m medulla and spine for a whole week 

Whole length of backbone sore to touch, also ribs of 1 side. | 

Tenderness of spinal column when stretching. 

Aching across and m kidneys 

Occasional creeping sensation in region of 1. kidney. 

When she stoops cannot rise again without violent pam in 
region of kidneys. 

Pain in region of 1 kidney, darting over 1. hip, especially 
when spine is pressed upon. 

II Throbbing and thumping in region of r suprarenal cap- 
sule seeming to come from abscess or sore spot just below 
fifth rib, r. side, under breast, creeping chills in region of r. 
kidney, throbbing, contracting, drawing and relaxing, as if 
caused by icy cold insects with claws Abscess of liver. 

Lumbar vertebrae sensitive to touch. 

II Pam m lumbar portion of spine, myalgic; induration of 
testes 

Sensation of water dropping out of a bottle in lumbar region 
(opposite third lumbar vertebra), between posterior and 
superior spine of ilium and vertebra. 

jji^Lumbago^caused by straining in lifting. 

Pam in back of hips, running around and down limbs. 

Pam in sacrum and coccyx 

UPPER LIMBS^— ^Rh eumatic pam/in top of 1. shoulder, < 
from motion, occasional little darts of pam if kept still 

11 Rheumatic pain^n r. shoulder and arm. 

Rheumatic pains m shoulders, notably 1 , also in hands, 
with pains on closing them. 

Brown, itching eruption on 1. shoulder. 

11 Severe pain from abscess, extending to r. shoulder and 
down to elbow. 

11 Pain commencing under 1. scapula, running down 1. arm 
to little finger,' which pricked as if asleep. 



320 


MEDORRHINUM. 


Cold numbness on outer side of arms» just below elbow. 

^Itching and irntation/inside of elbow joints. 

Sharp pain in elbow when moving it 

Cracking of joints, especially elbows. 

Left forearm and hand numb, unable to hold anything with 
force, any attempt to raise arm caused a sense of discomfort 
and irritability 

Pain in 1 arm and sensation in head as if swollen ; connected 
with heart, numbness down 1. arm. 

Aching in bones of arm after headache 

Numb pam in 1. arm, cannot even hold a paper any length 
of time, the veins become enlarged; it is very painful to raise 
arm. 

\Trembling of arms and hands. 

yRig ht arm cold/ 

Crampy pam m first and second fingers of r hand 

In night, sensation of a boil coming on back of hand, just 
above metacarpal phalangeal joint of 1. index finger, sore to 
touch, with drawing pains from every direction, expected to 
find a boil there in morning, but found only a red spot, not 
elevated 

^ Bur ning of hands/^ wants them fanned and uncovered, 
always cold hands. ’ 

*Tntehse burning in palms; burning and itching of hands, 
first 1., then right. 

Itching of hands at roots of and between fingers, as in itch. 

Palms and sometimes feet burning hot. 

Right hand is cold, then left. 

Cold hands, with coldness extending all over body. 

Sharp rheumatic pains across middle knuckles of 1. hand, 
also rheumatism of arms and legs. 

Hot numbness of back of hands. 

Back of hands ro ugh . 

hands. 

M^le finder of l.^hand swdlen and cannot be bent without 
pain ; cannot touch palm with it, top of this finger painfully 
sensitive, numb an3'*3ead, she "cannot grasp anything with it, 
can hardly touch anything. 

Hardness at base of ball of little finger. 



MEDORRHINUM 


821 


Transverse depression on nails as if they were bent 

W Consumptive incurvation of nails. 

Acute lancinating pain of right arm at the level of the del- 
toid attachment, deep down near the bone. 

\ Ac hing in right shoulder and arm^dull, sore pain, and sore- 
ness and stiffness of arm when moved. Hurts most to move 
it back or straight out from side. Worse at night or from any 
pressure on back of shoulder that pushes shoulder forward. 
Weight of bedclothes on arm hurts it Aching at times ex- 
tends to fingers, and the fingers swell when used. 

\Nails dry and brittle 

Rheumatism; of the wrists and ankles with complete loss of 
power in the part^affected If in the ankle, was unable to 
walS7 *if in the wrist, it had to be earned m a sling. 

LOWER LIMBS. — Woke with%a^ sharp pain over 1 hipj 0 )re- 
venting stooping, makes walking difficult, it is like a stiff 
iieck, but more aching. 

Slight aching pains to hip joints and knees. 

Pams in both legs, at times from hips down to knees, at 
other times in 1 . , only when walking 

Sensation of heaviness, or want of power to move limbs, in 
walking. 

Heaviness of legs, very difficult walking (especially going 
up or down stairs), legs are so heavy, feel like lead. 

Trem bling oHnnbs, legs give w^. 

Lower lim bs ..ach^ll nigfit/ preventing sleep. 

Legs do not go right in walking 

Little dropping of r. leg 

Yerj restless with the legs 

Numbness m 1. leg from knee to hip, feeling as if paralyzed. 

Longing to stretch legs 

The ‘ pam seems to tighten the whole body, especially the 
feet and thighs. 

II Rheumatic pain^m muscles of legs/ 

Many years since had a leg amputated just above ankle; 
after healing it began to swell, end of stump turned black, 
severe pains m muscles and bones, and ultimately a pimple 
appeared on stump, which broke and discharged for some 
time, all this has been reproduced. 

22 



322 


MEDORRHINUM 


During a terrific thunderstorm, very sharp pains in knees 
shot upwards, pains < by stretching. 

Aching pain in legs, with inability to keep them still in bed, 
<"^&en giving up "control of himself, as when trying to sleep 
C> after Lil tigr ) 

Weak kneed when getting up from a chair. 

When walking, pain in 1 knee, that caused it to give way, 
letting her down 

Trembling in legs from knees down, 1 leg trembles most, 
burning in feet. 

"^Xegs dead and heavy, throbbing from knees down. 

Coldness of legs up to knees, also of hands and forearms. 

Short pulling pains in knees, toes, ankle joints and hands. 

Drawing sensation under knees and in ankles. 

Contraction of muscles under 1 knee and in 1. calf. 
\^ Cram ps^ soles and calves at night. 

Cmmp m 1. calf, afterwards in r. leg between knee and 
thigh. 

I Kind of cramp in 1 calf at night, muscles knotted, > 
stretching, not cramp, but knotting. 

Ankles turn easily when walking 

II Sudden intense pain in 1. ankle, back of joint, on going to 
bed, could not move limb or body without screaming, could 
fin3 ho position of comfort 

I Burning of feet, wants them uncovered and fanned. 

\ B o th ^ f ee|^som ewha t swollen | |d^ ropsy ^ ^ of 

Sove ieeling un^r 1. foot. 

Edem a of feet followed and > by diarrhea. 

Cold feet with chills all over body. 

Small sharp pain in soles when first stepping on them in 
morning, not felt any other time. 

HSwe lling/and\itchin^\m soles|(itching between toes/and 
pulling pains extending up to knees, itching, painful, papu- 
lous eruption around waist, and hivelike eruption wherever 
flesh IS pressed on. 

Il^enderness of soles/qjhat he could not stand on them at 
all and had to walk on his knees. 

”**7 Soreness in ball of foot under toes 

Great toe sore, r. one worst; p^ns shooting through toes 
when sitting still. 



MEDORRHINUM. 


323 


Pain, swelling and inflammation of r great toe, 

11 Cold and sweaty feet 

Great toe covered with scales like tetters. 

II Old foot sweats, < during winter, for seven years 
V Corns very tender/ 

jAlmost entire loss of nervous force in legs and arms» ex- 
hausted by slightest effort. 

II Pam like rheumatism along r side, r. hip, 1 leg (upper, 
lower 1 ), pains drawing, < in dampness, 1. leg swollen near 
knee 

II Stiffness throughout body and joints. 

If Deformity of finger joints, large, puffy knuckles, swelling, 
stiffness and pain of both ankles, '.great tenderness of heels / 
and balls of feet; the swellings of all affected joints were puffy 
like wind galls; general condition < inland, > near shore. 

Numb sensation in 1 arm, hand and leg; 1. leg. goes to 
sleep. 

Eruption under and on toes and on hands and feet. 

Right knee painful, red and swollen 

Synovitis of left wrist, dorsal aspect, tendons attacked be- 
ing the extensor proprius policis and indicis 

Acute pain in the tendo Achilhs, left foot and along the 
inner border of the right tibia. The part is edematous and 
very sensitive. 

The rheumatic symptoms in the extremities are of extreme 
intensity, 

A man with clonic spasms, the legs suddenly shot up from 
the bed. 

\Feet always wet with perspiration./ 

REST. POSITION. MOTION. — Rest, little darting paina in L 
shoulder. 

Lying down: vertigo slightly >; on ear, aching in cartilage; 
cough <. 

Lying on back or either side when coughing: rattling, 
wheezing or whistling. 

Lying on stomach, coug h > . 

Cymg^n either side: contents of lower part of chest and 
abdomen seem to press upon each other 

Cannot lie on left side for any considerable length of time. 



324 


MEDORRHINUM. 


\Can only sleep on back, with hands over head/ 

Sleeps on her knees, with'face forced in pillow. 

Must he on face and protrude tongue, larynx stopped so 
that no air could enter. 

Could find no position of comfort, intense pain in 1. ankle, 
back of joint 

Sitting still, pains shooting through toes. 

Sitting up in bed faint suffocative sensation 

Stooping, vertigo, cannot rise again without violent pain 
in region of kidneys, impossible, pain in hip. 

Leaning head forward: tight band across forehead <. 

De sire to throw head back, drawing in cords of neck. 

Head drawn backwards 

Leaning body very far back- can only pass .stool. 

Drawing up knees, clawing in stomach <, menstrual colic. 

Must rise and double up: pain in pit of stomach. 

Thrusting tongue in cheek brought on coughing. 

Applied r hand to pit of stomach and 1. to lumbar region: 
intense agonizing pain in solar plexus. 

Cannot hold paper long: numb pain in 1. arm. 

When closing hands pain m them. 

Slight exertion: palpitation; heat, tendency to perspire 

Motion, vertigo <, of 1. leg, pain m uterus <, of arm causes 
pain in upper r lung, sharp pain at apex of heart <, least, 
pain m chest <, of arms, pains m chest <, soreness of 1 
shoulder-blade, of head causes pain in neck; of shoulders, neck 
or arms, pain in shoulders; < of elbow, sharp pam. 

Getting up from a chair: weak kneed. 

Getting up: as if bones were out of joint; shakes herself to 
get them into place. 

% Cannot keep still/ restlessness , > by clu tching ha nds. 

Inability to keep legs stil l in becfT a^mg pain 
^^ntinual rubbing of head m pillow^/and rolling from side 
to side: cerebral suffering 

Attempt to raise arm: discomfort and irritability. 

When rolling eyes, neuralgic pains <. 

Coul d not move^limb or bo dy w ithout screami ng: inten se 
pam m L ankle, back of joint, "" 

Stretching: tenderness of spinal column; pains in knees <, 
cramp in calf <. 



MEDORRHINUM. 


325 


When first stepping on soles small sharp pains. 

\^]3ad to walk on his knees:; tenderness of soles 
Walking pain passed from 1 ovary to groins, pain m 
uterus <, aching in 1 lung, difficult, pain m hip, pains from 
hips down to knees, heaviness in limbs, legs do not go right, 
pain in 1 knee, ankles turn 

Going up and down stairs, difficult from heaviness of legs. 
Extremely sensitive, swollen bunions, worse on 1. foot, 
puffed, very red, feet hot; in the centre there is a spot as if 
blood had collected, which is very sore , itching very annoy- 
ing, must remove shoes to rub them, which relieves for the 
time; very sensitive to pressure, flesh feels as if cracked open; 
in the evening, after being on the feet all day, almost unen- 
durable, worse on warm days, feet swollen and tender. 

NERVES. — Intense nervous sensibility, respecting touch of 
garment or a lock of hair by any one not en rapport. 

Starts at slightest sound 
Unusually active, going as if on wings 
Restlessness, cannot keep still, but feels greatly relieved by 
clutching hands very tight. 

ll.Consumptive languor^ great general depression of vitality. 
4^ Very tired. 

Faintness early in morning with no appetite. 

Sensation as if she would faint, followed by a great heat 
down spine and between shoulders. 

\Trembling all over/ great nervousness and profound ex- 
haustion. 

Great general subjective trembling, even tongue felt 
trembling 

Sensation of creeping things throughout body continually 
Quivering sensation, with tingling and numbness 
\Tonic spasmy rigid extension of arms and legs, the hands 
evSted, palms outwar d;, thumbs down, fingers clav^i^ 
'TE^pileptiform spasms with foaming at mouth, rigidity of 
body and limbs, violent regurgitation at heart with absence of 
mitral cluck. 

Opisthotonos. 

^tate of collapse/nearly gone; wants to be fanned all the 
time, wants "more “air; cold and pulseless, with cold perspir- 
^ion; throws off all covers. 



326 


MEDORRHINUM, 


Risus sardonicus 

Medorrhinum, in the same sphere, is characterized by s^reat 
disturbance and irritability of the nervous system from center 
to periphery. Its pains are intolerable, tensive, shooting, 
neuralgic. It produces tension, involuntary tension, which 
cannot be relaxed except by voluntary effort of the will. Its 
nerves are easily shocked, it is\easily startled at the slightest 
^und. Its restlessness is > by clutching the hands very 
tight. Its nerves quiver, tingle, tremble and produce spasms. 
It is also cold, yet throws the cover off and wants to be 
fanned. It is < by warmth, even when too cold to be fanned. 
It IS < by warmth, even when too cold to touch, as in col- 
lapse. It IS also < by wet, damp, drafts and thunder storms. 
As to time, it is worse from daylight to sunset, worse morn- 
ings and bright evenings Its functional disturbance covers a 
long period before organic destruction begins Its general 
condition is > near the seashore and < inland 

SLEEP. — Sleepy, yawning, chilly^sjeepy but cannot sleep./ 
%^asmodic yawnmgj^i^cannot suppress it, followed by spasm 
of glottis. 

^T^sleep, but hears everything, answers questions as if she 
was awake. Nightmare. 

Bites tip of tongue in sleep 

Feels as if she would have nightmare. 

Sleeps at night on her knees, with face forced in pillow; 
kneeling position. 

y Can o nly sleeg^pn back with hands over head/ if she lies on 
either side, the contents of lower part of chest and abdomen 
seem to press upon each other and cause discomfort. 

When asleep day or night, no matter how short a time, 
profuse perspirationion face and neck. 

Sleep with wearing dreams of walking; waking with im- 
pression that she had slept for hours, although it was only 
thirty minutes. 

Such restless nights and terrible dreams of ghosts and dead 
people, she dreads night to come 

Dreams: horrid; painful; exhausting; that she is drinking. 

Woke at night and saw a woman of pleasant face, dressed 
in grey, standing by bedside, wiping a tumbler; she backed 
from me miles away, becoming very small. 



MEDORRHINUM- 


327 


I Wakeful, slept towards morning. 

Great restlessness at night, sleepy but could not sleep, 

II Becomes wide awake at 6 p m and continues so till 12, 
with entire passivity of bram and cessation of thought; slight 
restlessness 

N^Restless sleep^talking and tossing all night, with copious 
sweat of head, neck and chest, had to dry her hair several 
Times m the night 

Slept well but woke at an early hour with a frightened sen- 
sation as if something dreadful had happened, the weight on 
the head was heavy, and great heat in it, could not rest m 
bed, felt as if she must do something to nd her mind of this 
fearful torture, for two hours was in this state of mind; she 
struggled against it, fought with what seemed to be the ad- 
versary, scolded herself for her weakness, all to no purpose, 
and grew weak with the effort, she cannot describe the mental 
agony she endured 

TIME. — Aggravation from daylight to sunset, always brighter 
in evening. 

Morning: soreness and crawling in 1. nostril, bad taste; 
tongue thickly coated; foul breath; gleety discharge, soreness 
of heart; small sharp pains m soles when first attempting to 
step on them, early faintness. 

10 A. M.: chill, chattering, shivering 

10:30 A^_M^-1 headache < ; fever with thir^. 

11 A. M : pain in region of suprarenal capsules. 

• From 10 to 11 A m * cold feet and legs. 

From 10 A. M. to 12 nervous during fever, moving fingers. 

From 10 A m to 1 p m. * fever and malaise <. 

From 10:30 A M. to 12 30 p. M thirst during chill 

At 11 A. M. chill, beginning with great coldness of fingers 
and toes, fever, preceded by cold feet 

At 2 p. M feet cold first, after chill excessive languor. 

At 5 P M . chill, followed by fever and slight sweat, next 
day same, but slighter. 

midnight to 3 A M^ f ever,/wi th ne rvous restlessne ss. 
Irequ^oTa^^ 

I ^Afternoon : 

Mifer y'or W p/'S cannot retain u rine more than an hou r. 


\From 

Day: 


328 


MEDORRHINUM 


6pm.: became wide awake until 12 p M. 

Evening sharp pain through temples, itching <, 

Night: headache, aching in cartilage of ear; intense and 
frequent erections, cannot retain urine, dryness, soreness and 
choking very severe; incessant dry cough, cough <, causing 
retching, sensation of a boil coming on back of hand; aching 
in legs, cramp in soles and calves, restless sleep; rapid pulse; 
sweats 

TEMPERATURE AND WEATHER. — In sun, walking: 1. lung 
becomes very hot. 

Too much heat < urination in bed at night. 

After getting warm in bed. wh^en urinating, must do so 
every hour rest of night. 

**lEntering warm room . cough 
Wants hands fanned and uncovered 

Wants to be fanned all the time, wants more air, state of 
collapse, ha nds and feet must be fanned 
^nsibve to drafts of air, takes cold easily. 

When wind blows on parietal bone, pain 

Salt water bathing: sore throat and cold in head <. 

After getting wet chill, followed by fever and slight sweat. 
Damp weather, pains in limbs > 

Getting cold incontinence of urine. 

Craving for ice during kidney attack 
Piece of ice cools chest for an instant, then it is hotter 
Inland chronic rheumatism in joints <, > near shore 
FEVER. — Creeping chills running down back and all over 
body in a zigzag course 

Chills, up and down back, several times a day, 10 a. m., 
some chattering and shivering; at 10 30 a m., fever with 
thirst, began in fingers and toes; from 10:30 to 12.30, thirst 
during chill, none during fever; from 10 to 11 a m., cold feet 
and legs, from 10 to 12, nervous during fever, moving fingers; 
at 11 A. M., beginning with great coldness of fingers and toes; 
at 2 P. M , feet cold first, after chill excessive languor; at 5 P. 
M , followed by fever and slight sweat (after getting wet); 
repeated next day, but slighter 

Shivering chills, with boring pains in chest 

Cold hands, with coldness extending all over body. ' 



MEDORRHINUM. 


329 


^oldness of legs up to knee, also of hands and forearms. 

Flashes of heat alternating with chills. 

Coldness r hand, then 1. , a slight flush of heat succeeded, 
then sensation of a foreign substance in r eye, then m left 

Must be fanned all the time, throws clothes off, yet surface 
is cold, burning, mostly subjective, of hands and feet, wants 
them uncovered and fanned 

Great general internal heat after dinner, as if blood was 
boiling hot in veins, same after slight exertion 

I Great burning heat all over body, with flashes of heat m 
face and neck. 

Fever with or without thirst; with gushes of perspiration 
on face, followed by languor, with nervous restlessness from 
midnight to 3 a. m. , at 11 a m. preceded by cold feet, fell 
asleep during fever; after fever, sweat on palms, feet and 
legs, with rapid pulse at night, in afternoon, and malaise < 
from 10 to 1 

Hectic fever; every afternoon. 

^^^eat tendency to perspire)^n exertion^ sensitive to cold 

TlProfuse sweat about neck. 

\Night sweat^ 

IT Chills for four months every day, commencing from 3 to 4 
p. M. , chill wnth headache, thirst, nausea, sometimes vomit- 
ing, fever with headache, thirst, nausea, principally on head 
and neck, pains from waist downwards; frequent urination, 
dark color, frequent, tasteless eructations, constipation; bad 
taste in mouth in morning. 

II Chill came first at night, afterwards at various hours, for 
instance, on two consecutive da^^s at 2 p m , then two days at 
3, 4, 5 and 6 each, then at 7 P m , where it remained for two 
weeks, chill commenced in small of back, running up and 
down, lasted about an hour, and as it ceased, profuse and fre- 
quent urination appeared and continued during fever, conges- 
tion of chest simulating pneumonia during fever* causing great 
alarm, great renal distress during paroxysm; thirst during 
fever for hot drinks; fever continued for six or eight hours; 
profuse sweat after fever, great nervousness during paroxysm, 
was sure he would die, intolerance of noise; irritable, 

ATTACKS, PERIODICITY, — In close succession, pains in ear. 

Alternately : flashes of heat and chills 



330 


MEDORRHINUM. 


Several times daring day: sudden attacks of vertigo, chill 
up and down back 

Takes half hour to empty bladder 

Every day for four months chills commencing from 3 to 4 
p. M 

Every afternoon, hectic fever, about 5 p. m , oppression of 
breathing 

Nightly, passes enormous quantity of urine in bed 

Chill came first at night, afterwards at various hours; on 
two consecutive days at 2 p m , then two days at 3, 4, 5, 6 
each, then 7 p. m., where it remained for two weeks. 

For six or eight hours; fever 

For forty-eight hours, violent retching and vomiting. 

For three nights, cannot sleep, pain in carbuncular boils. 

For several days, entire loss of smell 

For three days: intense headache, inflammation of eyes 

For SIX days: child hard of hearing 

wliole week l&eat in medulla and spine 

Six months after chancrelike ulcer on prepuce there came 
for several months successive crops of vesicles on prepuce. 

ittaiHittl', — r I I - * M f ( I i » •« * 

jFor ten months, gonorrhea. 

For seven years: < during winter, old standing foot sweats. 

For twenty years: gleety gonorrheal discharge 

LOCALITY AND DIRECTION. — Right.* neuralgia in temple; in 
eye; headache in temple, as of a worm crawling in ear; sore- 
ness of concha, quick, darting pains in ear; fever-blisters near 
corner of upper lip; neuralgia of upper and lower jaw, hard 
swelling in upper jaw^ as of a tumor in side of abdomen; ten- 
sive pain in side of abdomen; darting pain from centre of 
ovarian region to lower edge of liver, cutting in lower ab- 
domen, running into spermatic cord, testes very tender, dis- 
tinct bubbling sensation in kidney; sensation of three bubbles 
in renal region; heavy, drawing, wandering pains m arm and 
hip; tense pain passing diagonally m ovary, small chancres on 
edges of labia; pain in upper part of lung; pain in r. shoulder 
as though it came from 1,; darting pain from centre of lung to 
lower edge of liver, cold pain in lung, s harp stitching 
b ottom of lung, lung cold, sharp pain 

mild heat spreading over r. side, pain m bottom of lung; sen- 



MEDORRHINUM. 


B31 


sation of enlarged gland in side of neck, pain under scapula; 
throbbing and thumping m region of suprarenal capsule, 
seeming to come from just below hfth rib; creeping chills m 
region of kidney, rheumatic pam in shoulder and arm, severe 
pain from abscess of liver, extending to shoulder and down 
elbow, crampy pain m first and second fingers of hand, drop- 
ping of leg, cramp m leg, between knee and thigh, soreness 
of great toe, pain, swelling and inflammation of great toe, 
pain like rheumatism along nape, whole side, hip, upper leg. 

Left, neuralgia in temple and eye, aching over eye, pam in 
parietal bone; tensive pains in side of head, ptosis of outer 
end of upper lid, pulling pam in lower lid, itching, aching or 
boring pam in ear, nnghole in ear sore, soreness of outer wing 
of nostril, crawling m nostril, fever sore on lower hp near 
commissure; swelling m region of submaxillary gland, mild 
cramp in calf, hot swelling on side of anus; heavy, drawing, 
wandering pains in calf; great deal of pam in ovary; ovary 
seemed enlarged; soreness and nervous pam in a spot on side of 
uterus; swelling of breast, oppression < on side, sharp pain 
in bottom of lung; aching in back of lung, an old sore spot in 
top of lung aroused, fatigue of lung, walking in sun, lung be- 
comes excessively hot, pam m upper chest; aching in lung 
under scapula; sharp pam m edge of sternum and lung, lung 
very painful, feels drawn towards r. side; side of chest from 
top of lung to waist hot as fire; bottom of lung sore to pres- 
sure; dull, heavy pain at top of lung, intense boring below 
scapula; sore spot size of silver dollar begins at top of lung> 
extends through to lower part of back; after having slept on 
side, soreness of heart, great pam in cardiac plexus, extend- 
ing to arm; intense pam in side of chest, pam from sore spot 
below scapula to heart; dull pain in heart, with pam in arm; 
burning in arm; sensation of an abscess in chest; great sore- 
ness of muscles of lower chest, ribs sore to touch; occasional 
creeping sensation m region of kidney; pam in region of kid- 
ney darting over hip; rheumatic pain m top of shoulder; 
itching eruption on shoulder; pam commencing under scapula, 
running down arm to little finger; forearm and hand numb; 
pain in arm and sensation m hand as if swollen; numbness 
down arm; numb pain in arm; sensation of a boil coming on 



S32 


MEDORRHINUM 


back of hand, pains across middle knuckles of hand, middle 
finger swollen, sharp pain over hip; numbness of leg, pain in 
knee when walking; trembling in leg; contraction of muscle 
under knee and in calf, knotting of muscle in calf, sudden in- 
tense pain in ankle, back of joint, sore swelling under foot; 
pains like rheumatism in lower leg, leg swollen near knee, 
numb sensation in arm, hand and leg, leg goes to sleep, itch- 
ing sometimes confined to side. 

From without inward: pain in r. ear 

First r. hand cold, then left. 

From 1. to r.. pain m shoulders, burning and itching of 
hands 

SENSATIONS. — Of falling, as if intoxicated, as if occiput was 
enlarged; head as if tightening, as of a tight band across fore- 
head, as if front half of brain would come through forehead; 
as if skin was drawn tight; as if she would go crazy, as of three 
points of tension in head, as if large cords were drawn to 
each, as if tensive pains would break, as if head had been 
struck; as if occipital protuberances were enlarged, as if eyes 
were pulling out of head, as if she stared at everything, as if 
eyes protruded; as of sand under lids, as of sticks in eyes, lids 
and inner canthi, as of a cool wind blowing in eyes, as if upper 
lid had a cartilage in it, as if a tube went through head; as if 
parchment was drawn over ear, as of a worm crawling in r. 
ear, as if it commenced boring in anterior wall of auditory 
canal; as if mucous membrane of nose was hypertrophied, as 
of a centipede crawling m 1 nostril; mouth as if burnt; throat 
as if scraped; as of a paper of pins in pit of stomach that 
seemed to force themselves through flesh , as if heart palpi- 
tated in pit of stomach, as if a lump in stomach, cramps in 
stomach as from wind, sensation in liver as if caused by icy 
cold insects with claws, as of a heavy weight in lower abdo- 
men, as of a tumor in r. side of abdomen, pressure as of a 
hard, biconvex body in abdomen, beating as of a pulse in ab- 
domen, as if there was a large lump on posterior surface of 
sphincter am; as of passage of calculus in ureter; after urina- 
ting, a feeling as if something more remained in urethra, as if 
a sac was distended in 1 ovary and if pressed would burst, 
pain in 1 groin as if leg pushed something; 1. ovary as if en- 



MEDORRHINUM. 


333 


larged; as if she must press ovary, cutting as if with knives in 
pelvic region, pain as if menses were coming on; choking as if 
epiglottis was closed; as if lining of larynx and pharynx was 
torn off; larynx as if ulcerated; as of a lump m larynx; as if 
thorax was too full, as if larynx would be torn to pieces, as if 
bronchial tubes were enlarged, as if lining membrane was a 
loose fold of tissue, chest as if painfully contracted, lung as if 
beaten or bruised, as if her breath was fanning a blistered sore 
in lung; as if there was a cavity extending from side to side in 
chest, filled with burning air, which dilated in puffs in all 
directions, pam in r shoulder as though it came from 1. 
straight through; 1 lung as if collapsed or paralyzed; as if 
lung was drawn up in hand and let loose; 1. lung as if drawn 
toward r side as if something had grown to sore spot m front 
of chest and was drawing back, heart as if large, as of a cavity 
where heart ought to be; pain as if radiating in different parts 
of 1 side of chest, as if heart was swollen, as of an abscess on 
1 chest, between pectoralis major and minor, as of an en- 
larged gland in r. side of neck, under upper part of sterno- 
cleido-mastoid, pains m shoulders as if bones would be 
crushed, as of water dropping out of a bottle in lumbar region, 
pricking in 1. little finger as if asleep, 1. hand as if swollen, as 
if a boil was coming on back of hand, 1 leg as if paralyzed, 
creeping chills in region of r kidney, as if caused by icy cold 
insects with claws, as if she would faint, as of creeping things 
throughout body; as if she would have nightmare, as if con- 
tents of lower part of chest and abdomen seemed to press 
upon each other; as of a foreign substance in r. eye, then in 1. ; 
as if blood was boiling hot in veins, as if she had taken a 
severe cold, sore all over as if bruised, as if all bones were out 
of joint. 

Pam in forehead, in temples, over eyes, in centre of brain; 
in 1. parietal bone; circling through head and around crown; 
in back of head; in r. eye; in eyes; up Eustachian tube and 
out of both ears; m renal region; at end of penis, m 1. ovary; 
in lower abdomen, in upper part of r. lung; in r shoulder, in 
1. upper chest through to shoulders, from upper lung to sore 
spot below 1. scapula, in heart and lungs; in heart from sore 
spot below 1. scapula to heart; in 1. arm; through chest and 



334 


MEDORRHINUM. 


mammae, in nape and between scapulae, running on to either 
side, shoulder and down to lumbar region, in back between 
scapulae; under r scapula, straight through from 1 tor shoul- 
der, m region of 1. kidney, in lumbar portion of spine, in back 
of hips, running around abdomen and down limbs, in sacrum 
and coccyx, commencing under 1 scapula, running down arm 
to little finger, in 1 arm, when bending middle finger of 1 
hand, in both legs, from hips down to knees, in 1 knee, of 
right great toe; from waist downwards 

Intolerable pains, in carbuncular boils 

Intense, agonizing pain, in solar plexus. 

Terrible pains, all through head, in liver. 

Intense pain: m head, m cerebral region; in stomach and 
upper abdomen, m abdomen, m heart, in 1. ankle, back of 
joint 

Awful pain: in middle lobes. 

Violent pain: in region of kidneys. 

Extreme pain: in urethra 

Intense, excruciating neuralgic pains, in pelvic region 

Intense neuralgic pains, from teeth to head 

Severe pain: in back of head, all over head; from abscess 
of liver to r shoulder and elbow; in ureters, on deglutition, 
from abscess extending to r. shoulder and down to elbow, in 
muscles and bones of stump of amputated leg. 

Sharp pain, through temples, in occiput; in bottom of 1 
lung, along r. edge of sternum, changing to 1 edge and then 
into lung; around heart, thence to head, at apex of heart; in 
elbow; over 1. hip; in knees. 

Great pain: in chest, in cardiac plexus, extending to 1. arm 
and throat. 

Hard pain: in frontal region. 

Tearing pains: m abdomen. 

Sharp, cutting pain, across root of penis. 

Sharp, shooting pains m swelling in region of submaxillary 
glands. 

Short, shooting pains: in breasts. 

Acute, sharp, quick, or dull quick pain in heart. 

Quick, darting pain: m r. ear. 

Darting pain: from centre of r. ovarian region to lower edge 



MEDORRHINUM. 


335 


of liver, m abdomen, through scapulae, through lung, which 
makes her start; from centre of r lung to lower edge of liver, 
over L hip 

Boring pam in 1 ear, intense, m chest and below L 
scapula 

Shooting pains, through toes, about three inches long in 
various directions and all over body. 

Cutting m r lower abdomen, running into spermatic cord; 
in pelvic region. 

Neuralgia- m temples and parietal bone, m L eye, around 
middle part of cranium, m eyeballs, of r. upper and lower 
jaws to temple; in head. 

Sharp, stitching pain; in bottom of r lung, over surface of 
both lungs 

Sharp, needlelike pains m rectum 

Terrible, bearing down, laborlike pains, during menses. 

Intense menstrual and renal colic. 

Intense burning pain, m head 

Grasping pains, in liver and spleen 

Contracting pain, from superior angles of scapulae, passing 
to seventh dorsal vertebra and down same to ninth 

Dull, pinching pain: in region of suprarenal capsules 

Cramping pain: in first and second fingers of r. hand 

Gnawing, aching pam: in abdomen. 

Short, pulling pains in knees, toes, ankle joints and hands. 

Pulling pam: in 1 lower lid from outer canthus, in sacrum 
and pubic region, extending up to knees 

Heavy, drawing, wandering pains: in r. arm, r. hip and 1, 
calf 

Drawing pains: in every direction of chest; on back of 
hand, from every direction, in limbs. 

Rheumatic pains: in top of 1 shojijder^ in r shoulder and 
arm; in hands, across middle knuckles of 1. hand, of legs, in 
musclel; of Tegs; along r. nape, whole r. side, r. hip, 1. leg. 

Most distressing aching: m bones. 

Severe aching pain: in 1. ovary. 

Dull, heavy pain: at top of 1. lung. 

Dull pam: m broad ring around head; m cerrebellum; in 
epigastric region; in 1. heart. 



336 


MEDORRHINUM. 


Small, sharp pain, in soles 
Little darts of pain in 1. shoulder 

Cramps, in stomach, in soles and calves, in r leg between 
knee and thigh. 

Mild cramp in 1 calf. 

Clawing: in stomach, like cold insects in r. kidney 
Gnawing feeling, in stomach. 

Painful shock, at base of each lung 

Tensive pain* in 1. side of head as far back as parietal emi- 
nence and to middle of crown, in r. side of abdomen, all over 
body from head to foot 
Tense pains diagonally in r ovary 
Numb pain, in 1 arm 
Cold pain, in r lung and liver 
Weak, stiff aching: in back. 

Heavy throbbings. in heart, all over body 
Painful tenesmus: of bladder and bowels 
'Painful eruption: around waist 
Burning pain* in lower part of back, in hips 
Smarting, of eyelids. 

Burning heat from liver round to back, in 1. ovary, in back 
of neck and down spine. 

Burning glow, in cerebellum and down spine 
Burning, in both nostrils, in pit of stomach, on urination; 
in meatus; over chest; m heart, through to back and down 
into 1 arm; of hands, in palms; soles of feet, in chest. 

Heat: in temporal region; under lids; in abdomen, in L 
ovary, m chest; in 1. side of chest from top of lung to waist; 
of heart; from chest through to back of shoulder, in medulla 
and spine; down spine and between shoulders. 

Flushes of heat* in face and neck. 

Soreness: of edges of eyelids, of outer wing of 1 nostril, in 
1. nostril; of teeth; of mouth, of pharynx; of throat; through 
urethra; of testes, in one spot in lower part of uterus; of nip- 
ples; of breasts; of larynx, in heart, chest and mammae; in 
ball of foot under toes, of great toe; all over body. 

Excoriated sensation, in glottis. 

Sore feeling: throughout chest; under 1. foot. 

Sore spot: on top of 1. lung, size of silver dollar, begins at 



MEDORRHINUM. 


^37 


top of 1 lung and like a red hot bolt extends through to lower 
part of back 

Slight pam. in bottom of r. lung. 

Pricking sensation all over body 
Tingling, through body. 

Tenderness of brain, of spine, from cerebellum to kidneys; 
of testes, of breasts, of spinal column , of soles, of heels and 
, balls of feet 

Hot numbness: of backs of hands 
Simmering, m head 
Dragging of testes. 

Constricted sensation: at bottom of both lungs. 

Contracting, drawing and relaxing, in region of kidneys. 
Contraction extending from eyes and meeting m brain; 
down whole length of spine; of muscles under 1. knee and in 
1. calf. 

Contractive stiffness, extending from spine to head and 
seeming to thicken scalp. 

Drawing, in cords of neck, under knees and m ankles 
Discomfort, in 1. forearm and hand, in chest and abdomen 
from lying on side 

Distress: in renal region. 

Bursting sensation: m heart 

Stiffness: in jaws and tongue; of pharynx; throughout body 
and joints of both ankles 
Stuffed feeling: m chest. 

Suffocative sensation: in thorax. 

Pressure: back of eyes, m vertex, in lower abdomen; in 
bladder 

Oppression of chest, of heart. 

Weight, in vertex. 

Heavy feeling: m head; in limbs. 

Tightness: extending from eyes and meeting in brain, ex- 
tends down whole length of spine; m stomach. 

Twitching and drawing m: of limbs and cords of neck. 
Throbbing and thumping, in region of r suprarenal cap- 
sule. 

Throbbing: in temporal region; in sides of stomach; m re- 
gion of liver; from knees down. 

23 



338 


MEDORRHINUM 


Pulsation: m ears 

Bubbling sensation: in r kidney 

Fluttering, about heart. 

Quivering, in body. 

Trembling, at pit of stomach; of limbs, in legs from knees 
down; all over; of tongue. 

Tickling: m ears; under upper part of sternum. 

Singular sensation: through chest 
Sensation of action^ in bone^ of nose 
Restlessness, at night. 

Numbness, down 1 arm, of 1 middle finger; in 1. leg from 
knees to hip, in 1 arm, hand and leg, through body. 
Lightness of head. 

Sinking and agonizing sickness, at stomach 
Deathly feeling: in kidneys. 

Sinking sensation, under sternum. 

Faintness* early in morning. 

Weakness, after nocturnal emission 
Fatigue: of 1 lung. 

• Dryness: of eyelids, of mouth; of throat, of larynx, of 
glottis 

Creeping sensation in region of 1 kidney. 

Itching: of scalp, in nose, of eyebrows; over 1. eye, of 
ears, in occiput; in cerebellum and medulla; in base of brain, 
in eyeballs; in 1. ear; in cartilage of ear; across kidneys, in 
sacrum and down back of legs to feet; in back part of 1 lung; 
in 1. lung under scapula, in bones of arm, in hip joints and 
knees; in lower limbs, of vagina and labia; of eruption on 1. 
shoulder; in side of elbow joints, of hands, at roots of and 
between fingers, in soles; between toes; of eruption around 
waist; all over body; of eruption on limbs f from knees up, on 
forearms and around waist 

Chilli ness: when bladder is too full. 

Cold" numbness, on outer side of arms, just below elbow 
Coldness: of end of nose, of r. arm; extending all over 
body; of legs up to knees, of hands and forearms; of fingers 
and toes. 

TISSUES. — Great heat and soreness, with enlargement of 
lymphatic glands all over body. 



MEDORRHINUM. 


339 


Sensation as if she had taken a severe cold, with most dis- 
tressing aching in bones; throat very sore and swollen, deglu- 
tition of either liquids or solids impossible 

There is scarcely a spot on body from head to foot but what 
is full of pain, of tensive and letting go character, accom- 
panied by heat, this heat is a sensation, burning hot, but not 
perceived on surface by touch 
'"**^ore all over as if bruised. 

Th^ pains seem to tighten .the whole body, especially feet 
and thighs 

Feeling as if all the bones were out of joint m getting up, 
shakes herself to get them into place. 

1 Obstinate rheumatism. 

I Sequelae of acute articular rheumatism; walks leaning on 
a cane, bent over, muffled in wraps to ears, looking like a 
broken down man apparently soon to fall into his grave 

Carbuncular boils that seem small, discharge slowly and 
show dark red streaks, pains are intolerable, could not sleep 
for three nights. 

^^ukemia, of Grauvogl and Virchow, occurring in children 
of sycotic parents 

A girl of 17, of tubercular history, with the same rheumatic 
order of symptoms, with epistaxis, hemoptysis, albuminuria, 
endocarditis, with suffocative attacks and violent palpitations 
ended in permanent disablement 

\Glandular enlargemenl/in various parts of the body, with 
^ rachitis, is traced to hereditary gonorrhea, patients are better 
at the seaside . — Gtlbert 

'^^^Vildes thinks that the suppression ofy f^yus^ hen derived 
from gonorrhea in the father leads to hycirocephalus, capil- 
lary bronchitis, obstinate teething diarrheas and cholera in- 
f^um; if derived from^the grandfather, suppression leads to 
consumption and lingering diseases. 

{Tiery red rash/developing^about the anus^/in babiep^a few 
days old,' const ipation^with hard dry stools/ when the nurses 
say" ''Baby’s water \scalds it terribly,’’ the indications for 
Medorrhinum are clear. He regards the latent and gonor- 
rheal taint as the true explanation of many of the disease 
manifestations included by Hahnemann under psora. Among 



340 


MEDORRHINUM. 


other diseases he traces vascular meningitis and cerebro-spinal 
n^mngitis in infants to the same source. 

Burnett appears to confirm this as he traces gout and some 
forms of rheumatism to a sycotic ongin. 

\Sycotic children (born so), when one or both parents have 
gonorrhea, have cholera infantum, marasmus, are pining chil- 
dren 

Noeggerath says jjLtent gonorrhea in husband may cause in 
wife acute and chronic perimetritis, oophoritis, if impregna- 
tion results, abortion follows, or only one child is born, ex- 
ceptionally two or three, 

I have traced epithelioma, phthisis, cauliflower excres-^ 
cences# sterility, and\erosions to a sycotic origin , \pernicious 
^anemia/often has gonorrhea as its base, suppressed gonorrhea 
may produce , iritis, syphilis produces it without suppression. 

The suppression of the external manifestations of gonor- 
rhea seems first to involve the central nervous system func- 
tionally, and is much later in attacking the organism destruc- 
tively. 

TOUCH. PASSIVE MOTION. INJURIES.— Touch soreness of 
r concha; soreness of vesicles on prepuce, nipples and breasts 
very tender, chest sore, small spot below left scapula very 
sensitive, chest sensitive; whole length of backbone, also ribs 
of 1. side and lumbar vertebrae sensitive, of garment, or lock 
of hair, nervous sensibility ‘ 

Pressure of eyelids together causes neuralgic pains in eye- 
balls, on 1 ovary, could not bear, bottom of 1. lung sore, on 
spine, pain in kidneys and hips <, on flesh causes hivelike 
eruptions. 

Rubbing: intense itching in nose. 

Scratching: red spots on limbs itch. 

Motion of cars* headache and diarrhea 

Straining when lifting causes lumbago. 

SKIN. — Great yellowness of skin. 

\Intense/and\mcessantX itching^*' fugitive, < towards night, 
sometimes confined t<Xl. side./ 

Ttching all over body, most on back, vagina and labia, and 
< thinking of it 


\Jntense itchingil^ll over body^ould scratch till it bled, but 


MEDORRHINUM* 


841 


Pricking sensation all over body. 

Red spots itching when scratched and on undressing at 
night, on limbs, particularly from knees up, on forearms and 
around waist 

II Copper colored spots (syphilitic) remaining after erup- 
tions, turn yellow brown and detach in scales, leaving skin 
clear and free. 

vSmall, pedunculated\warts,with^in heads^ike small button 
muS&rooms on various parts of body and thfghs 
'^Itching* intense, incessant, fugitive, of vulva, vagina, fre- 
qu'ently erratic, changes place, but not > by scratching; < 
towards night; < when thinking of it. 

An eruption of roseolous patches appeared on the body, ab- 
domen and chest, so exactly like those of typhoid that the 
possibility of this was discussed 

Girl of eleven had been treated by many physicians with 
salves and ointments to the general impairment of her health. 
Face mottled with a profusion of red scurfy sores, eyelids m- 
v^ved and nearly denuded^of lashes; hairy scalp one diffuse 
mass of thick yellow scabs, from beneath which oozed a highly 
offensive mixture of ichor and sebum Passing down neck, 
bac&, perineum and involving genitals and pubes was a fiery 
red band as broad as a child’s hand, oozing a pale yellow 
serum, which caused the clothing to stick to the body. Told 
the mother he could cure the case but it would certainly get 
worse the first three months, ^edorrhmum cm^was given, 
one dose dry on the tongue The external appearance grew 
rapidly worse, but appetite, sleep and general health steadily 
improved, and in nine months she was completely cured. — 
Wtldes. 

Child of six since infancy horribly disfigured with tinea capi- ^ 
^ tis Scalp a mass of dense crusts exuding a fetid ichor. The 
only semblance of hair being a few distorted stumps ending in 
withered roots. One dose cured in a few months, and at the 
time of writing patient was a healthy and extremely talented 
young lady, and the possessor of a luxurient head of chestnut 
hair. — Wtldes, 

CHARACTERISTICS. — For th e constitutional effects of mal- 
treated and suppressed gonorrfiea, when the best selected 
re^^Ts^ to relieve or permanently fmprove. 



342 


MEDORRHINUM. 


For persons suffering from gout, rheumatism, neuralgia and 
diseases of the spinal cord and its membranes — even organic 
lesions ending in paralysis — which can be traced to a sycotic 
origin. 

For women, with chronic ovaritis, salpingitis, pelvic cellu- 
litis^ fibroids, cysts, and other morbid growths of the uterus 
and “ovaries, especialljJi^ij symptoms point to malignancy, /with 
or without sycotic origin. 

"" For scirrhus, carcinoma or cancer, either acute or chronic 
in development, when the symptoms correspond and a his- 
tory of sycosis can be traced 

Bears the same relation in deep-seated sycotic chronic affec- 
tions of spinal and sympathetic nervous system that Psormum 
does to deep-seated affections of skin and mucous membranes. 


Children, pale, rachitic; tdwarfed* and^ stunted/in growth / 
(Bar. c ); mentally, dull and weak. 

Great heat and soreness,v^ith enlargementH^of lymphatic ' 
glands/all over body, ^pThal curvatures^br more or less pro- 
nounced traces o\rachiti^ 

Consumptive languor, fatigue, great general depression of 
vitality 

Pams: arthritic, rheumatic, a sequel of suppressed gonor- 
rhea (Daph od., Clem.), constricting, seem to tighten the 
whole body (Cac.), 'sore all over, as if bruised (Arn , Eup.) 

\TrembhnMall <?7/^rMsubiective)/ intense nervousness and 
profound exhaustion, 

Slate of collapse^ wants to be fanned all the time (Carbo v.) ; 
craves fresh air; skin cold, yet throws off the covers (Camph., 
Sec.); cold, and bathed with cold perspiration (Ver.). 

Insatiate craving: for liquor, which before she hated (A. S. 
A. R.); for salt (Cal,, Nat); for sweets (Sulph., Tub.); for 
beer, ice, acids, oranges, green fruits, coffee grounds, 
^octurnal enuresis^'^ passes enormous quantity of ammoni- 
acal ) high-colored urine in bed every night; < by overwork or 
overplay, extremes of heat or cold; when with a history of 
sycosis the best selected remedy has failed to cure 

Inten sely restless and fidgety legs and feet. 

Burn ing of hands and feet, wants them not only uncovered, 
but fanned (Each., Sulph,). 



MEDORRHINUM 


343 


RELATIONS. — Antidoted by Nux vom , nervous and j?eneral 
symptoms and the aggravations from an overdose or too fre- 
quent repetition, Ipecac (dry cough). 

Compatible. Aloe, Sulph , Tuber, (especially early morn- 
ing diarrhea, stool driving out of bed) 

Compare: Pic ac., Gels , inability to walk, legs tire and 
give out, priapism; Camph , Secale, Tab , Ver. Cm collapse, 
skin cold, covered with cold sweat, throws off all covering); 
Amb., Anac , Cal , Can I , Con., Cup., Stram , VaL, Ziz. (as 
if in a dream) 

Aggravation, when thinking of it (Helon , Ox. ac. ), heat, 
covering, stretching out, leaning head forward; thunder- 
storm; least movement; sweets, salt bathing, early morning 
(three to four A. m.) , common to this remedy and all sycotics; 
m the mountains; in the sun; warmth of bed, entering a 
warm room; from warmth, even when cold to the touch; from 
daylight to sunset (rev of syph , which is worse from sunset 
to sunrise), 

Amelioration: at the seashore, lying on the face or stom- 
ach; damp weather (Caust., Nux); by leaning far back (con- 
stipation, can only pass stool m this position) 

In summer, 1875, I had an obstinate case of acute articular 
rheumatism in a man aet. 60, from June 11th to September 
^th; he suffered excruciating agony from neuralgia. After a 
desperate battle for life the first week of September, he was 
relieved, and arose from his bed a wreck. It was expected 
that time and out-door life and the best hygienic measures 
would restore him. But weeks and months passed without 
change; he walked the streets leaning on a cane, bent over, 
muffled iiT^wraps to his ears^linSr looking like an old man 
a ^uFto fall into after my attehd- 

an^^ I "saw*liim pass my office, and considering his previous 
good health and robust frame the question arose. Why does 
he remain in this condition? Is there any miasm hereditary 
or acquired uncured to explain the obstinacy of the case? 
Could it be a gonorrheal taint ^ For reasons unnecessary to 
mention I could not ask him. 

Dr. Swan’s suggestion now occurred to me 

An obstinate case of rheumatism might be due to latent 



344 


PSORINUM. 


gonorrhea, and Medorrhinum high^will cure it, in many cases 
where improvement reaches a certain stage, and then stops, 
Medorrhinum has removed the obstruction and the case prog- 
ressed to a cure, and this too m cases where gonorrhea ap- 
peared to be a most unlikely cause, teaching us, it anything, 
the universality of latent gonorrhea and the curative power of 
the dynamic virus. 

His wife consulted me on other matters, and said ''her hus- 
band was as well as could be expected considering his age; 
she believed he would not do anything more, as he regarded 
his feeble state due to his age ” However, he came next day, 
and I gave himLthree dose^of Medorrhmum/to be takeiKevery 
\morning/ within^ ten days he returned feeling well and look- 

"oiTe* dose to be taken after some 
tunTj'^Tiris was the last prescription he has required. Within 
the month, after the Medorrhinum, he dropped his cariTanS* 
muMer, waited tRe street ''erect* with a firm step a perfeSiy 
weir man, having increased in weight from 140 to 212 pounds. 






PSORINUM. 

In the subsequent list of antipsonc remedies no isopathic 
remedies are mentioned, for the reason that their effects upon 
the healthy organism have not been sufficiently ascertained. 
Even the itch miasm (psormum), in its various degrees of 
potency, comes under this objection. I call psorin a homeo- 
pathic anti-psoric, because if, the preparations of psorin did 
not alter its nature to that of a homeopathic remedy it never 
could have' any effect upon an organism tainted with that 
same identical virus The psoric virus, by undergoing the 
processes of trituration and shaking, becomes just as much 
altered in its nature as gold does, the homeopathic prepara- 
tions of which are not inert substances in the animal economy, 
but powerfully acting agents 

Psorinum is a simihmum of the itch virus. There is no inter- 
mediate degree between idem and simihmum, in other words, 
the thinking man sees that similimum is the medium between 



PSORINUM. 


345 


simile and idem. The only definite meaning which the terms 
‘‘isopathic and sequale'’ can convey is that of similimuni; 
they are not idem. 

Hitnerto syphilis alone has been to some extent known as 
such a chronic miasmatic disease, which when uncured ceases 
only with the termination of life Sycosis (the condylornata- 
tous disease}, equally ineradicable by the vital force without 
proper medicinal treatment, was not recognized as a chronic 
miasmatic disease of a peculiar character, which it neverthe- 
less undoubtedly is, and physicians imagined they had cured 
it when they had destroyed the growth upon the skin, but the 
persisting dyscrasia occasioned by it escaped their observa- 
tion. 

Incalculably greater and more important than the two 
chronic miasms just named, however, is the chronic miasm of 
psora, which, whilst those two reveal their specific internal 
dyscrasia, the one by the venereal chancre, the other by the 
cauliflower- growths, does also, after the completion of the in- 
ternal infection of the whole organism, announce by a pecu- 
liar cutaneous eruption, sometimes consisting of only a few 
vesicles accompanied by intolerable voluptuous tickling itch- 
ing (and a peculiar odor), the monstrous internal chronic 
miasm — the psora, the only real fundamental cause and pro- 
ducer of all the other numerous, I may say innumerable, forms 
of disease, which under the names of nervous debility, hys- 
teria, hypochondriasis, mama, melancholia, imbecility, mad- 
ness, epilepsy and convulsions of all sorts, softening of the 
bones (rachitis), scoliosis and cyphosis, caries, cancer, fungus 
hematodes, neoplasms, gout, hemorrhoids, jaundice, cyanosis, 
dropsy, amenorrhea, hemorrhage from the stomach, nose, 
lungs, bladder and womb, of asthma and ulceration of the 
lungs, of impotence and barrenness, of megrim, deafness, 
cataract, amaurosis, urinary calculus, paralysis, defects of the 
senses and pains of thousands of kinds, etc., figure in system- 
atic works on pathology as peculiar, independent diseases. 

CHARACTERISTICS-— Especially adapted to the psoric consti- 


tution. 

In chronic cases when well selected remedies fail to relieve 


or pernia nejttly 


indicated but flail s to a ct 


diseases, Sulph.); when 



346 


PSORINUM. 


Lack of reaction after severe acute diseases. Appetite will 
not return 

Children are pale, delicate, sickly. Sick babies will not 
sleep day or night but worry, fret, cry (Jalap.), child is good, 
\plays all day; restless, troublesome, screaming all night /(rev. 
of, Lyc.). 

Great weakness and debility; from loss of animal fluids; 
rematmng after acute diseases , independent of or without 
any organic lesion, or apparent cause. 

Body has a filthy smell, even after bathing. 

The whole body painful, easily sprained and injured. 

Great sensitiveness to cold air or change of weather. 

Stormy weather he feels acutely, feels restless for days be- 
fore or during a thunderstorm (Phos ), dry, scaly eruptions 
disappear in summer^ return in winter. 

Ailments: from suppressed itch or other skin diseases when 
Sulphur fails to relieve; severe, from even slight emotions; 
never recovered from typhoid. 

Feels unusually well day before attack 

Extremely psoric patients, nervous, restless, easily startled. 

All excretions — diarrhea, leucorrhea, menses, perspiration — 
have a^rnon-like odoy 

Anxious, full of fear, evil forebodings 

Religious melancholy, very depressed, sad suicidal thoughts; 
despairs of salvation (Mel ), of recovery. 

Despondent: fears he will die; that he will fail in business; 
during climaxis; making his own life and that of those about 
him intolerable. 

Driven to despair with excessive itching. 

Headache: preceded, by flickering before eyes, by dimness 
of vision or blindness (Lac d.. Kali bi ), by black spots or 
rings. 

Headache: always hungry during; > while eating (Anac., 
Kali p.); from suppressed eruptions, or suppressed menses; 
> by nosebleed (Mel). 

Hair, dry, lustreless, tangles easily, glues together (Lyc.). 
Plica polonica (Bar., Sars., Tub.). 

^galg: dry, scaly or moist, fetid, suppurating eruptions; 
oozing a sticky, olensive fluid (Graph,, Mez.). 



PSORINUM. 


347 


Intense photophobia, with inflamed lids; cannot open the 
eyes, lies with face buried in pillow. 

Ears humid scurfs and soreness on and behind ears, oozing 
and offensive viscid fluid (Graph ). 

Otorrhea: thin, ichorous, horribly fetid discharge, like de- 
cayed meat; chronic, after measles or scarlatina. 

Acne, all forms, simplex, rosacea, < during menses, from 
coffee, fats, sugar, meat, when the best selected remedy fails 
or only palliates 

Hungry tn the middle of the night; must have something 
to eat (Cma, Sulph.) 

Eructations tasting of rotten eggs (Arn., Ant. t., Graph.). 

Oumsy. tonsils greatly swollen; difficult, painful swallow- 
ing; burns, feels scalded; cutting, tearing, intense pam to 
ears on swallowing (painless. Bar. c.), profuse, offensive 
saliva; tough mucus in throat, must hawk continually. To 
not only > acute attack but eradicate the tendency 

Hawks up cheesy balls, size of a pea, of disgusting taste 
and carrion-like odor (Kali m ). ^ 

Diarrhea sudden, imperative (Aloe, Sulph ); stool watery, 
dark brown, fetid^ smells like carrion; involuntary, < at 
night from 1 to 4 A. m., after severe acute diseases; teeth- 
ing; in children, when weather changes 

Constipation: obstinate, with backache; from inactivity of 
rectum; when Sulphur fails to relieve 

Enuresis, from vesical paresis; during full moon obstinate 
cases, with a family history of eczema. 

Chronic gonorrhea of year’s duration that can neither be 
suppressed nor cured ; the best selected remedy fails. 

Leucorrhea: large, clotted lumps of an intolerable odor; 
violent pains in sacrum; debility; during climaxis. 

\During pregnancy:/' most obstinate vomiting, fetus moves 
too violently; when the best selected remedy fails to relieve; 
. to correct the psoric diathesis of the unborn. 

Profuse perspiration after acute diseases, with relief of all 
suffering (Calad., Nat. m.). 

Asthma, dyspnea: < m open air, sitting up (Laur.); > 
lying^down and keeping arms stretched far apart (rev. of 
Ars.); despondent, thinks he will die. 



348 


PSORINUM, 


Cough returns every winter 

Hay fever, appearing regularly every year the same day of 
the month; with an asthmatic, psoric or eczematous history. 
Patient should be treated the previous winter to eradicate the 
diathesis and prevent summer attack. 

Cough after suppressed itch, or eczema; chronic of years’ 
duration; < mornings on waking and evenings on lying down 
(Phos., Tub.); sputa green, yellow or salty mucus; pus-like, 
coughs a long time before expectorating 

Skin: abnormal tendency to receive skin diseases (Sulph.), 
emptions easily suppurate CHep ), drj/^ inactive, rarely 
sweats; dirty look, as if never washed, coarse, greasy, as if 
bathed in oil; bad effects from suppression by Sulphur and 
Zinc ointments. 

Sleepless from intolerable itching, or frightful dreams of 
robbers, danger, etc (Nat. m ). 

Psonnum should not be given for psora or the psoric dia- 
thesis, but like every other remedy, upon a strict individuali- 
zation — the totality of the symptoms — and then we realize its 
V^onderful work. 

RELATIONS. — Antidoted by Coffea, Nux v. (if < when too 
frequently repeated or over-dose). 

Compatible: Carb v., Cinchona, Opium, Sul., Tub. (if 
want of susceptibility to medicinal action). 

Followed well by Alum , Bor., Hep., Lyc., Sul , Tub. 

Complementary: Sul., Tub , after Lact. ac. and Nux v. 
(vomiting of pregnancy), after Arn., Beilis, Ham. (in trau- 
matic affections of the ovaries); Sulph. follows Psor. in mam- 
mary cancer. 

Inimical: Apis, Crot., Lach. and the serpent poisons. 

Compare: Cham., Jalap (sick babies, fret day and night); 
(happy all day, scream at night) (Lyc ) cry all day, sleeps at 
night, nervous effects of electnc storms (Phos., X-ray); Gels., 
Lac d.. Kali hi. (headache preceded by dim vision and dark 
spots); Anac , Kali phos. (headache with hunger > while 
eating); Mel. (headache relieved by nose-bleed); Baryt. c., 
Lyc ,Sars., Tub. (plica polonica); Kali mur. (offensive cheesy 
balls from the throat); Cal., Nat. mur. (all symptoms > by 
lying down and keeping arms stretched far apart, (Ars., must 



PSORINUM. 


349 


sit up and lean forward), Phos , Tub. (cough and affections 
of the respiratory tract < mornings on waking, and evenings 
lying down), Graph., Hep , Sil (eruptions and slight injuries 
of the skin easily suppurating), Dig (drinking < cough), 
Bry , Nat , Mai (earthy, sallow, greasy face), Puls., Tub. 
(erratic shifting pains < from fats and pastry < evenings), 
Sang , Tub (sensation as if tongue were burned) ; Ars., Bap., 
Pyr (sensation as if parts were separated, Ars body at waist, 
Bap the brain and limbs), Kali c., Pyr., Tub (profuse sweat 
during convalescence), Amb , Caps . Cm., Laur , Op., Val. 
(lack of susceptibility to best selected remedy) , Gels, Kali 
lod , Sab., Cm n. (hay-fever); Cma, Chin s , Ign , Lyc., 
Sul , Tub (hungry at night, can’t sleep until they eat), 

Ars., Rhus, X-ray, Tub causes, mental emotions, or men- 
tal labor, overlifting; suppressed eruptions, weather changes; 
electric storms; traumatism, sprains and dislocations. 

MIND. — Thoughts vanish after overlifting 

Memory weak, cannot remember, does not even know his 
room 

Thoughts which he cannot get rid of constantly reappear in 
his dreams. 

Dull all forenoon, disinclined to work. 

Dull, stupid, foggy, as after a debauch, on awaking in night; 
dizziness, he falls down 

As if stupid in 1 half of head, morning. 

Mental labor causes; fulness in head; intense headache; 
throbbing in brain, pain m 1 temple 

[Very disagreeable mood; impatient; extremely ill-hu- 
mored. 

I Irritable, peevish, passionate, noisy , nervous, easily 
startled, restless, hands tremble 

ll^Intolerably self-willed/ annoys those about him; a boy, 
suffering from an eruption 

1 She is very irritable, easily angered; always thinks of 
dying. 

1 Vacillating, fearful, mania. 

I Anxiety, with oppression of chest. 

II Anxious, full of fear, melancholic; evil forebodings. 

I Great fear of death; anxiety about heart and dyspnea, 
with attacks of pain in chest. 



350 


PSORINUM. 


1 1 Believe the stitches in heart will kill him if they do not 
cease. 

I Restlessness: with eruption, a child, /with oppression of 
chest. 

"^"1 Sentimental, full of spleen, very low-spirited. 

I 'Discouragement. 

I His ideas are sad and joyless. 

II Very depressed, sad, suicidal thoughts. 

1 1 Depressed in spirits and hopeless 

I Melancholy, sorrowful, despairing 

I Desparing mood, fears he will fail in business 

I I Much depression on account of an eruption on dorsum of 
hand which appears over night. 

[Greatest despondency, making his own life and that of 
those about him intolerable, dry cough, evening fever. 

1 Is so downhearted she could commit suicide, then is so full 
of phantasms 

I Great depression of mind\ during climaxis^ with chronic 
abdominal disorders, 

1 Hypochondriasis, with hemorrhage from rectum 

I Religious melancholy. (Melilotus ) 

[Despairs of recovery, thinks he will die, hopeless, espe- 
cially after typhus, > from nosebleed. 

I [ Melancholy after suppressed itch; emaciated, pale, earthjr 
complexion j weakness of limbs, flushes of heat and palpitation 
prevent sleep; sleep comes toward morning, would like to 
stay in bed until midday, aversion to work, indifference, 
weeping, seeks solitude, despairs of recovery; she is irritable 
and forgetful. 

II Feels the greatest anguish m head, with a whirling before 
eyes every day, from 5 A. M until 5 p m., since two years, 
walks up and down his room wringing his hands and moaning 
continually, “Oh, such anguishl Oh, such anguish!” only 
when he takes his meals he ceases moaning; appetite is good. 

1 1 Has been nervous about nine months; was obliged to 
abandon all busines s; has taken much quinine and other drugs; 
a very disa^^eeSEJle feeling about head; mental depression, 
thinks he will not recover; has lost all hope; cannot apply his 
mind to business; confusion of senses, he cannot reckon; 



PSORINUM. 


351 


attacks of numbness of legs and arms, 1 side<; < on going 
to bed, formication and crawling, with pricking and smarting 
on scalp, and some on extremities, tongue white. 

II Driven to despair with excessive itching. 

Every moral emotion causes trembling. 

Severe ailments from even slight emotions. 

Disturb apices of the mind and spirit of all hinds. 

Melancholy by itself, or with insanity, also at times alter- 
nating with frenzy and hours of rationality. 

Anxious oppression, early on awaking. 

Anxious oppression in the evening after going to bed. 

Anxiety, several times a day (with and without pains), or at 
certain hours of the day or of the night; usually the patient 
then finds no rest, but has to run hither and thither, and often 
falls into perspiration. 

Melancholy, palpitation and anxiousness cause her at night 
to wake up from sleep (mostly just before the beginning of 
the menses). 

Mama of self-destruction (spleen). 

A weeping mood, they often weep for hours without know- 
ing a cause for it 

Attacks of fear; e g , fear of |ire, of being alone, of apo- 
plexy, of becoming insane, etc 

Attacks of passion, resembling frenzy 

Fright caused by the merest trifles; this often causes per- 
spiration and trembling. 

Disinclination to work, m persons who else are most indus- 
trials; no impulse to occupy himself, but rather the most 
decided repugnance thereto 

Excessive sensitiveness 

Irritability from weakness. 

Quick change of moods; often very merry and exuberantly 
so, often again and, indeed, very suddenly, dejection; e. g., 
on account of his disease, or from other trifling causes. Sud- 
den transition from cheerfulness ^to sadness, or vexation 
without a cause 

’^"Numbness and giddiness of the head; the patient can 
neither think, nor accomplish any mental labor. 

She cannot control her thoughts. 



352 


PSORINUM. 


At times she seems to be deprived of thought, she sits there 
as if she were absent 

The head feels benumbed and drowsy in the open air 

SENSORIOM. — I Vertigo, mornings, objects seem to go around 
with him, with headache; eyes feel pressed outward; with 
confusion and drawing in forehead, with roaring in ears 

Great dulness of head; he fears inflammation of brain, nose- 
bleed relieves. 

Fulness and heaviness in head. 

Vertigo, the patient reels in walking 

Vertigo, on closing the eyes, everything around him seems 
to turn, he is then attacked with nausea 

Vertigo, on turning briskly he almost falls over. 

Vertigo attacking him with a jerk in the head, he loses his 
senses for a moment. 

Vertigo, accompanied with frequent eructations. 

Vertigo, on looking down upon the floor, or on looking up. 

Vertigo, in walking along a road in a plain, which is not en- 
closed on either side 

Vertigo, she appears to herself either too large or too small; 
other objects, likewise, appear either too large or too small. 

Vertigo resembling a swoon 

Vertigo, causing a loss of consciousness. 

INNER HEAD. — Frontal headache, with sensation of weakness 
in forehead. 

Headache by sweat at night. 

Pain as if l^rain had not room enough in forehead, when ris- 
ing in morning, a forcing outward; < after washing and 
eating. 

Pressing headache in small spots in forehead and temples, 
< 1. side; feels intoxicated, stupid 

Morning headache, with pressing in forehead; stupefaction, 
staggering; eyes feel sore. 

Sensation as from a heavy blow received on forehead 
awakens him, 1 a. m 

II Surging, drawing and digging in forehead with vertigo. 

II Pain beginning over 1 eye and goes to r. ; < from hour to 
hour, then diarrhea and nausea, finally bloody vomiting; diz- 
ziness, obliges her to lie down; blur, and blue stars before 



PSORINUM. 


353 


eyes, veins of temples much distended, day before headache 
inordinate appetite, also during first hours of pain; < and 
brought on by change of weather, so that even in middle of 
night she is awakened by pam and always knows there has 
been a change, soreness of stomach, sensitive to touch and 
pressure of clothes, catamenia regular. 

1 Headache preceded by flickering before e>es; dimness of 
sight or spots, spectres, objects dancing before eyes, black 
spots or rings. 

I Headache from repelled eruption 

Pressing headache, especially unilateral 

Cramplike contractive headache 

Like hammers striking head from within outward; all 
through head as from a hammer 

Fulness of head during mental labor 

Fulness in vertex as if brain would burst, with formication 
in head, followed by heavy sleep 

Pam in back of head as if sprained, pressure in r. side of 
occiput as if luxated. 

Pam from r. to 1. as if a piece of wood was laid on back of 
head. 

i I Is always very hungry during headaches. 

I I Congestion of blood to head immediately after dinner. 

1 Great congestion of brain, relieved nosebleed. 

Congestion to head, heat; awakened at night stupefied; 

could not recollect, after sitting still awhile had to rise to col- 
lect his senses 

I Congestion to head^cheeks and nose red and hot; erup- 
tion oh face reddens great anxiety every afternoon after 
dinner \Fifth month of pregnancyy 

Vertigo, reeling while walking^ 

Vertigo when closing the eyes, everything seems to turn 
around with him, he is at the same time seized with nausea. 

Vertigo, on turning around brisklj^ he almost falls over. 

Vertigo, as if there was a jerk in the head, which causes a 
momentary loss of consciousness. 

\\Ver tigq/vith frequent eructations. 

V^tigo even when only looking down on the level ground, 
or when looking upward. 

24 



354 


PSORINUM. 


Vertigo while walking on a road not enclosed on either 
side; in an open plain. 

Vertigo she seems to herself now too large, now too small, 
or other objects have this appearance to her. 

Vertigo, resembling a swoon. 

Vertigo, passing over into unconsciousness. 

DiZ 2 ;iness, inability to think or to perform mental labor. 

Her thoughts are not under her control. 

She is at times quite without thought (sits lost in thought). 

The open air causes dizziness and drowsiness in the head. 

Everything at times seems dark and black before his eyes, 
while walking or stooping, or when raising himself from a 
stooping posture. 

\^Rush of blood to the head/ 

Heat in the head (and m the face) 

A cold pressure on the top of the head. 

Headache, a dull pain in the morning immediately on wak- 
ing up, or in the afternoon when walking rapidly or speaking 
loudly. 

>^eadache on one sid^/with\^certain penodicit}j/(after 28, 
14 or a less number of days), more frequently during full 
moon, or during the new moon, or after mental excitement, 
after a cold, etc ; a pressure or other pain on top of the head 
or inside of it, or a boring pain over one of the eyes 
'I^Headache daib^at certain hours, a stitching in the 

temples 

Attacks of throbbing headache {e. g.^ in the forehead) with 
violent nausea as if about to sink down, or, also, vomiting, 
starting early in the evenings repeated every fortnight, or 
sooner or later. 

Headache as if the skull were about to burst open. 

Headache, drawing pains 

Headache, stitches m the head (passing out at the ears). 

Roaring noise in the brain, singing, buzzing, humming, 
thundering, etc. 

Rush of blood to the head. 

Sometimes he sees everything dim or black on walking or 
stooping, or raising the head from stooping. 

Rush of blood to the head. 



PSORINUM. 


355 


Heat in the head and in the face. 

Feeling of cold pressure on the head 

Dull headache in the morning, on waking up, or in the after- 
noon, either on walking fast or speaking loud. 

Headache, twinges in the head (coming out by the ears); 
usually in walking, especially m walking and taking exercise 
after eating 

Headache, shooting pains in the head coming out by the 
ears, they often see everything black. Dm in the brain, sing- 
ing, humming, noise, thunder, etc. 

Stupefying, pressing, morning headache, > relieved by 
sweat at night. 

Pam from right to left, as if piece of wood were laid on 
back of head. 

Headache preceded by dim vision or dark spots before eyes; 
extreme dullness, fears inflammation of brain, > by nose- 
bleed followed by darkness before eyes. Cured. — Haynel 

OUTER HEAD — | Hair, dry, lustreless, tangles easily; glues to- 
gether, must comb it continually 

II A man, aet 28, dark complexion, dark brown hair, had a 
spot on 1 frontal region, commencing at edge of hair and ex- 
tending upward three-fourths of an inch, the skin covering 
spot was many shades whiter than the surrounding skin, and 
the lock of hair growing on it had turned perfectly white; 
after Psor hair and spot became natural color. 

II Sensation as if head was separated from body. 

Averse to having head uncovered; wears a fur cap in hot 
weather 

Viscid sweat about head. 

Whole head burns. 

Pustules, boils on head, mostly scalp, which looks dirty and 
emits an offensive odor. 

II Moist, suppurating, fetid, also dry eruptions on scalp. 

’I Scurfy eruption of children; large yellow vesicles around 
and between scabs. 

1 Profusely suppurating fetid eruption on head; rawness and 
soreness behind ears. 

1 Large humid blotches on head, with scabby eruptions on 
face. 



356 


PSORINUM. 


1 Pustules and boils on head, containing large quantities of 
pus, severe itching, causing child to scratch so violently that 
blood flows, formation of thick, dirty, yellow scabs, which 
when removed show a raw surface from which a yellow lymph 
exudes, which makes the linen stiff, after removal new scabs 
form, eruption spreads on nape of neck, scalp and most of 
forehead, the eruption is of very offensive odor, such large 
quantity of lymph is exuded that head seems to stick to pil- 
low, child very restless, scratches head violently, and if pre- 
vented becomes irritable and screams, large pustules^on arms 
and body, which show no tendency to heaL 

I Eruption on head, particularly on occiput, completely 
hiding scalp from view, profuse exudation, soiling pillow at 
night and causing excoriation of skin of nape of neck, offen- 
sive smelling, innumerable lice 

I Humid, scabby itching, offensive smelling eruption on 
head, full of lice; glandular swellings. 

I Head so covered with eruptions that no part of scalp was 
visible 

I Eruption on head with swelling of glands, with urticaria. 

II Tinea capitis et faciei 

I Crusta serpiginosa. 

The scalp full of dandruff, with or without itching. 

Eruption on the head, tinea capitis, malignant tinea with 
crusts of greater or less thickness, with sensitive stitches when 
one of the places becomes moist, when it becomes moist a 
violent itching, the whole crown of the head painfully sensi- 
tive to the open air, with it hard swellings of the glands in 
the neck. 

The hair of the head as if parched. 

The hair of the head frequently falls out, most m front, on 
^e crown and top of the head; bald spots or beginning bald- 
ness of certain spots. 

Under the skin are formed painful lumps, which come and 
pass away, like bumps and round tumors 

Feeling of contraction in the skin of the scalp and the face. 

The hairy scalp is covered with scales, with or without itch- 
ing. 

Eruptions on the head, scald, malignant scabs (the crust 



PSORINUM. 


357 


being more or less thick), with shooting pains when a liquid 
IS oozing out, intolerable itching during the wet stage; the 
whole top of the head painfully affected by the open air, at 
the same time hard glandular swellings on the back part of 
the neck 

Hair feels as if it were dried, hair falling out abundantly, 
especially on the forepart and on the top of the head, or in 
the centre of the crown, or baldness of some places 

Painful tubercles on the skin of the head, coming and going, 
like boils, round tumors, in rare cases they terminate in sup- 
puration. 

Sensation of constriction in the skin of the head and face. 

EYES AND SIGHT. —Aversion to light 

1 1 Great photophobia, walks with eyes bent upon ground; 
scurfy eruption on face. 

1 Photophobia: when walking in open air, with inflamma- 
tion of lids 

1 Fiery sparks before eyes. 

1 Objects seem to tremble for a few moments and get dark. 

1 Confusedness before eyes after anxiety. 

tyision blurre^black spots before eyes, flickering; danc- 
ing about of objects. 

I Darkness before eyes and ringing in ears. 

j^ Amaurosisy with scabby eruptioiy^on occiput and ears. 

I sSrou^horoTditis, some ciliary^'congestion and greaF hazi- 
ness of vitreous, so that optic nerve was only discerned with 
great difficulty and then was found decidedly hyperemic, as 
was the whole fundus; headache, especially in morning; con- 
stant profuse sweating of palms of hands. 

II Lids spasmodically closed; intense photophobia and pro- 
fuse flow of hot tears; much pustular eruption on face, large 
brown scab on r. eye, from beneath which pus pours forth 
abundantly when touched, bowels costive; appetite poor and 
only for dainties. Pustular keratitis. 

1 Recurrent pustular inflammation of cornea and conjunc- 
tiva; chronic form; scrofulous basis. 

Pterygium. 

Eyes feel tired in evening. 


^Lachrymation. 



358 


PSORINUM. 


Stitches in eyes. 

Soreness of eyes and burning, must close them frequently. 

Heat and redness of eyes with pressing pains. 

Burning, pressing pains in eyes. 

I Heat, redness and pressure in eyes, tendency to catarrhal 
inflammation, lids slightly agglutinated during morning. 

1 Inflammation of eyes with burning. 

Eyes water, inflamed, hurt so she can scarcely open them; 
pains over eyebrows, down nose, also back of head; com- 
plained mostly of head. 

Right eye inflamed, pressure as from foreign body when lids 
are closed. 

I Ophthalmia, with pressing pains, as if sand were in eyes. 

II Right eye red, internally and externally; vesicles on cor- 
nea, eruption on head 

I Acute ciliary blepharitis; internal surface of lid chiefly 
affected; photophobia, strumous diathesis, with unhealthy, 
offensive discharges. 

I Ciliary blepharitis r. to 1., < morning and during day; 
chronic cases; subject to exacerbations. 

1 Scrofulous inflammation of eyes,imlceration of corneay^ 

1 iKteumatic, chronic and blepharopEthalmia. 

1 Eyes become gummy. 

I Inflammation of lids, internal surface much congested; 
great photophobia, cannot open eyes, lies on face. 

I Eyelids: swollen; inflamed; bloated, child rubs eyes; 
guffy , grealfy swollen, 'd^ pressed togetherV thickened; 
tendency to styes; itching, especially in canthi, herpetic erup- 
tion; scrofulous inflammation, covered with thick crusts, 
whole body covered with branlike tetter. 


Eyes m uch inflamed. 1. more than r. ; supra-orbital pain; 
profuse lachrymation;"intorerance of light, must bury face in 
pillow; tear-sac very sensitive. 

The right eye feels as if moulding away. 

Pressive pain on the eyes, especially late in the evening; he 
must shut them. 

He^annot look lon^^t anythm^else’^gyerything flickers/ 
be^'ejEm^yObjects seem to mo viy 

^TEe^^^idsTespecially ^inTSir* morning, are as if closed; he 



PSORINUM. 


359 


cannot open them (for minutes, sometimes even for hours); 
the eyelids are heavy as if paralyzed or convulsively closed. 

The eyes are most sensitive to daylight; they are pained by 
it, it makes them smart, and they close involuntarily. 

Sensation of cold in the eyes. 

The canthi are full of pus-like mucus (eye-gum) 

The edges of the eyelids full of dry mucus. 

The meibomian glands round the edges of one of the eyelids 
are inflamed, either one or more (stye). 

On the edges of the eyelids, inflammation of single meibo- 
mian glands or of several of them 

Inflammation of the eyes, of various kinds. 

Yellowness around the eyes. 

Yellowness of the white of the eye. 

Dim, opaque spots on the cornea. 

Dropsy of the eye 

Obscuration of the crystalline lens, cataract, squinting 
\Far-sightedness,/he sees far m the distance, but cannot 
clearly distinguish small objects held close 
\ Short-sightedness,^ he can see even small objects by hold- 
ing them close to the eye, but the more distant the object is*, 
the more indistinct it appears, and at a great distance he does 
not see it. 

False vision; he sees objects double, or manifold, or only 
the one-half of them. 

Be fore his eyes there are floating as it were flies, or black 
goints, or dark streaks, or networks, especially when looking 
into bright daylight 

"^^The eyes seem to look through a veil or a mist; the sight 
becomes dim at certain times. 

xj^ight-blindness;/ he sees well m daytime, but, in the twi- 
light, he cannot see at all. 

.Blindness by day;* he can only see well during the twilight. 

Xmaurosis, uninterrupted dimness of vision increased finally 
even to blindness. 

HEARING AND EARS — | Singing, cracking, humming, buzzing 
and ringing in ears witli^ardness of hearing.^ 

Sensation as if he hear^S with ears not his own. 

\Sev ere pain in ear ^confined him to J)ed^for four d3.y^ ear 
swollen, thought pain would drive hirn "crazy. 



360 


PSORINUM. 


I Discharge of reddish earwax or fetid pus 

II Otorrhea, with headache, thin, ichorous and horribly 
offensive, like rotten meat, very offensive, purulent (watery, 
stinking diarrhea); brown, offensive, from 1. ear, for almost 
four years; chronic cases following scarlet fever 

i^Ulceration of membrana tympani. 

I itching in ears, child can hardly be kept from picking or 
boring in meatus. 

1 Meatus externus scabby 

I External ears raw, red, oozing, scabby, sore pain behind 
ears 

Soreness of whole external ear, with abundant yellow, offen- 
sive smelling discharge, severe itching < in evening and last- 
ing till midnight, preventing sleep and nearly driving him 
crazy, loss of appetite; great despondency. 

I ^Herpes Jrqrn temples over ears to cheeks, at times throws 
off^ innumerable scales, at others shows painful rhagades with 
yellow discharge, forming scurfs; fetid humor; itching intol- 
erable 

I I Right ear a mass of crusts and pus, the crusts extended 
behind auricle to occiput upward upon parietal bone nearly to 
vertex, forward to r ear and over cheek; upon edge of region 
involved small vesicles filled with clear fluid, which became 
yellow, then crusted, and pus flowed from beneath crusts 

Humid soreness behind ear 

1 1 Scurfs on ears, and humid scurfs behind ear. 

\Scabby eczema behind r. ear/came out, curing child’s old 
dry deafness. 

|1?ustules: on and behind concha, behind 1. ear. 

The hearing is excessively irritated and sensitive, she can- 
not bear to hear a bell ring without trembling; he is thrown 
into convulsions by the beating of the drum, etc , many 
sounds cause pains in the ear. 

There are stitches in the ear, outwardly. 

Crawling sensation and itching in the ear. 

Drynes s in the ear , d^ scabs within, withou^any ear-wax. 

Running from ear of thin, usually ill-smelling pus. 

Pulsation in the ear. 

Various sounds and noises m the ear. 



PSORINUM 


861 


Deafness of various degrees even up to total deafness, with 
or without noise in the ear, occasionally worse, according to 
the weather 

Swelling of the parotid glands. 

A brown-colored offensive discharge from the 1. ear for four 
years. 

Ears* pain in ear so severe as to confine him to bed for five 
days. External ear much swollen. Thought the pain in his 
ear would make him insane Soreness in jaw, r. side, around 
the ear, could not use his mouth, because of the contraction 
and pain; could scarcely crowd his fingers between his teeth. 

Ears, man, aged 40, discharge of reddish cerumen from 1. 
ear < at night; had troubled him for many years Sensation 
of valve opening and shutting in 1. ear < in afternoon. Buzz- 
ing in ear which stopped suddenly and was followed by vio- 
lent itching Dull, heavy pain m base of brain m afternoon, 
with sensation as though skin of abdomen was greatly relaxed 
and drawn down. Face sallow and greasy. Many pustules 
on skin and neck, which itch intensely and bleed easily when 
scratched — G, A. Whippy, 

NOSE AND SMELL— Loss of smell, with coryza. 

Smell of blood. 

Soreness of nose, nose sensitive when inhaling air 

Boring, stinging in r. nostril, followed by excessive sneezing. 

Burning followed by thm nasal discharge, which relieves. 

1 1 Dry coryza with stoppage of nose. 

11 Septum narium inflamed, with white, suppurating pus- 
tules. 

Tough mucus in nose; feels like a plug there, it nauseates 
him; > when stooping. 

Catarrh, with cough and expectoration of yellow-green 
mucus. 

II Bloody, purulent discharge from nose, 

lliChronic catarrh*^ dropping from posterior nares, so as to 
awaken him at night; hawking quantities of lumpy mucus 
gave temporary relief from feeling of fullness, ^ucus in nose/ 
would dry like white of egg, 3 eeded to be forcib^ removed. 
**Tll^ain in liver, < from sneezing 

[ Acne rosacea. 



362 


PSORINUM. 


Epistaxis, more or less profusely, more or less frequently 

The nostrils as it were stopped up. 

Sensation of dryness in the nose, troublesome even when 
the air passes freely. 

Polypi of the nose (usually with the loss of the power of 
smelling) ; these may extend also through the nasal passages 
into the fauces. 

Sense of smell, weak, lost 

Sense of smell perverted. 

Too violent sensation of smell, higher and highest sensitive- 
ness for even imperceptible odors. 

Scabs in the nose, discharge of pus or hardened clots of 
mucus 

Fetid smell in the nose. 

Nostrils frequently ulcerated, surrounded with pimples and 
scabs. 

Swelling and redness of the nose or the tip of the nose, fre- 
quent or continual 

Coryza at once, whenever she comes into the open air, then 
usually a stuffed coryza while m her room. 

Dry coryza and a stuffed nose often, or almost constantly, 
also sometimes with intermissions. 

Fluent coryza at the least taking of cold, therefore mostly 
in the inclement season and when it is wet. 

Fluent coryza, very often, or almost constantly, also in 
some cases uninterruptedly. 

He cannot take cold, even though there have been strong 
premonitory symptoms of it, simultaneously with other great 
ailments from the itch malady. 

Chr onic catarrh: constant dropping from posterior nares 
awakens patient at night; hawking quantities of lumpy mucus 
with temporary > from sensation of fulness; mucus in nose 
would dry like white of an egg, needing to be forcibly re- 
moved. \Pso rinum 200th cured. / 

FACE. — Face: pale, y^oWj'Sckly; broad blue rings around 
eyes; bluish appearance; burning heat and redness; swollen, 
with eruption. 

1 1 Painful tension and pressure in r. zygoma, towards ear. 

Cheek bones pain as if ulcerated. 



PSORINUM. 


363 


1 1 Pain as if lame in condyle of jaw. 

1 1 Sweat of face with general heat. 

1 Much roughness of skin of face; eruption on forehead be- 
tween eyes, stools very offensive. Eczema. Scrofulous oph- 
thalmia. 

I Scabby face, especially cheeks from ears; hps and eyelids 
swollen, sore about eyes. 

I Crusta lactea on face and scalp, especially over either ear 
and cheek, exfoliating numerous scabs, or it cracks and dis- 
charges a yellow, fetid humor 

I I Moist scab behind ears with dry tetter on back of head, 
on both cheeks extending upward to eyes and downward to 
corners of mouth, reddish, very closely packed, millet-seed- 
like, itching, dry pimples, with frequent loose stools, a child 
one and a half years old 

1 1 An offensive-smelling, crusty eruption extending over 
whole face for three months, had completely closed eyes. 

II Eruption on face of a child; whole face covered with a 
crust, lips and eyelids swollen, aversion to light, large mois- 
tening spots on head and behind ears 

I Humid eruptions on face; whole face covered with humid 
scurfs or crusts, with swelling of lips and eyelids and humid 
soreness behind ears. 

Pimples on forehead. 

Red, small pimples on face, especially on nose, chin and 
middle of cheeks. 

1 Closely packed, itching pimples on both cheeks from eyes 
to corners of mouth. 

1 Ulcers in face 

i Coppery eruption on face. 

I 'finea faciei. 

1 Lips* painful, swollen, particularly upper; dry; burning; 
brown and black, dry, ulcerated; swollen and covered with 
scurfs. 

I C^orners of mouth sore, often ulcerated; sycotic condylo- 
mata. 

Soreness of jaw, r. side, around ear; could not open wide 
enough to admit fingers. 

rUubmaxillary and lingual glands swollen, sore to touch; at 
same time suppurating pustules on same place. 



364 


PSORINUM. 


Paleness of the face during the first sleep, with blue rings 
around the eyes. 

Erysipelas on the face 

Frequent redness of the face, and heat. 

Yellowish, yellow color of the face. 

Sallow yellowish complexion. 

Gray, yellow color of the face. 

Pamfulness of various spots on the face, the cheeks, the 
cheek-bones, the lower jaw, etc., when touched, while chew- 
ing, as if festering inwardly, also like stitches and jerks; espe- 
cially in chewing there are jerks, stitches and a tension so 
that he cannot eat. 

Under the nose or on the upper lip, long-lasting scales or 
itching pimples. 

The red of the lips is quite pale. 

The red of the lips is dry, scabby, peeling off; it cha;ps. 

^Swelling of the lips^ especially of the upper lip, 

TheVmside of the lips/is lined with' little sores or blisters/ 

Cutaneous eruptions of the beard and of the roots of the 
hai rs of the beard, with itching 

Eruptions of the face of innumerable kinds. 

Glands of the lower jaw swollen, sometimes passing over 
into chronic suppuration. 

Glandular swellings down the sides of the neck. 

TEETH AND GUMS. — Stitching m teeth from one side to 
other, radiating to head, with burning in r cheek, which is 
swollen. 

Sensation of soreness of teeth. 

Stinging in teeth (while eating). 

lilLooseness of teeth /they feel so loose, fears they may fall 
out,^ < from^ touch, especially from teeth. 

pfoothache: < at night and from cold, > from warmth. 

[Gums: ulcerated, bleeding. 

Gums bleeding at a slight touch. 

Gums, the external or the internal, painful, as if from 
wounds 

Gums, with erosive itching. 

Gums, whitish, swollen, painful on touching. 

Gums, recession, leaving the front teeth and their roots bare. 



PSORINUM. 


365 


Gnashins: of the teeth during sleep 

Looseness of the teeth, and many kinds of deterioration of 
the teeth, even without toothache 

Toothache of innumerable varieties, with varying causes of 
excitation 

She cannot remain in bed at night, owing to toothache. 
TASTE AND TONGUE • — 1 Loss of taste with coryza. 

1 Taste bitter, goes off when eating or drinking; foul, much 
mucus in mouth, > in fresh air, bitter with yellow-coated 
tongue; fiat, sticky, dinner tastes oily. 

1 Tongue, dry, tip feels burnt as far as middle, he has hardly 
any taste, tip very dry, as if burnt, painful; white, yellow; 
thickly coated with whitish-yellow slime, ulcerated 
On the tongue, painful blisters and sore places 
Tongue white, coated white or furred white 
Tongue pale, bluish white 

Tongue full of deep furrows, here and there, as if torn 
above 

Tongue dry 

Sensation of dryness on tongue, even while it is properly 
moist. 

vStuttermg, stammering,/ also \at time^ sudden attacks Jbf in- 
ability to speak. 

""TKKJOTljD^Xcffiesion of tough mucus to posterior surface of 
soft palate, necessitating hawking. 

Tough mucus in mouth of a foul, nauseous taste, teeth stick 
together as if glued. 

1 Dryness of mouth, burning. 

Tickling, burning, mouth inflamed, sore, < from warm 
food, not annoyed by cold food 

Blisters inside lower lips, burning, painful, 
i Ulcers in mouth. 

On the inside of the cheeks painful blisters or sores. 

Flow of blood from the mouth: often severe. 

Sensation of dryness of the whole internal mouth, or merely 
in spots, or deep down m the throat. 

Fetid smell from the mouth. 

Burning in the throat. 

Mouth inflamed and sore; < from warm food, but not 
annoyed by cold. 



366 


PSORINUM. 


Constant flow of saliva, especially while speaking, particu- 
larly in the morning. 

Continual spitting of saliva. 

Insipid, slimy taste m mouth. 

Intolerably sweet iaste in the mouth, almost constantly. 

Bitter taste in the mouth, mostly in the morning. 

Sourish and sour taste m the mouth, especially after eating, 
though the food tasted all right 

Putrid and fetid taste in the mouth. 

Bad smell in the mouth, sometimes mouldy, sometimes 
putrid like old cheese, or like fetid foot-sweat, or like rotten 
sour-krout. 

THROAT. — I .Accumulation of mucus in throat and mouth. 

Tough mucus in throat, hawking. Typhoid. 

1 1 Sensation of a plug or lump m throat impeding hawking. 

I Dryness in throat with thirstlessness 

I Dryness, scraping sensation in throat 

I I Throat burns, feels scalded. 

II Tension and swollen feeling in throat. 

iDifficult swallowing^ throat feels swollen 

Pam when swallowing saliva. 

II Cutting tearing pain m throat on swallowing. 

1 1 Steam arising from fat causes immediate constriction of 
throat and chest. 

Severe angina, on r side an ulcer, with a sore pain deep 
inside and burning in fauces. 

glands swollen; fetid otorrhea 

Ulcers on r side, with deep-seated pain and burning in 
fauces. 

Frequently mucus deep down in the throat (the fauces), 
which he has to hawk up with great exertion and expectorate 
frequently during the day, especially in the morning. 

Fre quently inflammation of the throat, and swelling of the 

APPETITE, THIRST. DESIRES, AVERSIONS.— Good appetite, 
With daily attacks of anxiety, easily satisfied, great hunger, 
even after a hearty meal, canine hunger preceding attacks 
(diarrhea). 


L onpi itis;, 

Ulcerated sore throat. 



PSORINUM. 


367 


I Diminished appetite, after typhus; but great thirst; during 
convalescence. 

II Thirst, during dinner; with dryness of throat, especially 
for beer, mouth feels so dry. 

Desire for acids. 

Loathing of pork. 

Ravenous hunger at midnight, waking from sleep. 

EATING AND DRINKING. — While eating ceases complaining. 

II Immediately after dinner, congestion of blood to head. 

1 1 Pam in chest extending to shoulder, < after cold drinks. 

I Drinking causes cough 

HICCOUGH, BELCHING, NAUSEA AND VOMITING.^l Eructations: 
sour, rancid, tasting and smelling like rotten eggs, room is 
filled with an offensive odor. Arn., Graph , Ant t Arn — 
especially in A m ; Ant t — at night, Graph, in a. m. only, 
after rising, disappearing on rinsing the mouth. 

II Waterbrash '^hen lying down, > on getting up. 

I Nausea, with poor appetite, m morning, with backache, 
after suppressed itch, morning with pain m small of back; all 
day, with vomiting 

Vomiturition, followed by vomiting, first of blood, then of 
sour, slimy fluid. 

\ Const ant nausea during the day, with inclination to vomit; 
a kind of vomiting of sweet mucus every morning at ten and 
in evening. 

Vomiting of sour mucus in morning before eating. 
Eructations, with the taste of the food, several hours after 
eating 

\Eructations,' empty, loud, of mere air, uncontrollable, often 
for hours, not infrequently at night 

Incomplete eructation, which causes merely convulsive 
shocks in the fauces, without coming out of the mouth; spas- 
modic straining in the esophagus 
Eructation, sour, either fasting or after food, especially 
after milk. 

Eructation, which excites to vomiting. 

Eructation, rancid (especially after eating fat things). 
Eructation, putrid or mouldy, early in the morning. 
Frequent eructations before meals, with a sort of rabid 
hunger 



368 


PSORINUM. 


Heart-burn, more or less frequent, there is a burning along 
the chest, especially after breakfast, or while moving the body 

Water-brash, a gushing discharge of a sort of salivary fluid 
from the stomach, preceded by writhing pains m the stomach 
(the pancreas), with a sensation of weakness (shakmess), 
nausea causing as it were a swoon, and gathering of the saliva 
in the mouth, even at night. 

The ruling complaints in any part of the body are excited 
after eating fresh fruit, especially if this is acidulous, also after 
acetic acid (in salads, etc ). 

Nausea early in the morning. 

Nausea even to vomiting, in the morning immediately after 
rising from bed, decreasing from motion 

Nausea always after eating fatty things or milk. 

Vomiting of blood. 

Hiccough after eating or drinking. 

Swallowing impeded by spasms, even causing a man to die 
of hunger. 

Spasmodic, involuntary swallowing. 

SCROBICITLUM AND STOMACH. — Stitching pain in pit of 
stomach 

II Weakness of stomach. 

11 Frequent oppression of stomach, especially after eating. 

Cramps in stomach. 

^^yspepsia^ eructations, flatus and stools like spoiled eggs. 

1 1 Gastric buious affections. 

Frequent sensation of fasting and of emptiness in the stom- 
ach (or abdomen), not unfrequently with much saliva m the 
mouth. 

Ravenous hunger (canine hunger), especially early in the 
morning; he has to eat at once else he grows faint, exhausted 
and shaky (or if he is in the open air he has to he straight 
down). 

Ravenous hunger with rumbling and grumbling in the ab- 
domen. 

Appetite without hunger; he has a desire to swallow down 
in haste various things without there being any craving there- 
for in the stomach. 

A sort of hunger; but when she then eats ever so little, she 
feels at once satiated and fuir 



PSORINtM 


369 


When she wants to eat, she feels full m the chest and her 
throat feels as if full of mucus. 

Want of appetite, only a sort of cfnawing, turning and 
writhing in the stomach urges her to eat 

Repugnance to cooked, warm food, especially to boiled 
meat, and hardly any longing for anything but rye-bread (with 
butter), or for potatoes. 

In the morning, at once, thirst, constant thirst 

In the pit of the stomach there is a sensation of swelling, 
painful to the touch 

Sensation of coldness in the pit of the stomach. 

Pressure in the stomach or m the pit of the stomach, as 
from a stone, or a constricting pain (cramp j. 

In the stomach beating and pulsation, even when fasting. 

Spasm in the stomach, pam m the pit of the stomach as if 
drawn together 

Griping in the stomach, a painful griping in the stomach; 
It suddenly constricts the stomach, especially after cold drink- 
ing. 

Pain m the stomach, as if sore, when eating the most harm- 
less kinds of foods. 

Pressure in the stomach, even when fasting, but more from 
every kind of food, or from particular dishes, fruit, green veg- 
etables, rye-bread, food containing vinegar, etc 

During eating, feels dizzy and giddy, threatening to fall to 
one side. 

After the slightest supper, nocturnal heat m bed; m the 
morning, constipation and exceeding lassitude. 

After meals, anxiety and cold perspiration with anxiety/ 

During eating, perspiration. 

Immediately after eatmg^^vomiting/ 

After meals, pressure and burning in stomach, or in the epi- 
gastrium, almost like heartburn. 

After eating, burning m the esophagus from below upward. 

Feels shaky and exhausted, wants food continually, or else 
gets cold and wet all over. 

HYPOCHONDRIA. — 1| Deep-seated stitching, pressing pain in 
region of liver, < from external pressure and lying on r. side; 
pain hinders sneezing, laughing, yawning, coughing, deep in- 
spiration and walking. 

25 



370 


PSORINUM. 


Stmgmgr, sharp pain in region of liver and spleen. 

1 Chrome hepatitis. 

Stitches in spleen, > when standing; < when moving, and 
continuing when again at rest. 

I Chronic induration of spleen. 

ABDOMEN. 1 Bloated abdomen 

II Flatulency with disorders of liver. 

1 Constant feeling of emptiness and looseness in abdomen; 
sensation as if intestines were hanging down 

I Pams in abdomen after eating; flatulency and tendency to 
^diarrhea, > when flatus passes. 

Pain in abdomen while riding 

Cutting pain in intestines 

II Colic, removed by eating; > passing fetid flatus 

Painful bearing down, with painful burning micturition. 

Stinging, sharp pains in inguinal glands. 

Pam through r. groin when walking 

Lumps in r groin, preventing stooping 

Inguinal hernia > hernial sac infiltrated. 

I Chronic abdominal affections. 

‘•MU. ^ 

I Abdominal affections during climaxis, with a high degree 
of ill-humor 

After meals, distension of the abdomen. 

After meals, very tired and sleepy. 

After meals, as if intoxicated. 

After meals, headache 

After meals, palpitation of the heart 

Alleviation of several, even remote, complaints from eating. 

The^flatus does not pass oShnt moves about/ causing many 
ailments of body and spirit. 

'The abdomen is distended by flatus, the abdomen feels full, 
especially after a meal. 

Sensation as if the flatus ascended; followed by eructa- 
tions — then often a sensation of burning in the throat, or 
vomiting by day or by night. 

Pain in the hypochondria when touched, and in motion, or 
also during rest. 

Constricting pain in the epigastrium, immediately under the 
ribs. 



PSORINUM 


371 


Cutting pains in the abdomen, as if from obstructed flatus; 
there is a constant sensation of fulness in the abdomen — the 
flatus rises upwards 

Cutting pams m the abdomen almost daily, especially with 
children, oftener in the morning than in other parts of the 
day, sometimes day and night without diarrhea. 

Cutting pains in the abdomen, especially on the one side of 
the abdomen, or the groin. 

In the abdomen qualmishness, a sensation of voidness, dis- 
agreeable emptiness, even immediately after eating, he felt as 
if he had not eaten anything 

From the small of the back, around the abdomen, espe- 
cially below the stomach, a sensation of constriction as from 
a bandage, after she had had no stool for several days. 

Pam m the liver, when touching the right side of the ab- 
domen. 

Pain in the liver, a pressure and tension — a tension below 
the ribs on the right side. 

Below the last ribs (in the hypochondria}, a tension and 
pressure all over, which checks the breathing and makes the 
mmd anxious and sad. 

Pam in the liver, stitches, mostly when stooping quickly 

^ Inflammation of the liver. 

Pressure in the abdomen as from a st|^P > 

Hard ness of the abdomen. 

Crampy colic, a grasping pain m the bowels 

In colic, coldness on one side of the abdomen. 

A clucking, croaking and audible rumbling and grumbling 
m the abdomen. 

So-called uterine spasms, like labor pains, grasping pains 
often compelling the patient to he down, frequently quickly 
distending the abdomen without flatulence. 

In the lower abdomen, pams pressing down towards the 
genitals. 

\ Inguinal hernias/ often painful while speaking and singing. 

Swellings of the inguinal glands, which sometimes turn into 
suppuration. 

STOOL AND RECTUM. — Emission of hot, fetid, sulphurous 
flatus; smelling like rotten eggs. 



372 


PSORINUM. 


Stool: normal, but passed in a great hurry, with quantities 
of flatus, can hardly reach the water-closet. (Aloe.) 

Griping and desire for stool while riding. 

I Diarrhea, preceded by colic 

1 Frequent thin stool, with eruption on head 

Green bilious diarrhea, mixed with mucus, soft, voided with 
difficulty from weakness. 

I Stool dark brown, very fluid and foul-smelling, having 
the smell of rotten eggs, mostly in children m their first or 
second summer, green mucus, or bloody mucus, smells like 
carrion, < at night; frequent, liquid, involuntary, nearly 
painless 

II Semiliquid, brownish, indelible, insufferably nasty, passed 
during sleep, at 1 and 4 a. M , with undigested food. Infan- 
tile diarrhea 

\\ Horribly offensive, nearly painless, almost involuntary, 
dark and watery stool, only at night and most towards morn- 
ing. 

II Involuntary stool during sleep. 

II Boy, aet four months, whitish bad-smellmg diarrhea; 
constantly crying, with drawing up of knees as if in pain; 
rattling cough, cries all night, acts as if he had earache in 1. 
ear, from which there was a slight discharge; seldom urinates; 
after second dose, sixteen hours after first, broke out all over 
his head and face, with a small pimply eruption, a vesicle at 
the apex of each pimple, which exuded lymph which dried in 
a thick brown scab, which gradually fell off in a day or two, 
and in two weeks left the skin perfectly clean. 

1 Diarrhea: after severe acute disease; at night, early m 
morning, when rising in morning; in childbed; when weather 
changes (general condition) 

Before stool, griping pains about navel. 

1 Cases which do not respond promptly to the indicated 
remedy, the children having dirty, yellow, greasy skin, with a 
partially developed eruption on forehead and chest, with con- 
stant fretting and worrying. 

I Lienteria. 

1 Chronic diarrhea; offensive stools. 

iCholera infantum ;/stools dark brown, watery, of an intol- 



PSORINUM. 


373 


erably offensive odor, liquid, mucous or bloody and excess- 
ively fetid. 

I Cholera infantum m summer; nervous and restless at 
night, awake at night as if frightened, or cry out during sleep; 
then two or three nights afterwards, they begin with diarrhea; 
stools are profuse and watery, dark brown or even black m 
color, very offensive, almost putrid in odor, < at night. 

I Cholera 

I Soft stool passed with difficulty; from weakness. 
i^Obstmate constipation/ with coryza and obstruction of 

nose, pain m small of back; blood from rectum; due to tor- 
por of rectum; lasting three or four days, due to inactivity of 
rectum; stool on third or fourth day was accompanied by 
severe pains which induced patient to withhold effort as much 
as possible. 

II Sensitive hemorrhoidal pam in rectum. 

I Unpleasant burning in rectum. 

Soreness in rectum and anus while riding, 
ll^^emorrhage from rectum; m old women large quantities 

of blood discharged at once, with constipation and hypochon- 
driasis. 

Burning hemorrhoidal tumors 
Prolapsus rectf, with burning. 

Stool: normal, but imperative, passed m a great hurry, 
with large quantities of flatus; can scarcely reach the toilet. 
Prolapsus recti, with intense burning of parts. 

Constipation, delayed stools sometimes for several days, 
not infrequently with repeated ineffectual urging to stool 
^ Stools hard/ as if burnt, in small knots, like sheep-dung, 
often covered with mucus, sometimes also enveloped by vein- 
lets of blood. 

Stools of mere mucus (mucous piles) 

Passage of round worms from the anus. 

Discharge of pieces of tape-worm. 

Stools, in the beginning very hard and troublesome, fol- 
lowed by diarrhea. 

Very pale, whitish stooL 
Gray stools 
Green stools 



374 


PSORINUM. 


Clay-colored stools. 
yStpols with putrid, sour smell/ 

At the stools, cutting pains in the rectum. 

Stools show diarrhea for several weeks, months, years 

Frequently repeated diarrhea, with cutting pains in the ab- 
domen, lasting several days 

After stool, especially after a softer, more copious evacua- 
tion, great and sudden prostration 

Diarrhea soon weakening, that she cannot walk alone. 

Painless and painful hemorrhoidal varices on the anus, in 
the rectum (blind piles). 

Bleeding hemorrhoidal varices on the anus or in the rectum 
(running piles), especially during stools, after which the hem- 
orrhoids often pain violently for a long time. 

With bloody discharges in the anus or in the rectum, ebul- 
lition of blood through the body and short breathing. 

Formication and itching formication in the rectum, with or 
without the discharge of ascandes. 

Itching and erosion in the anus and the perineum 

Polypi in the rectum. 

Cholera infantum: obstinate, which seemed to defy the best 
selected remedy. Stool very thin and watery, dirty, green- 
ish*" smelled like carrion. Child very fretful, had no sleep for 
two days and nights Psorinum 4 cm., one dose. In two 
hours child went to sleep, and in four hours was well, without 
a repetition. — W, A. Hawley 

URINARY ORGANS. — 1 1 Involuntary urine, cannot hold it, ves- 
ical paresis Typhus. 

H]^uresis;/wets bed at night; again during full moon, ob- 
stinate cases. 

Scanty urination nearly every half hour, with burning in 
urethra and in condylomata. 

I Urine: dark brown, with reddish sediment, loaded with 
pus; frequent, scanty; burning and cutting in urethra; thick 
whitish; turbid; red deposit, cuticle forms on surface; pro- 
fuse. 

During micturition, anxiety, also at times prostration. 

urine/is discharged, succeeded by great 

weariness. 



PSORINUM. 


375 


Painful retention of urine (with children and old people). 

When he is chilled (feels cold through and through)^ he 
cannot urinate. 

At times, owing to flatulence, she cannot urinate 

The urethra is constricted m parts, especially in the morn- 
ing 

Pressure on the bladder, as if from an urging to urinate, im- 
mediately after drinking. 

He cannot hold the urine for any length of time, it presses 
on the bladder, and passes off while he walks, sneezes, coughs 
or laughs. 

Frequent micturition at night, he has to get up frequently 
at night for that purpose. 

Urine passes off m sleep involuntarily. 

After urinating, the urine continues to drip out for a long 
time 

Whitish^rme, with a sweetish smell and taste, passes off 
m excessive abundance, with prostration, emaciation and in- 
extinguishable thirst (diabetes). 

During urination, burning, also lancinating pains in the 
urethra and the neck of the bladder. 

Urine of penetrating, sharp odor. 

The urine quickly deposits a sediment. 

The urine discharged is at once turbid like whey. 

With the urine there is discharged from time to time a red 
sand (kidney grits). 

Dark-yellow urine 

Brown urine. 

Blackish urine. 

Urine with blood particles, also at times complete hema- 
turia. 

MALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — Excessive, uncontrollable sexual 
instinct. 

[Aversion to coition; impotence, want of emission during 
coitus. 

I Absence of erections; parts flabby, torpid. 

Prostatic fluid discharged before urinating. 

Drawing pains in testicles and spermatic cords. 

Inflamed ulcer on glans, with swelling and heaviness of tes- 
ticles 



376 


PSORINUM 


11 After suppressed gonorrhea, rheumatism, lameness; con- 
juncTivitis, with granulations, intense photophobia, pain dart- 
ing around, through head: other eye sensitive to light. 

"" 1 Chronic painless discharge from urethra, leaving yellow 
stain upon linen 

1 1 Gleet of twelve years* duration 

II Seven large, moist, itching, occasionally burning condy- 
lomata on prepuce, every night nocturnal enuresis; during 
day must urinate nearly every half hour, urination scanty and 
accompanied by burning in urethra and condylomata; lips 
ulcerated, particularly at corners of mouth, in several locali- 
ties, but particularly in popliteal spaces, dry, herpetic erup- 
tion, not Itching 

II Sycotic excrescence on edges of prepuce, with itching and 
burning. 

II Boy, aet 7, suffering since birth ,\r.-sided inguinal hernia/ 
about three inches of intestine descending to testicle through 
widely opened inguinal canal, upon applying a bandage severe 
inflammation of tunica vaginalis occurred, which yielded to 
Pulsat , bat returned every time bandage was applied, child 
gradually grew miserable and thin and lost all appetite; fever 
set in, and a large amount of water collected in tunica vagi- 
nalis, as the case improved a painful, burning, itching excori- 
ation with acrid discharge appeared upon inner surface of 
prepuce and upon corona glandis 

I Hydrocele. 

II Hydrocele, caused by repeated inflammation, in conse- 
quence of pressure from a truss. 

\^ischarge of^prostatic fluid after urmation/but especially 
^after a difficult stool (also almostVconstant drippmg/of the 
^me). 

Nocturnal passage of semen, too frequent, one, two or three 
tirn^a*week, or even every night. 

Nightly discharge of the genital fluid in women, with volup- 
tuous dreams. 

Nocturnal pollutions, even if not frequent, yet immediately 
attended with evil consequences. 

Semen passes off^lmost mvoluntarilmn daytime/with little 
excitation, often even without erection. 



PSORINUM 377 

Erections very frequent, long continuing, very painful, with- 
out pollutions. 

T^he semen is not discharged, even during a long continued 
coition and with a proper erection, but it passes off after- 
wards in nocturnal pollutions or with the urine. 

Accumulation of water in the tunica vaginalis of the testicle 
(hydrocele). 

There is never a complete erection, even with the most 
voluptuous excitement 

Painful twitches in muscles of the penis. 

Itching of the scrotum, which is sometimes beset with pim- 
ples and scabs. 

One or both of the testicles chronically swollen, or showing 
a knotty induration {Sarcocele). 

Dwindling, diminution, disappearance of one or both tes- 
ticles. 

Induration and enlargement of the prostatic gland. 

Drawing pain in the testicle and the spermatic chord. 

Pam as from contusion m the testicle. 

Lack of the sexual desire in both sexes, either frequent or 
constant 

Uncontrollable, insatiable lasciviousness, with a cachectic 
complexion and sickly body. 

\ Sterility, impotence, /without any original organic defect in 
the sexual parts 

FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — ilLeft ovary indurated after a 
violent knock, followed by itching eruption on body and face. 

ii Knotty lump above r. groin; even a bandage hurts. 

Pinching in pubic region m women. 

Cutting in 1 loin; cannot walk without assistance 

II Metrorrhagia. 

Menses delayed and scanty. 

I Amenorrhea, in psonc subjects when tetter is covered by 
thick scurfs, with phthisis. 

II Dysmenorrhea near climaxis, 

11 Menstrual disorders during climaxis 

llLeucorrhea, large lumps, unbearable in odor; violent 
pains in sacrum and r loin; great debility. 

1 Ulcers of the labia. 



PSORINUM. 


SYS 

Disorders of the menstrual function; the menses do not ap- 
pear regularly on the twenty-eighth day after their last ap- 
pearance, they do not come on without other ailments and 
not at once, and do not continue steadily for three or four 
days with a moderate quantity of healthy colored, mild blood, 
until on the fourth day it imperceptibly comes to an end with- 
out any disturbance of the general health of body and spirit; 
nor are the menses continued to the forty-eighth or fiftieth 
year, nor do they cease gradually and without any troubles 

The menses are slow in setting in after the fifteenth year 
and later, or after appearing one or more times, they cease 
for several months and for years. 

The menses do not keep their regular periods, they either 
comet several days too early, sometimes every three weeks, or 
even every fortnight 

The menses flow only one day, only a few hours, or in im- 
perceptibly small quantities. 

The menses flow for five, six, eight and more days, but only 
intermittently, a little flow every six, twelve^^ twenty-four 
flours, and tEen they cease for half or whole days, before more 
Is ciischarged 

The menses flow too strongly for weeks, or return almost 
daily (bloody flux) 

Menses of watery blood or of brown clots of blood. 

Menses of very fetid blood 

Menses accompanied with many ailments, swoons or 
(mostly stitching) headaches, or contractive, spasmodic, cut- 
ting pains in the abdomen and m the small of the back; she 
is obliged to he down, vomit, etc. 

^Polypi In the vagina 

\ Le ucorrhea/from the vagina, one or several days before, or 
soon after, ^the rnonthly flow of bloody o^ during the whole 
ImTe "from the one menstrual discharge to the other, with a 
diminution of the menses, or continuing solely instead of the 
menses, the flow is like milk, or like white, or yellow mucus, 
or like acrid, or sometimes like fetid, water 
%Pg|yic tumor,^pronounced malignant by Dr. Macdonald; 
aftero^ning abdomen refused to remove it on account of ad- 
hesions; urine loaded with pus; stool involuntary and horribly 



PSORINUM, 


379^ 


offensive, nurses could not endure it. Psor. 30 cured —5, S. 
Moffatt, 

A lady, 32, had severe fever, temperature from 103 to 105, 
attended with headache, backache and cramps in muscles of 
limbs, with severe abdominal and pelvic pains, the result of 
instrumental abortion As the acute symptoms passed off, 
there was a great fear and mental restlessness, which Aconite 
failed to relieve 

Each evening at 6, would become restless and break out in 
profuse icy cold sweat, continued all night, very exhausting, 
not > by external heat. As evening approached, great fear 
of the on-coming cold sweat and icy chilliness. With the 
cold copious sweat was a foul taste and very offensive odor. 
Psorinum dmm., one dose dry on tongue >. 

PARTURITION. PREGNANCY. LACTATION.-j During preg- 
nancy: fetus moves too violently; abdomen tympanitic; nau- 
sea; vomiting; obstinate cases. 

IlMammse swollen, painful, redness of nipples, burning 
around them. 

j I Pimples itching violently, about nipples; oozing a fluid* 
Second month of pregnancy. 

11 Mammary cancer. 

Dwindling of the breasts, or excessive enlargement of the 
same, with retroceding nipples. 

Erysipelas on one of the breasts (especially while nursing). 

A hard, enlarging and indurating gland with lancinating 
pains in one of the mammse. 

Itching, also moist and scaly eruptions around the nipples. 

\ Pre mature births.; 

During pregnancies great weariness, nausea, frequent vom- 
iting, swoons, painful varicose veins on the thighs and the 
Tegs, and also at times on the labia, hysteric ailments of vari- 
ous kinds, etc. 

' Mrs H. E. L., aged 56, had an attack of acute peritonitis 
two years ago, involving especially the r, lower abdomen; has 
never been well since, having persistent attacks of pain in r. 
inguinal region, so severe that her attending physician always 
resorted to Morphine. 

The concomitant symptoms were easily controlled, but on 



380 


PSORINUM. 


their disappearance the attacks of pain increased m frequency 
and violence Physical examination revealed adhesive bands, 
which contracted the vagina, and involved the r broad liga- 
ment and r. ovary, which was apparently firmly bound down 
to the side of the pelvis. The pain was aggravated by mov- 
ing the limb; walking; standing erect; lying on the painful 
side. After attempting in vain for months to relieve the local- 
ized pain by the careful selection of a remedy, with only tem- 
porary relief, certain to be followed by a more severe relapse, 
in desperation Psormum was given; the pains disappeared 
and have never returned, notwithstanding the pathological 
diagnosis. 

A lady, 32, had severe fever, temperature from 103 to 105, 
attended with headache, backache and cramps in muscles of 
limbs, with severe abdominal and pelvic pains, the result of 
instrumental abortion. As the acute symptoms passed off, 
there was great fear and mental restlessness, which Aconite 
failed to relieve. 

Each evening at 6, would become restless and break out in 
profuse icy cold sweat, continued all night, very exhausting, 
not > by external heat. As evening approached, great fear 
of the on-coming cold sweat and icy chilliness. With the 
cold, copious sweat, was a foul taste and very offensive odor. 
Psorinum dmm , one dose dry on tongue >. 

"IrOiCE AND LARYNX. TRACHEA AND BRONCHIA.— | Hoarse- 
ness; when talking, phlegm sticks in larynx 

I Talking is very fatiguing. 

II Voice weak, trembling. 

I Suffocative and crawling sensation m larynx, producing a 
paroxysmal, dry, hacking cough. 

Tickling, throat as if narrowing, must cough to relieve it. 

I I For eleven years hay fever, coming on about 20th of 
August. 

Hoarseness, after the least amount of speaking; she must 
vomit in order to clear her voice 

* Hoarseness, also sometimes aphony (she cannot speak loud 
but must whisper), after a slight cold 

y Constan t hQarseness ^n^phon:^or ye ars, he cannot speak 
aloudwrd. 



PSORINUM 


881 


Suppuration of the larynx and the bronchia (Iarynj?o-bron- 
chial phthisis). 

Hoarseness and catarrh ver^^ often, or almost constantly; 
his chest IS continually affected 

Cough, there is frequently an irritation and a crawling in 
the throat, the cough torments him, until sweat breaks out 
upon the face (and upon the hands). 

RESPIRATION. — i Short breath or want of breath 

11 Convalescents go out for a walk, instead of being invigor- 
ated return home in order to get breath or to he down so they 
can breathe more easily, feel < instead of > from being in 
open air. 

1 Chest expands with great difficulty, cannot get breath. 

I Anxious dyspnea, with palpitation and pain in cardiac re- 
gion 

I DyspJiea * < when stittng up to terite, > ivhen lying dozen, 
congestion to head after dinner, great despondency; < the 
Clearer arms are brought to body. 

Must keep arms spread wide apart 

I Asthma, as if he would die; precursor of hydrothorax. 

Stitches from behind forward, m chest and back, when 
breathing 

Want of breath in open air, must hurry. 

Obstruction of the breath, with stitching pains in the chest 
at the slightest amount of walking, he cannot go a step far- 
ther (angina pectoris). 

Asthma, merely when moving the arras, not while walking. 

\ Attacks of suffocation /especially^after midnight, the patient 
has to sit up, sometimes he has to leave his bed, stand stoop- 
ing forward, leaning on his hands; he has to open the win- 
dows, or get out into the open air, etc.; he has palpitations; 
these are followed by eructations or yawning, and the spasm 
terminates with or without coughing and expectoration. 

Palpitation with anxiety, especially at night. 

Asthma, loud, difficult, at times also sibilant respiration. 

Shortness of breath. 

Asthma, on moving, with or without cough. 

Asthma, mostly while sitting down 

Asthma,* spasmodic; when she comes into the open air it 
takes her breath. 



382 


PSORINUM. 


Asthma, m attacks, lasting several weeks. 

COUGH. -~1 Cough; from tickling in larynx^^dry^hard^^^ caused 
by tickling in trachea; in evening with pains in criest and 
throat, passing off when she is quiet; produced by talking; 
with sensation of weakness in chest, dry, with sensation of 
heaviness in chest; dry, with soreness under sternum, with 
stitches in chest, dry, with constricting pam in chest, < 
mornings when awaking and evenings on lying down; coughs 
a long time before expectorating; periodic attacks, chronic, 
spasmodic; of twenty-five years' duration. 

II Severe, dry cough with oppression of chest and pain as if 
everything in chest were raw and scratched, fever in evening; 
great depression of spirits, making life burdensome to him. 

II Cough, causing tearing from centre of chest to throat, all 
on r side; cough < at night, urine escapes when coughing. 

An old, dull cough, palpitation and a fixed pain in chest dis- 
appear, the entire feeling is better, only the lower white of 
eye turns red and ulcers form on it, eye waters, without pain, 
with photophobia, > in fresh air 

II Dry cough, pain in the chest for last three months, a con- 
stricting pressure at fourth and fifth ribs near sternum, ex- 
cessive irritability and ill-humor 

II Cough with expectoration; asthma, thinks he will die. 

I Cough with expectoration of green mucus, nearly like mat- 
ter, especially m morning when waking and m evening when 
lying down, with nausea; it sticks firmly and he can only ex- 
pectorate with difficulty. 

II Cough with salty-tasting, green and yellow expectoration, 
oppression of chest; gradual loss of strength; after suppressed 
itch. 

I Expectoration of blood with hot sensation in chest; yel- 
lowish-green 

I Chronic blennorrhea of lungs, threatening phthisis. 

1 Drinking causes cough. 

|[ Cough aggravates pain in liver and pain in chest extend- 
ing to shoulder 

Cough; frequent irritation and crawling m the throat; the 
cough torments him, until perspiration breaks out on his face 

T&SrEIsT.'andsT.'" ' 



PSORINUM. 


383 


Cough, which does not abate until there is retching and 
vomiting, mostly m the morning or in the e%'ening 
Cough, which terminates every time with snee^sing. 

Cough mostly in the evening after lying down and when- 
ever the head lies low 

Cough, waking the patient up after the first brief sleep, 
\^pugh, especially in the night./ 

Cough, worst after awaking m the morning. 

Cough, worst after eating. 

Cough, at once with every deep breath 
Cough, causing a sensation of soreness in the chest, or at 
times stitches in the side of the chest or the abdomen. 

Dry cough. 

Cough, with yellow expectoration resembling pus, with or 
without spitting of blood 

Cough, with excessive expectoration of mucus and sinking 
of the strength (mucous phthisis j 

Attacks of spasmodic cough (whooping cough) 

INNER CHEST AND LUNGS,— Oppression: in chest; an.xious, 
every morning; with cough 
Pressure on chest. 

Burning pressing pain m chest. 

Pain m chest, great anxiety by spells. 

II Constriction of chest when inhaling steam from fat. 
Excruciating pains in chest. 

Cutting as of knives m chest. 

Feels as if everything were torn in chest. 

Whole chest feels sore. 

At times bruised, suppurative pain through whole chest, ex- 
tending towards r. shoulder and becoming fixed there, < 
after frequent coughing, after cold drinks. 

II Pam in chest, as if raw, as from subcutaneous ulceration. 
Ulcerative pain in chest under sternum. 

II Stitches: m sternum, with backache; from behind forward 
in chest and back when breathing, in r. side of chest when 
breathing, in chest (L side). 

Sharp pain, r. side, opposite tenth rib 
11 Fixed p ain in r. side of chest. 

Pams m r. side oHcfiest <. from motion, laughing, cough- 
ing, with sweat. 



384 


PSORINUM. 


11 Chest pains from coughing. 

1 1 Pams in chest grow more severe two or three times a day, 
begin with chilliness and trembling, followed by heat one 
hour in duration, great anxiety of heart and mind with fear 
of death, dyspnea and restlessness, attacks pass off with sour, 
clammy sweat and chilliness, sweat however occurs every 
night independent of attack 

1 1 Hot sensation in chest 

II Tedious recovery in pneumonia. 

II Dull pressure in r side of chest, extending thence over 
whole chest, < bending forward m writing, not by motion or 
deep inspiration, dry cough with expectoration of small lumps 
of mucus; speaking affects him very much, great prostration 
after preaching, so that he must rest a long time to recuper- 
ate, voice IS not husky, but it requires all his strength to get 
through with his work, chest narrow, shoulders projecting 
Phthisis 

1 1 Pam in chest comes by fits; great anxiety, a feeling of 
ulceration under sternum, chest inflates only with much ex- 
ertion; coughs a long time before beginning to expectorate. 
Phthisis pulmonalis 

I Suppuration of lungs Phthisis pulmonalis. 

1 Chronic blenorrhea of lungs. 

1 Hydrothorax. 

Chest symptoms > when lying down. 

Violent, at times unbearable, stitches in the chest at every 
breath, cough impossible for pain, without inflammatory 
fever (spurious pleurisy). 

Pain in the chest on walking, as if the chest was about to 
burst. 

Pressive pain in the chest, at deep breathing or at sneezing. 

Often a slightly constrictive pain in the chest, which, when 
it does not quickly pass, causes the deepest dejection. 

Burning pain in the chest. 

Frequent stitches m the chest, with or without cough. 

Violent stitches in the side; with great heat of the body, it 
is almost impossible to breathe, on account of stitches in the 
chest with hemoptysis and headache; he is confined to his 
bed. 



PSORINUM. 


385 


Rush o f blood to the chest 

MSIt, PULSE AND CIRCULATION.— II Stitches in cardiac re- 
gion, low gurgling extending towards heart, for a moment 
breathing is impossible 

1 Pam in heart > when lying down, thinks the stitches will 
kill him if they continue. 

I ] Gurgling (gluckernj in region of heart, particularly no- 
ticeable when lying 

I Palpitation, with anxiety; mental disquietude, dislike for 
work, from coughing, in those suffering from hepatic dis-- 
orders 

I Dyspnea with palpitation, with pain in cardiac region. 

Sounds of heart indistinct, bellows’ murmur with first 

sound. 

II Stenosis of 1. osteum venosum, purring in region of apex, 
cyanotic lips, dyspnea and shortness of breath when walking 
in open air, > lying down. 

II Rheumatic pericarditis, pulse 144; skin dry, pain in head 
and limbs, but more particularly in shoulder; dyspnea, with 
pain m region of heart, effusion, indistinct heart sounds; bel- 
lows’ murmur with first sound, inability to he down. 

I Pericarditis of psoric origin, > lying quietly. 

Pulse: weak, feeble, irritable, indicating return of abscesses 
on neck. 

NECK AND BACK. — Painful stiffness of neck, soreness and 
tearing on bending backward. 

\Glands of neck swollen on both sides/painful to touch, as 
if bruised; pain extends to head. 

II Herpetic eruption on side of neck extending from cheek, 

11 Nape of neck excoriated by discharge from eczema capitis. 

Tearing and stitches between scapulae 

Weakness and pain m small of back; < from motion. 

11 Constant pressing pam in small of back, < from motion, 

I Excessive backache. 

When breathing, frequent stitches from back toward chest. 

II Backache when walking, with stitches in sternum. 

I Severe backache, as if bruised, cannot straighten out. 

II Backache with constipation. 

I Backache after suppressed eruption, 
i S^pina bifida. 

26 



m 


PSORINUM. 


In the small of the back, in the back and m the nape of the 
neck, drawing (tearing), tensive pains 

Lancinating, cutting, painful stiffness of the nape of the 
neck, of the small of the back 

- Pressive pains between the shoulder-blades 

Sensation of pressure upon the shoulders. 

UPPER LIMBS. — Attacks of lameness and soreness m r, shoul- 
der, extending to hand 

Arms as if paralyzed and lame from shoulders to hands. 

J Tearing in arms 

111 Tetter on arm with small millet-like eruption exuding a 
yellow fluid, itches intensely m heat 

I Eruption in bends of elbows and around wrists. 

II Itchlike eruption on wrists with tearing in limbs. 

1 1 Dry tetter on wrists with rheumatism in limbs. 

f Trembling of hands. 

II Swelling and tension of backs of hands and of fingers. 

I Malignant boil, on hand a cone-shaped scab the size of a 
quarter of a dollar on a base as large again, bluish-red and 
strongly demarcated, where scab extends over ring there is 
another moist, white ring which forms a new scab; much ten- 
sion and burning 

i Pustules on hands, near finger-ends suppurating 

I! Copper-colored eruption or red blisters on backs of hands. 

’^tching between fingers, vesicles 

II Herpes m palms of hands, itching tetter 

I Sweaty palms, especially at night. 

Small warts size of pin’s head on 1 hand. 

II Nails brittle. 

Itch in axillae, bends of elbows; arm; forearm; elbow and ^ 
wrist, hands, finger joints, 

Arthur D., aged 21, has had for two months a papular erup- 
tion^ on his hands, forearms, between his fingers, in the popli- 
teal and elbow flexures, with intolerable itching; bleeding and 
burning after scratching. Great thirst for cold water in large 
quantities. Itching < at night, when warm in bed, sweats 
easily and profusely; very weak and emaciated; is anxious re- 
garding his condition. Psorinum cm., one dose, cured. 

E. M., aged 8, a papular vesicular eruption over entire 



PSORINUM. 


387 


body, but < in the flexures of joints, on hands and wrists, and 
between fingers, in palms, which resembled eczema, the itch- 
ing was intolerable, scratched until it bled, which > itching, 
and he would sleep, < at night on undressing and m bed, 
night sweats without relief, face sallow, pale; tongue coated 
dirty white, great thirst for cold water, offensive odor from 
body. Was attended with periostitis on r tibia, resulting in 
abscess After removal of sequestrum, under Psormum, com- 
pletely recovered 

M V had^chronic eczema on legs/of twenty years* standing. 
Had been treated by specialists, and spent months in various 
hospitals, with all kinds of external applications, without re- 
lief The front of left leg, from knee to ankle, covered with 
thick whitish crusts, and the skm drawn and wrinkled. At 
the edges of the crusts the skm was red and irritable White 
bran-like scales shed m large quantities, during sleep, by 
scratching or rubbing the leg; underlying surface red, angry 
looking, bleeding, with intolerable itching. Psormum 200, 
one dose dry on tongue, effected a permanent cure. 

Child, aged 3, had^^rnilk crusts since three months old; was 
emaciated, with enlarged cervical glands, and a sickly, puny 
appearance; the whole scalp was involved, and emitted an 
offensive odor. The hair was matted, impossible to keep it 
clean, bowels constipated, never moving without artificial 
aid. Psorinum 200, one dose, produced severe <, then a per- 
manent cure. 

LOWER LIMBS. — Pam m hip-jomts as if dislocated, < when 
walking, with weak arms. 

Sciatic pains: tension down to knee while walking 

lllschias* sciatica 

l^JParalysis of legs from suppression of eruption|on arm^ 

II Purpura on inner side of thigh. 

11 Old itch eruption on inner side of thigh and m popliteal 
space* 

11 Knees give w^ay under him. 

11 Dry herpes, especially in bend of knees. 

II Eruption about joints makes walking difficult, as if en- 
cased m armor. 

ne^aused by a fall a year ago. 




388 


PSORINUM 


1 Chronic gonitis 

Pams in legs, especially in tibiae and soles after too much 
exercise in walking, with a peculiar restlessness in legs, so 
that he frequently changes position, passing off after rising. 

I Oozing blisters on legs, from small pustules, increasing in 
size, with tearing pains 

II Vesicles becoming ulcers, on feet 

I Ulcers, on legs usually about tibiae and ankles or other 
joints, ulcers are indolent, slow to heal, on lower legs with 
intolerable itching over whole body, on feet. 

1^ Large swelling about ankle.." 

II For four or five weeks, feeling when walking as if 1 foot 
were pulled around inward; < for last two weeks, so that he 
sometimes looked to see if it were really so. Locomotor 
ataxia. 

Feet go to sleep 

Eruption on insteps soon becoming thick, dirty, scaly, sup- 
purating, painful and itching at times, keeping him awake. 

Heat and itching on soles 

II Corns between second and third toes of 1. foot. 

1 1 Qout in lower extremities. 

Weakness in all the pints as if they would not hold to- 
gether. 

Trembling of hands and feet 

II Hands and feet feel as if broken early in morning and after 
a little work 

1 Herpetic and itching eruption especially in bends of joints, 
in bends of elbows and in popliteal spaces 

I Tearing in limbs, in 1. knee and 1. axilla. 

II Chronic rheumatism in limbs, with a dry eruption on 
wrists. 

I Arthritis- rheumatism, especially in chronic forms. 

II For many weeks gouty pains, etc ; dry cough, constric- 
tive pressure and cutting, tearing pain at sternum near fourth 
and fifth ribs, greatest despondency and ill-humor. 

I Heatjn hands a nd feet 

II Hands moist, with cold, clammy sweat, the very touch of 
which was unpleasant; profuse sweating of feet; feet very 
painful, causing shuffling gait. 

1! Carries; rachitis. 



PSORINTJM. 


B89 


In the limbs, drawing (tearing), tensive pams, partly in the 
muscles and partly in the joints (rheumatism). 

In the periosteum, here and there, especially in the perios- 
teum of the long bones, pressive-drawing pains. 

Stitching pams in the fingers or toes. 

Stitches m the heels and soles of the feet while standing. 

Burning m the soles of the feet. 

In the joints a sort of tearing, like scraping on the bone, 
with a red, hot swelling which is painfully sensitive to the 
touch and to the air, with unbearably sensitive, peevish dis- 
position (gout, podagra, chiragra, gout in the knees, etc.). 

The joints of the fingers, swollen with pressive pains, pain- 
ful when touching and bending them. 

Thickening of the joints; they remain hard swollen, and 
there is pain on bending them. 

The joints, as it were, stiff, with painful, difficult motion, 
the ligaments seem too short. 

Joints, painful on motion 

Joints crack on moving, or they make a snapping noise. 

Numbness of the skin or of the muscles of certain parts and 
limbs 

Dying off of certain fingers or of the hands and feet. 

Crawling or also pricking formication (as from the limbs 
going to sleep) in the arms, in the legs and in other parts 
(even in the finger-tips). 

A crawling or whirling, or an internally itching restlessness, 
especially in the lower limbs (in the evening m bed or early 
on awaking); they must be brought into another position 
every moment. 

Yances,^aricose veins)tin the lower limbs/( varices on the 
pu^eKdaT, also^nTtlm^ (even with men), often with tear- 
ing pains in them (during storms), or with itching m the 
varices. 

Erysipelas, partly in the face (with fever), partly in the 
limbs, on the breast while nursing, especially in a sore place 
(with a pricking and burning pain). 

Whitlow, paronychia (sore finger with festering skin). 

\ |3hilblains/ even when it is not winter) on the toes and fin- 
gers, itching, b^urning and lancinating pams. 



890 


PSORINUM. 


Corns, which even without external pressure cause burning, 
lancinating pains. 

\Boils (furuncles), returning from time to time, especially 
on the nates, the thighs, the upper arms and the body. 
Touching them causes fine stitches in them. 

Ulcers on the thighs, especially, also upon the ankles and 
above them and on the lower part of the calves, with itching, 
gnawing, tickling around the borders, and a gnawing pain as 
from salt on the base of the ulcer itself; the parts surrounding 
are of brown and bluish color, with varices near the ulcers, 
which, during storms and rams, often cause tearing pains, 
especially at night, often accompanied with erysipelas after 
vexation or fright, or attended with cramps in the calves 
Tumefaction and suppuration of the humerus, the femur, 
the patella, also of the bones of the fingers and toes (spina 
ventosa). 

T^hickening and stiffening of the joints. 

Eruptions, either arising from time to time and passing 
airay again, some voluptuously' itching pustules, especially on 
tEI^ng^ or other parts, which, after scratching, burn and 
have the greatest similarity to the original itch-eruption, or 
nettle-rash, like stings and water-blisters, mostly with burn- 
ing pain; or pimples without pain in the face, the chest, the 
back, the arms and the thighs; or herpes in fine miliary 
grains, closely pressed together into round, larger or smaller 
spots of mostly reddish color, sometimes dry, sometimes 
moist, with itching, similar to the eruption of itch and with 
burning after rubbing them. They continually extend fur- 
ther to the circumference with redness, while the middle 
seems to become free from the eruption and covered with 
smooth^ shining skin (herpes circinatus). The moist herpes 
on the legs are called salt rheum; or crusts raised above the 
surrounding skin, round in form, with deep-red, painless bor- 
ders, with frequent violent stitches on the parts of the skin 
not yet affected; or small, round spots on the skin, covered 
with bran-like, dry scales, which often peel off and are again 
renewed without sensation; or red spots on the skin, which 
feel dry, with burning pain; somewhat raised above the rest 
of the skin. 



PSORINUM. 391 

Breckles, small and round, brown or brownish spots in the 
face, on the hands and on the chest, without sensation. 

^ Live r spots/large brownish spots which often cover whole 
limbs, the arms, the neck, the chest, etc., without sensation 
or with itching. 

Yellowness of the skin, yellow spots of a like nature around 
the eyes, the mouth, on the neck, etc., without sensibility. 

Warts on the face, the lower arm, the hands, etc. 

Encysted tumors (wensj m the skin, the cellular tissue be- 
neath it, or in the bursae mucosae of the tendons (exostosis), 
of various forms and sizes, cold without sensibility. 

Glandular swellings around the neck, in the groin, in the 
bend of the joints, the bend of the elbow, of the knee, m the 
axillae, also in the breasts. 

Watery swelling, either of the feet alone, or m one foot, or 
in the hands, or the face, or the abdomen, or the scrotum, 
etc., alone, or again cutaneous swelling over the whole body 
(dropsies). 

Attacks of sudden heaviness of the arms and legs. 

Attacks of paralytic weakness and paralytic lassitude of the 
one arm, the one hand, the one leg, without pain, either aris- 
ing suddenly and passing quickly, or commencing gradually 
and constantly increasing. 

Sudden bending of the knees. 

yChil dren fall easily,^ without any visible cause. Also similar 
attacks of weakness with adults, m the legs, so that in walk- 
ing one foot glides this way and the other that way, etc. 

While walking m the open air sudden attacks of faintness, 
especially in the legs. 

While sitting the patient feels intolerably weary, but 
stmnger while walking 

** The predisposition to spraining and straining the joints at a 
misstep, or a wrong grasp, increases at times even to disloca- 
tion; e, in the tarsus, the shoulder-joint, etc. 

The snapping and crackling of the joints at any motion of 
the limb increases with a disagreeable sensation. 

The going to sleep of the limbs increases and follows on 
slight causes; e. g,, in supporting the head with the arm, 
crossing the legs while sitting, etc. 



392 


PSORINUM. 


The painful cramps in some of the muscles increase and 
come on without appreciable cause. 

Slow, spasmodic straining of the flexor muscles of the limbs. 

I ^Sudden jerks /of soma muscle|i^and limbsi6ven while walk- 
ing, e, g y oi the tongue, the lips, the muscles of the face, of 
. the pharynx, of the eyes, of the jaws, of the hands and of the 

i 

Tonic shortening of the flexor muscles (tetanus) 

Involuntary turning and twisting of the head, or the limbs, 
with full consciousness (St Vitus* Dance) 

^^dden fainting spells^nd sinking of the strength, with loss 
of consciousness. 

Attacks of tremor in the limbs, without anxiety. Continu- 
ous, constant trembling, also in some cases beating with the 
hands, the arms, the legs 

Attacks of ^ loss of consciousness, lasting a moment or a 
minute, with an inclination of the head to the one shoulder, 
‘with or without jerks of one part or the other of the body. 

Almost* constant yawning^ stretching and straining of the 
limbs 

Increasing susceptibility of straining a joint, even by a very 
slight muscular effort, by light mechanical labor, on stretch- 
ing the arms above the head for the purpose of reaching 
something elevated, on lifting light things, on turning the 
body quickly, on rolling something, etc. This, often slight, 
straining or extending the muscles sometimes induces the 
most violent diseases, swoons, hysterics, complaints of all 
degrees, fevers, hemoptysis, etc , whereas a person that is not 
affected with psora is able to lift any burdens he pleases, 
without any inconvenience. 

REST. POSITION. MOTION. — Sitting aggravates dyspnea 
(asthma) and pain in heart, these and other ailments are > 
while lying down. 

Many ailments are < or come on when riding in a carriage, 
and when exercising in open air, and > by rest and in room. 

Rest: stitches in spleen. 

Lying down: waterbrash, cough <, chest symptoms >; 
pain in heart >, gurgling in region of heart; pericarditis bet- 
ter. 



PSORINUM. 


393 


Lies m same position in morning as when he fell asleep 
Lies on face inflammation of eyes. 

Lying on r side, pain in region of liver <. 

Must lie down, dizziness; to breathe more easily. 

Cannot lie down, rheumatic pericarditis. 

Cannot straighten out: backache. 

Changes position: restlessness m legs. 

Sitting up to write, dyspnea < 

The nearer arms are brought to body, dyspnea <. 

Bending forward, pressure in chest < 

Bending backward: painful stiffness of neck. 

Stooping, tough mucus in nose, lumps in groin prevent. 

Had to rise at night to collect his senses. 

Getting up: waterbrash > 

Standing stitches m spleen >. 

Morning, stitches m spleen <; pain in chest <; does not 
< pressure in chest, pains m small of back <. 

Exertion: causes perspiration, eczematous eruption; urti- 
caria. 

Slightest exercise* profuse perspiration. 

Walking pain in region of liver hinders, pain through 
groin; cannot walk without assistance; cutting in 1. lom; 
shortness of breath in open air; backache; pain in hip joints 
<, tension to knees; difficult, eruptions above joints, as if 1. 
foot were pulled around inward, profuse sweat with debility. 
NERVES. — 1 Nervous, restless, easily startled. 

II Subsultus tendinum. 

I Malaise ;' feels tired out. 

I Constantly tired and sleepy; very little labor exhausts 
himTTxhausted after riding in a wagon 

Looks pale, exhausted and thinner than usual. 
fPVery weak and miserable after suppressed itch. 

Weakness; of all the joints of the body as if they would not 
hold together. 

I Loss of strength, with cough, with oppression of chest 
I i Trembling and chilliness, with attacks of pain in chest. 
Stormy weather affects him. 

4[ Debility.; ^ independent of any organic disease; loss of ap- 
petite; tendency to perspiration on exertion and at night; ^ 



394 


PSORINUM, 


after acute diseases; after protracted diseases or loss of fluids; 
after typhus, with despair of recovery; thinks he is very ill 
when he is not, appetite will not return; in the evil conse- 
quence of suppressed itch, especially after large doses of 
sulphur 

1 After typhoid, diphtheria, pneumonia. 

(Kali c. after parturition or abortion ) 

I Constantly increasing debility, with abdominal affections. 

II A man, aet. 21, was obliged to run until nearly exhausted; 
although strong and well before, he now became weak, per- 
spiring easily and had severe pain in r. side, < by coughing, 
laughing, motion. 

Frequent attacks of epilepsy, religious melancholy (im- 
proved) 

Epilepsies of various kinds. 

Burning pains on the whole r. side of body, felt as if the r 
side of the head and r. eye would burst, was so painful and 
swollen. 

Mr. C., 48, spare, dark. Hypochondriacal. Nervous for 
nine months. Had to give up business Took much quinine 
and many other drugs, without >. Complains of very disa- 
greeable feeling about the head, great mental depression; 
thinks he will never recover, hopeless and despondent. Can- 
not apply his mind to business. Seems confused, cannot 
reckon. Numbness of legs and arms < on 1. side, < going 
to bed, formication and crawling, with pricking and smarting 
on scalp and on extremities. Tongue coated white. After 
three months' treatment remained stationary It was then 
ascertained that h4 swea ted very easily^ on least exertion, and 
somewhat at ni^otTwimgrea^^ memory. Psormum 

SWsoon caused marked improvement and enabled him to re- 
turn to business.—/. B BelL 

SLEEP. — 1 Sleepy by day, sleepless at night, from intoler- 
able itching; dyspnea; congestion to head. 

I Sleepless after 12 p m., from congestion to head. 

ll^ild apparently well, but^at night I would twist and turn/ 
and^f^tifrom bedtime till mornin^nd next day be as lively 
as ever,' - - 

not sleep at nig 



h^ but worry and fret and 



PSORINUM. 


S95 


Dreams; anxious, vivid, continue after waking, of robbers, 
danger, traveling, etc. 

On waking; cannot get rid of the one persistent idea. 

11 In morning lies in same position as when he fell asleep. 

Night-mare, he usually suddenly awakes at night from a 
frightful dream, but cannot move, nor call, nor speak, and 
when he endeavors to move, he suffers intolerable pain, as if 
he were being torn to pieces. 

Sleepiness during the day, often immediately after sitting 
down, especially after meals. 

\Difficulty in falling asleep, when abed m the evening; he 
often lies awake for hours. 

He passes the nights in a mere slumber. 

\Sleeplessnessy from anxious heat, every night, an anxiety 
which sometimes rises so high that he must get up from his 
bed and walk about. 

After three o’clock in the morning, no sleep, or at least no 
sound sleep. 

As soon as he closes his eyes, all manner of fantastic ap- 
pearances and distorted faces appear. 

In going to sleep, she is disquieted by strange, anxious fan- 
cies, she has to get up and walk about. 

Very vivid dreams, as if awake; or sad, frightful, anxious, 
vexing, lascivious dreams. 

Loud talking, screaming, during sleep. 

Somnambulism; he rises up at night, while sleeping with 
closed eyes, and attends to various duties; he performs even 
dangerous feats with ease, without knowing anything about 
them when awake. 

Attacks of suffocation while sleeping (nightmare). 

Early on awaking, dizzy, indolent, unrefreshed, as if he had 
noF done sleeping and more tired than in the evening, when 
he lay down; it takes him several hours (and only after rising) 
before he can recover from his weariness. 

After a very restless night he often has more strength in 
the morning, than after a quiet sound sleep. 

Various sorts of severe pains at night, o^noctu rnal thir stj 
dr^ess of the throat, of the mouth, or frequenF.urmating at 
night. 



396 


PSORINUM. 


XIJJE —Aggravation^in the ev^n^^ndiibefore midmghy 

Morning: 1. half of head stupiSTvertigo; when risii^^lorc- 
ing outward in head, headache <; eyes slightly agglutinated, 
ciliary blepharitis <; nausea towards stools; early, diarrhea; 
when rising, diarrhea, cough < when awaking, hands and 
feet, as if broken. 

Forenoon dull. 

Day . ciliary blepharitis worse, nausea and vomiting; 
sleepy. 

Evening: fever, eyes feel tired; itching in ear<, vomiting; 
cough, chilliness in upper arm and thighs, as if he should lose 
his senses; heat, with delirium, itching and heat in eyes. 

Night: feels dull, stupid; dropping from posterior nares 
awakens him, toothache <; stools <; stools only, diarrhea; 
nervous, restless, awakens as if frightened; wets bed, cough 
<, sweaty palms; perspiration, sleepless; child twists, turns 
and frets; heat; terrible itching of whole body; screaming. 

TEMPERATURE AND WEATHER.-^reat sensitiveness to coL^ 
air/ojy:hange of weather^ wears a fur capTo or shawl, 

e^n m hottest summer weather. 

^Aggravation from sudden changes of weather 

Feels a restlessness in his blood days before and during a 
thunderstorm. 

Cough: returns every winter. 

Air: nose sensitive when inhaling. 

Open air: when walking, photophobia; taste >; feels <; 
cough >; shortness of breath, itching >. 

Averse to having head uncovered. 

While m bed: itching of body. 

Warmth, toothache >; of body causes itching, intolerable 
itching. 

Warm food: inflamed mouth <. 

Summer, cholera infantum; dry scaly eruption disappeared. 

Cold: toothache <; drinks, < pain in chest; weather, dry 
scaly eruption returned. 

Change of weather: headache caused and made <; diar- 
rhea. 

Washing: > pressure in head. 

Increasing susceptibility to colds, either of the whole body 



PSORINUM 


397 


( often even from repeatedly wetting the hands, now with 
warm water, then wnth cold, as in washing clothes), or only 
susceptibility of certain parts of the body, of the head, the 
neck, the chest, the abdomen, the feet, etc., often in a mod- 
erate or slight draft, or after slightly moistening these parts, 
even from being m a cooler room, in a rainy atmosphere, or 
with a low barometer. 

So-called weather prophets, i e.^ renewed severe pain m 
parts of the body which were formerly injured, wmunded, or 
broken, though they have since been healed and cicatrized; 
this renewed pain sets in, when great changes of the weather, 
great cold, or a storm are imminent, or when a thunderstorm 
is m the air. 

FEVER. — I Chilliness m evening on upper arms and thighs, 
with thirst, drinking causes cough, then heat and cough, with 
oppression of chest; and trembling, with attack of pain in 
chest. 

The more intense the pain the more he sweats. Tibia. 

I Intern al sh ivering, creeping chills and icy-cold feet. 

I Heat: at night and dryness m mouth; m afternoon or 
evening, feels as if he would lose his senses, with thirst; in 
evening, with delirium, great thirst, followed by profuse sweat; 
when nding in a carnage; sudden over whole body, with 
trickling perspiration all over face 

I Sweats easily, weak. 

^weat: profusej^cold, clammy from least exertion; profuse 
when tak ing slightest exercise; when walking; at night; on 
face7 palms of hands and perineum when moving about, pro- 
fuse sour, clammy, with faint oppression of chest after chill 
and heat, after typhus, colliquative. 

Sweat, profuse at 3 A M. 

II When taking a walk profuse sweat with consequent de- 
bility, taking cold easily. 

Sweat at night > headache. 

1 1 Profuse sweating relieves all the complaints; chronic dis- 
eases. TCalad.) 

” ( Profuse night sweats of phthisis. 

I Want of perspiration, dry skin. 

j Typhus: picks bedclothes, reaches for objects in air: pro- 
found debility. 



398 


PSORINUM. 


1 1 After ague color of face worse 
Painful sensation of cold m various parts. 

Burning pains in various parts (frequently without any 
change in the usual external bodily temperature). 

Coldness, repeated or constant of the whole body, or of the 
one side of the body; so also of single parts, cold hands, cold 
feet which frequently will not get warm in bed 

Chilliness, constant, even without any change m the ex- 
ternal bodily temperature 

Frequent flushes of heat, especially in the face, more fre- 
quently with redness than without, sudden, violent sensation 
of heat during rest, or in slight motion, sometimes even from 
speaking, with or without perspiration breaking out. 

Warm air in the room or at church is exceedingly repug- 
nant to her, makes her restless, causes her to move about (at 
times with a pressure in the head, over the eyes, not infre- 
quently alleviated by epistaxis) 

Rushes of blood, also at times a sensation of throbbing in 
all the arteries (while he often looks quite pale, with a feel- 
ing of prostration throughout the body) 

Perspiration comes too easily from slight motion, even 
wliile sitting, he is attacked with perspiration all over, or 
merely on some parts, e almost constant perspiration of 
the hands and feet, so also strong perspiration in the axillse 
and around the pudenda 

Daily morning sweats, often causing the patient to drip, 
this for many years, often with sour or pungent-sour smell 
\One-sided perspiration/ only on one side of the body, or 
only on the upper part of the body, or only on the lower part. 
\Intermittent fever,.' even when there are no cases about, 
either sporadic or epidemic, or endemic, the form, duration 
and type of the fever are very various, quotidian, tertian, 
quartan, quintan or every seven days 
Every evening, chills with blue nails. 

Every evening, single chills. 

Every evening, heat, with rush of blood to the head, with 
red cheeks, also at times an intervening chill. 

^^termittent fevei^of\several weeks’ duration^^ followed by a 
\mois t itching eruption lasting several weeks, but which is 



PSORINUM. 


899 


healed again during a like period of intermittent fever, and 
alternating thus for years 

The more intense the pain, the more profuse he sweats 
(Tiha), 

Perspiration, cold and hot alternately, appeared about 8 
A. M. 

ATTACKS, PERIODICITY.— Every other day* headache, thirst, 
cold. 

^Nearly every half hour? urination.^ 

Two or three times a day. pains in chest grow severe. 

1am sensation as of a heavy blow on forehead, diarrhea. 

Immediately after dinner, congestion of blood to head. 

Every morning at ten. oppression. 

Every afternoon great anxiety 

Every day, from 5 A. M until 5 p. m. , anguish in head. 

Every night, nocturnal enuresis; sweat. 

Day before headache: inordinate appetite. 

For three or four days, constipation 

During full moon, wets bed. 

For four or five weeks: feeling when walking as if 1. foot 
were pulled around inward. 

Nine months, has been nervous. 

For four years:^ discharge from ear. ^ 

For eleven years on 20th of August: hay fever. 

Twelve years’ duration, gleet. 

For twenty-five years, cough. 

LOCALITY AND DIRECTION.— Right, pressure m side of occi- 
put; large brown scab on eye, eye inflamed; ear a mass of 
crusts; eczema behind ear cured deafness, stinging m nostril; 
soreness of jaw; burning m cheek; ulcer on side of throat; 
pain through groin, lumps m groin; inguinal hernia; knotty 
lump over groin, violent pain in loin; tearing m side from 
cough, pain extending to shoulder; stitches m side of chest, 
sharp pam opposite tenth rib, fixed pain m side of chest; 
dull pressure in chest; lameness and soreness in shoulder; 
small vesicles behind ear. 

Left: half of head stupid; pains in temple, numbness of 
arm and leg; pressing headache <; pain over eye; spots on 
frontal region much whiter than surrounding skin; discharge 



400 


PSORINUM. 


from ear; pustules behind ear; ovary indurated after violent 
knock, cutting in loin, stitches inchest, stenosis of osteum 
venosum; small warts on hand, as if foot was pulled inward; 
corns between toes, tearing in knee, m axillse. 

From r. to left pain in occiput, ciliary blepharitis. 

From 1. to r. pain in eyes 

From within outward, as of hammers striking head. 

From behind forward: stitches in chest. 

SENSATIONS.— As if stupid in 1. half of head, eyes as if 
pressed outward; as if brain had not room enough in fore- 
head; as if brain would protrude, back of head as if sprained; 
r side of occiput as if luxated, as if piece of wood were lying 
across back of head, as if head were separated from body, as 
of a foreign body under eyelid, as if sand were in eyes; as if 
he heard with ears not his own, cheek bones as if ulcerated; 
condyle of ]aw as if lame, tongue as if burnt, teeth as if glued 
together; as if a plug in throat, as if intestines were hanging 
down; as if frightened; throat as if narrowing; asthma as if 
he would die; as if everything in chest were raw and 
scratched, as if everything were torn in chest; glands of neck 
as if bruised, back as if bruised; arms as if paralyzed, hip 
joint as if ulcerated, joints as if encased in armor, as if 1. foot 
were pulled around inward, as if joints would not hold to- 
gether; hands and feet as if broken, as if he would lose his 
senses 

Pain: in 1. temple, in chest, over 1. eye to r ; in back of 
head, over eyebrows; down nose, in liver, in cheek bones, 
in condyle of jaw, in throat; in chest extending to shoulder; 
in small of back, in abdomen, through r groin; m rectum; 
in cardiac region; in chest and throat, m heart, in head and 
hmbs, in hip joint; in knee, m legs. 

Excruciating pains, in chest. 

Intense pain: in head. 

Violent pains in sacrum and r. loin. 

Severe pain, in 1. ear; in limbs 

Sharp pain: r. side opposite tenth rib. 

Anguish, in head. 

Cutting, tearing pain, in throat. 

Cutting pains: in intestines, in urethra; in loin. 



PSORINUM. 


401 


Tearing: from centre of chest to throat, m neck, between 
scapulae, in arms; m limbs, in legs; in L knee and I axilla 
Cutting: in chest 

^Stitches^' in heart; in e^es, in teeth, in spleen, inchest 
an3*^back; ih siernum; m r side of chest, in cardiac region; 
"Between scapulae, from back towards chest. 

Stitching pain in pit of stomach, in region of liver. 
Throbbing, in brain. 

Fixed pain r. side of chest 
Griping pains about navel 
Cramps, m stomach 
Cramplike contractive pain, in head. 

Ulcerative pain: in chest under sternum 
Suppurative pain: through whole chest 
Pinching pam in pubic region. 

Constricting pain: in chest. 

Boring* m r. nostril. 

Digging, in forehead 

Drawing: m forehead; m testicles and spermatic cords. 
Pressing pain: m small spots in forehead and temples; in 
eyes, in region of liver, m small of back. 

Sore pain: behind ears. 

Burning pressing pam: m chest. 

Stinging: in r. nostril; in teeth; in region of liver and 
spleen; m inguinal glands; in many parts of skin. 

Burning of eyes; m nose; of face; in r. cheek; of blisters 
on inside of lower lip; of throat; in fauces, in rectum; in 
urethra; m condylomata; of excrescences on prepuce, around 
nipples. 

Smarting: on scalp. 

Soreness of eyes: of stomach; behind ears; of external 
ear; of nose; of jaw; of teeth; of mouth; m rectum and anus; 
under sternum; of vvhole chest, in neck; in r. shoulder. 
Rawness behind ears 
Hot sensation: inchest. 

Pricking: on scalp. 

Heat: of eyes, of hands and feet. 

Rheumatism: in limbs. 

Constricting pressure, at fourth and fifth ribs near sternum; 
at sternum. 

27 



402 


PSORINUM. 


Constriction of throat and chest. 

Pressure: in r. side of occiput; in r zygoma; on chest; in 
r. side of chest 

Heaviness, of head; of testicles, m chest. 

Tension m r. zygoma; in throat, of hands and of fingers; 
of boil on hand, down to knees 

Fulness, in head; in vertex. 

Oppression of chest; of stomach 

Singing in forehead 

Tired feeling in eyes 

Dullness, of head. 

Painful stiffness: of neck 

Lameness of shoulders and arms. 

Numbness of legs and arms 

Weakness: in forehead; of stomach; in chest; in small of 
back, in joints. 

Trembling: of hands; of feet. 

Restlessness, in legs 

Dryness: of tongue; of mouth, of throat. 

Tickling, m throat; in larynx; in trachea 

Crawling: on scalp; in larynx. 

Formication, on scalp, in head 

Itching: eruption on head; in canthi; in ears; of external 
ear; of pimples of cheeks; of excrescence on prepuce, of 
pimples around nipples, of tetter on arm; of body in bed, 
between fingers, tetter on palms, intolerable over whole 
body; of eruption on instep, on soles; inner angles of eyes; 
condylomata; of herpes. 


Disagreeable sensation of dryness over the whole body (also 
m^he face, around and in the mouth, in the throat or in the 
QQ se, although the breath passes freely through it). 
xISSUES. — Thinner than usual, pale, exhausted 


\Great emaciation, > in children,/ they are pale, delicate, 
sickly, will not sleep day or night, but worry, fret and cry^ or 
^dd is good, plays all day, is restless, troublesome, scream- 
ing all night. 

* ^l9 -ndular swelhn^^^ith^ruption on head./ 

^xci’^tions, diarrhea, leucorrhea, menstrual flow and 


perspiration, have ^carrion-like odor/ 



PSORINUM. 


403 


Body has a filthy smell even after a bath. 

Whole body painful, easily sprains and hurts himself. 

Rheumatism and arthritis. 

Deeply penetrating ichorous ulcers. 

Caries; rachitis; dropsy. 

The joints are easily sprained or strained. 

Increasing disposition to strains and to ///? oneself even 
at a very slight exertion of the muscles, even in slight mechan- 
ical work, in reaching out or stretching for something high 
up, m lifting things that are not heavy, in quick turns of the 
body, pushing, etc Such a tension or stretching of the mus- 
cles often then occasions long confinement to the bed, swoons, 
all grades of hysterical troubles, fever, hemoptysis, etc., while 
persons^ who are not psonc lift such burdens as their muscles 
are able to, without the slightest after effects 

The joints are easily sprained at any false movement. 

In the joint of the foot there is pain on treading, as if it 
would break 

Softening of the bones,' curvature of the spine (deformity, 
\hunchback>,\curvatiire^of the dong bones- of the thighs knd 
legs (pwflnis angltcus^ rickets) 

Fragility of the bones 

TOUCH. PASSIVE MOTION. INJURIES.— Touch, stomach sen- 
sitive; lingual glands sore; teeth <» vesicles sore 

Pressure, stomach sensitive, pam in region of liver <; 
from a truss, inflammation. 

Bandage: caused inflammation of tunica vaginaha 

Rubbing causes small vesicles to arise. 

Riding, pain m abdomen; griping and desire for stool, 
soreness in rectum and anus, m a wagon, exhausted, sweat. 

Violent knock: 1. ovary indurated. 

Fall caused pain in knee. 

Painful sensitiveness of the skin, the muscles and of the 
periosteum on a moderate pressure. 

Intolerable pam in the skin (or in the muscles, or m the 
periosteum) of some part of the body from a slight movement 
of the same or of a more distant part, r. from writing there 
arises a pain in the shoulder or in the side of the neck, etc., 
while sawing or performing other hard labor with the same 



404 


PSORINUM. 


hand causes no pain, a similar pain m the adjacent parts, 
from speaking and moving the mouth, pain in the lips and in 
the back at a slight touch 

SKIN. — 1 Abnormal tendency to receive skin diseases 

1 1 Large suppurating pusjtules on hands, particularly near 
ends of fingers; had eight or ten within a few weeks, itching 
of body particularly while in bed 

I Skin inactive, want of perspiration. 

I Itching when body becomes warm, and stinging in many 
parts at sanie time, intolerable, < in bed and from warmth; 
scratches until it bleeds, over whole body, when rubbed, 
small papules and vesicles arise, between fingers; m knee 
joints, in bends of knees; terrible, of whole body at night, 
preventing sleep 

II A girl, aet 18, sallow complexion but cleanly appearance; 
constant irritation of the different parts of body, day and 
night, compelling her to scratch, numerous pediculi corporis 
cling to neck, back and shoulders, menstruation had never 
occurred; anxious, depressed and tearful; inner angles of eyes 
filled with gummy mucus, heat and itching in them, in even- 
ing, corners of mouth sore 

11 Skin has a dirty, dingy look, as if patient never washed; 
in some places looks coarse as if bathed in oil, sebaceous 
glands secrete in excess, body always smells dirty. 

I Skin dirty, greasy looking, with yellow blotches here and 
there. 

I I Severe pains in limbs and dark, burning spots, so that 
skin of whole body except face resembled that of a mulatto; 
itch had been suppressed five times. 

II Scaly condition of skin of whole body; skin has a dirty, 
tawny color, although carefully kept, much itching causing 
desire to scratch, which gave but temporary relief, some 
months back instep showed signs of eruption, which soon be- 
came a thick, dirtydooking mass of scales and pus, painful 
and violently itching, at times pain kept her awake at night; 
disease of at least a dozen years’ standing. 

Rash on back and neck 

Urticaria with eruptions on head. 

Fine, red eruption, forming small white scales. 



PSORINUM. 


405 


Dry and scaly eruption^ with little pointed vesicles around 
reddened edges, disappearing during summer, but reappear- 
ing when cold weather comes on. 

Eczematous eruption after any severe exertion,* accom- 
panied by sensation of tension and swelling on fingers, dorsum 
of hands, nape of neck and towards ears; slightly elevated 
blotches upon an erysipelatous, swollen, hard base; eruption 
of numberless small vesicles; face in several places affected; 
eyelids swollen; intolerable itching, disturbing sleep; fingers 
so swollen that they cannot be flexed, after several days des- 
quamation in very fine scales occurred. 

^Eczema behind ears^ on scalp and in bends of elbows and 
armpits, accompanied fey abscesses affecting bones; nothing 
relieved, but the eruption disappeared, to reappear again, 
years after, on wrists, there was then a patch on each wrist 
as large as a half dollar, with intense itching, preventing 
sleep, with constant desire to scratch 
Eruption of small vesicles, quickly filling with a yellow 
lymph, painful, like sores, to touch, drying up after a few 
days, on forehead and several places on face, also behind r. 


ear. 

1 Moist herpes after suppressed scabies; intolerable itching 
when getting warm, < before midnight and in open air. 

I Herpes* with itching and burning; with biting-itching, 
with meal-dust, humid. 

i Herpetic eruptions. 

On face, hand and back, also on legs, an itchlike eruption 
appears and the eyes agglutinate so that they cannot be 
opened. 

II Itch: dry on arms and chest, most severe on finger joints; 
followed fey*Hoils, inveterate cases with symptonis of tubercu- 
losis; m recent cases, with eruptions in bends of elbows and 
around wrists; repeated outjbreak of single pustules after main 
erup tion seems all gone. 

~rAfter suppressed itch: urticaria in attacks, after every ex 
ertion; tuberculosis; single pustules often appear 

I Consequences of itch suppressed by sulphur ointment. 

II Psoriasis; psoriasis syphilitica. 




406 


PSORINUM. 


Pustules on forehead, chin and chest. 

11 Pustules or boils on head, particularly on scalp, scalp had 
a dirty look and emitted an offensive odor, fine, red eruption, 
forming ^mall white scales; pustules on hands. 

II Burning itching pustulec^dter vaccinatmn/ 

I Eruptions bleed easily and constantly tend to suppurate. 

I Crusty eruptions all over body. 

i Crusta serpiginosa. 

I Pemphigus. 

II Retrocession of eruption. Measles 

fi^lcersi/deep, penetrating, ichorous; on face and legs, old, 
with feVid pus, violently itching; scrofulous, with swelling of 
bones. 

1 1 Moist, itching condylomata. 

1 1 Suppressed eruptions. 

Dryness of the (scarf) skin either on the whole body with 
inability to perspire through motion and heat, or only in some 
parts. 

Sensation of dryness over the whole body, also in the face, 
at the mouth and in the mouth, in the throat or m the nose, 
although the air passes freely (especially upon the hands, the 
external side of the arms and legs, and even in the face; the 
skin IS dry, rough, parching, feels chapped, often scaly like 
bran). 

^Eczema/ something more than a year since a young lady 
came under my observation who had one of the worst cases I 
ever saw. At 15 years I remember her as attractive and bril- 
liant, with a fine head of hair and one of the most perfect 
complexions, or skins, I ever saw. Upon questioning her I 
learned: Family history negative. Had been in every way 
in perfect health. At 14 years was vaccinated, “worked’* 
well, six months later attended a school exhibition one very 
cold night in winter and face was considerably exposed. Next 
morning awakened, face greatly swollen, intensely red, almost 
unbearable itching. Eyes suffused and injected, ears double 
their normal size. Very little constitutional disturbance. 
Called an allopathic physician who employed local and in- 
ternal measures with little immediate result. Soon papules 
were formed, many of which became vesicular and not a few 



PSORINUM. 


407' 


pustular; discharge of a thick, dirty fluid which stained and 
stiffened linen. Hair was cut close and “locals ” applied here 
also Week after week she had slight improvements and ag- 
gravations She was of strong allopathic faith, yet after three 
years of arsenic, potash, cathartics, zinc and a dozen other 
local applications she sought homeopathic treatment. Ap- 
peared to improve for a time, then as bad as ever, and finally 
returned to allopathy; finding no relief, employed some patent 
remedies with apparent transitory improvement She was 
now, at the time I saw her, taking nothing at all, had suffered 
for SIX years, and was still as bad as ever, or even slightly 
worse, I found her in mmd, though naturally bright and 
cheerful, very despondent, with even suicidal thoughts, com- 
plete despair of recovery. Hair dry and without lustre, eyes 
somewhat suffused and injected, which condition attends a 
sort of incipient asthmatic affection, making its appearance 
each fall; some hoarseness Face, neck and much of body 
was coarse, rough and of a dirty brown color Does not per- 
spire at all. Eruption behaves much the same as at first and 
above described, itching intolerably, better by gentle scratch- 
ing which is continued until it bleeds Between points of erup- 
tion skin IS much indurated. Eruption surrounded by bluish 
circle; pruritus worse at night, when undressing, and by 
Warmth of bed. Desquamation is so great that the sheet was 
each morning shaken and scales swept away. I went to work 
with a faint heart, feeling that I was somewhat lacking m un- 
common and peculiar symptoms I prescribed \Psormum 200 
(B & T powder each night dry on tongue,. for a week. 

Eruption in bends of elbows and knees, dry, scaly and small 
pointed vesicles around the reddened joints, disappeared en- 
tirely in summer and reappeared when cold weather set in, 
violent itching < by warmth of bed or by scratching. Pson- 
num 42 m., two doses, at six weeks intervals, cured. No re- 
turn the following winter. 

A teething baby, nine months old, had eczema, beginning 
at outer angle of r. eye and spreading over entire face. First 
a raised inflamed base of a tawny red, then scattered pustules 
which coalesced to form large crusts, from which oozed an 
oily, yellow, viscid discharge, cracks upon ears with a similar 



408 


PSORINUM. 


discharge. Graphites cm. was given without result, then 
Sulphur, but the eruption spread until the cheeks were a mass 
of crusts. It then appeared on back jand arm and one leg, 
and here gave off fine bran-like scales The scalp soon be- 
came involved and covered with crusts a quarter of an inch 
thick, Psonnum cm., one dose, which < for a week, then 
improvement began and went on to a perfect cure, notwith- 
standing the eruption of three teeth. 

A man, aged 80, suffered with eczema since 18 years old, 
which appeared soon after vaccination. A very troublesome 
cough had annoyed him for months, for which I was called to 
attend him. 

Cough < at night, on lying down/and on rising in the 
morning. Coughs long before expectorating. Sputa yellow- 
ish, salty, puriform. Sensation of pressure on chest; requires 
great effort to expand lungs Chest painful, < after cough- 
ing, mucous rales over both lungs. Loss of appetite Eczema 
always < in winter; intense itching < nights The eczema 
£ad been suppressed by local treatment, and cough developed. 
Psorinum cm. Within 48 hours cough and chest symptoms 
improved, but the eczema reappeared over the body, with in- 
tense itching. Improving m health, but still has some eczema 
which gives him little trouble — Chapman 

Mrs M , aged 72, tissues enormously distended withMropsy, 
unable to he down for nine weeks from dyspnea. Legs from 
ankles to crest of ilium and arms from wrist to elbows covered 
with a dirty, scaly eruption, itching violently < at night, 
could not avoid scratching, which gave no relief until it caused 
bleeding All forms of external applications had been used 
in a vain effort to suppress the eruption. Psorinum 52m. one 
powder in four teaspoonfuls of water, given in four doses, half 
hour intervals, and six powders of placebo, one each night, 
gave prompt relief, and the patient was able to walk in two 
weeks. One week later another dose was required, as there 
was a slight return of the eruption on the ankles; this com- 
pleted the cure . — Hawley 

^Eczema Rubruny^ Mrs. G., aged 71, face red and swollen, 
almost erysipelatous m appearance. Heat of fire caused tor- 
ture when it touched her face; always sits with her back to 



PYROGEN. 


409 


the fire Cold air > bathing <, must dry face with great 
care. Burning and itching intolerable; cannot sleep; sits all 
night by an open window gently rubbing face with a handker- 
chief Scratching increases burning and itching, mental ex- 
citement, of which she has much, greatly <. j^Psorinum 500 
cured in one month. 

A woman had attacks of terrible itching of skin without 
eruption through three periods of gestation. In the last she 
complained of the same itching, when Dr. Lippe advised 
Psormum In two days erysipelas appeared Her face was 
very much swollen. 


PYROGEN. (A Product of Sepsis.) 

For sapremia or septicemia puerperal or surgical, from 
ptomaine or sewer gas infection; during course of diphtheria, 
typhoid or typhus, when the best selected remedy fails to > or 
permanently improve. 

The bed feels hard (Arn.), parts lam on feel sore and 
bruised (Bapt ), rapid decubitus (Carb ac.). 

Great restlessness y must move constantly to > the soreness 
of parts (Arn , Beilis, Eup ) 

Tongue: large, flabby y clean, smooth as if varnished, fiery 
red; dry, cracked, articulation difiicult (Crot , Ter ), 

Taste: sweetish; terribly fetid, pus-like; as from an ab- 
scess 

Vomiting* persistent, brownish, coffee-ground, offensive, 
stercoraceous, with impacted or obstructed bowels (Op , 
Plb.). 

Diarrhea* horribly offensive (Psor.); brown or black 
(Lep.), painless, involuntary, uncertain, when passing flatus 
(Aloe, Olean ). 

Constipation* with complete inertia (Op., Same ), obsti- 
nate from impaction, in fevers , stool, large, black, carrion- 
like, small, black balls, like olives (Op.. Plb.). 

Fetus: or secundines retained, decomposed, dead for day, 
black; horribly offensive discharge, ‘‘never well since” septic 
fever, following abortion or confinement. To arouse vital 
activity of uterus. 



410 


PYROGEN. 


Lochia; thin, acrid, brown, very fetid (Nit. ac ), suppressed, 
followed by chills, fever and profuse fetid perspiration. 

Distinct consciousness of a heart, it feels tired; as if en- 
larged, purring, throbbing, pulsating, constant in ears, pre- 
venting sleep, cardiac asthenia from septic conditions. 

Pulse abnormally rapid, out of all proportion to temperature 
(Lil ) 

Skin: pale, cold of an ashy hue (Sec.), obstinate, varicose, 
offensive ulcers of old persons (Psor ) 

Chill, begins on the back, between scapulae, severe, general^ 
of bones and extremities , marking onset of septic fever, tem- 
perature 103 to 106, heat sudden, skin dry and burning; pulse 
rapid, small, wiry, 140 to 170, cold clammy sweat follows. 

In septic fevers, especially puerperal. Pyrogen has demon- 
strated its great value as a homeopathic dynamic antiseptic. 

RELATIONS. — Antidote: Nux vomica for the agg. from over- 
action of a single dose or for bad effects of repeated doses;, 
Rhus, Eup per. for the aching, restlessness and bone pains. 

Compatible: Am., Bap , Rhus, Eup per in typhoid and 
other fevers with muscle soreness, bed feels hard. Ars , Ech.» 
Lach., Malar, (the vegetable Pyrogen), Ant. t., Bapt., 
Brom , Lyc., Phos , fan-like motion of Alse nasi. Bry., cough 

< by motion and in warm room. Ipec., uterine hemorrhage (if 
Ipec. fails when apparently well selected). Bap , Psor., of- 
fensive diarrhea. Lept., Psor., black stools. Opium, Plumb., 
Same., constipation, hard black balls. Nit. ac., Sec., thin, 
offensive lochia. Phos., water is vomited as soon as warm in 
stomach. Bell , MeliL, throbbing, bursting headache. Carbo 
V , Ech., Psor., offensive varicose ulcers of old people Hep., 
SiL, Calc sulph., tendency to profuse suppuration. Sulph , 
Psor., patient continually relapsing after the apparent similli- 
mum. 

Aggravation: motion, moving the eye, in a warm room; 
rising from lying or sitting up (cough relieved by sitting up, 

< by lying down, Clarke). 

Amelioration, heat, hot bathing or drinking hot water; 
binding affected part tightly; stretching out limbs; walking, 
changing position, 

MIND. — Loquacious; can think and talk faster than ever be- 
fore (S). 



PYROGEN. 


411 


Irritable (S). 

Delirious on closing eyes; sees a man at foot of bed 

Whispers, in sleep. 

Sensation as if she covered the whole bed, knew her head 
was on pillow, but did not know where the rest of her body 
was. 

Feels when lying on one side that she is one person, and 
another person when turning on the other side. 

Sensation as though crowded with arms and legs. 

Hallucination that he is very wealthy, remaining after 
fever. 

Increased buoyancy of spirits, although he felt ill. 

Great depression 

Muttering delirium. 

Anxiety, restlessness. 

The muttering delirium sets in early, leading to uncon- 
sciousness and death. 

The signs of infection are horror, delirium, stupefaction 

Brain active during the night, could not sleep, was making 
speeches and writing articles 

HEAD. — Staggers as if drunk on rising in morning (S). 

Dizziness on rising up in bed. 

Pams in both mastoids, < r ; dull throbbing m mastoid 
region (S). 

Great throbbing of arteries of temples and head, every pul- 
sation felt in brain and in ears, the throbbings meet on top of 
brain (S). 

Painless throbbing all through front of head, sounds like 
escaping steam (S). 

Frightful throbbing headache > from tight band. 

Excruciating, bursting, throbbing headache with intense 
restlessness (often accompanied with profuse nose-bleed, nau- 
sea, and vomiting). 

Sensation as if a cap were on. 

Rolling of head from side to side. 

Forehead bathed in cold sweat. 

Throbbing of carotids and vessels of the neck, a distinct^ 
wave-like throb from the clavicles upwards. 

Child with cerebro-spinal meningitis was so sick that at one 



412 


PYROGEN. 


time it seemed as though she could not recover; there was 
automatic motion of the right arm and right leg, rolling the 
head from side to side; this kept up until it would turn her 
around from left to right till her feet would get on the pillow 
or touch the head-board; she was brought out of this condi- 
tion with Pyrogenium 

Dull headache. 

Cerebral symptoms are not usually severe, but there is often 
a low form of delirium. 

Dizziness, headache. 

Heavy headache, uncomfortable. 

Morning headache. 

Pulsation felt in head, painless throbbing. 

EYES. — Left eyeball sore, < looking up and turning eye 
outward (S). 

Projecting eyes. 

Lids seem dry and roughened as if filled with sand, mucus 
collecting in inner canthi; agglutinated and crusty borders on 
waking in the morning. 

Sticky and inflamed eyes. 

Intense photophobia, lies with fists pressed tight m eyes. 

Phlyctenular keratitis, both eyes < by light. 

EARS. — Loud ringing, like a bell, in left ear, ringing and 
roaring in right ear < at night 

Ears cold. 

Ears red, as if blood would burst out of them 

Sound as of escaping steam, a puffing, purring sound. 

Loud ringing in right ear lasting but a few minutes 

NOSE. — Nose-bleed; awakened by dreaming of it and found 
it was so. 

Sneezing: every time he puts hands from under covers, at 
night. 

Nostrils closing alternately (S). 

Cold nose. 

Fan-like motion of alae nasi. 

Sneezing at night, nostrils closing and alternating from side 
to side. 

Thick, gluey discharge from nose < right. 

FACE. — Face: burning; yellow, very red; pale, sunken, and 
bathed in cold sweat; pale, greenish, or chlorotic. 



PYROGEN. 


413 


Circumscribed redness of cheeks. 

Hectic flush in afternoon and evening, coming on regularly 
at 3 or 4 p M and lasting till midnight, then face covered 
with large drops of cold perspiration. 

Face assumes a pinched and anxious expression 
MOUTH. — Tongue: coated white in front, brown at back; 
yellowish brown, bad taste in morning (S) 

Tongue coated yellowish grey, edges and tip very red; 
large, flabby, yellow brown streak down centre. 

Tongue clean, smooth, and dry, first fiery red, then dark 
red and intensely dry, smooth and dry; glossy, shiny as if 
varnished, dry, cracked, articulation difficult 

Tongue dry and not a particle of moisture on it. Has had 
no thirst since she has been sick Bitter taste in the mouth; 
tongue dry down the center 

Taste, took one dose of Pyrogen cm (Swan) in the after- 
noon. During the evening a terribly fetid taste, as if mouth 
and throat were full of pus, which lasted 24 hours; sensation 
as of a broken abscess m the mouth A nauseating, offensive 
taste in morning, for many days during proving. 

Tongue dry and brown 
Bad taste in the mouth. 

Sticky saliva. 

Pasty, furred tongue 

THROAT. — Diphtheria with extreme fetor. 

Relaxed throat 
Elongated uvula 
Ulcerated tonsils. 

LARYNX. — Usually cough. 

Coughing when expiring. 

Cough attended with rusty expectoration. 

Laryngitis 

Cough every time I move or turn over in bed. 

Coughed up yellow sputa through the night. 

Cough severe after rising. 

Coughing, spitting up large masses of phlegm from larynx. 

Cough < by motion 

Cough more in a warm room 

Coughing causes pain in back of head. 



414 


PYROGEN. 


Burning in larynx and bronchi on coughing. 

Cough up yellow sputa through the night. 

APPETITE.— No appetite or thirst (19th day). Complete 
loss of appetite. 

Great thirst for small quantities, but the least liquid was in- 
stantly rejected 

Drinking very hot water, > thirst and vomiting (dog). 

No appetite, yet nourishment is freely taken and digested. 
Poor appetite for breakfast. 

No appetite, as stomach and bowels feel so full. 

No appetite for dinner. 

Unusual appetite for chocolate. 

STOMACH. — Belching of sour water after breakfast 
Nausea and vomiting 

Vomiting, persistent; brownish, coffee-ground; offensive, 
stercoraceous, with impacted or obstructed bowels. 

Vomiting and purging. 

Vomits water when it becomes warm in stomach; vom- 
iting >. 

Urging to vomit, with cold feet 

Stomach feels too full; < after eating and > by frequent 
sour eructations 

Nausea > by drinking very hot water and by vomiting 
Vomiting is not infrequent 
''Nausea on first rising 
Dyspepsia. 

Belching some water after breakfast 
Stomach and bowels feel too full to eat 
ABDOMEN. — Full feeling and bloating of abdomen. 

When lying on left side bubbling or gurgling sensation in 
hypochondria, extending back to left of spine 
Pain in umbilical region with passage of sticky, yellow, 
offensive stool. 

While riding in a buggy aching in left of umbilicus; < 
drinking water; > passing flatus 

Soreness of abdomen so severe she can breathe with diffi- 
culty, and hardly bear any pressure over right side. 

Very severe cutting pains right side going through back, < 
by every motion, talking, coughing, breathing deep, > lying 
on right (affected) side, groaning with every breath. 



PYROGEN. 


415 


Great distension of the abdomen, with high temperature — 
lochial discharge, intensely offensive, as if rotten. Peritonitis. 
Irregular action of the bowels 
Sensation of cold in abdomen 
Sensation of heaviness in abdomen. 

Ascites (Bright’s disease). 

STOOL AND ANUS. — Feculent and thin mucus, and finally 
bloody diarrhea and tenesmus (dog) 

Two soft, sticky stools, 8 to 9 a. m. 

Involuntary^ escape of stool when passing flatus 
Profuse watery, painless stools, with vomiting. 

Stool, horribly offensive, carnon-like. 

Stool very much constipated, large, difficult, requires much 
effort, first part balls, last part natural, with streaks of blood, 
anus sore after. 

Constipation hard, dry accumulated feces, stool large, 
black, carnon-like , small black balls like olives. 

Congestion and capillary stasis of gastro-intestmal mucous 
membrane, shedding of epithelium, bloody fluid distending 
intestines (dog), 

(Sweat about anus removed, fistula relieved ) 

Usually diarrhea. 

Irregular action of the bowels. 

No stool today, very unusual 
Sticky yellow stool. 

Passing flatus, sometimes involuntary. 

URINARY ORGANS. — Urine scanty; only passed twice in 
twenty-four hours. 

Urine, yellow when first voided; after standing, cloudy 
with substance looking like orange peel; red deposit on ves- 
sel hard to remove; deposits sediment like red pepper with 
reddish cloud on vessel. 

Got up three times in night to urinate 
(Bright’s disease.) 

Urine contains albumin and casts, horribly offensive, car- 
rion-like. 

Frequent calls to urinate as fever comes on 
Intolerable tenesmus of bladder, spasmodic contractions, 
involving rectum, ovaries, and broad ligaments; [cured m a 



416 


PYROGEN. 


case of Ymglmg’s with Pyrogen cm. (and higher) ; patient's 
next period came on naturally and painlessly, whereas before 
menses had been painful and extremely offensive] . 

Irregular urination. 

Action of the kidneys irregular. 

Aching in region of the kidneys 

Urinated only twice to-day Very unusual, usually several 
times a day, normal in quantity 

Urine loaded with albumen. 

Red lime inside of vessel, hard to remove. 

Sediment like red pepper that floats at the bottom 

MALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — Testes hang down relaxed; scro- 
tum looks and feels thin. 

FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — Puerperal fever, with offensive 
lochia (cured) 

Puerperal peritonitis with extreme fetor, a rotten odor. 

Parts greatly swollen (Bright’s disease). 

Menses horribly offensive, carrion-like. 

Menses last but one day then a bloody acrid leucorrhea, 
horribly offensive. 

Hemorrhage of bright red blood with dark clots. 

Septicemia following abortion, fetus or secundmes retained, 
decomposed and horribly offensive. 

(Has cured prolapsus uteri, with bearing down > by hold- 
ing the head and straining as m the act of labor. ) 

Abscess of 1. ovary, acute throbbing pain, great distress, 
with fever and rigors (Pyrogen cm (Swan) produced an enor- 
mous flow of white creamy pus with general >). 

Lochia: thin, acrid, brown, or fetid, suppressed, followed 
by chills, fever, and profuse fetid perspiration. 

It has cured prolapsus uteri, with bearing down, > by hold- 
ing the breath and straining, as in the act of labor. Pain 
starting in the uterine region and passing upward to the um- 
bilicus It was the reverse (a cork-screw pain), this was 
momentarily > by holding the breath and bearing down, as 
in labor; momentarily > by pressing the hands against the 
vulva, then she said she would have to turn loose, as it made 
her worse. Lillium had previously failed m this case Pain 
starting in the umbilicus or a little above, and passing down 



PYROGEN. 


417 ' 

towards the uterus, but at midway of abdomen it would be 
intercepted by the same kind of a pain starting from the 
uterus and passing upward till they would meet midway be- 
tween the umbilicus and uterus, then gradually die out till 
another would come as before, > momentarily by drawing 
her knees up to her chin and grasping her arms around themi 
and holding them tight Intolerable tenesmus of the bladder, 
it was more of a spasmodic contraction than anything else, at 
the same time this condition would be reflected to the rectum^ 
and this strong desire to defecate without ability to do so- 
would also involve the ovaries and broad ligaments Nux 
vom and Lillium tig had no effect whatever. 

Severe chill; dull frontal headache, restless* pale, anxious 
Sharp shooting pains through abdomen. Pam m head severe; 
she clasped it with her hands as if she had received a sudden 
blow and cried, “Oh! my head;” became very restless, said 
she was going to die, and did not want the baby, of whom she 
was very fond, near her. Face pallid, with offensive viscid 
perspiration, abdomen sensitive to pressure; lochia and milk 
ceased. Thirsty for frequent small drinks Pulse 140, weak, 
small; temperature 103. Pyrogen cm. 6 doses in water one- 
half hour apart She made a good, though slow recovery. 
Puerperal septicemia 

Mrs. T, B., pale, slender, delicate, but in good health; 
primipara, was successfully delivered April 10th, 1901. On 
the 20th found her with a temperature of 102; lochia scanty, 
pale, offensive, but she felt well and had no pain Fever in- 
creased in severity gradually for several days, until tempera-^ 
ture reached 105 and 106, with a pulse of 120-130; still she 
insisted she felt well and would not go to bed Several reme- 
dies, Bapt , Bell., Ech., Tar , were given without effect. 
Finally a severe shaking chill followed in a few hours by an-^ 
other sent her to bed, and the nurse was recalled. Pyrogen 
was given. Following day temperature 102, lochia reap- 
peared in natural color; the abdominal sensitiveness ceased 
and in two or three days disappeared entirely. She rapidly 
recovered. 

Mrs W. S. C , a slender woman, primipara, delivered June 
10th, instrumental. Severe peritoneal laceration, which was 
28 



418 


PYROGEN. 


repaired. The morning of the third day had shake; cutting 
spasmodic pain m uterus, which was swollen and sensitive, 
iochia dark, profuse, clotted, both iliac regions sensitive to 
pressure < left side Belladonna gave no relief. Fever con- 
tinued to rise, lochia darker, more offensive, containing 
threads and clots. The odor and other symptoms indicating 
approaching sepsis she received Pyrogen with very gratifying 
results, and a rapid recovery 

Carrie, aged 16 years, been sick two or three months under 
allopathic care Breath, perspiration, expectoration, menses, 
urine and feces horribly offensive, carnon-like, disgust up to 
nausea about an effluvia that arises from her own body, sore- 
ness of the chest and abdomen, menses last but one day and a 
sanguineous leucorrhea that is of the same odor, pulse 106, 
with a bad cough, worse coming into a warm room, large, 
fleshy, pale, greenish or chlorotic face, mother having just 
died of consumption. Pyrogen cm , one dose, and better in 
ten hours, and on November 12th cough, odor and soreness 
nearly all gone, pulse 80, tongue clean Sac lac , and she 
remains well to this writing. — Wakeinan 
RESPIRATORY ORGANS. — Wheezing when expiring. 

Cough: expectorating large masses of phlegm from larynx; 
< by motion, < in warm room, cough, burning in larynx 
and bronchi; pain in occiput, stitching in small of back, only 
noticed in the chair, coughs up yellow sputa through night. 

Cough > sitting up, < lying down. 

Expectoration: rusty mucus; horribly offensive, bloody 
sputa. 

CHEST. — Pam in right lung and shoulder, < talking or 
coughing 

Neglected pneumonia cough, night-sweats, frequent pulse, 
abscess had burst discharging much pus of mattery taste 
(rapid recovery under Pyrogen, three doses). 

Chest sore, purple spots on it. 

Severe contracting pain within lower sternum, sometimes 
extending to nb-joints and up to throat, as if esophagus were 
being cramped. 

Ecchymoses on pleura (dog). 

J. A. W., aged 61. An old soldier full of rheumatic aches 
and pains; complaining much. 



PYROGEN. 


419 


April 7, 1895. Rode twenty-two miles m a big wind storm, 
chilling and disagreeable, on the 5th. Taken to bed at once. 

Hot and cold flashes, < moving about. Aching and sore 
all over Bones ache Very restless and 7tervous, Impatient. 
Head feels btg, full and aches all through head and down 
neck; < coughing. Nasal discharge fluent and thin Lungs 
sore and pai7iftd, < coughing. Coughs considerably, some 
little expectoration, < at night. 

Pulse 84 Bowels not moved since the 4th. Urine scant. 
Chilly when moving. When first taken sick, and when riding 
in the storm, his toe nails felt as if they were flying off^ first 
one, then another. This feeling was very marked and disa- 
greeable 

Pyrogen cmm , three doses, two hours apart. 

Within twelve hours the pains were all gone and he had a 
good night’s rest Sat up next morning feeling better and 
freer from pain than in four months ” A very rapid and 
prompt cure — Yinghng 

Respirations are rapid and shallow. 

Pam in the chest, and perhaps orthopnea, from pleuritic* 
affections 

Pain m the region of the left nipple, as if in the heart which 
was going to ache. 

HEART. — Pam in region of left nipple, as if in heart; in- 
creased action, pulse 120 

Heart tired as after a long run, increased action < least 
motion. 

Never free from weary sensation about the heart. 

Every pulsation felt in head and ears; a painless throbbing. 

Sensation as if heart were enlarged, distinct consciousness 
of a heart. 

Sensation as if heart were too full of blood. 

Sensation as if the heart were pumping cold water. 

Violent, so persistent that it became very tiresome. 

Palpitation or increased action without corresponding in- 
crease of temperature. 

Palpitation < by motion, < lying on affected (left) side 

Loud heart-beats, audible to herself and others 

Could not sleep for whizzing and purring of heart, when 
she did sleep was delirious. 



420 


PYROGEN. 


Cardiac asthenia from septic conditions. 

Ecchymoses on heart and pericardium (dog) 

Palpitation < from motion > remaining quiet, pulse 160- 
170 per minute 

Tired feeling about the heart, as after a long run, feel as if 
I would like to take it out and let it rest, it would be such a 
relief if it would stop its throbbing, temperature not raised. 
BACK AND NECK. — Pams in back in lumbar region. 

Bubbling sensation or gurgling in the left hypochondrium, 
extending back to the left side of the spine, felt when lying on 
the left side. 

Pam m small of back. 

Weak feeling m the back 
Stitching pain m the back on coughing 
Throbbing of vessels of neck running up in waves from 
clavicles. 

LIMBS. — Aching: m bones, all over body as from a severe 
cold, with soreness of flesh, head feels hard, > motion (S). 
Cold extremities. 

Numbness of hands, arms, and feet, extending over whole 
body 

Automatic movement of r arm and r. leg, turned the child 
round from r to 1 till feet reached the pillow; repeated as 
often as she was put right (cerebro-spinal meningitis) 

UPPER LIMBS. — Pam in shoulder-jomt; in front, passing 
three inches down arm (S) 

Hands and arms numb. 

Hands cold and clammy. 

Dry eczema of hands 

Profuse exudation in axillary region. 

Pam m left shoulder-joint, in front, passing down the arm 
from two to three inches, lasting till going to bed. 

LOWER LIMBS. — Aching about knees, deep in bones, while 
sitting by a hot fire, > by walking 

On going to bed aching in patella; > flexing leg 
Aching above 1 knee as though bone broken (S). 

Aching above knees m bones, > stretching out limbs. 
Tingling in r little toe as though frost-bitten. 

Feet and legs swollen (Bright’s disease). Numbness of 
feet. 



PYROGEN. 


421 


Aching m bones; all over body as from a severe cold; with 
lameness and soreness of muscles; bed feels hard; > motion. 
< from motion. 

Cold extremities, feet bathed m cold sweat. 

Numbness of hands, arms, and feet, extending over whole 
body. 

Edema of legs, in case of Bright’s disease. 

Aching pains in legs, as if in the bones. 

SKIN. — Mrs. I , aged 35, mother of two children, swelling of 
calf of leg, vesication formed on top of 1. foot, followed by a 
large ulcer, which eventually covered the whole foot. As the 
diseased process extended up the leg, several abscesses formed 
in succession, the swelling continuing to spread to the hip. 
About three inches below the trochanter a large abscess bur- 
rowed in the soft tissues, discharging great quantities of pus 
when opened. 

Restless, unable to lie m one position, motion caused great 
pain, but moving gave > , must be continually moved, every 
hour or two every night, which a dose of Rhus failed to >. 
The feet, ankles and abdomen very much swollen, urine 
scanty, with red sandy sediment; constant sensation of reple- 
tion, IS very thirsty yet unable to dnnk; hungry, yet the least 
food causes repletion, very peevish, whines like a child. 
Swelling and pain still increasing, face and neck yellow, 
emaciated and wrinkled; temperature 103, pulse 120. After 
Ars , Rhus, Lyc and Nux v. failed to give any >, Pyrogen 
cmm., one dose, followed by placebo every hour; improve- 
ment began and continued for four days, when a copious, 
painless, watery, offensive diarrhea began; another dose of 
Pyrogen was given and the patient went on to a rapid re- 
covery. 

Skin and conjunctiva becomes jaundiced. 

Soon after the rigor, sometimes a subcutaneous abscess 
forms, or discolorations and pustules are seen on the skin. 
Jaundice appears. 

Bed sores easily form and skin shows a tendency to slough 
on very slight pressure. 

Patches of superficial gangrene frequently occur, without 
provocation. 



422 


PYROGEN. 


Erysipelas. 

Skin pale, cold, of earthy ashy hue. 

Obstinate, varicose, offensive ulcers of old people. 

NERVES. — Great nervousness and restlessness. 

Could not he long in one place without moving, yet moving 
gives no relief 

Great debility in the morning. He staggered when at- 
tempting to walk. 

Nervous weakness attending convalescence from septic 
fever. 

SLEEP. — Dreamed he had nosebleed, and on waking the 
nose had bled all over the pillow. 

Restless sleep, with moaning. 

Unrefreshing sleep. 

Disturbed sleep. 

Slept awhile; woke to roll and tumble in every conceivable 
position. 

Unable to sleep from brain activity and crowding of ideas. 

Restlessness > after sleep. 

Cries out in sleep that a weight is lying on her. 

Whispers in sleep. 

Kept awake by purring of heart. 

Dreams: of various things, of business, of his patients and 
the remedy which cured them. 

Dreamed all night of the business of the day. 

Can lie but a few minutes in any position. 

Could not sleep till dawn— brain too active — could not keep 
my eyes shut. 

Cries out in sleep as if in pain. 

FEVER. — ‘‘In all cases of fever commencing with pains in 
the limbs’" (Swan). 

Shivers and begins to move about restlessly; temperature 
rises gradually and as gradually subsides (dog). 

Chills running up and down the spine in successive waves; 
heat gives no relief. 

Temperature rises rapidly to 104® F., and sinks rapidly from 
heart failure (dog, fatal dose). 

Constant terrible aching all over the body; bed feels hard, 
must move frequently in search of a soft place. 



PYROGEN. 


423 


Chilly at times and a little aching, a little feverish. 

After dinner, ache all over, chilly all night, bed feels hard; 

After getting into bed, chilly, teeth chatter; woke 10 p. m. 
in perspiration on upper part of body, > motion (S). 

Feels hot as if he had a fever, but temperature was only 
99° F , feels like 105°, 

Frequent calls to urinate as soon as fever came on; urine 
clear as water 

Every other day dumb ague. 

Perspiration horribly offensive, carrion-like, disgust up to 
nausea about any effluvia arising from her own body. 

Cold sweat over body. 

Fevers caused by sewer gas poisoning; surgical infection; 
dissecting wounds, blood poisoning, or absorption of pus by 
medicated topical application 

Delirium when closing the eyes, sees a man at the foot of 
the bed or in the farther part of the room; hands cold and 
clammy; abdomen so sore that she can scarcely breathe; 
bowels so sore cannot bear any pressure over the right side; 
< from sitting up in bed, vertigo on rising up m bed 

N. B., child 4 years old, resided in a house m which plumb- 
ing was being repaired, A few days after was attacked at 2 
A. M. with: Vomiting and purging, stools profuse and watery. 
Cold extremities, ears and nose, forehead bathed in cold per- 
spiration Tongue heavily coated, yellowish-gray, edges of 
tip very red Great prostration Great restlessness mental 
and physical, pulse 140, small and wiry; temperature 99. 
Great thirst for small quantities, but the smallest quantity 
was instantly rejected. Later in day stool was horribly offen- 
sive, of a carrion-like odor; face pale, sunken, bathed in cold 
perspiration. Tongue dark red and free from the heavy coat- 
ing of early morning, intense thirst, but water < both vomit- 
ing and purging. After Ver., Ars , Carbo v. and Bap. had 
been given, with no improvement, the patient evidently sink- 
ing, impossible to count the pulse, thinking perhaps sewer-gas 
poison may have been the factor, and the clean, fiery red 
tongue called my attention to Dr. Burnett’s cures in the 
Homeopathic World with Pyrogen. I gave two doses dry on 
the tongue with prompt and permanent relief. 



'424 


PYROGEN. 


Miss E. B , aged 14, complained of feeling weary, unable to 
go to school. Applying thermometer, found temperature 102, 
pulse 108, and her father sent for me I found tongue abnor- 
mally red, thin, white fur at base. Had a slight epistaxis in 
\the morning which Bryonia >, but failed to affect the fever. 
As there was absolutely no pain and very few symptoms, she 
was allowed to wait a few days on placebo Sewer-gas was 
now discovered as the cause, Pyrogen, one dose, was given 
with rapid recovery 

Inclined to talk all the time at night during the fever; cold 
sweat over the body; pain in the small of the back, desires to 
urinate; it is scant, talks to herself, urging to vomit, with 
cold feet, restlessness > after sleeping; purple spots on the 
chest, cries out in her sleep that some one or a weight is 
lying on her; heart beats hard, has a laborious action, sensa- 
‘ tion as if the heart was too full of blood, it beats very loud, 
heart sounds can be heard some distance from the thorax, 
always can hear her heart beat, could not sleep last night for 
whizzing and purring of heart, when she did fall asleep was 
delirious. Sensation as if a cap were on her head. When 
she awakens and finds it there she knows that she is all right, 
that she is not delirious, > after vomiting; whispers in her 
sleep, whispers to herself, if you ask her what she said does 
not answer, sensation as if she covered the whole bed; she 
knew that her head was on the pillow, but she could not tell 
where the rest of her body was 

She feels when lying on one side that she is one person and 
‘ that when she turns to the other side she is another person; 
sensation as though the fever would not run in each alike, 
that IS to say, she felt as though she was existing in a second 
person, or that there were two of her. 

Coldness and chilliness all day that no fire would warm; 
sits by the fire and breathes the heat from the stove, chilly 
whenever leaving the fire; at night when the fever came on 
he had a sensation as if his lungs were on fire and that he 
must have fresh air, which soon brought relief. 

Sensation as though he was crowded by his arms and legs; 
when turning over m bed they were still crowding him, as 
soon as the fever came on he commenced to urinate, he can 



PYROGEN. 


425 


tell every time when the fever is coming on because of this 
urgency to urinate The urine is clear as spring-water Very 
severe pain m the right side; kmfe-like pains going through 
to the back; < from every motion, from coughing or talking 
or taking a long breath, > from lying on the affected side, 
groaning with every breath; redness of the face and also of 
the ears, it looked as if the blood would burst out of them. 
After the fever leaves he still has the hallucination that he is 
very wealthy and he has a very large sum of money m the 
bank, and this was the last to leave him — this idea that he 
had the money. 

I can hardly mention Pyrogen without becoming enthusias- 
tic, on account of the wonderful results that I have had from 
it in blood poisoning In any kind of septic infection, either 
puerperal or traumatic, Pyrogen will do wonders, when the 
symptoms correspond. It is similar to Anthracinum in some 
respects 

An old woman dying with gangrene inoculated one of her 
nurses; the nurse had chills, high fever and red streaks run- 
ning up the arm following the course of the lymphatics 
Pyrogen rapidly removed the whole process — Boger 

The palmar surface of the left forearm was torn to the bone 
by a buzz-saw. It was dressed by adhesive plaster, which 
was put on so tightly that it had to be removed m 24 hours, 
replaced by another and a few stitches taken; but the whole 
hand began to swell, became very painful, gradually grew 
worse for eighteen days, during which patient had but few 
hours sleep Whole hand and forearm were enormously 
swollen, almost black m color and mortification threatened. 
Amputation was now decided. 

At this stage a homeopathic physician found in addition to 
the symptoms above the patient delirious and excited, he 
•could not he down, for the bed was too hard, nor could he 
rest the arm on anything, for everything on which it lay also 
seemed too hard. Pyrogen 50m. In a few hours he was 
sleeping quietly, temperature reduced and pain lessened. Im- 
provement was rapid and steady to complete recovery. 

Slight elevation of temperature, severe rigor, followed by 
sweating. The rigors are usually severe, and they occasion- 
ally occur with the regularity of ague 



426 


PYROGEN. 


Pulse becomes weak and rapid. 

Pulse felt m head and ears, painless throbbing. 

Fever of the intermittent type, with the usual accompani- 
ments of loss of appetite, restlessness, thirst. 

Rigors cease after the first few days, but the temperature 
usually maintains a remittent character. 

Puerperal fevers 

Typhoid fever 

Feverishness. 

Pyemia 

Septicemia. 

Burning in the face. 

Blood was throbbing all through every part of head and 
body — could feel it even m my fingers. 

Chilly all night. 

GENERALITIES. — Cannot he more than few minutes in one 
position, > change. 

Debility in morning, staggered on trying to walk (S). 

Aching all over, bed feels hard. 

Great muscular debility, rapid recovery in a few hours 
(dog). 

Restlessness, turning in bed, groaning. 

Pains in limbs and general uneasiness 

Soon after the initial rigor, pain and swelling of one or 
more joints occurs. 

Peculiar sweet smell about the patient, as in diabetes. 

A sudden attack of pleurisy occurring in any one with otor- 
rhea. Pyemia may be suspected 

General lassitude. 

Nervousness. 

Feebleness. 

Malaria, pains in limbs, especially in legs and back, with 
headache, distress in stomach, like a heavy wad. 

Restlessness, when beginning to move and during motion. 

Restless and moaning, in persons dying, especially from 
scarlet fever or diphtheria, often enables them to recover. 

Great nervousness and restlessness, wants to be covered or 
rocked. 

Great aversion to being washed. Cries when washed. 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


427 


Will not sleep in bed, but wants to be held in lap and kept 
in slight motion, wakes when the motion is stopped or on 
attempting to lay her down. 

AGGRAVATION* — Restlessness > when first commencing to 
move (Rhus < when first commencing to move). 

AMELIORATION* — From hard rocking in a chair. 


SECALE CORNUTUM* 

SYNONYMS* — Ergota (Ergot or Argot, Fr., a cock’s spur); 
Ergot of rye; Spurred rye; Secale clavatum, Mater secalis; 
S6igle ergote (Fr ); Mutterkorn; Kornmutter (G) 

CHARACTERISTICS.-“Adapted to women of thin, scrawny, 
feeble, cachectic appearance ; irritable, nervous temperament; 
pale, sunken countenance. 

Very old, decrepit, feeble persons. 

Women of very lax muscular fibre; tvtvyXltiiTLg seems loose 
and open, no action, vessels flabby; passive hemorrhages, 
copious flow of thin, black, watery blood; the corpuscles are 
destroyed. 

Hemorrhagic diathesis, the slightest wound causes bleeding 
for weeks (Each , Phos.); discharge of sanious liquid blood 
with a strong tendency to putrescence, tingling in the limbs 
and great debility, especially when the weakness is not caused 
by previous loss of fluids. 

Leucorrhea: green, brown, offensive. 

Boils: small, painful with green contents, mature very 
slowly and heal in the same manner, very debilitating. 

Face: pale, pinched, ashy, sunken, hippocratic; drawn, 
with sunken eyes; blue rings around eyes. 

Unnatural, ravenous appetite; even with exhausting diar- 
rhea; craves acids, lemonade. 

Diarrhea: profuse, watery, putrid, brown; discharged with 
great force (Gamb., Crot ), very exhausting; painless, invol- 
untary; anus wide open (Apis, Phos.) 

Enuresis: of old people; urine pale, watery, or bloody; 
urine suppressed. 



428 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


Burning, in all parts of the body, as if sparks of fire were 
falling on the patient CArs ). 

Gangrene; dry, senile, < from external heat. 

Large ecchymoses, blood blisters; often commencement of 
gangrene. 

Collapse in cholera diseases; skin cold, yet cannot bear to 
be covered (Camph.). 

The skin feels cold to the touch, yet the patient cannot tol- 
erate covering; icy coldness of extremities 

Menses, irregular, copious, dark fluid; with pressing, labor- 
like pains in abdomen; continuous discharge of watery blood 
until next period. 

Threatened abortion especially at third month (Sab.); pro- 
longed, bearing down, forcing pains. 

During labor, pains irregular; too weak, feeble or ceasing; 
everything seems loose and open but no expulsive action, faint- 
ing. 

After pains: too long, too painful, hour-glass contraction. 

Suppression of milk: in thin, scrawny, exhausted women; 
the breasts do not properly fill. 

Pulse small, rapid, contracted and often intermittent. 

PROVERS. 

1. Mrs L. M. Hayes, with the 200th. This prover knew the 
potency but not the drug. She was perfectly convinced that 
in the 200th potency no drug was capable of producing medici- 
nal symptoms on the healthy, and persisted in repeating her 
experiments to verify or disprove former results. Took No- 
vember 4th, six drops every other day for a week. November 
17th, took six drops twice a day for a week. January 5th, 
took fifteen drops every day for a week March 1st, took fif- 
teen drops every morning for three days. 

2. Miss R. C. Wilder, took six drops, 30th potency, in morn- 
ing of November 5th, 8th, 12th, 15th. 

3 H. B. Reynolds, took one drachm of 2d potency, in re- 
peated doses. 

4. J. S. Campbell, took several doses of 2d potency. 

5. F. W. Rogers, took one drachm of 200th potency, a dose 
twice a day for two weeks. 



SECALE CORNUTUM* 


429 


6. Mrs M. T. Hathaway, repeated doses of 200th potency. 

7. D M. Finley, 100th potency; repeated the proving four 
times with same results each time 

8 Miss H. M. Swathel, took 200th potency, from March 1st 
to A.pril 23d, two or three times a day Took 100th potency 
from May 2d to May loth, once or twice daily 

9 G. D Green, took 2d potency for two weeks. 

10 C. S Erswell, took 100th potency, one drachm, in daily 
doses for two weeks. 

11 E H Pond, took 30th potency 

12. E. C Watts, took 30th potency daily for a week. 

Since March, 1880, the drug was given out to seventy-two 
volunteers, as follows 

Second potency to 16 provers 
Third potency to 4 provers. 

Sixth potency to 17 provers 
Thirtieth potency to 13 provers. 

Sixtieth potency to 5 provers. 

One hundredth potency to 6 provers. 

Two hundredth potency to 8 provers. 

Blanks potency to 3 provers. 

The blanks were given to those whose health, on examina- 
tion, was not deemed sufficiently good to warrant a reliable 
proving, only one of whom (a young man who afterwards 
died of albuminuria) obtained or returned any results. 

RULES OBSERVED. 

So far as possible, every prover was examined as to health 
and personal qualifications; and questioned or cross-ques- 
tioned on the recorded results. 

Provers were directed to follow the rules laid down by Dun- 
ham for proving a drug. 

No person knew what she or he was taking 

BOTANY 

Adam Lonicer, of Frankfort, about the middle of the 16th 
century, is the first botanical wTiter to notice Ergot, and soon 
after Thalius speaks of it as used '"‘ad sistendum sangiiinem 



430 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


In 1623, Caspar Bauhm mentions it under the name of Secale 
luxurtans, and in 1693 the English botanist Ray alludes to its 
medicinal properties. 

The true nature of Ergot, whether a product of diseased 
vegetable life or a true vegetable itself, has long been a source 
of a great diversity of opinion. But according to the latest 
authorities, Secale cornutum belongs to the order Thallo- 
phyta— cellular or non-vascular plants This is the lowest 
order of the vegetable kingdom and is divided into two classes, 
Algse and Fungi, which is based upon the presence in the 
former of Chlorophyll, and its absence in the latter They 
produce no differentiation of root, stem or leaf. In the low- 
est members of the group there is no sexual reproduction; in 
the higher the sexual union may be by a single spore, or a 
mass of spores, or a fructification within which spores are 
found. De Candolle and Fries in 1816, and Ldveille, in 1827, 
added, by their researches, much to our knowledge of the in- 
timate structure of Secale, but it remained to L. R Tulsane, 
in 1853, by his admirable monograph “M^moire sur V Ergot 
des Glumacees,” to clear up many disputed points in the for- 
mation, growth and development of this fungus, and this 
monograph is still referred to by nearly every author as the 
best work on the subject Yet Fluckiger and Hanbury main- 
tain that tke true nature of Ergot has not been settled even by 
Tulsane’s long continued and admirable researches. 

FORMATION. 

Hamilton sums up the conflicting views entertained by 
various writers as follows. 

a. “Some regard Ergot as a fungus growing between the 
glumes of grasses, in the place of the ovary (hence Leveille 
calls it Spaceha segetum) 

b. “Some regard Ergot as a diseased condition of the 
ovary or seed. 

c. “Some have supposed that ordinary morbific causes 
(such as moisture combined with warmth) were sufficient to 
give rise to this diseased condition of the grain. 

d. “Some have ascribed the disease to the attack of insects 
or other animals. 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


431 


e ‘‘Some, dissatisfied with the previously assigned causes 
of the disease, have been content with declaring Ergot to be 
a disease, but without specifying the circumstances which in- 
duce it.” 

Fluckiger and Hanbury state, “That the tissue of the seed 
of the rye, in the process of development, does not undergo a 
transformation^ but is simply destroyed f 

Neither in external form, nor in anatomical structure, does 
Ergot exhibit any resemblance to a seed, although its devel- 
opment takes place between the flowering time and that at 
which the rye begins to ripen It has been regarded as a 
complete fungus, and as such was named by De Candolle 
Sclerotiwn Clavus^ and by Fries Spermoedia Clavius No fur- 
ther change occurs in the Ergot while it remains in the ear, 
but laid on damp earth, interesting phenomena take place 
At certain points small, orbicular patches of the rind fold 
themselves back, and gradually throw out little white heads. 
These increase in size whilst the outer layers of the neighbor- 
ing tissue gradually lose their firmness and become soft and 
rather granular, at the same time that the cells, of which they 
are made up, become empty and extended. In the interior 
of Ergot, the cells retain their oil drops unaltered. The heads 
assume a grayish-yellow color, changing to purple, and finally 
after some weeks stretch themselves towards the light on 
slender, shining stalks, of a pale, violet color. The stalks 
often attain an inch in length with a thickness of about half a 
line. Fluckiger further says. “Ergot of rye collected by 
myself in August, placed upon earth in a garden-pot and left 
in the open air unprotected through the winter, began to de- 
velop the Clavtceps on the 20th of March.” 

Hering calls it an undetermined fungus, and from the doubt- 
ful position it has so long held m the world of science classes 
it, not without some reason, as a “Nosode;” and when a 
doubtful point m Materia Medica is to be solved, the opinion 
of the venerated and scientific Henng is deserving of some 
consideration. 

Nosode, he says: “Is the general term given to the alco- 
holic extracts of morbid productions, foolishly called isopathic 
remedies. The most useful and fully proved are Hydropho- 



432 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


bmum and Psonnum To these ‘ Nosodes ' belong the Ustilago 
maidis, the Secale cornutum, the fungus of the potato, the 
ambra of the pot-fish, anthracin, vaccinin, variolm, etc , etc 
The sneering remarks of Trinks and others in 1826 against 
Sepia arid the ignorant opposition to Lachesis have sunken 
into oblivion during the succeeding score of years All the 
condemning remarks against the Hydrophobinum, Psonnum 
and other ‘ Nosodes’ will meet the same fate We can afford 
to wait.” 

PREPARATION 

For homeopathic use the Ergot of rye should always be 
prepared fresh, as it is fed on by a small acarus which de- 
stroys the interior of the gram, leaving it a mere shell. Ergot 
kept in stock longer than a year should always be rejected on 
this account. 


MEDICAL HISTORY. 

Among the writings of the ancients there is no distinct no- 
tice to be found of Ergot. In 1089 the French historian, 
Sigebert, refers to an epidemic m the following passage 

“A pestilent year, especially in the western parts of Lor- 
raine, where many persons became putrid, in consequence of 
their inward parts being consumed by St Anthony’s fire. 
Their limbs were rotten and became black like coal They 
either perished miserably or, deprived of their putrid hands 
and feet, were reserved for a more miserable life. Moreover, 
many cripples were afflicted with contraction of the sinews ” 
An epidemic disease in Hessia m 1596 first attracted the at- 
tention of the medical profession to Ergot as a cause Rath- 
law, a Dutch accoucher, employed it in 1747, but it was not 
until thirty years later, 1777, that the essays of Desgranges, 
and especially those of Stearns and Prescott in the United 
States, that its medicinal properties became known. 

To the use of rye flour, more or less adulterated with Ergot, 
is attributed the formidable disease known in modern medi- 
cine as Ergotism, but in early times by a number of names: 
Morbus spasmodicus, Convulsivus Mahgnus, Epidemicus vel 
Cereahs, Convulsion Raphania, I gnus Sancti Antonia, There 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


433 


is now little doubt that the terrible epidemics which occurred 
m France in the tenth century and in Spain in the twelfth 
century were due to Ergot. Fluckiger and Hanbury says: 

“In the year 1596 Hessia and the adjoining regions were 
ravaged by a frightful pestilence, which the medical faculty of 
Marburg attributed to the presence of Ergot m the cereals 
consumed by the population. The same disease appeared in 
France m 1630; m Voightland, Saxony, in the years 1648, 
1649 and 1675, again in various parts of France in 1650, 1670 
and 1674. Freiburg and vicinity were visited by the same 
malady in 1702; other parts of Switzerland in 1715-16; Sax- 
ony and Lusatia in 1716, many other districts of Germany in 
1717, 1722, 1736 and 1741-42. The last European epidemic 
occurred after the rainy season of 1816 in Lorraine and Bur- 
gundy, and proved very fatal among the poorer classes.” 

From time to time a number of monographs giving a more 
or less accurate description of the various epidemics supposed 
to have been caused chiefly by Ergot and other adulterations 
m France, Germany and Switzerland have appeared. In 
1825, the year previous to his departure for South America, 
Henng made a collection of these monographs which he left 
with Trinks, who had it completed by one of his assistants 
and published. These comprise the first 80 of the 170 authori- 
ties of the encyclopdma^ taken from Hartlaub and Trinks. 
The later additions are chiefly toxicological and clinical. 

Dr. R. B. Johnstone, of Pittsford, N. Y., writes: 

“In 1883-84, during the building of the West Shore Rail- 
road, I was called upon to treat many of the Italian employe® 
for an eruption which appeared upon the body in many places, 
but usually on the shoulders, neck and inner surface of the 
upper arms In the majority of cases it was on the right side 
alone, but if on both sides was always worse on the right. 
The eruption would begin in a small point, like the prick of a 
pin, which would soon assume a pimple-like form and finally 
become pustular and as large as a small pea. At other times 
they would appear as large as a small boil (half an inch across 
the base), of a dark bluish hue, shading off to the healthy 
color of the skin an inch or more from centre of boil They 
were intensely painful to touchy aching^ burning and itching^ 
29 



434 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


better from light rubbing^ worse from scratching, worse from 
heat. The small ones would dry up leaving no cicatrix, but 
the large ones would fill slowly with a bright yellow pus-like 
material, or at times a bloody, watery serum, remaining open 
for days, having extremely painful edges and base, and dis- 
charging towards its close a thick, dirty, offensive serum. 
They were decidedly indolent in character, and left a promi- 
nent cicatrix. Cool air blowing over the eruption would re- 
lieve the itching and burning, but not the pain. Secale, 
Lachesis, Causticum were the remedies chiefly indicated. 
Having learned that the Italians ate largely of rye bread made 
«6f a very poor and cheap quality of flour, while other nation- 
alities (not eating the rye bread) did not suffer from it at all, 
I attributed the eruption to poisoning by Ergot in the bread; 
and if a patient presented without an interpreter I usually 
i^ave Secale, which would cure about seven cases in ten.’^ 

G. K. — A miller of Pittsford. N. Y., informs me that 
he IS unable to grind rye even for a short time Upon enter- 
ing a rye mill, had a sensation of constriction m the throat, 
great difficulty in breathing; difficult inspiration; expiration 
accompanied by soreness all over the chest; oppression of the 
Uhest, soreness of the chest; intercostal pains; pricking of the 
tongue. 

^‘The foregoing symptoms are distinctively of rye grinding, 
when grinding wheat no symptoms follow. He also informs 
me that m two rye mills in Rochester he knows a number of 
individuals engaged therein who suffer as above with the ad- 
dition of an eruption particularly on the neck, chest, behind 
the ears and around the waist The eruption is pustular, 
itching violently, and discharges a yellow matter. One man 
he knew who was compelled to give up rye grinding because 
of the many boils and carbuncles. He recovered entirely after 
changing his occupation. Nearly all rye grinders have en- 
larged finger joints and poor teeth ” 

DAY BOOK OF MRS. M. F. HATHAWAY. 

March 6, 1885. — ^Took a powder (Secale 200) every morn- 
ing and at night on retiring, for three days, then at night 

only, for a week. 

« 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


435 


March 9th. — A sore spot felt on back part of base of tongue, 
left side, as though a canker sore” were making its appear- 
ance; it was not felt in day time and passed away after a few 
days. 

March 10th and 11th. — A slight frontal headache and some 
mental confusion, but not very troublesome. Sore spot on 
base of tongue, right side. 

March 13th. — Spots with a sore bruised feeling appeared 
about and below the left knee. On looking found a swollen 
patch about the size of a silver half dollar, of a purple red 
color. Towards evening three or four similar spots appeared 
further down the leg, about the top of the shoe, so sore could 
scarcely bear the touch of the shoe, and attended with violent 
itching, but were so extremely sore could not scratch them, 
and when touched gave me a faint, sick feeling. 

March 14th. — Headache and confusion more pronounced, 
and chiefly in frontal region. Three or four spots appeared 
on right leg below the knee, with violent itching and the same 
sore bruised feeling 

March 15th. — An eruption in the form of a rash or small 
pustules appeared on the face, left side chiefly, very sore and 
sensitive to touch. It would begin in fine points like the prick 
of a pin or the sting of an insect and gradually increasing in 
size to a small pustule as large as a pea Felt like the spots 
on the legs, with the same sore, bruised feeling in the skin of 
face and neck. There were twenty-eight small pustules on 
left side of face and neck. 

March 18th. — The eruption appeared on the left shoulder, 
several small pustules in a cluster, with the same character- 
istic soreness. Ceased taking drug. Dull, heavy headache 
in forehead and eyes; much throbbing 

Before the menses (four or five days) a dark colored leucor- 
rhea was observed, not very profuse, but attended with a 
tired and uneasy feeling m the pelvis. 

, April 5th. — The eruption on face, neck and shoulders grad- 
ually disappeared, but left discolored, ecchymosed spots and 
patches like the remains of an old bruise for several weeks, 
especially on lower leg. 

April 18th. — Menses appeared on time, very profuse for the 



436 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


first three or four days, accompanied by a good deal of pain 
and an uneasy sore feeling through the pelvis (much more 
than usual), but an unusual amount of pain for a week before 
the menses. Flow darker, much more profuse (formerly pro- 
fuse for one day) for four days. Considerable clotting. The 
flow continued for ten days, a circumstance which never oc- 
curred before. Vertigo during entire menstrual period, with 
inclination to fall forwards. 

Was attacked while at lectures with palpitation which con- 
tinued nearly all the afternoon Could feel the heart flutter 
and remit. Pulse 108 and 110. Violent throbbing of the 
carotids, faint for several hours. Never had palpitation be- 
fore m her life. Headache, full, throbbing, bursting, like a 
Glonome headache (has proved Glonoine), only not so sore 
on shaking the head. 

MIND. — Stupid, half-sleepy state 

Impaired power of thinking. 

Delirium: quiet; wandering. 

Mania; with inclination to bite, with inclination to drown. 

Uncomfortableness and depression 

Fear of death. 

Anxiety, sadness, melancholy. 

Great anguish, wild with anxiety. 

Apathy, indifference. 

Constant moaning and fear of death. 

Great anxiety and difficult respiration. 

Excessive sadness, gradually changes to cheerfulness; talks 
and acts foolishly, rage, followed by continuously deep sleep. 

Paralytic mental diseases; treats his relations contemptu- 
ously and sarcastically; wandering talk and hallucinations; 
apathy and complete disappearance of the senses. 

II Laughs, claps her hands over her head, seems beside her- 
self. 

After miscarriage. 

Memory failed. Forgot names of friends whom I met daily. 

Confusion of mind. Unpleasant forebodings. 

Anticipated misfortunes, as though about to lose something 
of great value, 

tl Sensation of intoxication while undressing, to retire (third 
day and for several successive evenings). 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


437 


During entire proving I experienced an elevation of spirits, 
felt buoyant and exhilarated. 

SENSORIUM. — Unconsciousness, with heavy sleep, preceded 
by tingling m head and limbs. 

Diminution and loss of senses, sight, hearing, etc. 

All the senses benumbed. 

Consciousness seems to continue until the last breath, and 
just before death it seems as if patient would improve. 

Stupefaction, stupor 

Vertigo constantly increasing, with stupefaction and heavi- 
ness of head, reeling, inability to stand erect, peculiar feeling 
of lightness of head, particularly in occiput, as from intoxica- 
tion, unsteady gait. 

Heaviness of head and tingling in legs. 

II Sensation of intoxication while undressii\g. 

INNER HEAD. — Pulsations in head with giddiness, she cannot 
walk. 

Pam and confusion most in occiput. 

Congestion to head and chest 

Headache, hemicrania on 1. side. 

Vertigo during entire last menstrual period, inclination to 
fall forwards. , 

Head heavy. Sharp stinging pain running upwards through 
the left eye into forehead and left side of head, coming in 
paroxysms. 

A dull, heavy, at times pressing headache, most severe on 
right side, aggravated in warm room, but not ameliorated in 
open air. 

Dull pain on each side of the head, above and before the 
ears, worse in warm room. At times it was throbbing, and 
continued with more or less severity for three weeks after 
leaving off the drug. It was semi-lateral at times, and seemed 
to prefer the right side and forehead. 

Feels oppressed; stupid, heavy, aches every night; would 
waken me at night; ameliorated by eating breakfast and ex- 
ercise. 

Could not sleep on account of the fearful oppressive head- 
ache, extending from occiput up over head to the eyes 

Severe pam in occiput, forehead, temples, back of eyes 
aggravated by pressure on nape of neck. 



488 


SECALE CORNUTUM, 


Headache aggravated in open air, and first entering warm 
room, as after riding in cold north wind in winter, when en- 
tering warm room the head aches so fearfully. 

More or less, a dull headache during the entire proving, 
especially in the forehead and eyes. 

Head full, throbbing, bursting, like a Glonoine headache, 
though not so sore on shaking the head. 

Continuous, supra-orbital headache (developed after prov- 
ing the remedy a week). 

Pam from forehead to the eyes; burning sensation m the 
eyes; no inflammation; pain shoots through the eyeball back- 
ward. 

OUTER HEAD. — Hair falls out. 

Twisting of head to and fro. 

II Scalp sore. 

Scalp sore; so painful, cannot bear to move the hair. 

Felt as though the hair had been parted in a new place, or 
pressed by hair pm. 

Hair looked at roots as though bulbs were enlarged. 

Scalp slightly pink in irregular spots, pimples appeared 
over scalp; small, very sore to touch, with slight burning sen- 
sation 

EYES AND SIGHT.— Photophobia 

Dimness of vision; mistiness before eyes. Cataract. 

Double or triple vision. 

Blue and fiery dots flying before eyes. 

Pain in eyes with feeling as if they were spasmodically ro- 
tated. 

Stitching pain in eyes; pressure on balls. 

After an epidemic of the rye disease an unusually large 
number of cataracts occurred in young people, twenty-three 
of whom gradually became blind (fifteen men and eight 
women), associated with headache, vertigo and roaring in 
ears; of the cataracts two were hard, twelve soft, and nine 
mixed. 

I Cataracta senilis. 

II Suppuration of cornea; < from warm applications. 

II Retinitis diabetica. 

Dilation of pupils. 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


439 


Suppressed secretion of tears. 

Injection of conjunctiva 

Eyes sunken, surrounded by a blue margin. 

Paralysis of the upper lids, from coal gas 
Immovable state of eyelids after facial erysipelas 
Eyes look fixed, wild, glazed; staring look. 

II Pustulous conjunctivitis and blepharitis. 

II Exophthalmos with struma. 

Exophthalmic goitre 

EARS AND HEARING. — Undue sensitiveness of hearing, even 
slightest sound re-echoed in her head and made her shudder. 
Confused hearing, deafness. After chorea 
Singing in ears and difficult hearing 
Humming and roaring in ears, with occasional deafness. 
NOSE AND SMELL. — Sneezing. 

Nose feels stopped up, yet watery discharge runs from it. 

II Nose stopped up on 1. side as with a solid plug 
11 Nosebleed: blood dark, runs continuously, with great 
prostration, small, threadlike pulse, in old people or drunk- 
ards; of young women, from debility 

Passive morning epistaxis from left side, bright red. 

Morning nose-bleed, something very unusual, left side only, 
passive, but bright red. 

Nose stopped up on left side as with a solid plug, but not 
much discharge. 

Nose sore to touch externally and internally 
Nose-bleed not very profuse, recurring for several successive 
days. 

Bleeding at the nose on every attempt to wipe it, 

FACE.— Face; pinched, pale, earthy-looking; sunken, hip- 
pocratic, ashy; swollen; contracted, discolored, with sunken 
eyes, blue rings around eyes, risus sardonicus; distorted; wan, 
anxious 

Tingling in face. 

Muscular twitchings usually commence in face and then 
spread all over body, sometimes increasing to dancing and 
jumping. 

Spasmodic distortion of mouth and lips. 

Forehead hot. 



440 


SECALE CORNUTUM 


Lockjaw. 

Lips deathly pale or bluish 
Oppressed, full of blood during fever 

Face and neck feel hot, as if full of blood and ready to 
burst 

TEETH AND GDMS. — Looseness of teeth 
Grinding of teeth. 

Bleeding from gums. 

II Difficult dentition, great weakness; vomiting of every- 
thing taken, great thirst, pale face, eyes dim, sunken, dry 
heat, with rapid pulse, restlessness and sleeplessness. 

TASTE AND TONGUE. — Tongue: thickly coated with yellow- 
ish- white, dry, tenacious substance, discolored, brown or 
blackish; deathly pale; cold and livid, clean, with dry, red 
tip, red tip and edges, centre coated 

Slight but unpleasant warmth on tongue, during day 
Spasm of tongue, projecting it from mouth, forcing it be- 
tween teeth and rendering speech indistinct 
Feeble, stuttering, indistinct speech, as if tongue were 
paralyzed. 

Coated yellowish brown through middle, sides clean. 

In the evening (second day) a sore spot felt on the back of 
the tongue, left side, as though a “canker sore” were making 
its appearance 

In the evening of the third day the same sore feeling on the 
tongue, but on right side This is not felt at all during the 
day time. 

MOUTH. — Bloody or yellowish green foam at mouth. 
Increased secretion of saliva, ptyalism. 

Much acid fluid in mouth 
Spitting of blood 
Fetid breath 

Speech difficult, slow and weak, with a feeling at every 
motion as if there was some resistance to be overcome. 
Dryness of mouth. 

Dry, but seldom thirsty. Burning, dry sensation, not re- 
lieved by drinking Brackish taste 
Stammers unintelligible words between teeth; speech, diffi- 
cult and stammering, speech, slow and weak, with a feeling 



SECALE CORNUTUM 


441 


on every motion as if there were alw^ays some resistance to be 
overcome. 

THROAT, — Dryness of soft palate, throat and esophagus, 
with thirst 

Burning in throat with violent thirst 

Painful tingling in throat and on tongue 

II Throat sore on 1. side running up into ear. 

I Follicular pharyngitis, hawking up of little follicular exu- 
dates 

I Diphtheria: loss of strength, rapid loss of sensibility; 
numbness of extremities, painful tingling and crawling on 
tongue, dry gangrene, apathy, dilated pupils; burning pains 
of affected parts, stammering speech, absence of all reaction. 

I I Severely paralyzed both in swallowing and in speaking, 
could scarcely take food without great danger of choking, 
speech reduced to a whisper; could not bear heat or covering 
and would throw all covering off. Post-diphtheritic paralysis. 

Soreness with dryness and sensation of constriction, better 
by swallowing; symptoms worse mornings. 

Rawness, dryness and constriction of throat, without any 
pain. 

Throat sore on left side running up into ear. 

Throat on right side red, sore, with a feeling as if it were 
constructed of tense and hard fibres, very slightly hoarse. 

Later throat felt constricted, chiefly on right side, right 
side and back of throat inflamed, red and “stiff,” some pain 
on swallowing. (I am not inclined to right sided sore throat, 
almost all my attacks of the kind being confined to the left 
side. ) 

APPETITE, THIRST, DESIRES, AVERSIONS.— Ravenous, insa- 
tiable appetite, even when dying from exhausting discharges 
from bowels 

Hunger as from long fasting 

Disgust for food, especially for meat and fatty things. 

Thirst, during all stages of fever, unquenchable, for acids. 

Great thirst and dryness of mouth and throat, with burning 
and tingling of tongue. 

Desire for. sour things; lemonade. 

HICCOUGH, BELCHING, NAUSEA AND VOMITING.— Eructations. 



442 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


With disagreeable taste; sour, tasteless, but with subjective, 
disagreeable, empyreumatic odor; empty. 

Nausea, inclination to vomit; painful retchings, constant, 
< after eating. 

Excessive nausea and debility, with very little vomiting of 
a dark brown coffee-grounds fluid. 

Vomiting, of food, of bile; of mucus; of green, offensive, 
watery fluid, painless and without effort, with great weakness; 
immediately after eating, of lumbrici, of blood, black vomit. 

I Hemat emesis, patient lies still; great weakness but no 
pain, abdomen soft 

SCROBICULUM AND STOMACH —Tenderness of epigastrium. 

Anxiety and pressure in pit of stomach, with great sensi- 
tiveness to touch. 

I Severe anxiety and burning at pit of stomach. 

Pam in pit of stomach. 

Violent pressure in stomach, as from a heavy weight. 

Warmth and feeling of repletion. 

Burning in stomach. 

Painful constriction of epigastrium. 

Great distress and oppression of stomach. 

II Bilious vomiting, with cramping pains in stomach, burn- 
ing in stomach extending up esophagus; head sunk upon 
breast, face pale, yellowish, voice weak, pulse small Cardi- 
algia 

1 1 Attacks of severe pressure and constriction in region of 
stomach extending through to spine, extremely painful and 
followed in half an hour by vomiting of tasteless fluid or of 
contents of stomach, thereupon an intermission of several 
hours occurred; during attack region of stomach felt as if con- 
tracted, and on percussion gave a tympanitic note, has three 
to four attacks daily, 

I Hemorrhage from stomach, lies still with great weakness 
but no pain; face, lips, tongue and hands deadly pale; skin 
covered with cold sweat, pulse frequent, threadlike; oppres- 
sion; abdomen soft, without pain. Hematemesis. 

II Hematemesis; attacks preceded by pains in epigastrium 
and nausea, pain going to 1 side when pressure is made in 
epigastrium; marked protrusion in 1. hypochondrium, with 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


443 


pain, blood red, never containing particles of food, and when 
collected in basin appears more like bloody serum than pure 
blood and is of offensive odor, quantity vomited not very 
large; frequent chilliness at night, followed by profuse sweat; 
strength not much impaired; appetite and sleep good. 

Eructations: having the odor of burnt horn. 

Appetite much increased; was very hungry, ashamed to eat 
as much as desired. 

Felt as though I had dined on chopped cabbage 

Nausea after leaving table 

Felt too full, fermented, much flatulence. 

Flatulence rumbling through stomach and bowels. 

A tired sensation — one of distress and oppression — over re- 
gion below the stomach, was present much of the time during 
the proving. 

HYPOCHONDRIA. — Enlargement of the liver. 

Inflammation and gangrene of liver; acute pains in hepatic 
region, tongue thickly coated with a brown tenacious sub- 
stance, burning in throat, unquenchable thirst, great weak- 
ness, but no pain; limbs cold and covered with cold sweat. 

Burning in spleen; thrombosis of abdominal vessels. 

ABDOMEN. — Distension of abdomen, tympanites; meteorism. 

Flatulence with rumbling. 

Painful sensitiveness and rumbling, with continual nausea 
and confusion of head. 

Inclination to colic, diarrhea, and bloatedness of abdomen. 

Pain in lower belly, preventing an upright position, even 
forcing him to lie doubled up in bed. 

Colic with convulsions. 

I Pam in abdomen with burning in stomach. 

I Pams in hypogastric region. 

Pain in loins as from false labor pains. 

Continual bearing down in lower abdomen. 

Burning in abdomen. 

Cold feeling in abdomen and back. 

Strong pulsation m umbilical region. 

Lumps and welts in abdomen; in affections of uterus. 

II Aneurism of mesenteric artery, in women. 

Abdomen much distended. 



444 


SECALE CORNUTUM 


Distension of abdomen, much flatulence as though soon to 
suffer from diarrhea. 

Spasmodic jerking of small intestines near sigmoid flexure 
as though tied about with strings, which were interruptedly 
pulled. Worse evening, and better by pressure and lying on 
affected side. This lasted for about three weeks 

Bowels felt weak, sick, faint, as in summer from eating too 
much fruit, no pain but hot and dry internally 

Bowels did not pain, and seemingly would have been re- 
lieved of heat, dryness and uncomfortable feeling if I could 
have drunk water enough to reach them, which I was unable 
to do. Neither drinking water nor an enema gave relief 
STOOL AND RECTUM. — 1| Diarrhea, very exhausting, per- 
nicious, very offensive, involuntary, profuse, watery, putrid, 
brown; discharged with great force, very exhausting, urine 
suppressed, painful with great prostration; painless with ting- 
ling and numbness in limbs, putrid, fetid, colliquative, patient 
does not want to be covered or to be near the heat, but pre- 
fers to be in the air or wishes to be fanned; sudden attacks, 
of children, discharges whitish, watery, chronic in overfed 
children, great prostration, during August; great stools undi- 
gested, or watery, at times yellowish, also greenish, with for- 
cible expulsion, accompanied by discharge of flatus; paralytic 
weakness of sphincter ani with involuntary discharges 

Stools: yellowish, greenish, brownish, watery and floccu- 
lent; colorless, watery; profuse, frequent; putrid; gushing; 
involuntary; watery, slimy; thin, olive green, offensive, 
watery; fetid, dark colored, thin, involuntary; watery, yel- 
lowish or greenish, discharged rapidly with great force and 
even involuntarily, painless, without effort and with great 
weakness. 

Before stool, cutting and rumbling in abdomen. 

During stool: cutting; great exhaustion, coldness. 

After stool: exhaustion 

11 Five to ten minutes after taking least quantity of food, 
severe colic which made her bend double and cry out, pain 
begins between region of stomach and navel, extends thence 
to sides and rest of abdomen and down to sacral region, ac- 
companied by severe urging and tenesmus, followed by a 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


445 


thin, slimy, yellowish stool with some relief of pam, four to 
five such attacks follow each other, then relief until she eats 
again, four to five evacuations during night, she compares 
pains to labor pains; great thirst, thick mucous coating on 
tongue, sleep disturbed, prostration Diarrhea 

II Uncomfortable fullness of abdomen, with transient pinch- 
ing pains in upper abdomen as from flatus; at night severe 
cutting pains throughout whole abdomen, restless anxious 
tossing about, with short and unrefreshmg naps; during night 
anus firmly closed, '‘as if locked up,” in morning frequent 
short watery evacuations, in gushes, preceded by cutting pains 
in abdomen. 

II Stools yellowish-white, slimy, undigested, escaping invol- 
untarily, < at break of day. Diarrhea. 

I Interminable diarrhea in summer, which resists everything, 
especially in scrofulous children, putrid, fetid and colliquative; 
choleraic symptoms, with cold, clammy perspiration ; sinking 
spells at 3 A. m. (not the restless anguish of Arsenicum). 

I I Colliquative diarrhea 

I Cholerine with more retching than vomiting. 

I Cholera infantum, profuse undigested stools, watery and 
very offensive, discharged by fits and starts and followed by 
intense prostration, pale face, sunken eyes, dry heat, quick 
pulse, restlessness and sleeplessness; great aversion to heat 
and to being covered. Cholera infantum. 

II Vertigo, cramps or drawing in calves of legs, rumbling in 
abdomen, nausea, stools in rapid succession, brownish or col- 
orless, rapid prostration, coldness of limbs, tongue but slightly 
coated 

1 1 Profuse prostrating evacuations, severe painful cramps in 
feet, toes, hands and fingers which are spread apart or ex- 
tended toward back of hands, cramping pressure in stomach; 
dry, wrinkled, cold skin, cyanotic color. Cholera. 

I Cholera infantum; cholera morbus; cholera Asiatica. 

I I Patient cold, almost pulseless, with spasmodic twitching 
of muscles in various parts of body; spreads fingers asunder; 
eyes sunken, features pinched; much spasmodic retching 
although not much vomiting; skin harsh, shrivelled, dry, as 
if there were no moisture left in system; urine suppressed; 



446 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


tingling or formication all over body, stools profuse, watery, 
ejected with great violence, is cold but cannot bear to be cov- 
ered Cholera. 

1 1 Aversion to heat or being covered, with icy coldness of 
extremities. 

I Diarrhea after cholera. 

I Cholera Asiatica, with collapse, sunken, distorted face, 
particularly mouth; crawling sensation as from ants. 

Paralysis of rectum, anus wide open. 

I Hemorrhage from bowels. 

I Constipation. 

Constipated; dry, dark, detached, yet difficult to expel 

No desire for days; feels as though rectum was full 

Frequent stools; light colored, soft. 

Diarrhea: stool small, scanty. Almost every time urine 
was passed during the day, a small stool 

Constant desire for stool 

URINARY ORGANS. — Retention of urine, urine pale or bloody, 
discharge of thick black blood from kidneys; obscuration of 
sight Scarlatina. 

Diabetes; great general lassitude; heaviness of limbs; loss 
of strength; emaciation, gangrene; skin dry and withered, 
furuncles, petechiae, fever, with unquenchable thirst, dimin- 
ished power of senses; dryness of mouth, morbidly great ap- 
petite; cardialgia; costiveness, diarrhea, watery urine, in- 
creased quantity of urine. 

II Hematuria in a boy suffering from suppuration of the 
glands of neck after scarlet fever; urine also very albuminous; 
anasarca, great thirst 

1 Passive hemorrhage, blood thin; blood corpuscles wanting 
m consequence or dissolution; or painless discharge of thick 
black blood in consequence of kidney disease; coldness of 
body; cold perspiration on forehead; great weakness. Hema- 
turia. 

Urine suppressed; on introducing catheter a gill of dark, 
prune-colored urine passed, which appeared to be full of 
gritty sediment emitting a very disagreeable odor. 

Unsuccessful urging to urinate. 

Ischuria paralytica. 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


447 


1 Paralysis of bladder, 

1 Enuresis: old people, pale, watery or bloody urine. 

Urinary deposit looking like white cheese. 

i Bloody, albuminous urine 

I Discharge of thick black blood from bladder; kidney affec- 
tions 

Urine increased in quantity, lighter color, passed more fre- 
quently, especially at night. Milky on standing a short time. 

Pressure in bladder at night 

MALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — After lightness in occiput, violent 
dragging in spermatic cord causing sensation as if testicle 
were being drawn up to inguinal ring. 

After sexual excess palpitation of heart 

I Weak memory after exhausting coition, impotence. 

Clonic spasmodic stricture of urethra 

FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — Uterus and r ovary much con- 
gested, very sensitive to touch. 

II Pam m ovaries and uterus 

Pains of an expulsive character in uterus. 

Prolonged bearing down and forcing pains in uterus; thin 
and scrawny subjects 

Burning pains m greatly distended uterus, which felt hard 
and was painful to touch. 

1 1 Putrescence of uterus, abdomen distended, not very pain- 
ful; discharge from vagina, brownish, offensive; ulcers on ex- 
ternal genitals discolored and rapidly spreading, burning hot 
fever, interrupted by shaking chills; small, sometimes inter- 
mittent pulse, great anguish, pain in pit of stomach, vomit- 
ing decomposed matter, offensive diarrhea, suppressed secre- 
tion of urine; skin covered with petechial and miliary erup- 
tions or shows discolored, inflamed places, with a tendency to 
mortification; the patient lies either in quiet delirium or grows 
wild with great anxiety and a constant desire to get out of 
bed. Metritis. . 

11 Metritis, tendency to putrescence; inflammation caused 
by suppression of lochia or menses; discharge of thin black 
blood, a kind of sanies, with tingling in legs and great de- 
bility. Metritis 

Cancer/and gangrene of uterus. 



448 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


I Uterine ulcers feel as if burnt, discharge putrid, bloody 
fluid 

The uterus that had previously been in a normal condition 
descended so that it almost protruded, was hot and painful, 
os open as large as middle finger, excessive desire to urinate, 
labor pains only relieved by wet bandages or pressure upon 
abdomen; lasted three days, did not miscarry though os re- 
mained open during this period, afterward uterus gradually 
ascended, pains diminished, and after five or six days os con- 
tracted, went on to eighth month, when she miscarried. 

I I Uterus about an inch from labia mferiora, membrane 
around it felt hard, while rest of mucous membrane of vagina 
was very much relaxed and gathered into a fold at lower part. 

I Partial prolapsus of uterus for eight months after a forceps 
delivery; dysuria; sense of weight over pubes as if contents of 
abdomen would fall forward. 

1 Prolapsus of three months* standing; frequent severe cut- 
ting pains in abdomen, occasional nausea. 

I Dreadful bearing down, dragging out feeling in lower ab- 
domen, so that her life is almost unbearable, every four or 
five days profuse, thick, yellow discharge from vagina; hesi- 
tation in urinating; rheumatism Hysteralgia. 

Hemorrhage from uterus; apparent death of newborn child. 

1 Incessant metrorrhagia. 

I Uterine hemorrhage: when uterus is engorged; with pains 
in sacrum, extending down thighs and pressing into lower ab- 
domen of a pregnant woman; profuse protracted flow, tear- 
ing, cutting colic, cold extremities and cold sweat, weak, 
hemorrhage < from slightest motion, blood thin and black, 
black, lumpy or brown fluid, of disgusting smell, black liquid 
blood 

II A woman, aet. 45, passed through a normal confinement 
seven years ago; miscarried about two years ago, hemorrhage 
kept up for five months under allopathic treatment, with ex- 
acerbation during time of menstruation; after ceasing for 
seven months, hemorrhage set m again with slight intermis- 
sion of one or two weeks, excessive anemia; sunken features; 
skin cold and dry; pulse small and quick; heavily coated 
tongue; loss of appetite; headache; since five days, daily ten 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


449 


or twelve painless stools, of mucous, watery, sometimes foul- 
smelling masses, thin, black, foul-smelling bloody discharges. 

1 1 Feeble and extremely emaciated, skin flaccid, face very 
pale and sunken, with an expression of suffering, mucous 
membranes pale and cool, hands and feet deficient of natural 
warmth, action of heart quickened, breathing short and op- 
pressed, pulse very small, 120, abdomen distended, os uteri 
very open, with indented and puffy edges, flaccid and soft, 
vagina tender and cool, manual examination caused much un- 
easiness and flooding, violent headache limited to one spot, 
throbbing in temples, roaring in ears, giddiness on slightest 
movement, enfeebled nervous system showed extraordinary 
excitability, many times in day, and especially at night, 
cramps in calves and spasmodic twitching of limbs, causing 
exhaustion, remains several hours in bed as if paralyzed, 
digestion and sleep disturbed to some extent; hemorrhage 
still continued, even m horizontal position, and elevation of 
pelvis caused no diminution m large quantity of blackened 
coagula which were constantly passing, while least movement 
increased discharge in a very great degree Chrome passive 
hemorrhage 

I Uterine hemorrhage, flow passive, dark and may be offen- 
sive; tingling or formication all over body, holds her fingers 
spread asunder, asks to have her limbs rubbed, finally lies 
unconscious and cold. 

II Metrorrhagia, relaxed condition of body, depressed, anx- 
ious state of mind; unusual drowsiness by day; gush of thin 
black blood on least movement of body, general feeling of 
prostration, diminished temperature of body; wooden, numb 
feeling in lower extremities 

Uterine hemorrhage; did not wish to be covered, desired 
windows to be open, though room was very cold and surface 
of body like a corpse. % 

I Painless flooding in feeble, cachectic, dysciatic women, or 
such as have long resided in tropical climates. 

II Since last delivery menses too seldom and very irregular, 
last time rather copious in consequence of unusual exertion; 
at night dreamed she was ascending the stairs with a heavy 
load, and suddenly a clot of blood came away and the blood 

30 



450 


SECALE CORNUTUM 


seemed to gush forth, the alarm awakened her and she found 
that she was bleeding fast, on following morning strength 
greatly reduced, lips and whole body, even tongue, deathly 
pale; pulse could not be distinguished, frequent fainting fits; 
periodic pains with expulsion of clots of blood and between 
these attacks constant oozing of thin bright blood. 

II An excessive menstrual flow every two weeks, lasting 
seven to nine days, for last four weeks flow is continuous; 
very weak and thin; has severe pains in loins and uterine re- 
'gion, bearing down pains as if in labor 

I Menses too profuse and lasting too long; with tearing 
and cutting colic, cold extremities, cold sweat, great weakness 
.and small pulse, or with violent spasms. 

Menstrual blood thin and black, black, lumpy or brown 
fluid and of disgusting smell 

II Menstrual colic, pains so severe as to frequently cause 
spasms, uterine region very sensitive to touch, high fever; 
pains > when flow appears 

I [Menstrual colic, pale face, coldness of limbs, cold sweat; 
small, suppressed pulse, tearing, cutting pains in abdomen 

II Menses irregular, every four weeks for three to four days, 
copious dark-red fluid discharge of blood, with pressing, labor- 
like pains in abdomen, constipation; pressure in occiput; 
afterward continuous discharge of watery blood, until next 
period. 

Suppression of menses with pain. 

11 Gangrene of whole vaginal mucous membrane; on hold- 
ing apart the labiae this membrane was found of a dark slate 
color, emitting the characteristic odor 

Vagina hot or cool 

1 Discharge from vagina almost black, fluid and very fetid. 

I Leucorrhea: in thin, scrawny women, with prolapsus uteri; 
green, brown, ofiensive, like cream, from weakness and 
venous congestion. 

Ulcers on outer genitals, discolored and rapidly spreading. 

Sharp pains in left ovarian region, week before menses 

Menses a week too soon (always regular before to a day). 

Flow bright red and coagulable; many clots. 

OSensive in odor; a cold cadaverous smell. 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


451 


Before the menses (four or five days) a dark colored leucor- 
rhea was observed, not very profuse, but with a very uneasy 
feeling about the pelvis 

Menses appeared very profuse, lasting for ten days, but only 
profuse for the first three or four days, accompanied by a 
great deal of pain and an uneasy ,sore feeling (more than 
usual), and a dull headache during entire proving, especially 
in forehead and eyes 

Catamenia occurred on time Flow easy, abundant, pain- 
less and entirely without clot 

Passed a membrane. Period ceased (fifth day), having 
been entirely free from discomfort 

At second period the flow was of good color, rather fluid, a 
few clots. 

Continuous exercise stopped it on the second day, but no 
backache, headache or other disagreeable symptoms appeared 
m consequence. 

Next period appeared at proper time “with few premoni- 
tory symptoms,” but with a feeling all day as if I ^mist keep 
sttll or have the flow checked Passed a membrane. In four 
days menses ceased (During the spring months of the past 
two years have passed membranes at the monthly period, but 
never before in consectUtve months ) The flow is usually 
attended with uneasy feelings and is always greatly clotted, 

Leucorrhea the week before, discharge like white of egg 
(many times daily), changed just before menses to a yellow- 
ish offensive discharge; irritating, relieved by bathing parts 
in cold water 

After menses sharp pains m uterus and pelvic region, with 
dragging, bearing down sensation, and aching across small of 
back 

Genital organs feel as if full of hot blood, pressed to their 
utmost capacity. The surface did not burn, but felt as though 
blood-vessels were filled with hot blood 

Uterus prolapsed, region sore to touch. This condition 
continued for weeks. 

Menses one week too soon, too profuse, and what is very 
unusual, attended with much bearing, pressing down pain. 

Second month, four days too soon, flow darker than cus- * 



452 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


tomary and offensive, but not clotted, lasts two days longer 
and IS too profuse but not weakening 

Vertigo at the time of the menses with pain and heaviness 
in the pelvis for a week before the menses. 

Unusual amount of pain and heaviness m pelvis for a week 
before menses. 

Flow darker, much more profuse (formerly profuse for one 
day only) but this lasted four days. 

Considerable clotting 

PREGNANCY. PARTURITION. LACTATION.— Arrested devel- 
opment of fetus. 

Discharge of blood during pregnancy. 

I Threatened abortion more especially at third month, with 
copious flow of black, liquid blood, false labor pains, with 
bloody discharge, in feeble, cachectic women, having a wan, 
anxious countenance, pulse almost extinct, fear of death, ©on- 
vulsive movements. 

II Extremely violent pains, almost without intermission, she 
seemed to be in the last stage of labor, but on examination os 
was found about the size of a half dollar, thick and somewhat 
rigid 

I [Extremely violent pressing labor pains, os, however, be- 
ing only about as large as a ten cent piece, hysterical convul- 
sions 

I I When advanced about seven and a half months in preg- 
nancy was taken with labor pains, wriggling and not distinctly 
intermitting, os tincae open, and about size of a shilling, dul- 
ness and slight aching of head, despondent 

II Prone to abortion in third month, had passed through five, 
although she kept her bed as soon as pregnant, some labor 
pains with bloody discharge; was able to attend to her house- 
hold duties and went to full term. 

1 1 After lifting a heavy weight during sixth month of preg- 
nancy severe pains in stomach, abdomen and small of back 
and a pushing-down sensation; violent movements of fetus; 
cold feet, numbness and tingling in feet, small, weak pulse 

[After abortus, difficult contraction of uterus; thin, black, 
foul-smelling discharge. 

I Retained placenta, after miscarriage, especially when oc- 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


453 


curring: during early months of pregnancy; offensive dis- 
charges, patient cold and often almost pulseless from loss of 
blood, uterine contractions very imperfect, or else prolonged 
tonic contraction. 

II During eighth month of pregnancy violent convulsions 
with frothing at mouth, etc , followed by variable spasms; 
insensibility and clonic spasms, < at every pain, on return of 
consciousness complained of dull frontal and occipital head- 
ache and incessant uterine pains Premature labor. 

II During pregnancy: frequent and prolonged forcing pains, 
particularly in thin, ill-conditioned women, cramps in calves 

I Uterine pains prolonged but ineffectual. 

I A sensation of constant tonic pressure in uterine region; 
causes great distress, desires fresh air, does not like to be 
covered. 

I Hour-glass contraction 

I I During labor: prolonged bearing-down and forcing pain 
in uterus, pains irregular, pains too weak; pains feeble, or 
ceasing, everything seems loose and open, no action; fainting 
fits. 

I Strength of uterus weakened by too early or perverted 
efforts. , 

I Thin, scrawny women, skin shrivelled, dry and harsh, sal- 
low face, weak in labor; pains seem to be entirely wanting, 
uterus flabby; bearing down in sacral region, a sort of pro- 
longed urging feeling m abdomen 

I I While the head was passing m lower strait, she was sud- 
denly seized with violent convulsions lasting about three or 
four minutes, followed by a stupid state with stertorous 
breathing and uneasy moaning as if from pain. 

1 Labor ceases, and twitchmgs or convulsions begin 

I Puerperal convulsions with opisthotonos 

I Retained placenta, with constant, strong bearing-down in 
abdomen, or with relaxed feeling of parts. 

II After labor, pale, weak; uterus distended, burning pains 
therein, hard, painful to least touch, discharge of black, co- 
agulated or brown, watery offensive-smelling blood, throb- 
bing, tearing pains in thighs extending down to toes; pain < 
from motion; strong pulsations in umbilical region, which 



454 


SECALE CORNUTUM, 


could be felt by the hand, pulse at wrist weak and rapid, fre- 
quent yawning. 

1 1 Post-partum hemorrhage, with relaxation of uterus, only 
temporarily relieved by compression: after-pains excessive, 
< when child nursed 

] I After-pains too long and too painful. 

1 1 Violent after-pains with hemorrhage arising from irregu- 
lar contractions; the longitudinal fibres alone contracting in 
such a manner as to leave a sulcus in middle, making it ap- 
pear as if uterus were split open from top to bottom. 

1 1 Cessation of lochia, with fever, inflammation of uterus, 
subsequently an abscess opened through vagina. 

II Lochia: dark, very offensive; scanty or profuse, painless 
or accompanied by prolonged bearing-down pain, suppressed, 
followed by metritis, suddenly changes character and becomes 
of a dirty brown or chocolate color, with fetid odor, grows 
sad and melancholy and fears death, of too long duration 

I Fever with frequent watery stools. Puerperal fever. 

[Strong tendency to putrescence, discharge of sanious 
blood, with tingling in legs and great prostration, urine sup- 
pressed, offensive diarrhea, voice hollow with difficult breath- 
ing, feeble and inaudible; burning fever interrupted by shak- 
ing chills, does not care to be covered, cold limbs; cold sweat 
over whole body, gangrene 

i Suppression of milk, the milk will not flow from the 
breast 

I Lack of milk with much stinging in mammae. 

1 In women who are much exhausted from venous hemor- 
rhage, thin, scrawny women, the breasts do not properly fill 
with milk 

Thin, scrawny children with shrivelled skin, spasmodic 
twitchings, sudden cries, feverishness 

Pendulous abdomen 

Promotes expulsion of foreign bodies from uterus. 

Married woman, aged 25, had severe pain in the pelvic 
region; great bearing-down, excruciating rectal and vesical 
tenesmus ; restless sleep, high fever, and heavily-coated 
tongue. Subperitoneal hematocele was diagnosed in consul- 
tation Tumor increased rapidly, and increased fever, pulse 



SECALE CORNUTUM 


455 


130 to 150, tongue dry, dark-brown, sordes on the teeth, 
vagmahsecretions fetid, frequent urgent micturition, mucous 
dysentery, with increased tenesmus, countenance expressive 
of great suffering Under Secale, tumor discharged through 
the rectum, large quantity of dark, thick blood, patient grad- 
ually recovered 

VOICE AND LARYNX, TRACHEA AND BRONCHIA.-- 1 Voice, 
hollow, hoarse, with difficult breathing, feeble and inaudible; 
weak, unintelligible, stammering 

Thickening of mucous membrane of air passages 
Lungs during chill felt as though respiration fanned air 
RESPIRATION. — Respiration, slow, labored and anxious, op- 
pressed, moaning, constant sighing, hiccough 

Blood is sometimes expectorated during violent efforts to 
breathe 

Lungs during chill felt as though respiration fanned air on 
a perfectly dry surface , only during chills 

Sharp pains through left chest, especially when walking 
COUGH. — Hard, hoarse cough, with but little expectoration. 
IlConcussive cough, profuse perspiration, sleepless nights, 
inclination to colic, diarrhea, bloatedness of abdomen; em- 
physema. Bronchitis. 

I Spitting of blood, with or without cough 
INNER CHEST AND LUNGS,— Cramp in chest. 

Pams over nearly whole front part of chest, < from cough- 
ing and motion 

I I Expectoration of dark, frothy, rather viscid blood, brought 
up by a slight cough and amounting to a teacupful m four 
hours, a spot as large as a crown piece on r side of chest to 
r of nipple, dull on percussion, with bronchial respiration and 
mucous rale over that part 

HEART, PULSE AND CIRCULATION,— 11 Palpitation, hot fore- 
head, inclination to sleep, spasmodic shocks from r. half of 
chest into r arm and leg, m paroxysms every two or three 
hours, oftener in night, after each meal, less m open air, 
coldness and numbness of r. hand, with tingling in fourth and 
fifth fingers, loss of muscular power and feeling in hand; after 
sexual excess. 

1 Palpitation of heart: with contracted and frequently inter- 
mitting pulse. 



456 


SECALE CORNUTUM 


I Pulse, often unchanged even during violent attacks; gen- 
erally slow and contracted, at times intermittent pr sup- 
pressed, somewhat accelerated during heat, small, empty, 
weak, threadlike, m hemorrhages 

During the entire proving palpitation of the heart (some- 
thing I never had before in my life) ; could feel the heart flut- 
ter and remit 

Palpitation nearly all the afternoon 

Violent throbbing of the carotids, faint for several hours. 

Was attacked while at lectures with palpitation which con- 
tinued about eight hours 

Pulse 108 and 110 

NECK AND BACK.— Tumors on neck discharging yellow pus. 

Gentle, creeping sensation in back, as if a soft air were 
blowing through it 

Tingling in back, extending to fingers and toes 

Pam m small of back 

Stitch in back. 

Sudden “catch” or “kink” in back 

Pams in sacrum with bearing down as if parts would be 
forced out, < when moving 

I I Hard, hoarse cough, with but little expectoration, pains 
nearly all over front part of chest, < from coughing and mo- 
tion, for several years tenderness of lower cervical and upper 
dorsal spinous processes, with stiffness of neck, < from every 
exertion or strain upon spine, pressure upon diseased portion 
of spine produces pain there, as well as all through chest, with 
irritation to cough 

II Stitches m upper dorsal vertebrse (between shoulders), 
constant when sitting, intermittent when standing, at times 
extending into hands, < by pressure upon vertebrse, frequent 
formication through all limbs, at times rigidity and spasmodic 
stretching of fingers so that for several minutes he cannot sew; 
frequent pressure and swelling beneath epigastrium , pain in 
back < when sewing 

Violent pain in back, especially in sacral region, anesthesia 
and paralysis of limbs, convulsive jerks and shocks in para- 
lyzed limbs, painful contraction of flexor muscles; paralysis 
of bladder and rectum Myelitis. 



SECALE CORNUTUM 


457 


1 Myelitis diffusa 

Paraplegia preceded by cramps and muscular pains 
Difficult, staggering gait; complete inability to walk, not 
for want of power but on account of a peculiar unfitness to 
perform light movements with limbs and hands: contraction 
of lower limbs on account of which patient staggers, trem- 
bling of limbs, sometimes attended with pains, formication of 
hands and feet, excessive sensation of heat, with aversion to 
heat or being covered 

Spine disease with gressus vaccinus 
Muscles of neck stiff, sore. 

Shoulder-blades and clavicle lame, as though wrenched or 
twisted 

Back aches, feels weak, especially in sacrum. 

Sharp, shifting pains in all parts of body 
UPPER LIMBS. — Arms fall asleep 
Rough rash all over arm. 

Spasmodic jerks of hand, with flexion of hand at wrist or of 
forearm 

1 Numbness and insensibility of hands and arms 
Burning in hands. 

Hands deathly pale 

Coldness and numbness of r hand with tingling of ring and 
little fingers. 

Loss of feeling in backs of fingers. 

Loss of muscular power and of feeling in hand 

Fingers convulsively drawn in toward palm, clasping thumb. 

I Contraction of fingers 

Fingers bent backward or spasmodically abducted. 

I I Left thumb spasmodically drawn toward dorsum of hand, 
followed m a few minutes by cramping and flexure of rest of 
fingers toward palmar surface, hands feel numb like velvet; 
next day both hands became affected and after several days 
felt a tingling and stitches in legs, followed by heaviness of 
same, < after walking, generally appearing while sitting, 
while cramps in hands always appear after using them 

Loss of sensation in tips of fingers. 

Numbness of tips of fingers. 

Crawling in tips of fingers as if something alive were creep- 



458 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


ing under skin or as if fingers were asleep, as from pressure 
upon arm. 

Peculiar prickling feeling in tips of fingers; they are sensi- 
tive to cold 

Painful swelling of fingers. 

Violent pains in finger tips. 

I Gangrene of fingers, senile gangrene. 

Shifting pains first through my hands from one finger ta 
another, then through the wrist joint 

Wrist weakened so it was painful to lift weights. 

Sensation of burning on left hand as though irritated with 
Cayenne, warm after rubbing 

Dull, spasmodic pain from shoulder to elbow along median 
nerve, worse on right side and in morning 

LOWER LIMBS. — Hammering, tearing pain in both thighs in- 
creased by motion. 

Legs heavy and tired. 

Tingling m legs. 

Creeping feeling in anterior femoral and posterior tibial 
regions. 

Shuffling gait as if feet were dragged along, 

Rheumatic pains of joints 

I Cramps m calves of legs and soles of feet, disturbing sleep 
at night and hindering walking in pregnant women 

I I After an attack of cholera cramps in calves and sensation 
of numbness and formication in. toes. 

1 1 Cramp in calves. 

I Burning in feet. 

I The feet seem asleep and stiff. 

1 Toes of r. foot spasmodically drawn upwards, continuously 
during day and occasionally at night, causing a peculiar limp- 
ing gait, this cramp was accompanied by no pain, but by a 
very tiresome sensation rendering walking, particularly going 
up and down stairs, very difficult, tendons running along dor- 
sum of foot to toes were tense as wires and the corresponding 
muscles of leg larger and harder than normal, now and then 
slight sensation of coldness in back and also a peculiar buzzing 
(formication) in spine. 

Swelling of feet with black spots. 



SECALE CORNUTUM 


459 


II Beginning senile gangrene: swelling and livid coloring of 
r. foot extending to malleoli, foot cold, severe indescribable 
pains. 

11 Senile gangrene commenced in great toe of r, foot and 
slowly extended, foot was livid and swollen; all the symptoms 
pointed to its complete loss. 

II Dry gangrene of foot with constant severe, burning tear- 
ing pains 

Severe pains in sole of foot and toes, black spot on plantar 
surface of heel, toes livid, blue, cold, burning pains, foot 
swollen, walking impossible. Senile gangrene. 

11 Profuse, stinking and corrosive perspiration of feet, soften- 
ing and bleaching soles and destroying quickly stockings and 
shoes, existing two months m a girl eighteen years old 

Tingling in toes. 

II Gangrene of toes. 

Shifting pains through ankles and knees. 

Legs so weak gave out while walking. 

Knees so weak could hardly reach top of stairs. 

Legs would give out '' suddenly. 

Lassitude, weakness, heaviness, trembling of limbs. 

Limbs cold, covered with cold sweat. 

Formication; pricking, tingling, numbness, insensibility of 
limbs 

Spasmodic pains, drawing and crawling in limbs 

Burning in hands and feet 

I Fuzzy feeling in limbs 

I Cramps in hand and toes. 

Painful jerkings in limbs at night. 

Most violent convulsive movements of limbs occur several 
times a day; during intervals fingers are numb and often con- 
tracted. 

Sudden periodic contraction of limbs, with tensive pain. 

Contractions of hands, feet, fingers and toes. 

Gangrene of limbs, limbs suddenly became cold, leaden 
colored and lost all sensation. 

I Paraplegia. 

Internal pain greatly < by heat, whether of bed or atmos- 
phere; somewhat > when exposed to a cooler atmosphere, 



460 


SECALE CORNUTUM 


though even then it was scarcely tolerable, the pain extended 
by degrees from toes to legs and thighs, and from fingers to 
arms and shoulders, gangrene supervened 

Not the slightest pain in gangrenous limb when pricked or 
cut, though frequently motion is not entirely lost. 

Absolute insensibility of tips of fingers and toes. 

II Cold gangrene of limbs 

I True anthrax, rapidly changing into gangrene. 

Hands and feet swollen with a gangrenous black and sup- 
purating eruption 

Pam with some swelling without inflammation, followed by 
coldness, blue color, cold gangrene and death of limb 

The limbs become cold, pale and wrinkled as if they had 
been a long time in hot water 

Have pained me much. 

No strength in limbs or between shoulders. 

Glad to sit down; too weak to talk; tired. 

REST. POSITION. MOTION. — Must he doubled up in bed; 
pain in belly 

Sitting: stitches in vertebra, constant; cannot bend for- 
ward or backward without losing his equilibrium. 

Holds hands with fingers spread widely apart. 

Standing, stitches in vertebra intermittent. 

Inability to stand erect: vertigo. 

Every exertion, tenderness of cervical process <. 

Motion: hemorrhage <, giddiness, after labor pains <; 
pains over chest<, pains in sacrum <; tearing in thighs <. 

Walking: heaviness of legs >, impossible from gangrene. 

Every attempt to walk knees sink from under him. 

Cannot walk: giddiness 

NERVES. — 1 Hyperesthesia of cutaneous nerves, especially of 
spine. 

II Sensation of soreness in abdomen; formation of large 
himps and swellings in abdomen, r. hand very weak, particu- 
larly fingers, so that she could hold nothing, nor sew with that 
hand, when placing open hand to side and taking it away a 
spasm of hand occurs, the fingers are spread apart and she 
cannot close the hand; rapid alternations of heat and cold in 
hands and feet; cramps in legs; icy coldness of knees; trem- 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


461 


bling of r. arm and hand while eating, must use the left; sen- 
sation of coldness in stomach, > for a short time by warm 
drinks, habitual constipation 

II Burning in all parts of the body as if sparks of fire were 
falling on them, 

I Neuralgia, caused by pressure of distended veins upon a 
nerve trunk. 

Spasmodic twitchings. 

Irregular movements of the whole body. 

Spasmodic distortion of limbs, relieved by stretching them 
out 

II Expression of countenance varied every moment from a 
constant play of the muscles, eyes rolled about, pupils 
dilated, tongue jerked out, head moved about from side to 
side, arms in constant action with most diverse movements, 
snatched objects rather than took hold of them, could hold 
nothing securely, trunk also in constant motion; urine could 
not be retained, pulse small, weak, quick, heart beat tumul- 
tuously, appetite poor; bowels torpid, aching in occiput; 
sensation of formication m extremities, memory impaired, 
speech difficult, hurried; no relief at night, staggered about 
the house almost all night 

I Chorea associated with menstrual irregularities. 

I I The muscular twitchings usually commence in face and 
spread thence all over body, sometimes increase to dancing 
and jum^^g 

Spasms with fingers spread apart. 

Convulsive jerks and starts in paralyzed limbs. 

Painful contractions in flexor muscles. 

Tetanic spasms, with full consciousness, followed by great 
exhaustion 

II Convulsions. 

Tonic spasms 

Epileptiform spasms, epilepsy. 

1 1 Complains of great weakness, constipation, heaviness in 
epigastrium, formication in legs and cramps; at night while 
asleep gets epileptiform attacks of which she knows nothing 
next morning except that she feels greatly prostrated and has 
a constant heaviness in head 



462 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


II After abortus, spasms with full consciousness, afterward 
great exhaustion, heaviness in head and tingling in legs. 

1 1 Convulsions first occurring after a fright when a little girl,^ 
returned after each confinement 

II Twitching of single muscles, twisting of head to and fro, 
contortions of hands and feet, labored and anxious respira- 
tion. 

II Numbness of extremities, paralysis of some parts, painful 
tingling (like crawling of ants) on tongue. 

I Paralysis after spasm, and apoplexy, with rapid emaciation 
of affected parts and involuntary discharges from bowels and 
bladder 

II Suddenly fell to ground, but without loss of consciousness, 
on every attempt to walk the knees would sink from under 
him, especially r , while sitting cannot bend forward or back- 
ward without losing his equilibrium, arms slightly weak, sen- 
sation of touch not affected, general dulness; difficult speech, 
inclination to weep; complains of headache and pain m lum- 
bar region, sleep poor; urine and feces escape involuntarily, 
no stool for several days; at times oppression of breathing. 

II Paralysis of lower extremities, m a woman past climac- 
teric, a hard, sensitive tumor m one of her breasts had been 
developing for several years, but for the last year or two had 
rapidly increased in size and become very painful; by con- 
tinued application for several months of a yellowish salve the 
tumor was enucleated, in about a month after ceasing to use 
the salve, a peculiar torpor or deadness was felt in great toes, 
which extended to whole foot and ankle joint, feet seemed 
large and heavy and could be moved only by moving whole 
limb, gait shuffling as if feet were dragged along by lifting 
legs, slight numbness in hands. 

I Paralysis with rapid emaciation, with relaxation of sphinc- 
ters. 

Myelitis and softening of cord. 

Trembling; unsteadiness of whole body. 

II Restlessness, extreme debility and prostration. 

Loss of power of voluntary motion. 

II Sinking spells from diarrhea, at 3 A. m. 

II Collapse from choleroid diseases, etc., with cold skin, yet 
unable to bear warmth. 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


463 


SLEEP. — Frequent yawning. 

Inclination to sleep, drowsiness, deep, heavy sleep, stupor. 

Sleep at night disturbed by frightful dreams. 

Restless and sleepless 

Disturbed by distressing dreams. Surrounded by danger, 
constantly trying to escape evils Sometimes my family were 
sick unto death, or the house on fire, again I was pouring 
water from one bucket into another to free it from lizards and 
reptiles, that would crawl over the sides of the vessel and en- 
danger my children. 

Night after night my dreams would continue of this charac- 
ter. I would waken, my head would be in such distress, not 
from pain but oppression I would turn my pillow and change 
my position to endeavor to forget my dreams, and after some 
time would again fall asleep, to be awakened by another 
equally unpleasant dream 

This condition of head and sleep lasted six or seven weeks. 
(November 17th to January 5th ) 

TIME. — At 3 am.: sinking spells 

At break of day: diarrhea 

In morning: frequent short evacuations. 

During day: warmth on tongue; unusual drowsiness; toes 
drawn up continuously 

During night* anus firmly closed; cramps in calves and 
twitching of limbs, dreamed she was ascending stairs, palpi- 
tation; toes drawn up occasionally 

Jerking in limbs, staggered about house with chorea; 
ulcers <. 

TEMPERATURE AND WEATHER. — Open air: palpitation less. 

Wants to be in air or be fanned* with diarrhea. 

Warm applications, suppuration of cornea <, ulcers <. 

Warm drinks* coldness of stomach <. 

Does not wish to be covered; diarrhea, uterine hemorrhage. 

Heat: could not bear it and would throw off all covering, 
in post-diphtheritic paralysis, with diarrhea, did not wish to 
be near, aversion to, with cholera, internal pam much <; 
gangrene <. 

Wet bandages* > labor pains 

Cold, ulcers >; gangrene >, 



464 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


FEVER. — Disagreeable sensation of coldness m back, abdo- 
men and limbs 

Skin cold, with shivering. 

Coldness of surface of body, particularly extremities 

I Violent chill of but short duration, followed soon after by 
internal burning heat, with great thirst 

I Chill with thirst. 

II Violent shaking followed by violent heat, with anxiety, 
delirium and almost unquenchable thirst 

II Intense, icy coldness of skin, with shivering, pale, sunken 
face 

I Cold limbs, cold sweat, great weakness. 

Cold stage preceded by vomiting, succeeded by moderate 
sweating. 

I Severe and long-lasting dry heat, with great restlessness 
and violent thirst. 

I I Heat with thirst and hot skin. 

I Burning heat, interrupted by shaking chills, then internal 
burning heat, with great thirst. 

I Sweat: all over body, except face; profuse cold, cold 
limbs, from head to pit of stomach; especially on upper body; 
cold, clammy over whole body, colliquative. 

I I Exhausting perspiration, accompanied by evening fever 
and alarming cough. 

I Cold surface; sunken pale face and blue lips, will not be 
covered; tingling in limbs; holds hands with fingers widely 
spread apart, cold, clammy sweat, speech feeble, stuttering. 
Ague. 

I I Aversion to heat or to being covered; may feel cold but 
does not wish to be covered 

I Great tendency to typhoid. Intermittent. 

Chilly sensation from least motion in bed at night, not 
ameliorated by covering up. 

Chilly all over, especially shoulders and back, but do not 
shiver or shake 

Kept limbs drawn up close to body, are too cold to lie 
straightened out, they ache but are too cold to straighten out. 

Limbs and whole body ache as though tired and lame, 
particularly hips and knees. 



SECALE CORNUTUM 


465 


Get warm about 5 a. m , then hands, chest and back moist 
With perspiration 

Chill at 11 A M., lasting three hours 

Chills would creep up and down the back between the 
shoulders, spreading down and out into the limbs 
Chills in back up and down the spine 
Fever followed with great oppressto 7 i of face and head 
Desired fresh air constantly, though walking any distance 
would aggravate the headache, especially over eyes and 
through the forehead 
Slight in the morning. 

Hands, back and chest moist with perspiration about 5 
o'clock in the morning. 

Severe chill, from 4 am to 10 a m , m small of back, 
along spine; during chill, shooting pains chiefly in legs and 
arms; very thirsty during chill, little thirst during or after the 
fever, slight sweat; mouth dry, wants to drink continually; 
violent nausea, vomiting great quantity of bile, superticial 
congestion, veins of extremities very full 
A man, 67, has suffered from emphysema and asthma, car- 
diac complications with hypertrophy and weak, rapid, irregu- 
lar pulse, < by ascending stairs and walking. For two or 
three years been subject to attacks of severe coldness that 
came on irregularly, followed by great weariness for two days. 
The hands and feet became pale and cold with an intense 
feeling of weariness; some throbbing of head which seemed 
warm, after some hours limbs became warm again leaving 
only weariness. Temperature, normal during attacks; arterio- 
sclerosis was no doubt due to tension of arteries and its conse- 
quent anemia Aconite, Arsenic, Cedron, Chin, sulf gave 
only temporary relief; Secale cured — Tessier, 

ATTACKS, PERIODICITY. — Sudden attacks; diarrhea. 
Alternation of heat and cold, in hands and feet. 

Five to ten minutes after taking least quantity of food 
severe colic 

Every two or three hours: paroxyms of palpitation. 

Several times a day, convulsive movements of limbs. 

For several weeks: formication in tips of fingers. 

Every two weeks: excessive menstrual flow; lasting seven to 
nine days. 

31 



466 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


For two weeks, profuse corrosive foot sweat 

For four weeks, flow is continuous. 

During August, diarrhea. 

In Summer: interminable diarrhea. 

For several years tenderness of cervical process 
LOCALITY AND DIRECTION. — Right, ovary congested, a spot 
on side of chest dull on percussion, spasmodic shocks from 
half of chest into arm and leg, coldness of hand, toes drawn 
up, swelling and livid coloring of foot; gangrene in great toe 
of foot, hand very weak; trembling of hand and arm. 

Left, hemicrama, nose stopped up, throat sore; protrusion 
in hypochondnum, thumb spasmodically drawn toward 
dorsum of hand. 

SENSATIONS • — As if intoxicated while undressing; as if eyes 
were spasmodically rotated; as of a solid plugin nose; as if 
tongue were paralyzed, as if there were some resistance to 
overcome in speech, as of a heavy weight in stomach, region 
of stomach as if contracted, anus as if locked up; as if testicles 
were being drawn up to inguinal ring, uterus as if burnt, as if 
contents of uterus would fall forward, as if soft air were creep- 
ing through back; as if sacrum would be forced out, as if some- 
thing alive were creeping under skin, as if fingers were asleep; 
as if limbs had been a long time in hot water, as if sparks of 
fire were falling upon different parts of body, in lumbar 
region; as if mice were creeping under skin. 

Pam: in occiput, in eyes, in pit of stomach, in epigastrium, 
in lower belly, in abdomen; in hypogastric region; in loins, 
in ovaries and uterus, in sacrum, down thighs and into lower 
abdomen, over front part of chest; in small of back, in 
sacrum 

Excruciating pains in spine. 

Violent pains, in back; in finger tips. 

Acute pain: m hepatic region. 

Severe pains, in stomach, in abdomen and small of back; 
in sole of foot and toes. 

Cutting: in abdomen. 

Tearing pains: in both thighs, in foot. 

Throbbing, tearing pains: m thighs. 

Tearing, stinging pains: m extremities. 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


467 


Pinching pains, in abdomen 
Forcing pain in uterus. 

Stitches, in upper dorsal vertebrae 
Stitching pains, in eyes; m legs. 

Stitch, in back 
Sudden catch: in back 
Throbbing, in temples 

Cramps in calves of legs, in feet, toes, hands and fingers; 
in chest 

Cramping pains: in stomach. 

Cramping pressure in stomach 
Rheumatic pains: in joints 
Tensive pain: in limbs. 

Drawing pains in calves of legs 
Drawing: in limbs. 

Dragging: violent in spermatic cord, in abdomen. 

' Stinging: on mamma 

Burning, in throat; of tongue, at pit of stomach, in spleen; 
in abdomen; in uterus; in hands, in feet 
Soreness: of throat, in abdomen. 

Tenderness: of epigastrium, of lower cervical and upper 
dorsal spinous processes 
Distress of stomach 
Painful constriction of epigastrium. 

Painful jerkings: in limbs 
Jerking: under skin 
Pulsations in head. 

Pressure, in eyeballs; in pit of stomach; m occiput; in 
uterine region. 

Heaviness of head; in epigastrium. 

Lightness, of head 

Peculiar prickling feeling: in tips of fingers 
Tingling in face, in throat and tongue; of legs; on tongue; 
in limbs; all over body, in fourth and fifth fingers; in back; 
in toes. 

Crawling: on tongue; in tips of fingers; in limbs; all over 
body; between skin and flesh; in upper lip, all about mouth. 
Formication in face; in gums; in extremities; m tips of 
fingers; over whole body. 



468 


SECALE CORNUTUM. 


Gentle creeping sensation, in back 

Fuzzy feeling in limbs. 

Dryness, of soft palate, throat and esophagus; of mouth. 

Numbness in limbs, of feet; of r. hand, of tips of fingers 

Cold feeling m abdomen and back; in limbs, of body, of 
r hand; m stomach. 

TISSUES, — It destroys the activity of the cord, convulsive 
twitchings and shocks, painful contractions, tetanic manifes- 
tations, perfect paralysis, with increased reflex activity, most 
excruciating spinal pains, especially m sacral region, paraly- 
sis of bladder and rectum, tendency to gangrene, rapid ema- 
ciation 

Dissolution of blood corpuscles, blood thin, passive hemor- 
rhages 

Anemic state, either from exhaustive diseases or artificial 
depletion, the blood is thin and does not coagulate. 

Thrombosis of abdominal vessels. 

I Neuralgia caused by pressure on nerves by a distended 
vein 

Tumefaction of glands 

I Lymphatic tumors. 

I I Collapse from choleroid diseases 

1 Rapid emaciation of paralyzed parts. 

Malignant pustule. 

Emphysematous swellings. 

Passive hemorrhage; blood dark and red, m feeble and 
cachectic persons, accompanied by tingling in limbs and pros- 
tration, desire for air, does not like to be covered; wishes to 
have limbs extended, skin cold. 

Rheumatism (peliosis rheumatica of Schoenlem) generally 
is found in cachectic individuals, with purpura, affects joints, 
especially of lower extremities, thrombosis of abdominal ves- 
sels. 

1 Ulcers: bleeding, becoming black; feeling as if burnt, 
painless; pricking, producing a prurient sensation, pus putrid; 
< at night, touch, from external warmth , > from cold. 

- II Gangrene* from anemia, external injuries, application of 
leeches or mustard, > from cold, < from heat, dry, of old 
people. 



SECALE CORNUTUM. 


469 


I Dry gangrene of extremities, parts are dry, cold, hard and 
insensible, of a uniform black color and free from fetor, large 
ecchymoses, blood blisters on extremities, becoming gangre- 
nous, black suppurating blisters, limbs become pale, cold, 
shrivelled or lead-colored, losing all sensibility. 

TOUCH. PASSIVE MOTION. INJURIES.— Touch pit of stom- 
ach very sensitive to, r ovary sensitive to; uterus painful; 
ulcers < 

Pressure, upon abdomen > labor pains; upon vertebra 
stitches <. 

After lifting heavy weight, during sixth month of preg- 
nancy, severe pain in stomach, abdomen and small of back. 

External injuries gangrene 

SKIN. — Skin dry and cool 

Cold and dry, dingy, wrinkled, dry and insensible; desqua- 
mation. 

II Formication: with a sense as if mice were creeping under 
skin; on face, gums and other parts of body; in extremities 
with tearing, stinging pains, in tips of fingers, lasting several 
weeks, with a partial loss of sensibility, over whole body. 

1 Crawling all over body, between skin and flesh, and jerk- 
ing under skin. 

Violent crawling and prickling over whole body, especially 
in upper lip and at times all about the mouth, 

I Bloody blisters on extremities, becoming gangrenous. 

II Boils, small, painful, with green contents, mature very 
slowly and heal in same manner; very debilitating. 

I Carbuncles, extensive ecchymoses. 

I Petechia and miliary eruptions. 

I I Purpura hemorrhagica 

I Cachectic females, with rough skin, pustules showing ten- 
dency to gangrene 

I Varicose ulcers and enlarged veins m old people. 

I Ulcers turn black, copious vomiting of a mixture of a 
thick, black, pitchy, bilious or shiny matter, 

I Indolent ulcer, ichorous, offensive pus, > from cold. 

General desquamation in scarlatina. 

I Variola pustules of abnormal appearance, either fill with a 
bloody serum or dry up too soon. 



470 


SECALE CORNUTUM 


Several sore pimples, the size of a pin’s head, gradually in- 
creasing to the size of a pea or larger, appeared on face, worse 
on right side, lastly, boil, very red, sore, swollen, painful, on 
right cheek near insertion of masseter muscle. 

Made me sick in bed, so fearfully painful, whole face con- 
gested and swollen. Discharged much green pusy finally a 
green core (bright green), and leaving a deep scar, which was 
long in healing. 

On the seventh day several spots with a sore, bruised feel- * 
mg appeared about and below the knee, the size of a half dol- 
lar, of a purple red color; then three or four similar spots 
appeared further down the leg, about the shoe top, which 
were so sore could hardly bear the pressure of the shoe. They 
itched violently, but were so sore could not scratch them, and 
when touched gave me a sick faint feeling 

These first appeared on the left side, then three or four 
appeared on the right leg. 

With them a rash appeared on the face which was very sore 
and felt like the spots on the legs, only they were smaller, but 
there was the same sore, bruised feeling in them It would 
begin in fine points like the pnck of a pm or the sting of an 
insect, and gradually increased m size to a small pustule as 
large as a pea. 

When spots disappeared they left a blue (ecchymosed) mark 
for several weeks especially on the legs. 

Immediately after the same kind of spots appeared on the 
shoulders, three or four m a cluster, with the same sore, 
bruised feeling. 

The same characteristic spots appeared six weeks later in 
another proving, twenty-eight of them m all, which were 
peculiarly sensitive to touch, accompanied by faintness and 
nausea. Some result m pustules 

GENERALITIES. — Many sharp, shifting pains in different 
parts of body, and stiffness of back and neck as though 
muscles were swollen close to occiput. 



SYPHILINUM 


471 


SYPHILINUM. 

AUTHORITIES. — Drs Sam’l Swan, I C. Boardman, Thomas 
Wildes, E A Ballard, Wm. Eggert, Laura Morgan, H. L 
Ostrom, Wm. Bradshaw, Thomas Skinner, R. M. Theobald, 
S. Morrison, D. W. Clauson, C F Nichols, E W. Berridge, 
Francis Burritt, S W Jackson, R N Foster, E B Nash, 
Julius Schmidt, C. W Boyce, W. A. Hawley, D B Morrow, 
J. R Haynes, H H Carr, H. C Allen, J. T Kent 

Dr. Swan’s provers. Miss Eva Spalding, Miss Hays, Mrs. 
Mary B Pitts, Mrs S S , Mr Brown, a lady, a woman, five 
provers (names and sex unknown) Dr. Morrison’s prover 

Mrs. . Dr. Berndge’s prover. Mrs. W. Heitts. Dr. 

H B. Carr’s provers: Dr. , Mrs Henry Hake, Mrs. Kelt. 

Copland’s Dictionary 

Dr Fellger said it was absurd to claim that any disease 
could be cured by its nosode, for after potenti^ing the nosode, 
we cannot be satisfied that it is in the same condition as when 
first taken from the diseased individual Thus the syphilitic 
poison IS composed of molecules, the molecules of atoms. 
When the poison is potentized the essential character of the 
molecules is undoubtedly lost, and hence it is not the same 
substance any longer Therefore, there can be no certainty 
that the potentized preparation is the same poison. But if, 
for argument, we allow that the molecules of the poison can 
be potentized without change of character, we still are not re- 
lieved of the dilemma, for primary syphilis in any one person 
will make a different set of symptoms from syphilis in another 
person. The variations are endless Hence, we must thfen 
have a potentization of each one of these different kinds of 
syphilis, which would be impossible Mercury is a staple sub- 
stance, always unchanged, it might then be expected to pro- 
duce identical sets of symptoms on any number of the most 
different people. Yet its action is different upon every person 
to whom it is given How much more, then, must be the in- 
dividual variations in the case of the poison of syphilis, and if 
Mercury requires so many different remedies to antidote it, 
how much more, then, must syphilis need a variety of reme- 



472 


SYPHILINUM. 


dies to treat it It is folly, then, to expect to treat symptoms 
with its nosode, and the folly is the more apparent when we 
realize that the character of this nosode is essentially changed 
in the process of potentizing The only way, therefore, to 
use a nosode is to prove it on the healthy, like any other drug, 
and note its symptoms in the regular way 

CHARACTERISTICS. — Pams from darkness to daylight, begins 
with twilight and ends with daylight (Merc , Phyt ) 

Pams increase and decrease gradually (Stan ), shifting and 
require frequent change of position 

All symptoms are worse at night (Merc ), from sundown to 
sunrise 

Eruptions dull, red, copper-colored spots, becoming blue 
when getting cold 

\^Extreme emaciatiorf^of entire body {Abrot., lod.) 

Heart, lancinating pains from base to apex, at night (from 
apex to base, Med ); from base to clavicle, or shoulder, 
(Spig.) 

Loss of memory, cannot remember names of books, per- 
sons or places, arithmetical calculations difficult. 

Sensations, as if going insane, as if about to be paralyzed, 
of apathy and indifference 

Terrible dread of night on account of mental and physical 
exhaustion on awakening, it is intolerable, death is preferable. 

Fears the terrible suffering from exhaustion on awakening 
(Each ). 

^eucorrhea^ profuse, soakmg through the napkins and run- 
ning down to the heels (Alum ) 

Headache, neuralgic in character, causing sleeplessness and 
delirium at night; commencing at 4 p m.; worse from 10 to 11 
and ceasing at daylight (ceases at 11 or 12 p. m., Lyc ), fall- 
ing of the hair 

'i^Acute ophthalmia neonatorum/lids swollen, adhere during 

M7pusp?3fe7; 

"^Iby cold bathing. 

Ptosis: paralysis of superior oblique, sleepy look from 
drooping lids (Caust., Graph.). 

Diplopia, one image seen below the other. 


"Teeth : |decaMa-t e dg^of j|um^nd break off; are cupped, 
^dges serra^13 ] ^^7fed m sTzey converge at their tips (Staph.). 



SYPHILINUM. 


473 


Craving alcohol, tn any form Hereditary tendency to 
alcoholism (Sar,, Psor , Tuber , Sulph , Sulph ac.). 

Obstinate constipation for years, rectum seems tied up with 
strictures, when enemata were used the agony of passage was 
like labor (Lac d , Tub ) 

\Fi ssur e»^in anu^and ^e^n^(ThuJa),^^g^kpse of rectum/ 
obstinate cases with a syphilitic history 
\ Rheumatism of the shoulder jomt/or at insertion of deltoid, 
< from raising arm laterally (Rhus— r shoulder, Sang. , left, 
Fer ) 

When the best selected remedy fails to relieve or perma- 
nently improve in syphilitic affections 

Syphilitics, or patients who have had chancre treated by 
local means, and as a result have suffered from\Hiroat and 
skin trouble^ffor years, are nearly always benefited by this 
remedy at commencement of treatment unless some other 
remedy is clearly indicated 

Relations ‘^antidote, Nux vomica/ for over-action or excess 
of action m sensitive organizations, or too frequent repetition 
of the remedy, especially in the higher potencies. 

^Compare Aur , Asaf , Kali lod , Mer , Phyt , Nit. ac m 
diseases of bone and syphilitic affections Ech , Lac can., 
Ijled in dysmenorrhea. Calc , Tub., headache deep in the 
brain Plat , Stan , pains increase and decrease slowly. 
Alum., Kali bi.. Puls , Psor , Sep , Teuc.,^ost-nasal catarrh/ 
^or ozena/ with offensive plugs or clinkers/ Hepar, Sil , Psor., 
tenclenc y to succe ssive absce sses (succession of boils, Anthr.), 
Aur , Lac can , Lach/MS-. iod., syphilitic stomatitis. Calc, 
fi., Fluor, ac., Kali bi , Kali lod , Mang , Mer,, syphilitic 
nodes Abrot., Iod , Tub ,\^ |)rpgressive emaciation/ Med., 
lancinating pains in heart (from (from 

base to clavicle or shoulder) Syph (from base to apex). 
Lach , fear of exhaustion on awakening. Caust., Qels., Graph., 
paralysTs of upper lids Asar , Med , Psor , Sul , Tub., hered- 
itary tendency to alcoholism Lac d , Tub., paralytic weak- 
ness of rectum with labor-like pains. Nat. mur , Same , 
Thuja, \ffssure a niy# Kreos , Mer. ,*> ^ r o ubl es during detention/ 
especial^ ^it hereditary syphilis be suspecteX*^rEos7^ 
bad effects of thunder-stonns. 



474 


SYPHILINUM. 


Aggravation motion, touch, hot or cold things, warm or 
damp weather, seaside, electric storms, winter, raising arms 
laterally, at night Cm common with all anti-syphilitics) 

Amelioration, cold bathing, in the mountains, warmth, 
walking 

MIND. — Loss of memory. 

Loses remembrance of passing occurrences, names, dates, 
etc , while all occurrences previous to inception of disease are 
remembere'd as distinctly? as ever, almost without effort. 

"“““"Very nervous, weeping without cause 

1 1 Cross, irritable, peevish. 

Irritable, excited, walking much of the time, does not want 
to be soothed, violent oji being opposed, has tremors, seems 
on the verge of convulsions, dazed, absent-minded, \always ^ 
l^washing her hands/'' 

^Periodical neuralgia in head 

I i Vgry despondent, do es not think he will ever get better. 

Feeling as if going itisame, or about to be paralyzed. 

A far-away feeling, witth apathy and indifference to future. 
\Crying infants^^ho be^in immediately after birth 

Draculty in making arithmetical calculations. 

II Terrible dread of mglht, not on account of cough so much 
as oh account of mental arid physical exhaustion when she 
awakes; it is intolerable, death is preferable; she fears to 
prepare for night and is positively in abject fear of suffering, 
in form of exhaustion om awaking, it is < by cough, but it is 
quite independent of coagh as she wakes in this awful state; 
always < as night approaches; leaves her about daylight, 
which she prays for, y&p ring cough./ Had had a dose of 
Syphilinum cm., twent 3 Mour hours before, on third night her 
anxiety and cough returned, though very much less Another 
dose of Syphilinum cm., next morning, removed all symptoms, 
including a pho nia, and^exlhaustion. requiring brandy 

Great d ifficulty, and sometimes impossibility7' of conc en- 
tratmg^ t he t ^ on particular subjects, yet at the same 

time can recollect consfecutive events and details which oc- 
curred 25 or 3D years previously in the order of occurrence, 
almost without effort. 

Cannot remember name s of persons, books or places. 



SYPHILINUM. 


475 


HEAD.^ertig ^<^on looking up/seems to be caused by heat. 

I HeadacSje. finear, from or near one eye backward, lateral; 
frontal, from temple to temple; deep into brain from vertex; 
as from pressure on vertex, in either temple, extending into 
or from eye > by warmth, in bones of head, < by heat of 
sun, after sunstroke. 

\Sick headacheVpains intolerable/arteries of head full and 
giilsating violently f ever frequent retching on trying to 

vomit , Ynien ses regular, but very scanty^ 

*ni Lancinating pain\iri occipui^< Invariablj^t Highland 
pausing sleeplessness/ but always ceasing with the coming 
Iigiit of morning. 

Headache and great debility. 

I Neuralgic headache causing sleeplessness or delirium at 
night, always commencing about 4 p. m., < at from 10 to 11 
p. M , and ceasing at daylight 

Bursting sensation in vertex as from severe cold 

Pam from eyes through to occiput, with sensation of weight 
in occiput drawing head back, or as if it were pulled back; 
eyes ache and smart 

Constant linear headache, commencing at both angles of 
forehead and extending in parallel lines backward — a precur- 
sor of epileptic attack. 

Heavy, cribbing, cutting pain across base of cerebellum. 

Heavy, clouded, dull feeling in base of brain. 

I Headache through temples, thence vertically like an in- 
verted letter T. 

II Coronal headache. 

I Headaches accompanied by great restlessness, sleepless- 
ness and general nervous erethism 

II Syphilitic headache for rnanj months, piercing, pressing 
excruciating over r eye; extending deep into brain; losing 
continuity of thought and memory, makes repeated mistakes 
in figures. 

SuSusion and full feeling in face, throat and head, with^n- 
\ numerabl^mal^nlarged)^ervical glands. ^ 

"" ^o re/one and a half inches in diameter, on occipital bone, 
covered with a thick, yellow-white scab. 

1 1 Dirty eruptior^on scalp./ 



476 


SYPHILINUM 


\Great loss of hairy^ 

n Nervous chills' preceded by aching pains m head, espe- 
cially m occipital and integuments thereof, head feeling 
heavy, sore, congested, also frontal headache about one-half 
or two-thirds inches wide across forehead under eyebrows, 
aching pains below waist, in pelvis and extremities, especially 
in tibia, which is sensitive to touch; pains commence about 4 
pTm^, culminate about midnight in delirium, and cease en- 
tirely at daylight 

1 1 Syphilitic cephalalgia m occiput, intolerable, extending to 
nervous ganglia of neck, causing hardening of cords, attacks 
at irregular intervals, especially after excitement. 

Cephalalgia in nerves of scalp, invariably worse at night and 
better after daybreak 

EYES. — II Red papulous eruption round 1 inner canthus, 
with isolated pimples on side of nose, cheek and eyebrow, 
these pimples were red, with de pressed centre, circumscribed 
areola, became confluent where they were most dense, pim- 
ples bleed when scabs come ofl, agglutination of lids. 

Sensation of heat with a little pain in outer half of 1. lids. 
\Myopia/ 

Sharp, pulsating pain, occasionally at outer end of superior 
border of r. orbit, apparently m periosteum. 

topper lidsYswollen. 

I^tosis y paralytica i eyes look sleepy from lowering of upper 
lid. 

\Diplopi^ one image seen lower than the other. 

Strabismus paralytica, eye turning inward, and pupil can 
only be turned outward as far as median line 

I Chr oni c rec urrent phlyctenular inflammation of cornea; 
successive crops of phlyctenules and abrasion of epithelial 
layer of cornea; intense photophobia; profuse lachrymation; 
redness and pain well marked; delicate, scrofulous children, 
especially if any trace of hereditary syphilis remains. 

|\L^. eyeball)(covered with\fungus-hke growths pain intense 
< at night. 

i^4cute ophthalmia^cieonatorum/ 

II IKedness and swelling of outer half of both lower tarsal 
edges. 



SYPHILINUM. 


477 


Syphilitic iriti S|jgnt ense pain steadily increasing night after 
'^"between 2 and" 5 a M , coming almost at the minute 
and ceasing same way 

1 1 Pam in r inner canthus as if blood went there and could 
go no farther, also in r. temple 

lj^oj:h eye^lue^in morning ^^onjunctiva injectedAphotoy 
^hcmia^onstantly wears a shade/ * ^ - 

1 1 Eyes dull 
^Infantile syphilis. 

\\ Ophthalmic pains, < at night, > by cold water. 

1 1 R eye alone affected, congestion of conjunctiva and scle- 
rotica, with some chemosis, lids inflamed, esp at outer can- 
thus, sensation of sand in eyes, lids agglutinated in morning, 
great photophobia (hereditary syphilis) 

Neuralgia every nightybeginning about 8 or 9 p m., grad- 
uaHylncreasing in severity until it reached its height about 3 
or 4 A M , and after continuing thus for two or three hours, 
gradually decreased and finally ceased about 10 A M , attacks 
gradually get more severe and last longer, first feels cold all 
over, almost a shiver, then soreness as if beaten in r. half of 
head, extending a little beyond middle line on vertex, in about 
thirty minutes scalding lachrymation from r. eye, with shoot- 
ing backward therein, eye is very red and closes, with photo- 
phobia, gnawing pains extend down r side of face and whole 
of nose," head is worst when eye is bad, during paroxysm r. 
"eye feels as if lids were open wide, and cold air blowing on 
exposed eye, she perceives a horizontal band across pupil of 
r. eye hindering sight; this came on soon after paroxysms 
commenced, eye > by placing handkerchief on head and let- 
ting It hang over eyes, also by gentle pressure, though she 
cannot bear much pressure, it is more painful when lying on 
r. (affected) side when also r side of head feels sore; r. eye 
red, and red vessels run all over it, converging towards iris, 
r. pupil horizontally oval, ‘r. ms looks dull and there is a 
slight brown hue around pupil; 1 eye normal, attacks seem 
to have originated from sitting at a window in a cold draft, r. 
eye being next window 

ij^During sleei^ids adherej^f in infantile syphilis. 

1 Paralysis of superior oblique. 



478 


SYPHILINUM. 


I Chronic recurrent phlyctenular \inflammation of cornea/ 
successive crops of phlyctenules and abrasion of epithelial 

’ layer of cornea, ^ntense photophobia^ profuse lachrymation/ 
^redness and paii^well marked^ delicate scrofulous children, 
especially if any trace of hereditary syphilis remains. 

Interstitial keratitis. 

Photophobia, black spots, shreds or. veils before sight. 

Itching of 1. inner canthus 

I I Eyes very red and inflamed. 

I i^artT^ophtKal^ neonatorum. 

II Eyes swollen and closed ‘with syphilitic ophthalmia, pus 
running out of them. 

II Acute 1. conjunctivitis, with considerable pain in eyeball, 
photophobia and lachrymation, followed by iritis; nocturnal 
aching in eyeball, pain extremely violent from 2 to 5 A m ; 
sight impaired. 

Intis with photophobia, congestion of conjunctiva and 
sclerotica, with puffiness of conjunctival mucous membrane; 
chemosis, pupil immovable, diminution of sight; supraorbital 


1 1 Pam m r inner canthus as if blood went there and could 
go no further, also m r. temple 

1 1 At 1 p. M scalding lachrymation of r eye with shooting 
therein, followed by shooting from around eye into eye, eye 
red and closed; this lasted about an hour, then decreased, 
ceasing about 3 p. m. , recurred for two successive days and 
again four days afterwards in a slighter degree, but at same 
hour. 

II On turning eye to 1. feels momentary coldness in inner 
halfoTr. eye. 

1 1 On waking, gum in r. canthus. 

1 1 On walking across room, r. eye sensitive to air, aches on 
using it. 


l^eft eye closedluipper licm swolleiy' as large as half an 
English walnut, \deep redXnot much pain/with oozing of 
purulent matter fro m between l iidis T ' ' ' 

‘ ij^rabisinus paraiyticusy?t£*r”re^us mternus being involved, 
andvthe eyafturning outward/ 

Left eyeball covered with a fungus-like growth, pain in- 
tense, worse at night. 



SYPHILINUM. 


479 


EARS.— M^tense earach^^ r. ear/ incisive pains thrusting 
into ear;\purulent watery discharg^tfrom ear>|vith pain/ 

II Gathering m 1. ear which discharges a great quantity of 
pus (.hereditary syphilis in a child). 

II Deafness\gradually increasing/ until she could scarcely 
hear at all. 

Incomplete deafness; nothing abnormal to be seen. 

1 1 Catarrhal or nerve deafness with marked cachexia. 

1 1 Calcareous deposit on tympanum 

1 1 Small, acrid, watery discharge occasionally from ears, no 
deafness (ozaena). 

NOSE. — -L^ side of nose, inside ala, itching. 

Nose stuffed up and burning 

I Attacks of fluent coryza 

lli^iDfiensive^ thick yeliow-green?^nasal discharge/ during 
sleep dry scabs form in both nostrils; following an applica- 
tion of salve for sore eyes, 1 submaxillary gland, which had 
been swollen and indurated, softens, discharges, and, after 
forty-five days, begins to heal slowly. 

llOzaena syphilitica. (Syph. brought out an eruption of 
sores with a fiery-red base on nose over frontal sinuses ) 

|| |L side^of nos e)(^i npde and ouj^^^ sor^hkewisd^hps ^nd 
N^chi n/ sores it ching and scabbj^^ over; after Syphihnum Im 
much better m twelve hours, many drying up and scabs fall- 
ing off, leaving skin beneath of a dull-reddish copper color. 

I Itching in nostrils 

FACE. -^Face drawn to one side, difficulty of speaking, mas- 
ticating, blowing 

|\Spasmodic twitching/ of many muscles, \esp. in faceXpa- 
ralysis agitans), with great melancholy and depression of 
spirits 

II Facial paralysisVr. side/thick speech, Xhemicrania^^ jactita-y 
^lon of^r. eye and hd/ 

An old gentleman has had for some years cancer on r* malar 
bone; no rest, his agony excruciating in extreineTreheved). 

II Face pale. 

Ii^ching, scabb^^eczematous eruption^’^singly or in clusters, 
looking like herpes. 

1 1 Nose and cheeks covered with eruptions and scabs^ in 
layers rising to a point. 



480 


SYPHILINUM 


I Dark purple lines between alse nasi and cheeks. 

II Lips and teeth covered with bloody mucus. 

S^res on lips and chin, esp 1 side, scabbing over 

II A boy, aged 20 months, ^retful/peevish^cross^nd^crying,y 
\(:ossing in his sleepy grinding his teeth/ face dotted with pap- 
iSies filled with a watery yellowish matter, most on edges of 
hds,\teeth irregularj^ arms and legs emaciated/^very tottery/ 
\on his feetKyery nervous/ 

Left submaxillary gland which had been swollen and indur- 
ated, softens and discharges, and after forty-five days begins 
to heal slowly 

TEETH. — Single small lunae cleft in upper incisors, perma- 
nent set, which\incisors are dwarfed in their general dimen- 
sions, and converge at their tips» inherited syphilis. 

Children’s teeth are cu pp ed. 

\Teeth decay ingVat edge of gum and\breaking off.. 

ilT.TtTte a worm in tooth, could not tell which tooth 

Singular feeling as if teeth had all got out of place, and on 
closing jaws teeth do not come well together "" 

First central upper incisors serrated, permanent teeth point 
towards each other, inner side concave, edges serrated/ 
Medorrhmum. 

Pam m r upper jaw, as if from teeth, with swelling of face. 

Painless fluttering occasionally in teeth, very peculiar, as if 
something alive, cannot detect which tooth it is 

MOUTH. — Tongue ^red and thick, ^two deep cracks/running 
^Jengthwise/in it, one on each side of median line. 

II Aphasia , difficulty of finding words, debility 

Tongue feels as if paralyzed. 

II Fetid breath. 

I Tongue coated white, edges indented by teeth. 

T o ngudyturns to one sid^/when protruded, difficulty m mas- 
tication, cannot turn food with tongue so readily from r. to 1. 
as in other direction 

II Put rid taste in mouth before epileptic fit. 

II Tongue very red and tEickf covered with herpetic erup- 
tion, two deep cracks running lengthwise on each side of 
median line, making it difficult to swallow. 

Tongue thickly coated, dirty, edges indented or serrated by 
teeth. 



SYPHILINUM. 


481 


11 Twenty\ulcers in mouth/every part involved, top and 
under side of tongue, lips, buccal cavity, fauces and nose. 
Two large ulcers, one on eaeh side near apex of tongue, were 
very much swollen, and the one on r. side had a gangrenous 
center, the rest lardaceous bottoms with bright fiery red edges, 
and were cut down as with a knife, and felt hard like an in- 
durated chancre. Septum of nose threatened, both alae nasi 
very painful, smarting with burning as if on fire; pains and 
burning prevented sleep, hungry but could eat nothing but 
fluids, as mastication was impossible, tongue heavily coated 
white, large quantities of stringy, viscid saliva running from 
mouth, of a sweetish taste, a putrid sickening odor filled 
whole house, all symptoms < toward night. This attack ex- 
cited by exposure to rain. 

|S|Ierpetic eruption^in mouthy, ^ tonsils, hard ^pajate and 
fauces, completely covering inside of mouth and throat, mak- 
ing irdifficult to swallow even, li<^uid$ 

0 Syphilitic destruction of hard and soft palates. 

Chancre on hard palate exposing the bones of roof of 
mouth 

THROAT. — II Chronic hypertroph}^Kof tonsils. 

1 1 Chancrous ulcer extending^ across velum palati to 1. pillar 
of pharynx, which was congested and thickened, interfering 
very much with his speech; voice husky. 

^ Acute pharyngitis ^ 

Sore throat 

deglutition painful/ especially 

Excoriation of throat when swallowing. 

Sore throat with granulations, 

Chancrous ulcers in pharynx. 

Herpetic eruption in mouth, tonsils, hard palate and fauces, 
completely covering inside of mouth and throat, making it 
very difficult to swallow even liquids 

APPETITE. — 1 1 Appetite indifferent and capricious. 

II Total loss orappetite for months, little or nothing satis- 
fies hum, formerly was generally ravenous. 

1 1 Loss of appetite. 

Xfiirst. 

Appetite good again J^yenous desire for food^eym^er^ 
meal. 



482 


SYPHILINUM. 


I 1^ Tendency to heavy drinking;^ alcoholism. 

I I Aversion to meat. 

I jvDyspepsia; flatulence, belching of wind; nervous dyspepsia,^ 
^ STOMACH. -^Nausea. 

I Heartburn/with pain and rawness from stomach to throat- 

piCofteTacou^ 

II Vomiting for we'eks or months due to erosion from super- 
ficiaPulceration of lining of viscus, herpetic, of syphilitic 
origin. 

ABDOMEN. — Pam or distress deep in abdomen as if in 


omentum. 

\ Fe eling of heat internally‘^m hypogastric region 

Pam in r. groin followed by swelling of glands. 

rpLarge painless bubo m r. groin opened and discharged 
freely. ' 

Slight lancinating pain m one groin, < at night. 

^ Inguinal bubo^^ 

SfOOL AND ANUS. — 1| Bowels torpid for five weeks. 

l^bstinate constipation^or many years,' rectum seemed 
tied up with strictures, when injections were given agony of 
passage was like child-bearing. 

^TCKronic constipation, with fetid breath, earthy com- 
plexion, gaunt appearance. 

II Stools very dark and offensive 

II Stools too light-colored. 

n> ^ilious di ar rhe^at seashore|^ainles^drivmg her ou t of^ 
wbed/abo^5 A. m.; stools during day: later" causTn’g'"ex^con^ 
tion; face red, suffers from heat; occasional painless, whitish 
diarrhea when at home, > always by going to mountains. 

I Obstinate cases oftcholera infantum/ 

i KFissuresyln anu s and re ctum^/ 

II Two mduratedVulcers at mouth of anus/somewhat sore: 
slight itching of anus. 

II Lower portion of r ect um hanging out like a ruffle, look ing 
like a ful l-blown rose fully three Tiiclies in diameterilmTsensi- 
tiv^ constant weak dragging sensation in rectum, extending 
as far as sacrum. 

URINARY ORGANS. — Itching in orifice of urethra . 

A sensation, in morning on going to urinate, \as if^Wale 
^rethr^ere stuffed u^r clogged/about an inch from orifice. 



SYPHILINUM. 


483 


Scalding urine. 

J^rination difficult and^very slow* no pam, but a want of 
power, so that he has to strain. 

'^^^rine mfrequent^not oftener than once in twenty-four 
hoursV scantyji^of a golden-yellow col^^ Syphilinum Im , 

woke next morning with great distention of abdomen and pain 
in region of kidneys; rising she passed a large quantity of 
normal colored urine, after which the distention and pain were 
relieved, next day regular urination, watery. 

II Profuse urination after chill; passed during night nearly a 
chamberful. 

j I Rich lemon-yellow scanty urine. 

1 1 Frequent urgin^\to urinatl^all nightykt least from 7 P. 
M. until 5 A. M , or sunset to sunrise. 

MALE SEXUAL ORGANS — | Chancre on prepuce. 

1 Buboes 

Surning^ in chancre; ulcer size of a split pea, on prepuce 
above corona glaiidis; edges raised, bottom covered with lar- 
daceous deposit, no pam or sensation m it. Gians purple, on 
1. side covered by an exudation. 

I Chancre on penis, third in two years, all on same spot. 

Aching of genitals, could not sit still for over a month. 


IKAfter suppressed chancre/ disease attackedVt estes/and 
yscrot um^ which became painful and swollen, this was sup- 
posed to be cured, but ever since, every few weeks, if exposed 
to damp weather would be seized with pam as if in kidneys, 
seemingly traversing ureters, but instead of passing into blad- 
der followed spermatic cord, down groins and into testes, 
pain agonizing, chiefly in cord, in present attack in r. : prick- 
ing in chancre, as though punctured by pins 

U Chancroid, phagedeni^ spreading rapidly; buboes com- 
mencing in each groin. 

.‘*l i| nlammationAndNinduration\pf spermatic cord/ 

11 Const ant pain in anterior part of r. thigh, ^ while stand- 
ing, "painful alfnlight, preve nting sleep; bubo in 1. inguinal 
region s'ize*^of a pigeon’s egg, purple, fluctuating; night sweats. 
\Bubo/pu rple, pointingjn,h ..groin|^ff e of .Elggog:g_e £|» ac- 
companied with night sweats, and constant pain in anienor 
portion of right thigh, < at night. 



484 


SYPHILINUM. 


FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — 1| Uterine and all surrounding 
parts loose, soft and flabby; 'profuse, thick, yellow leucorrhea; 
constant pain across small of back 

Slight whitish leucorrhea. 

[Yellow offensive leucorrhea, watery or not, so profuse it 
daily soaks through napkins and runs to heels of stockings if 
much on her feet 

I Profuse yellow leucorrhea < at night, in sickly, nervous 
children 

II Soreness of genitals, and muco-purulent discharge, in a 
child. 

II Acrid discharge causing violent itching and inflammation 
of external organs < at night from warmth of bed, parts very 
tender; itching and inflammation > during menses 

II Nocturnal < of r ovarian pain, preventing sleep. 

II Sore on r. labium majus, extending to 1. 

Intense itching of vulva on rising in morning, continuing 
until 10 o’clock. 

Menstruation painful, two weeks too soon, pink-red, bright, 
profuse, running free for some days; napkins wash easily. 
Menses returned in 28 days, painless 

|\ Pja.in ful menstruation/' 

The usually painful menstruation with all its concomitants, 


was very easy and the best for years. 

VSensitivenes^of os uteriy< to intolerable pain at menses, 
prN ^ n introductioif^f finge^r penis/ frequently causes abor- 
tion. 


Shar^^gzag shooting pain^in region of uterus. 
fOvahes"’^ COTgested and inflamed, tendency to ovarian 


tumors 

Sore aching m 1 ovarian region, extending to r with dart- 
mg pains. 

L. ovary swollen, ^^uring coitusjS^at moment of organism/a 
^sh^p^l:utting paii^like a knife, /^nd twice there was smarting 
as .of a sore; ovary swelled so much that its size and shape 
cquld easily be felt through abdominal walls (caused by 
Buboin), 

,|| Jter ine and ovarian diseases with pronounced nervous dis- 
orders, esp\in married women/ 



SYPHILINUM. 


485 


Mamma\sensitive to touch^eeling sore^during menses^ Wd 
at other times. 

RESPIRATORY ORGANS. — Hoarse, almost complete\ aphonia,/ 
day before menses. 

" 1 Diseased cartilages of larynx. 

Pam and oppression \a^ bifurcation of bronchia/and in 
larynx, it hurts her to breathe. 

If Attacks ofVspasmodic \bronchial asthma/tor twenty-five 
years, vthey come onionly at night||kfter lying down or during 
a" thunder-storm, producing most intense nervous insomnia, 
entirely preventing sleep for days and nights. 

I Violent attacks of dyspnea, wheezing and rattling of 
mucus, from 1 to 4 a m. 

COUGH. — Hard cough < at night, when it is continuous pre- 
venting sleep. 

\Hard^constant coug^with^hick, yelloy^/tasteless expec- 
toration. 

Dry, racking cough, with thick, purulent expectoration, 
caused by a sensation of rasping or scraping m throat, always 
< at night. 

Ili/Whooping-cough/with terrible vomiting 

I I Cannot he on r. side, as it causes a dry” cou^h 

11 Muco-purulent 'expectoration, greyish, greraish, greenish- 
yellow, tasteless 

1 1 Expectoration without cough, quite clear, white, feels like 
a round ball and rushes into mouth. 

Cough and dyspnea come on “t^fter midday dinner,,) has to 
figKt for breath, feels as if ""she would be suffocated, symptoms 
last all night, > at daybreak (improved). 

Expectoration of white phlegm. 

1 1 Dry, sharp, hacking^ cough without expectoration, but 
witlT'rawness, scraping "and" burning from fauces to stomach 
pit, \ with a whoop in mspiration&nd a choking sensation from 
fau^'to bifurVatlbn^oTOrcffiC great mental distress. 

Hard cough, < at night, when it is continuous, preventing 
sleep; white phlegm expectorated. 

Cough < on lying on right side. 

Hoarse, almost complete aphonia, the day before menses; 
no catarrh or sore throat. 



486 


SYPHILINUM. 


CHEST.— II Chronic asthma;^ in Summer, ^ especially when, 
'•weather was warm and damp, most frequently^ in evening, 
passing off at daybreak, soreness of chest, with great anguish 
and inability to retain a recumbent position ;>^n Winter/feevere 
\bronchial cough^succeeded by^asthmatic attack^ a'" regular 
type of chills and fever developed, suffered from this many 
years before. Within 24 hours after taking the Im. the char- 
acter of the asthma changed, during the night it disappeared, 
and the hour which had been that of relief, now became that 
of aggravation. The attacks only lasted a few minutes, and 
gradually becoming less severe, did not return for several 
months. 

oppression of ches^ to such an extent as to almost arrest 
breathing, asthma caused by sensation as if sternum were be- 
ing gradually drawn toward dorsal vertebra; Expansion of 
cliest difficult, confusion of mind, as if unconsciousness might 
follow Attack lasted about ten minutes, followed by general 
weariness which passed off m a few hours 

1 1 Rattling in chest and throat. 

centre of chest as if skin were drawn up, on draw- 
ing the head back. 

Lack of sleep produces sudden faintness and sinking sensa- 
tion in chest; three spells succeeded each other during a single 
night. 

Sensation of pressure under upper part of sternum. 

I Pain and pressure behind sternum. 

^ Angi n a t os is 1. ey e^ f acial ^ jpar^y sis I side/ slight aspha- 

sia; impotenceTrelieve^ 

"^TEczematous herpetic eruptions on chest 

A lady, 78 years of age, had suffered from attacks of spas- 
modic\ ^roncttia l for 25 years. The attack would 

come on only at night after lying down, or during a thunder- 
Storm, and produces tl^e m ost intense inso mnia, entirely pre- 
ventmgs^^ for days and nights together. Under allopathic 
treatment full doses of Morphine brought relief for twenty 
months. Ars., Amb., Bell., Ipecac, Nux, Phos , Sul., Op. 
high, and other apparently well selected remedies entirely 
failed. ySyphilinum cm^ cured 

HEARXir ^^^inating paii^ in heari/at night/from base to 
apex CMedor has reverse). 



SYPHILINUM. 


487 


Valvular disease of the heart, 

NECK AND BACK. — | Heavy aching and stiffness from base of 
neck up through muscles and cords into brain. 

II Great pain in back in region of kidneys, < , after urinating. 

jPain in coccyx at its junction with sacrum, sometimes in 
lower sacral vertebra, < on sitting, with a sensation as if 
swollen, though it is not Pams commencing in sacral regions 
internally, and apparently coming around to uterus 

II Canes of cervical spine with great curvature in same 
region, directly forward, occiput sinking down to a level with 
it and resting on protuberance of curvature, often nearly a 
teaspoonful of calcareous matter would be discharged at a 
time and on evaporating it a quantity of dry powder, looking 
like phosphate of lime, would be left, pain in curvature always 
< at night (no proof of syphilis) 

Rijgidity of inuscles. 

^heavy, dragging, dull feeling in lumbar region, with stiff- 
ness and want of elasticity. 

1 1 Caries or dorsal vertebras with acute curvature, numerous 
cloacae communicating with diseased bone, one much larger 
than the rest, exuding a sanious, offensive pus, and sur- 
rounded with proud flesh, great thickening and induration of 
surrounding parts from effusion of lymph; percussion or pres- 
sure not endurable, two abscesses m groins, 1.^ having been 
opened a year before r. about a month ago, least motion gave 
him great pain by day, and terrific pain by night, for five 
months, every night most intense neuralgic pains, com- 
mencing generally from 5 to 7 P. M. and never terminating till 
about daylight or about 5 A. m ; pains in muscles of loins, 
generally m 1 , sharp, cutting spasms, terrible to bear, pre- 
venting sleep and forcing him to cry out, < at least motion, 
and slightly > by warm poultices. 

II Psoas abscess first 1 then r., latter discharged more than 
a quart of offensive greenish pus when opened; severe noctur- 
nal pains, affecting upper sacral, lower dorsal and 1 cervico- 
facial regions, steadily increasing » they occurred twice, each 
time twenty-one days after either psoas abscess had been 
opened. 

Il^nlargemenl^pf cervical gland^and a number of pedun- 
culated- pin-head wart^on neck/ cured \>y^j/co-sj/phzlzmcm,j 



488 


SYPHILINUM. 


\ Enlargement of glands in different parts of the body, par- 
ticularly abundant about the neck, indurated and slightly 
painful causing a sensation of uncomfortable fulness and suf- 
fusion in face, throat and head. 

II Nocturnal aggravation of pains m back, hips and thighs 
II Enormous swelling of glands in head and neck; no relief 
frorn^ny remedy. Cured with Buboin Syphilitica cm. 

' Syphilitic sores on back near spine on hip 
Pams commencing in sacral region internally, and appar- 
ently coming around to uterus. 

Indurated lumps\between muscles of the neck 
Aching pains in limbs like growing pains. 

UPPER LIMBS. — fsgheumatismXgf shoulder-jomt/or at inser- 
tiojfi of deltoid, < from raising arm laterally. 

Can only raise arms to a right angle with axilla, trying to 
force them higher causes muscles to suddenly become para- 
lyged ajid they drop pendant. 

Lameness and pam of arm on motion < on raising arm up 
in front as if reaching, pam located about insertion deltoid m 
upper third of humerus, not painful to pressure 
II Fingers and thumbs have runarounds (infantile syphilis). 
^Always washing the hands 
1 1 Hands badly ulcerated on backs. 

II second finger is swollen and stiffened 
LOWER LIMBS-~2(^Swelling of legsXfrom knees downXsoles / 
^painful^Avhen standing on them,i^swellmg goes downnn morn 7 ^ 
y ng,:^ comes bacK at night./ 

Pains m low^ extremities, excruciating, completely banish 
sleep; < from hot fomentations, > pouring cold water on 
them > for an hour, after which the pains returned 
Cannot sit in a low chair, or squat down, owing to loss of 
control over knee and hip-jomts. 

Pams in long bones of lower extremities, also on joints 
Dull pains over back of feet to toes, began soon after get- 
^ tmg into bed, lasting until 4 or 5 a. m 

II For two or three winters intense cold pam m both legs, 
< in L, came on every night on lying down, lasting all night; 
> by getting up and walking, and in warm weather 
Pain in three toes of r. foot as if disjointed 



SYPHILINUM 


489 


11 Slight contraction of tendons beneath r. knee. 

Tearing pains in hip and thighs, < at night > about day- 
break, <C by walking, not affected by weather (improved). 

11 Redness and rawness with terrible itching -between toes. 

1 1 Bubo with pain in spot on middle of r thigh in front, only 
when standing and on deep pressure, which seemed to touch 
spot, which was apparently on periosteum. 

11 Two ulcers larger than a crown piece, dirty stinking, 
sloughing, with jagged, elevated edges, one on thigh above 
patella, another on head of tibia; two large pieces of bone 
came away from head of tibia. 

1 1 Osteosarcoma in centre of r. tibia the size of half an 
ostrich egg, pains agonizing at night, growth irregular, 
spongy, partly laminated, very hard 

I Contracted, painful feeling, in soles, as if tendons were too 
short. 

Aching pains in limbs, like growing pains 

Bone pains in knees and feet. 

Gradual rigidity of all joints after eruption; flexors seem 
contracted 

II Rheumatic swelling of 1. wrist and big toe^bluish red, 
with pains as if somebody sawed at his bones with a dull saw; 
> by heat of stove; < from sundown to sunrise; no appetite; 
has lasted two weeks 

\Feelin g of numbnes^n palms and sole^at times a prickly 
sensation as if numb parts were punctured by a great number 
of needles. 

I Excruciating arthritis; swelling, heat, and redness intense. 

^^heumatisny muscles are caked m hard knots or lumps. 

II Severe attacks of aching in lower limbs 

1 1 Sharp rheumatic pain, burning like fire, in 1, side of r in- 
step and below inner malleolus, prevents her from moving 
foot < when toe is pointed inward, < in evening, continuing 
during night, waking her up suddenly every two or three 
hours, worst from 1.30 to 3.30 A. m., < toward daybreak 
(improved). 

An old doctor residing here had been troubled for two or 
three winters with an intense cold :pain in both legs, left one 
worse. It came on every night on lying down and lasted all 



490 


SYPHILINUM. 


night, only relief was by getting up and walking, and every- 
thing had failed to help. Magnetic leggings ha"d affordeli 
most relief. The trouble ceased in warm weather He hap- 
pened to speak of it one day, and I told him I would stop it. 
As he wanted to try it, I gave him one dose of Syphilinum 
mm , dry He lost his pain for six or eight weeks, when it 
returned in a milder form, and he received one dose of Syphi- 
linum cmm , and he has never had it since Went all winter 
without pain. But he said the second powder m^^® 
genitals ache so that he couldn’t sit still, and this continued 
for over a month. 

SKIN.-\Pustular eruption .on different parts* of body;' in 
\patches/on certain places, particularly k on wrists .^nd shins, 
where bones are nearest cuticle, and isolated other large pus- 
tules on other parts, these break, discharging an ichorous 
fluid for one or two days, then heal, leaving characteristic 
gockmark cicatrice; patches take longer to heal, discharging 
same fluid till healing process commences. 

After healing of chancre a fresh pustular eruption appears 
on different parts of body, which when pustules have dis- 
charged an ichorous liquid and healed up, leaves fresh cop- 
pery pockmarks; Medorr. removed it permanently, causing it 
to turn yellow-brown, dry at edges and scale off, leaving skin 
permanently clear and free. 

fiBiting sensatioij^n different part^f body/as if bitten by 
bugs ,<at night only/ 

If^Syghilitic rash/, very prominent ^on forehead/ chm,^ arms ' 
and\front of thorax/ an abundance of fine scales peeling off; 
large prominent spot on centre of forehead, filled with fluid, 
as also are some smaller patches. 

Sy ph ilitic bullgi/discharging freely on cheeks, under chin, 
on back of shoulders, on scalp and other parts of body (infan- 
tile syphilis) 

II Macula; copper-colored; from crown of head to sole of 
foot 

: i ^emphigus^ ooking like a pock, often confluent and p^r- 
sistermjTreappears \Skin blui sh,/ — 

^HTMa^ula over hack, chest, abdomen, arms and legs, but not 
on any uncovered part of body. 



SYPHILINUM. 


491 


1 1 Several\elevated spots /on arm, stomach, leg and finger; 
has them habitually on face, chiefly on 1. cheek 

1 1 A blood-boil on arm: face broken out with a lumpy fiery 
rash. 

"^11 Eruption over whole body not elevated, but could be dis- 
tinctly felt by passing hand over skin; after Syphilinum Im. 
eruption came rapidly to surface; at same time a disagreeable 
odor began to be developed, eruption reddish-brown like^mall- 
pox pustules, without central depression; body covered with 
it, except scrotum and penis, increased, completely covering 
inside of mouth and throat, making it difficult to swallow even 
liquids, eyes also covered, making him completely blind, in- 
tolerable smell from body; tips of pimples became filled with 
pus, < from warmth of bed; fetid breath; eruption developed 
still more, a great quantity of pus, with intolerable itching, 
yet could not scratch as it was extremely sore; eruption left 
skin of entire body covered with dull, reddish, copper-colored 
spots, which in cold, looked blue 
SLEEP. — Great restlespess at night, impossible to keep long 
in one position 

I Absolute sleeplessnessXvies with, Sub m producing quiet, 
^refreshing sleep). 

Wakes soon after midnight and cannot sleep again till 6 

A, 

'**"E)uring the whole 24 hours can only rest from 8 to 10 A. M. 
Total loss of sleep for 22 successive days and nights 
Absolute sleeplessness for 11 to 14 days and nights 
FEVER. — 1 1 Great pains m head, whole body extremely cold, 
looked blue, wanted to be covered with blankets or couldn’t 
get warm, no appetite, sleeping almost continually, could not 
be aroused. 

l^^ervous chills^receded by pains in head, esp. occiput and 
scalp ^^cTf "That part; J>ains below waist, m pelvis, legs, esp. 
tibia, which is sensitive to touch; bowels torpid; cross, irri- 
table, peevish, pains begin every day at 4 p m , culminate at 
midnight, disappear at daylight. 

After retiring nerve chill beginning in anus, running down 
legs with spasmodic sensation; desire for stool, "> by profuse 
urination and by eructations. 



492 


SYPHILINUM 


Fev er: dry, hot, shortly after going to bed, parched lips, 

\ great thirst; during fever intensely hotj, wants to throw off 
covering, puts feet out of bed and against wall to cool them, 
high fever in middle of day, heat being intense, with sensa- 
tion as if burning up, thirst for large quantities often, sensa- 
tion of burning internal heat very marked; Jever preceded by 
slight chill and followed by sweat and great debility. 

II Sweat: profuse at nighty sleepless and restless^ esp be- 
tween scapula and down to waist, with excessive general de- 
bility. 

ffFever from 11 to 1 P M. daily^ perspires when she begins 
to get over fever; pain in back, < between shoulders, no am- 
bition or desire to move. 

I Excessive general debility and continued night sweats, lat- 
ter being most marked between scapulae and down to waist 

GENERALITIES. — Utter prostration and debility in morning, ^ 
^ Epilepsy, 

.Dwarfed, shrivelled-upi old-looking ibabies and children. 

Epileptic convulsions after menses, 

{{Body, extremities and face covered with syphilides, a 
sticking soreness begins in throat every evening between 6 
and 7 o’clock and continues to grow < during night; exceed- 
ingly restless until 4 A. m , then a restless sleep for a few 
hours; ^an scarcely swallow; when swallowing a sensation as 
o f t hroat tearing to pieces, continual throbbing in throat, <C 
from cold and hot drinks, and < lying down; throbbing in 
temples and ears, boring in ears meeting in centre of brain, 
sensation as if top of head were coming off; drawing pain m 
eyes < from lamplight ;\teeth pain)i^hen eating, also wh^ 
\takmg anything\hot or cold, feel as if they were loose, > 

! pr ess ing teeth together and pressing throat with hands, \ ex-/ 
' ^essiveAflow of saliva/it runs out of mouth\when sleeping^ 
severe pain in neck; bending back head, > pain in neck; 
aching pain in shoulders and knees; rending, tearing pains 
throughout body, > moving about slowly; had his wife hide 
his revolver lest m a fit of desperation he might kill himself, 
as was his desire during extreme paroxysms of pain, strikes 
wall with fist and^beats headl^against wallj^or relief ; ^^^sto ^ 
nara7dry'‘lireT^ dung; desire for stool three orfour times 



SYPHILINUM. 


493 


a day, but only a little scentless wind passes which gives re- 
lief; sitting at stool, > pain in head; is easily offended, gets 
desperate, cannot bear to be alone, great anxiety about get- 
ting well, at night no position suits him, walks floor or goes 
into street and moves about slowly, sleepy all the time but can- 
not sleep; dreams about his disease; < in open air, frequent 
urination with sudden desire; discharges large quantities of 
muddy urine. 

Shifting pains of a rheumatic character obliging a repeated 
change of position and posture 

\Lan cinating rheumatic pains/slightly relieved by a change 
of position at times, and sometimes relieved by motion 

Pams commence at 2 p m , gradually increasing till they 
reach their acme at 9 p m , continuing exceedingly acute till 
3 or 4 A. M , subsiding with daybreak. 

Pains more particularly < in, or confined to, the muscles 
and joints of lower limbs, for four or five weeks, then they 
seemed to go to the periosteum and bone itself, consequently 
becoming deeper and more profound. 

The pains produce two sensations, an external one which 
seems to he in muscles and joints, and an internal one which 
is deeper and much more unbearable, so much so that it seems 
by its profound nature to control the external ones and to 
cause those pains to disappear, afterward reappearing intensi- 
fied in the external sensation. 

Pams in all the limbs every night^after midnigh;y^weary, 
tired pains, making rest impossible, as he could lie nowhere 
without suffering in the part on which he rested Pains worse 
in lower limbs, much perspiration which partly >. 

Rheumatic neuralgic pains m all the muscles, even m cre- 
master, 7 iot m joints; darting pains in irregular attacks, some- 
times lasting a week or two The pains gradually increase 
and decrease, they are worse m damp and especially m frosty 
weather; they get worse at 4 or 5 p. M , attain their height at 
2 or 3 A. M , ceasing about 8 a. M Never contracted syphilis 
— ^very much improved by dm. 

Rheum atis m with swe ating of ha.nd s, wrists and leg s below 
the knees, and feet, with great soreness of soles, all < at 
night. 



494 


THYROIDIN. 


^Extreme emaciation.; 

Hardly able to lift hand. 

Feels < mornings, utter prostration and debility in morn- 
ing. 

Weak, emaciated. 

.Though 17 looked 12, was so reduced and dwarfe^ great 
attenuation of soft parts throughout, spare and hollow; con- 
fined to couch for about three years, and for one year was 
scarcely ever off back 

' After the disappearance of the pustular eruption, a gradual 
» ^ig idity of all the joints"ensues^ and all the flexors seem to be^- 
come contracted and shortened; this causes inability to closf 
the fingers on a knife, fork or spoon^and a partial inability to 
lifirtELe*"^foot in order to step up-stairs, except with great diffi- 
culty by using a cane, and only a step up or down at a time. 
(Note — This is not the case where the pustular eruption is a 
curative effect of the Syphilinum high. — Swan,') 

Feeling of numbness in palms and sole, which have also at 
times a prickly sensation as if the numb parts were punctured 
by a great number of needles. 

Rheumatic swelling of left wrist and left great toe which is 
bluish-red, with pains like sawing off his bones with a dull 
saw, better from heat of stove, worse from sundown to sun- 
rise; no appetite. 


THYROIDIN. 

Thyroidin Thyroid Extract. A Sarcode. Trituration of 
the fresh thyroid gland of sheep or calf. Attenuation of a 
liquid extract of the gland. 

MIND. — Acute stupor alternating with restless melancholia; 
at times could not be got to speak, but would lie on floor with 
limbs rigid; at other times would weep and undress herself; 
at times dangerous ancflj^omicidal^^'would put her arms round 
the necks of other patients so^^tightly as almost to strangle 
t6em (in this case the insanity was primary and the myxe- 
(iema secondary; both conditions were removed). Evinced 





THYROIDIN. 


495 


mcreased vivacity by quarreling with another patient about a 
trifling difference of opinion. 

Depression 

Fretfulness and moroseness gave way to cheerfulness and 
animation. 

‘‘All progressed cases of myxedema show some mental 
aberration which tends towards denpntia, usually with delu- 
sions, the latter taking the form of suspicion/and^ersecution.i 
Occasionally^ actual insanity /is present in the form of mama 
and insanity.'’ 

Delirium of persecution (three cases observed, one fatal, 
the result of taking Thyro. m tablets to reduce obesity). 

Sudden acute mania occurring m myxedema, perfectly re- 
stored mentally and bodily under Thyr. 

Mental aberration dating three years before onset of myxe- 
dema, subject to attacks of great violence, with intervals of 
depression and moroseness. 

State of idiocy ;\f earful nightmares. 

Excited condition, lasting all the rest of the day, grunting 
continuously and laughing in a way that was peculiar to her- 
self. 

Very excited, excited state followed by considerable de- 
pression. 

For several hours m what can be only termed a hysterical 
condition. 

^ofound depression. 

Irritable and ill-tempered. 

Became a grumbler. 

Angry. 

Had frights. 

HEAD* — Vertig o. 

Feeling of lightness in the brain, scarcely amounting to gid- 
diness. 

Much giddiness and headache for twenty-four hours. 

Awoke about 4 am. with sharp headache and intense ach- 
ing in back and limbs, which continued for three days and 
compelled him to keep his bed. 

Ever since taking the first thyroid [had had five glands 
altogether, at intervals] he had a strange feeling in his head, 
with vertigo and palpitation on stooping. 



496 


THYROIDIN. 


Headache (with fever symptoms); disappeared on suspend- 
ing treatment, reappeared seven days after recommencing. 

Frontal-coronal headache after taking one tabloid for four 
successive days 

(Constant headache, pains in occiput and vertex. ) 

(Headache in case of acromegaly ) 

Headache 

Headache and pains in abdomen. 

Fresh growth of hair (many cases). 

J Black hairs growing among the grey 

In one case of scleroderma and in one case of myxedema 
the hair fell off permanently 

In a case of myxedema the patient lost all the hair of his 
head and face and had a thick growth over his arms and 
thorax, under Thyr The hair of the head and face grew 
again and that of the arms and chest fell off. 

EYES. — (Prominence of eyeballs — exophthalmic goitre.) 

Optic neuritis (in five persons, four of them women, under 
treatment for obesity; no other symptoms of thyroidism). 

'\Accommodative asthenopia. 

EARS. — Moist patches behind ears heal up (case of psoriasis). 
Hyperplastic median otitis with sclerosis and loss of mobility 
of the ossicles (rapid amelioration — several cases). 

FACE. — Flushing- with nausea and lumbar pains, loss of 
consciousness, tonic muscular spasms, immediate; with rise of 
temperature, and pains all over, suddenly became breathless 
and livid. 

Faintness, with great flushing of upper part of body and 
pains in back. 

I Swelling of face and legs./ 

*tnTu]^s of face, tight sensation, heat, And angry redness 
removed. 

Burning sensation of lips with free desquamation 

MOUTH. — Tongue became thickly coated 

Feverish and thirsty. 

Great thirst. 

(Ulcerated patch on buccal aspect on 1. cheek near angle of 
mouth.) 

THROAT.— (Full sensation.) 



THYROIDIN. 


497 


Goitre, exophthalmic, cured. 

Goitre reduced. 

STOMACH. — Loss of appetite 

Increased appetite with improved digestion. 

Eructations 
Dyspeptic troubles. 

Nausea, with flushing and lumbar pains 

Nausea, slight vomiting 

Slight nausea recurring on thinking of it. 

Nausea soon after taking the gland. 

On five occasions the patient (a woman) vomited the 
thyroid. 

Always felt a sensation of sickness after the injections. 
Sensation of faintness and nausea (after a few injections). 
Feels tired and sick. 

Gastro-intestinal disturbance and diarrhea. 

ABDOMEN. — Flatulence increased, followed later in the case 
by amelioration. 

Headache and pain in abdomen 

STOOL — Diarrhea, with gastro-intestmal disturbance 

Relief of constipation with more natural actions. 

Cons tipat ion. 

URINARY ORGANS. — Increased flow of urine 
Increased urination, usually with clear, pale yellow secre- 
tion 

Slight trace of albumin found in urine. 

Albuminuria 

Diabetes mellitus, caused and cured. 

FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — Increased sexual desire. 

Six days after commencement of treatment menstruation, 
which has been absent over a year, reappeared and continued 
profusely (in several cases of myxedema with or without in- 
sanity) 

Menses profuse, prolonged, more frequent, early amenor- 
rhea. 

(Painful and irregular menstruation ) 

(Constant left ovanan pain, and great tenderness). 

Looks pale and feels ill. 

Pain m lower part of abdomen, headache and sickness (in 
33 



498 


THYROIDIN. 


girl of sixteen, probably menstrual effort provoked by Thyr. ; 
no catamenial flow appeared)*. 

Acts as a galactagogue when milk is deficient, when a defi- 
ciency IS associated with a return of the menses it will sup- 
press the latter 

(Puerperal insanity with fever ) 

(Puerperal eclampsia ) 

RESPIRATORY ORGANS, — Slight attack of hemoptysis, fol- 
lowed by cough and signs of phthisis at apex of 1. lung. 

(Voice became clear ) 

Dormant phthisis; lighted up the disease in five cases. 

HEART AND PULSE. — Death, with all the symptoms of 
angina pectoris 

On trying to walk uphill died suddenly from cardiac failure. 

While stooping to put on her shoes she “fainted ” and died 
in half an hour. 

On one occasion, after exerting herself more than she had 
done for a long time previously, “suddenly became extremely 
breathless and livid, and felt as if she was dying;” < by rest 
in recumbent position and stimulants. 

Two fainting attacks 

Frequent fainting fits. 

Complained occasionally of a feeling of faintness, not occur- 
ring particularly after the injections 

One patient showed extraordinary symptoms after the in- 
jection, the skin became so livid as to be almost blue-black. 

Degeneration of heart muscle m animals. 

A systolic cardiac murmur was less loud after the treatment 
than before. 

Sensations of faintness and nausea 

Palpitation on stooping. 

Weakness of heart’s action. 

Tachycardia and ready excitability of the heart persisting 
for several days after the feeding was stopped. 

Pulse rose to 112. 

Relaxation of arterioles. 

(Rapid^pulsation, with inability to lie down in bed.) 

(Jumping^sensation at heart.) 

— Flushing, nausea, and lumbar pains, lasting a few 
minutes. 



THYROIDIN. 


499 


Stabbing pains m lumbar region. 

Intense aching in back and limbs, which continued for three 
days 

Flushing of upper part of body and pains in back. 
(Backache.) 

UPPER LIMBS. — After injection, to a great extent lost the use 
of her hands for two days, recurred later, lasting a few hours. 

Felt queer and unable to raise her arms (after injection, 
another case) 

Arms less stiff and painful (psoriasis) 

LOWER LIMBS. — Tingling sensation in legs. 

Edema of legs appeared, and subsequently subsided and 
continued to rVappear and subside for a month 
Pam in legs. 

Incomplete paraplegia. 

Swelling of face and legs 

Feet frequently peel in large flakes, leaving a tender sur- 
face. 

Profuse flow of fluid from feet (in case of dropsy cured by 
Thyr.) 

Quivering of limbs; tremors 

Intense aching in back and limbs, lasting three days 
Pains in arms and legs, with malaise. 

Skin of hands and feet desquamated 
(Acromegaly, subjective symptoms ) 

GENERALITIES. — Malaise > by lying in bed. 

Stooping = palpitation. 

Rest m recumbent position > extreme breathlessness with 
lividity, felt as if dying. 

Myxedematous patients are always chilly; the effect of the 
treatment is to make them less so 

Loss of consciousness and general tonic muscular spasm for 
\ a few seconds^' 

Fainting attacks (many cases). 

Tremors, quivering of limbs, complete unconsciousness. 
(Tetany.) 

^Epileptiform fit,^ after which he was unconscious for an 
hoHr, next day felt better and warmer. 

' Malaise so great she refused to continue the treatment. 



500 


THYROIDIN. 


Agitation. 

Incomplete paraplegia. 

Hysterical attack. 

(Hystero-epilepsy with amenorrhea.) 

Nervous and hysterical, had to have nurse to watch her. 
Feels tired and sick. 

Stabbing pains. 

Aching pains (many cases). 

Aching pains all over. 

Diffused pains. 

Aching pains in various parts of body. 

Pains over whole body 

Brawny swelling at point of injection, followed by abscess 
of slow development. 

Myxedema removed (many cases). 

‘^A series of abscesses resulting from the injections, but 
probably originating from an accidental abscess quite inde- 
pendent of them.” 

A small abscess formed 

Increased suppuration in case of lupus. 

Gained a stone in weight 

Lost weight enormously (may cases of myxedema). 

Rapid gam of flesh and strength. 

Anemia and debility. 

Infiltration rapidly absorbed (psoriasis). 

Persons suffering from skin disease can bear much larger 
doses than those suffering from myxedema. 

(Acromegaly, headache, and subjective symptoms.) 
(Fractures refuse to unite.) 

A peculiar cachexia more dangerous than myxedema itself, 
Syphilis, secondary, tertiary 
SITIN* — Flushing of skin 

Skin became so livid as to be almost blue-black. 

Skin has desquamated freely, but there has been no per- 
spiration or diuresis 

Psoriasis, eruption extended and increased. 
psoriasis / redness and itching reduced; eruption separating 
and ' being she3'^jin ^^at scales, angry, inflamed appearance 
completely f one, ) 



THYROIDIN. 


501 


Moist patches behind ears heal up. 

Arms less stiff and painful, swelling diminished. 

Crusts separated, leaving faint red skin; eruption not 
nearly so painful 

(Symmetrical serpiginous eruption; dark red; edges raised 
and thickened ) 

Lupus, tight feeling, heat, angry redness removed; suppura- 
tion increased. 

Eczema, irritation of skin markedly allayed 

Scattered pustules of eczema mature quickly or abort. 

(Teething eczema.) 

(Syphilitic psoriasis.) 

(Rupia ) 

Scleroderma. 

Peeling of skin beginning on legs and extending over whole 
surface, skin has since become comparatively soft and 
smooth. 

Peeling of skin of lower hmbs, with gradual clearing 
(eczem^' 

Skin of hands and feet desquamated. 

SLEEP. — Continual tendency to sleep 

Awoke about 4 a. m. with sharp headache 

Fearful nightmares disappeared. 

Insomnia 

Excited condition; could not sleep. 

FEVER — Flushing, with nausea; with loss of consciousness. 

Always felt hot, and had a sensation of sickness after the 
injections 

Felt better and warmer. 

Flushing of upper part of body and pains in back. 

Temperature never rose above 99° but she felt feverish and 
thirsty. 

Temperature rose to 100° F., and remained there several 
days; pulse 112. 

Rise of temperature; diaphoresis 

Profuse perspiration on least exertion. 

4 IJIN «K * J jyMUWBi t-)** » »» ■» »*■ 



502 


TXJBERCULINUM. 


TUBERCULINUM. 


MIND. — Anxiety, gloomy, melancholy humor. 

Has lost melancholy expression she formerly had. 

Is disposed to whine and complain, dejected mind, anxiety. 
She is very sad. 

Nervous irritation; aversion to labor. 


Indifferent. 

Forgetful. 

Aversion to all labor, esp. mental work. 

Sensibility to music. 

Does not like to be disturbed by people;^ trembling of hands; 
Felt positively ugly, personal aversions became almost a 
mania. 

Trifles produced intense irritation and I could not shake 
them off. 

Very irritable, want to fight; no hesitancy in throwing any- 
thing'at any one, even without cause 
Memory weak, unable to think 

Comprehension and concentration almost impossible. 

Great anxiety for future, otherwise marked indifference. 
. Gr eat sleepiness and weariness, entire muscular system re- 
laxedl desire to he down all the time* 

Nervous, weak; irritable. 

Melancholy, despondent, morose, irritable, fretful, peevish. 
Dejected, taciturn, sulky, weeps , but knows not why; 
naturally of a sweet disposition, now on the borderland of 
insanity . 

Fretful, snappish, morose, depressed and melancholic, even 
to insanity 

Ill-mannered, qua rrels ome; lies in bed and complains, lach- 
rymose, weeps without any provocation, cannot help it. 
\Irritable on waking/nothing can please him, nothing 

SATISFIES. 

“ Melancholy with marked hypochondriacal delirium. 
Everything m the room seems strange, as though in a 
strange place. 


\Intense restlessness^ anAinward restlessness/ 



TUBERCULINUM. 


503 


11 With every little ailment whines and complains; easily 
frightened, particularly by dogs,^ screams in terror when ap- 
proached by a dog 

Anxiety, gloomy, melancholic humor. 

Very restless in the evening when aroused 

Periodical anxiety and terror. 

She IS very sad, dejected, and complains continually. 
^^Nervous irritation/ averse to physical or mental labor 

Indifferent, forgetfuTlLversrtoVll labor, especially mental 
work 

Extremely sensitive to music 

Sensibilities dulled; with chill and aching in the head, back 
and limbs 

Somnolence;,l^oss of vital powerj^great physical weakness./ 

T5oes not like to be disturbed, trembling of hands and ieet. 

Soporous, dazed condition, unable to find the right way, is 
confused, surroundings appear strange 

Memory weak or lost; unable to think or comprehend 
's, Comprehension difficult/ must read a paragraph several 
times before he can understand it. 

Sopor, somnolence, with dyspnea 

Coma, profound, lasting three days, with temperature 106. 

Delirium and serious meningeal symptoms, following an in- 
jection of Tuberculmum 

Complete unconsciousness, stupor and stertorous breathing. 

Insanity^ acute or chronic, with a family historj^^of tubercu-f 
Lar affections. 

When the best selected remedy fails to relieve or perma- 
nently cure m a marked tubercular diathesis, with a tubercu- 
lar family history. 

Despondent, discouraged, feel as if I would rather die than 
live 

II Although naturally of a sweet disposition, became taciturn, 
sulky" snappish, fretty, irritable, morose, depressed and mel- 
ahcliblic, even to insanity. — Burnett, 

^ HEAD. ^Verti^^esp. jin morning, heavy with obscuration 
of eyes; is**oSTiged to lean on something J by bending down, 
ijy rising after bending down, with palpitation; with 
nausea; with backache in morning: after dinner 



504 


TUBERCULINUM. 


Great heat in head, flushes of heat after dinner, sensation 
of heat in head in evening. 

Headache deep in forehead, deep in temples, on vertex, 
with sensation of heat; from neck to forehead, in morning, 
passing away m afternoon. 

Sensation of heaviness on vertex. 

Headache with obscuration of sight 
Headache with vertigo 
Piercing headache 

Piercing pain in forehead from 10 a m to 3 p m. 

Headache in evening, in afternoon. 

Frontal headache in morning 
Headache with rushing in ears. 

Heada che in morning with bleeding of nose 
Headache from neck to forehead, burning, piercing 
Colossal hyperemia of pia mater and brain substance; ex- 
treme engorgement of vessels on the surface, internally dusky 
red, tubercles presented no retrogressive changes (arachnitis). 
( Sensa tion as if brain were squeezed with iron band. — Bac ) 
ileadache < by motion ' ' ' * ' 

Sick-headache commencing about 8 A. M , increasing in 
severity through the day; very changeable, leaning the head 
to one side would increase the pain on that side 

Brain seems loose and rolling around from side to side. 
Darting pain in occiput, extending down the spine 
Headache commencing about 10 A. m , increasing until 3 or 
4 p. M. Pains erratic, changing place rapidly, first m one 
place then in another, not > in any position 
Headache in evening 8 pm, neurotic, first in one place 
then in another, over one eye then the other, then the occiput 
and down the spine. 

Headache in afternoon, worse from going up stairs, better 
in open air. 

Severe headache and vertigo m afternoon; a- dizzy, sick at 
stomach sensation, like sea-sickness 
Dull headache on waking. 

A stra nge sensation in head on first lying down as if some 
l^nt substance was rolling from above eyes to vertex 

bevere headache beginning upon mastoid process on left 
side and extending over head to opposite side 



TUBERCULINUM. 


505 


Complete physical exhaustion without any apparent cause. 
Chilly all day, although room was warm; muscles of the 
whole body sore to touch or pressure 

In morning so weary and muscles ache so severely it is diffi- 
cult to arise 


Great heaviness in head and pain in occiput and neck. 

Severe headache, < on second day, lasting until the third, 
recurring from time to time for many weeks and compelling 
quiet fixedness — Burnett, 

I Headache, tvith frequent sharpy cutting pains passing from 
above r, eye through head to back of L ear, — Rose, 

II Headache of great intensity preceded by a shuddering 
chill passing from brain down spine, with attack a feeling as 
if head above eyes were swollen, became unconscious with 
screaming, tearing her hair, beating her head with her fists or 
trying to dash it against wall or floor. — Swan 

II Headache of forty-five years’ standing, pain passing from 
r, frontal protuberance to r occipital region, — Swan 

II Terrible pain in head, as if he had a tight hoop of iron 
around it, trembling of hands, distressing sensation of damp 
clothes on his spine, almost absolute sleeplessness; profound 
adynamia; was thought by his friends to be on verge of in- 
sanity, most of his brothers and sisters had died of water on 
brain; r. lung solid, probably from healed-up cavities, as he 
at one time suffered from pulmonary phthisis. — Burnett, 

II Sullen, taciturn, irritable\ screams in his sleep/ is very 
Restless at night^constipated^ sister died of tubercular menin- 
gitis — Burnett, 

|1 Fretful and ailing, whines and complainsVmdurated glands 
^n be felt everywhere, ^hild hot/ drowsy, urine red ai^ 
sandy, much given to be frightened, particularly by dogs; 
was vaccinated and had a very bad arm for four months there- 
after, would not sfhile, whimpers when spoken to, skin dingy, 
skull hydrocephalic. — Burnett, 


II Boy, aged 20 months, ill for days with head, high fever, 
Irestlessness and constant screaming/ finally no sleep for forty 
^urs, followed by a condition of collapse, peculiar smell of 
body , family history of tuberculosis — Burnett 
'**^OTubercular meningitis, iJsrith effusion; head gradually en- 



506 


TUBERCULINUM. 


larged; alternately wakeful and delirious at night, talked non- 
sense by day, at intervals, nocturnal hallucinations and 
fright, delirium, pyrexia, had eczema^ which almost dis- 
appeared after two unsucceSful vaccinations, and which were 
soon followed 'by above condition, after administration of 
remedy th^re occurred a severe pustular erudition, then 
patches of a lejgra and ecgema appeared. — Bu7mett 

1 1 Basilar meningitis — St7iker, ^ 

I Tubercular meningitis . — SiTtker 

i I Acute cerebral meningitis, with intense strabismus. — 
Btegler. 

% Plica polonicaj several bad cases permanently cured with 
Tuberculinuni — Jackson, 

EYES.— Swollen lids, headache with swollen lids m morning. 

R. eye much swollen, conjunctiva inflamed 

Dulness and heaviness of eyes; darkness before eyes. 

Obscuration of vision with vertigo 

Opens r. eye (which had been closed) 

Breaking down of cicatrices of old corneal ulcers (Stoker). 

Clearing of corneal opacity the result of old tuberculous 
corneitis (Stoker) 

^jTuberculosis of eyelids^small grey and yellow nodules, ex- 
isting m conjunctiva of outer sections of lids, increased in size, 
ran together, then suddenly disappeared 
* Phl ycte nulae appeared where none existed before (Maschke). 

Conjunctivitis, herpes on lids 

Ambly opia/ with irregularity and complete paralysis of 
puj^oEun an alcoholic). 

Stye appeared on upper lid of r eye. Lid swollen, in- 
tensely painful; four days later opened' discharging green pus. 

Stye on lower lid of right eye, appeared suddenly, began to 
swell like a bee sting Opened within 48 hours discharging 
green pus. 

EARS. \Tinnitus. 

Rushing in ears with heavy head. 

Sticki ng pain from pharynx to ears 

Headache with rushing in ears an3*pressure on vertex. 

ears. 


Great aching in ears an d teeth, 
discharge oftyeilowish matt^^rom the 



TUBERCULINUM. 


507 


^Swelling of the glands /kroundUhe ear, and on'vthe neck, 
worse below the ear and behind.,* 

Slight discharge of yellowish matter from r. ear. 

No pain. * 

"Earl, aged 2 years Light complexion 
January 25, 1895 Consumption on the father’s side. Since 
last February has had a djscharge from the ears of a yellow- 
ish matter without special indications. Was relieved by some 
medication until within the last two or three weeks 

Now there is cpnsiderable swelling of the glands around the 
ear and on the neck, worse below the ear and behind, with a 
slight discharge of yellowish matter from the r. ear. No payi- 
l^b appetite, will only take milk when it has tea m it. Not 
in poor flesh, but thinner than usual. Desires fresh air and 
wants to be out of doors. Wretful at night^^seems to be better 
3uring the day. Was very fevensh a day or so before the ear 
Commenced to run. Tuberculinum 50m., one dose. 
“February 7. The swelling about the ear increased till Sun- 
day night (three days) and looked as though it would break 
on the outside Since then it has been going down, his ear 
quit running yesterday. The discharge became thick and 
would not run, they kept it syringed out with warm water 
and soap; it gradually grew less. Hardly any odor about the 
discharge. Stool once or twice a day Appetite better. A 
little more restless at night. Anxious to get out of doors, but 
cried to get back into the house again. Head seems to hurt 
when he cries. Disposition better, he is not so cross. The 
swelling about the glands almost gone. Seems to be grad- 
ually improving Placebo. 

February 26. Better in every way. No swelling or run- 
ning at the ear. The family consider him well. The only 
thing noticeable is that he seems somewhat pale and nervous 
when first getting up in the morning, but this soon wears off. 
Is in better flesh. Sac. lac. The case required no more 
medicine and rapidly went on to a cure. 

N0SE.-^Coryza./ 

Secretio^of mucus from nose, viscid, yellow-green. 

increased secretion of mucus, with frontal headache. 

Aching of ears and teeth with coryza in evening, with head- 
ache. 



508 


TUBERCULINUM. 


Bleeding of nose. 

^medones on nose, surrounded with minute pustules. 

The nose, which used to feel ‘‘hot and burning,” has lost 
this sensation. 

Profuse discharge of blood mixed with mucus from nares. 

Seem to have a fresh cold with each change of weather. 
Blowing blood from nose constantly. Profuse discharge of 
bloody mucus. 

i ^all boil at end of nose^at upper nasal commissure, and 
one on upper lip The boils were small, dark-red in color 
and contained green pus Very slow in healing. 

Sneezing, burning, watery coryza. Seemed to have fresh 
cold all the time. 

Fluent coryza. 

Discharge of thick tenacious, gray-colored mucus. 

Awakened every morning at 5 a m. to clear nose and throat. 

Rattling of mucus in throat immediately after eating, which 
must be expectorated. 

Soreness inside of nose, commencing as watery pimples, 
which, suppurating, form scabs, nose and lips somewhat 
swollen; itching slightly — Rose 

FACE.->»^dematous, pale face^ 

Clonic convulsions of musculus orbicularis inferior, acute. 

Convulsions in region of facial muscle, esp. buccinator. 

In one case the inflammation of the lupus (on face) pre- 
sented unquestionable erysipelas of a rather severe type, and 
the patient was for some time in danger. 

Flushing of cheek of same side as lung affected, during 
the reaction (Borgherini). 

Upper lip and nose became swollen during the first two or 
three reactions, the lip becoming cracked on inner surface. 

Herpes on lips and eyelids (Heilferich). 

After the tenth injection his 1. , moustache, which was kept 
cut to prevent scabs from gathering, ceased to grow, every 
hair^ fell out, a nd for a month the 1. upper lip was perfectly 
denuded of hair, and had all the appearance when seen under a 
lens of being depilated; however, the hairs began to grow 
well before he left the Home. (Hine). 

Slight swelling and itching of lips. — Rose. 



TUBERCULINUM. 


509 


TEETH. — Vague toothache. 

Teeth felt loose. 

“ Feeling as if the teeth were all jammed together and too 
many for his head.” 
i Sp rdes on teeth./ 

Inflammation of gums, scurvy-like 
trums turgescent, felt swollen. 

MOUTH. — Tongue foul, furred. 

Tongue much coated 

Coating on soft palate and tongue. 

Taste salty, purulent. 

. ^hthaeion tongue and buccal mucosa. 

Tongue dry 
D^oiess of lips 
On lips black blisters^ 

Palate, granulations enormously swollen and vascular. 
\^Breath ofien sive / 

si^t up biood streaked mucus from mouth and throat. 

A bitter, disagreeable taste; nothing tasted natural. This 
continued for more than a month. 

Tongue coated white at back and through the center. 
Scalded sensation o.n tongue and in mouth as though 
burned, tongue sore at tip. 

Lips dry, chapped, entire mouth very dry, but no thirst, 
worse in morning on rising. 

Thirst for small quantities of water. 

Wakened several times in th e ni ght on account of dryness 
of mouth. 

THROAT.— Aching in pharynx and larynx. 

Scratching in pharynx. 

Tickling in throat exciting cough. 

^h^tion of a tumor in throat. 

Dryness in throat ,\tonsilitis,^general inflammatory condi- 
tion of pharyngeal mucous membrane. 

Retropharyngeal abscess. 

Burning pain in throat. 

Sensation of constriction in throat; in larynx. 

Heaviness and sensation of r attling in throat . 



510 


TUBERCULINUM. 


Aching extending from throat to ears 

Dysphagia increased, later diminished (in laryngeal 
phthisis) 

Intense pain in naso-pharynx on swallowing. 

Sensation as if throat was swollen on the right side, expec- 
torating a great deal of mucus from posterior nares, worse 
immediately after eating. 

Needle-like pains m left side of throat < by swallowing. 

Pams shooting to the left ear when swallowing; unable to 
eat solids 

Dryness of the throat and posterior nares, with a dry, tick- 
ling cough at night. 

APPETITE.-^^petite good; enjoy food. It is all right until 
it reaches lower bowel, then urging begins Stool mostly un- 
digested; lienteria; weight 112, previous to proving, weighed 
134 

Loss of appetite, esp. m morning. 

Thirst: extreme, day and night; burning in morning 

Always drank coffee, but now cannot bear even the odor of 
it, which < the headache 

Gre at thirst 

Mouth, lips and tongue dry and parphed. 

V Craving for food.Tor something to eaL but not relieved by 
eating 

“^fOMACH. — Eructations and sensation of fulness over 
stomach 

Nausea, vomiting 

Vomited severely with > to headache 

Nausea and vomiting, nausea with efforts to vomit with 
colic and diarrhea. 

Transitory sickness and vomiting after dinner. 

Vomiting after every meal 

]^ausea and sickness in morning with heaviness in stomach 
region. 

"Pressure in stomach, going to throat, as if the clothes were 
too tight. 

Cramping pain m stomach. 

Nausea with pains in umbilical region with diarrhea. 

Nausea with racking and stirring in stomach and increased 
thirst. 



TUBERCULINUM. 


511 


Sickness in stomach and pressing. 

Nausea m morning. 

Sticking pains in stomach region 
Belching of tasteless gas 
Constant nausea, but could not vomit. 

Belching, with burning sensation in esophagus from stomach 
to mouth 

Tasteless eructations with much belching 
Nausea and repugnance at sight or odor of food 
Empty, twisted sensation in epigastrium, followed by an- 
other stool 

Much pressing, continuous pam in epigastrium 
Feels as if stomach was gripped by a hand. 

Great thirst for hot water, which does not relieve 
Empty sensation after eating as if not satisfied. 

[|,\Vindy dyspepsia, with pinching and pains under ribs of r. 
side in mammary line — Burnett 
ABDOMEN. — Cramping pains in stomach and abdomen. 
Sensation of constriction in abdomen. 

Colic with diarrhea and heaviness m stomach. 

Colic with great thirst 

Fatigue and sickness in region of stomach and abdomen; 
sticking pains deep in spleen; severe pain in region of liver. 

Aching (sticking) in region^ of liver, spleen, ovaries, sper- 
matic'cord, testicles (esp 1 ), in hip-joints, in rectum. 

Pains in region of appendix verrnildfmis 

Mass of enlarged glanST, m r iliac fossa much smaller. 

Six pustules at different parts of skin of back and abdomen, 
and after discharging have healed 

Discrete papular rash over chesj: and abdomen 
\Perforating ulcer^in intestines / 

Bloated sensation in abdomen all day. 

Borborygmus, much rattling and rumbling 
Seems as though something would start in left groin and 
crawl upward, with persistent ru mb ling. 

Dull pam and rumbling in abdomen, constantly changing 
from one side to the other 

Great exhaustion and weakness. 

Sens ation m abdomen as if greatly distende d; cl othing very 



612 


TUBERCULINUM. 


oppressive, particularly about the waist, obliged to remove 
Dorset immediately for fear of suffocation. 

Bursting sensation in abdomen 

Empty sensation m abdomen followed by burning from 
waist through lower extremities 

II Fever, emaciation, abdominal pains and discomfort, rest- 
less at night, glands of both groins enlarged and indurated; 
cries out in sleep, strawberry tongue — Burnett, 

II Tabes mesent erica, swelling on 1. side, also on r. , com- 
plains of a stitch in side after running, languid and indisposed 
to talk, nervous and irritable, talks in his sleep; grinds'fiis 
teeth, appetite poor, hands blue, indurated jtnd palpable 
^an3s everywhere, a drum belly, spleen region bulging out. 
— Burnett 

lii^^Inguinal glands indurated and visible jj ^exce ssive sweats,/ 
%p.tir onic diarrhea/ 

STOOL AND ANUS. — Obstipation, stool hard, dry, with wind 
and colic. 

Diarrhea with pinching and burning pains 

Pressure and constriction in rectum. 

Pain in rectum. 

Itching sensation in anus 

Constant urging to stool, often ineffectual. 

Tenesmus, painful, constant, not so severe when lying 
down, "Tut not > by lying. 

Ineffectual urging; no reference to stool, seems to be the 
sphincter muscles. 

Stool seems to drop for some distance above, coming chiefly 
in small diarrheic dribbles without pain, until sphincter is 
touched. Tenesmus begins as soon as feces pass over lower 
portion of rectum. 

Tenesmus and ineffectual urging day and night, no rest; 
disturbed, unrefreshing sleep 

Pain dull, more or less severe, about hips, sacrum and en- 
tire pelvic region. 

When I cough ^eems as if the rectum was being torn out. 

(?et very weary sitting, but dreaSTt’o Imove, as" motions < 
the tenesmus. 


4^Early morning diarrheaj^ urgent, watery, dark-brown and 



TUBERCULINUM. 


513 


offensive, passing with great force, 5 a. m This early morn- 
ing stool continued for eight days, invariably from 5 to 6 a m. 

Early morning, urgent, ineffectual with tenesmus. 

Early morning diarrhea, watery, painless, bright yellow, 
but little or no exhaustion followed. 

Mrs. S , aged 27, Denver, catarrh of nose, throat and 

larynx, ^cou^gh seyerey< by lying down; for ten or fifteen 
minutes after retiring coughs severely, loosens some tough ‘ 
mucus which can neither be raised) nor swallowed/ Night- 
sweats if warmly covered Morning diarrhea, watery, pro- 
fuse, gushing, at 6:30 A m. , a slight motion, turning in bed, 
necessitates getting up in a hurry, with a rush. Rumbling, 
gurgling m abdomen as if quarts of water were in stomrch and 
bowels By careful eating can go rest of day without Going 
without noon-day meal stool is natural, but it would not affect 
morning diarrhea. In morning, weak, exhausted. In after- 
noon, feels fairly well Excessively nervous during menses. 
Last three periods have been ten or fifteen days late and more 
scanty than usual Under the care of one of our best homeo- 
pathic prescribers has had Aloe, Sulphur, Podophyllum, Gam- 
boge and Rumex. 

Profuse, watery stool two or three times a day. 

Constant urging for stool Formication. 

Loose stool; slight tenesmus. 

Constant, ineffectual desire. 

Loose, yellow colored stool, with considerable straining; 
three stools since 5 P. M., attended with much thirst and bor- 


bo rygm us. 

Griping pain with bearing down in lower part of abdomen: 
some jelief ,af |:er ^ sto o l. ' 

Stool pale yellow color. 

Sensation of drawing and constricting of sphincter 
Profuse, watery, ill-smelling, like old cheese, at 5 p. m. 
Sudden diarrhea before breakfast, with nausea. 


Diarrhea, furious fever, burning hot skin, great heat in 
head, red, flushed face, eyes turned upward, quivering and 


rolling, peculiar fetid smell of body —Burnett 


HjC holera infain tum ^S 
hemorrhag^ 
farmfy history of phthisis. 


Swan, 


34 


bowels, X^ough ^ emaciation 



514 


TUBERCULINUM. 


URINARY ORGANS.-^Urine intermit s^^stops and starts^ flows 
slowly; must strain at stool to pass urine 
^^nable to pass urin^o matter how hard he strains or how 
fi^'^the bladder uhtuafter ‘spasm of anus, then it flows and 
sTops and flows again for several times. 

Diminished quantity of urine. 

Is obliged to urinate very often, esp. during changes of 
weather 

One-tenth albumin in height of reaction, disappeared 
afterwards. 

Specific gravity of urine increases from 1016 to 1023, with 
an excess of urates and ropy mucus 

Peptonuria m man, 33 (Maregliano). 

Hematuria with renal pain. 

Excess of urates. 


Abundant viscid mucous discharge. 

lSnnTlrequent,'^copious; deposits yellow, reddish cloud on 
standing, loaded with urates 

Urine, odor of boiling beans 

MALE SEXUAL ORGANS.— ^Pams in testicles, \ and cord/ of 
.side. 

Mr. G. A. T , 28, dry goods salesman, light complexion, 
mental, motive temperament, active, wirey, well nourished. 
Father and three uncles died of pulmonary tuberculosis, leav- 
ing him the only living male representative of the family, is 
strictly temperate, uses no coffee, tea, beer, or tobacco Has 
suffered for nine years from^^i^oluntary emissions/with or 
without erections, and with and without dreams, weak and 
exhausted for two days following emissions, has six or eight 
per month. Has had some of the best men of both schools in 
the city caring for him, and the last six years under homeo* 
pathic treatment, and for three years under one of the ablest 
members of this association. 

FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — Sev ere J)ains in breast in even- 
ing at be ginning of menstruation. * 

MenstruationV^ith pains^n\lumbo-sacral and ovarian region/ 

Sticking pain in lower abdomen; pains in lumbo-sacral 
region < when walking. 




TUBERCULINUM. 


515 


Blood lumpy, menstruation lasting more days than usual/ 
menstruation antepones eight days. 

'"Burning pains in external genitals; sharp leucorrhea, pains 
in sacral and ovarian region to hip-joints. 

Sensation of heat in genitalia externa, with increased leu- 
corrhea. 

Cramps in uterine region with pains in sacral and ovarian 
region. 

Burning pain in ovarian region 

Menstruation returns fourteen days after parturition. 

Menses five days\ early, \offensive,' scanty, dark flow only 
two days; ceased one day, returned on the fourth. The func- 
tion was wholly unnatural in appearance. 

Menses usually one or two days late and four days in dura- 
tion. ** 

Miss Mary E. A., 29, University student, one brother living 
in poor health. Mother, several aunts and rest of family died 
before thirty of tuberculosis In July, when 11 years old, was 
severely poisoned with ivy, and has annual attacks in summer 
ever since Menstruated at 13, early, full, scanty, dark, 
clotted, exhausting, dribbles for a week, omits in June, July 
and August every year. Stomach and abdomen bloated < m 
summer. Perspires easily on single parts Hands and |eet 
ede matous Nape and occiput heavy, painful. Mental labor, 
her college work can only be done with great efiort. Rest- 
less, dreamful sleep, unrefreshing Feet and hands cold and 
damp. Summer heat exhausts her Leucorrhea: acrid, pro- 
brownish-yellow, offensj.ve,jrunmng down to the heels jin 
large guan titles. Not relieved by bathing. 

Case ofi^ancer of the brea^so diagnosed by best allopathic 
authority in Boston, no history of grief or traumatism The 
most peculiar symptoms about it were its tubercular — small 
hard nodules in the gland, a superficial string e:^^din^ to 
tEe^ axilla. Previously had^suffered frorri^evere hea da che s^ 
since the growths appeared, headaches ceased. Tfie nip^ 
was retracted. On account of tubercular character of growths, 
the history of former headaches, which were similar to those 
of Tuberculinum, I gave the patient one dose In 48 hours 
burning, lancinating pains began in the growths, had pre- 



516 


TUBERCULINUM. 


viously suffered from burning pain which was palliated by 
sedatives. The burning, lancinating pains continuted two or 
three days, then gradually disappeared. The retraction of 
nipple was less marked, the tubercles softened, the pains dis- 
appeared and general health promptly improved. 

RESPIRATORY ORGANS. — Decided effect in laryngeal cases, 
mostly beneficial 

After ten injections, larynx markedly affected, inflammatory 
swelling and ulceration. 

Central infiltration of mucous membrane of larynx, high red 
color, brighter than normal. 

Enormous swelling of arytenoids appeared 

Tuberculous ou tgro wth 

Exfoliation at r. vocal cord, appearance extravasated below 
its posterior part 

Hyperemia of cords intensified and covered with minute 
ulcerating points 

Cough and expectoration lasting four months, from a wet- 
ting (removed, no bacilli found). 

Sensation of pressure on chest 

Cougli and sputa. 

Irritating cough, < in night 

Little cough m night with aching in side and blood-tinged 
sputa 

Severe cough in evening with pains below mamma on r 
side 

Inclination to cough. 

Severe cough wit h mu co-purulent secretion in morning 

Cougii pr ewnts him sleeping m^evening. 

Cough, secretion of phlegm, esp. by walking, with sticking 
pains in lungs and palpitation. 

A sort of whooping-cough 


After much cough sensation of mucus in pharynx, mucous 
secretion being easily ejected. 

Expectoration Heron, 

Palpitation and pains in back with cough. 

Crackling riles at r. shoulder, behind. 


Prxcoughxin nighty 

Cough with viscid mu 



TUBERCULINUM. 


517 


Copious watery expectoration usually seen during the re- 
action. — Wilson, 

With every increase of dose he suiEfered with asthniatic fits, 
lasting from three to seven hours. 

Extremd rapidity of respirations,' without dyspnea, 60 to 90 
in the minute, if the patient is spoken to, the rapid breathing 
ceases at once (as with a dog panting in the Heron, 

Is obliged to take deep inspirations, dyspnea. 

• Difficulty in breathing speedily increased. 

Marked feeling of suffocation. 

11 S^ljL^gbt tedious hacking cough, which had lasted for months 
in a girl of a distinctly phthisic habit — Burnett, 

11 Hard, dry cough, sometimes slight, but generally no ex- 
pectoration, slightly itvemsh.—Boardman, 

11 Hard, dry cough, shaking patient^^^ore during slee;^‘^but 
did not waken him. — Boardman, - 

“nTExpectoration of non-viscid, very easily detached, thick 
phlegm from air passages, followed after a day or two by a 
very clear ring of voice . — Burnett 
CHEST. — Sensation of pressure in chest. 

Heat in cliest 

Sticking pam in chest, especially at the apex of 1. lung 
Sensation of constriction m the precordial region. 

Pains in both sides of chest going to back. 

Pains in 1. side 
Sticking m side 
Nightly; pains on chest. 

Sticking pains in lungs; ml side, pains betw een scapulae. 
Aching in side in night. 

Sticking pain in chest on r and 1 side 
Sticking pain m 1. side in morning and afternoon. 

Sticking pam m lungs when laughing. 

Pain in axilla, esp. when elevating arm. 

Sticking pain: in lungs with cough and palpitation. 

Pressure in chest, sticking pam on both sides of chest, in 
back. 

Palpitation caused by deep inspirations, aching in back with 
pains under ribs. 

Pams in subclavicular region with cough. 



518 


TUBERCULINUM. 


Sticking pain in L lung 
Pam from clavicles to throat 

Pain in apex pulmonis radiating to axilla and arm. 

Sticking pam in chest and in back < from every movement. 
Pam m 1 lung to axilla. 

Pam on 1 side going back. 

Pain m 1 apex and in region of spleen. 

Severe pam in back, m axilla and arms. 

Pains in 1 side, must take deep inspiration. 

Bronchitic sounds in both lungs. 

Dulness r. apex. 

Sudden, profuse hemoptysis, ends fatally. 

Developed a cavity on side opposite to that first affected 
New deposits of tubercles on pleura. 

Surface of old pulmonary cavities showed unusually intense 
redness of granulation layers 

Hemorrhagic infiltration of walls. 

Recent hemorrhage observed in the cavities. 

In fatal cases of ulcerative phthisis the lungs esp , and also 
the pleura, showed extensive and severe recent changes — 
pleurisy, for the most part very severe, simple and tubercu- 
lous, frequently hemorrhagic, and not infrequently bilateral. 

\Caseous pneumonia/ or caseous hepatization — the lung ap- 
pemng like blood-pudding studded with pieces of lard (the 
patient an architect, 33, had six injections, the last four weeks 
before death At the beginning he had induration of one 
apex only The treatment was suspended because of persist- 
ent fever and infiltration of lower lobe). 

Catarrhal pneumonia was found, but it differed from ordi- 
nary catarrhal pneumonia (in which the alveoli when squeezed 
out have a gelatinous appearance) in that the contents of the 
alveoli were v^ watery and turbid — a turbid infiltration, it 
resembles a phlegmonous condition. 

Soft hepatization, which differs from ordinary catarrhal 
hepatization, in that m the midst of the patches foci of soft- 
ening become developed, leading to rapid breaking down and 
excavation. * 

Development of fresh tubercles; small tubercles giving rise 
to new ulcers have suddenly appeared, esp. in pleura, peri- 
cardium, and peritoneum. 



TUBERCULINUM. 


519 


Metastasis bacilli mobilized. 

Abscesses in the lungs. 

Perforating abscesses in respiratory organs 

Burning sensation in both lungs, better in the open air 

Severe burning sensation m apex of right lung, under sec- 
ond rib. 

Dry, hacking cough and expectoration of yellow, bloody, 
streaked mucus. 

Chest sore, first in one place then m another 

Early morning cough, sputa streaked with blood. 

Hard, dry cough for several days, resulting m the expector- 
ation of yellow mucus mixed with white lumps or a quantity 
of white, stringy substance looking like thick milk, with sore- 
ness of one or both lungs when coughing or taking a deep in- 
spiration. 

""^"Sensation of intense anxiety in the region of the heart, 
especially worse on waking. 

Pulsation synchronous with the heart-beat felt m all parts 
of the body 

I [Slight hacking cough, continuing all day, < at bedtime 
and on rising, emaciation, dulness on percussion at apex of r. 
lung . — Burnett 

II Girl, aged 15, tall for her age; tonsils enlarged, chronic 
discharge from nose, < early morning on rising, speech thick; 
thorax of pigeon-breast type, perspires much across nose; 
very bad perspiration of chest, armpits, palms, nose, and 
feet, feels very chilly, spleen swollen; distinct dulness on 
percussion at apex of r lung, suffered badly from vaccination; 
gets chilblains. — Etmiett, 

ll.ffectic flush of cheeks^ shortness of breath, slight hack- 
ing co^gh", several strumous scars on neck; dusky skin; lar^e, 
moist rales in both lungsT" Increased vocal resonance of r 
lung, amphoric sounds in r lung; large, soft-feelmg gland m 
1. side of neck, very pronounced endocardial bruit, best heard 
at apex beat. lodoformum 3x in four gram doses for two 
months, with improvement, followed by Tuberculinum c in 
very infrequent doses . — Burnett 

11 Incipient phthisis in a boy aged 7; loss of flesh, great 
prostration; morbid timidity, glands of groins and on both 



520 


TUBERCULINUM 


sides of neck very much enlarged and indurated, particularly 
glands over apex of r. lung, as he had suffered much from 
vaccination. Thuja 80 and Sabina 30 were first given, then 
Tuberculinum — Burnett. 

IlNocturnal perspirations i notched incisors; indurated 
glands everywhere, very large and numerous, drumbellied; 
^grmding of teeth at night, great susceptibility to taking cold; 
perspiration < at back of lungs and on head;^big hea^ with 
’^^^bnlgmg forehead^' subject to attacks of fever anS diarrhea. — 
Burnett 

I Kin cipienb^ tubercular disease, restless at nights, sleepless; 
grinds teeth, \ten dency dia.r rhe a^want of appetite, foul 
breath, notched teeth, pam after food; vomiting of food; in- 
durated glands, strawberry tongue, naughty; very irritable 
tempert^puny growtl^very thin, girl, aged 6. — Buntett, 

li A nasty lit'tle cough, for seven weeks, much expectora- 
tion; pains in r. lung, evening fever, liver and spleen en- 
larged, cough morning after breakfast, neck slightly goitrous; 
eats hardly any breakfast — Bitrnett 

II Cough, < 6a M ; notched incisors; thm and puny, cerv- 
ical and inguinal glands much enlarged and indurated, straw- 
berry tongue; girl, aged 7 — Burnett. 

II No respiratory sounds at top of r lung, and vocal reso- 
nance slightly increased, pain m 1. side; profuse perspiration; 
girl, aged 18. — Burnett 

II Much fever, < evenings; restless and terribly irritable; 
much depressed and in almost constant agitation; tongue very 
red;y:hronic diarrhea^ has lost fourteen pounds during last 
six weeks,\has no appetite;! evacuations discharged from bow- 
els as fro m a pop-gun — Burnett. 

’^ITlSad'^cougno^ twelve months’ duration; expectora- 

tion of blood; one of apices was audibly diseased, has had 
pn eum onia; chest flat, respiration accelerated; tanned un- 
duly m sun. — Burnett. 

llA]^emic, sickly, pale, profound debility: dyspnea, cannot 
roounF or hurry ymenses ixx&zvLldLtJ — Burnett. ***** 

"Tf Lady, aged 26, in first stage of consumption: dyspnea and 
rapid breathing; loss of flesh, greasy, dingy skin. — Burnett. 

II Stout man, bright, florid complexion, mother died of 



TUBERCULINUM 


521 


phthisis, with which disease her sister is sufEenng, gets pneu- 
monia very often in cold weather, hence travels from place to 
place to, avoid colds, coughs much, brings up much phlegm, 
perspired profusely and drank great quantities of fluids; 
wretched sleepless nights, with almost constant fever, glands 
of neck much enlarged. — Burnett. 

1 1 Complains that she has been in consumption for many 
years; is very thin and consumed with fever, lungs very fiat; 
respiration almost imperceptible; fever; poor appetite, lan- 
guid — Burnett 

1 1 Ringworm on scalp, lymphatic glands everywhere pal- 
pable. ribs very flat, strawberry tongue, bad cough, < at 
night, ^hough 11 years old she had practically no teeth, 
they w^ rudimentary, and not above level of gums —Bur- 
7iett, 

1 1 Pronounced phthisical habit ;\ se vere piles constipation; 
brown cutaneous affectio%on zhAomexi }^Surnht, 

In September, 1905, I was called to see a little Irish girl, 
named Mary Gilbert, ten years of age, who was suffering with 
what I thought was an attack of pneumonia, temperature 104, 
a dry cough with severe pam in chest I treated her with the 
usual remedies. Belladonna, Bryonia, etc , with only an ap- 
parent amelioration of symptoms But the child lost flesh 
and seemed to develop an empyema About the third week 
there was a profuse discharge of foul smelling pus-like matter, 
greenish in color, from mouth 

The family had been named by the ‘'household angel” that 
the child would die — three successive raps on the door at mid- 
night had given the warning. They administered holy water 
and masked for a consulting physician Dr Pugh, who had 
attended the mother a year previously, in pneumonia, of 
which she died, was called, made 9 careful examination and 
left the following note 

“I think you are completely right She has I think some 
empyema on right side (not much), but she has pulmonary 
tuberculosis of both lungs. I doubt that the hospital would 
do any good.' — (Sgd.) Dr. Chas. E. Pugh. 

I had thought of sending her to the hospital as she had the 
poorest of care at home, but the doctor said it was of no use, 



522 


TUBERCULINUM. 


nothing could save her. I quite agreed with him, but be- 
thought myself of Tuberculinum Here was a chance to try 
it, surely it could do her no harm. She was given a number 
of doses of the 200, and later higher potencies till I reached 
the cm., and with continual improvement. The cough dimin- 
ished, the hectic spots left her cheeks after a number of 
weeks, but before the real spring came she was a plump and 
rosy child. All this, too, in a cold, bad winter and with the 
most unsanitary surroundings. 

The child had previously had what I thought at the time 
werei^bercular abscesse^from enlarged cervical glands at 
the base of the neck. 

The family openly said her recovery was a miracle due to 
prayers to St. Anne, and it was a miracle, only the saint was 
Tuberculinum. I heard from little Mary this week and she is 
well, and I mean cured, restored to robust health, not in the 
least a puny child 

I always hesitate to use the remedy first hand, but have a 
number of times used it after other remedies failed, and with 
success, especially where there was a tubercular tendency. — 
Scholes 

HEART, — Palpitation early in morning. 

Se nsation of heaviness and pressure over heart. 

Palpitation with cough and sticking pain in lungs. 

By deep inspirations severe palpitation. 

Aching in heart. 

Palpitation in night < when raising himself up. 

Palpitation with pain in the back. 

Death from paralysis of heart. — Libkcrta. 

NECK AND BACK.-^Glands in neck/and scars swollen, and 
very tender, various lupus points about them showing yellow 
fluid under epidermis. 

Scars in neck softer and flatter, no lupus nodules now per- 
ceptible. 

Glands cannot now be felt, except the largest, which is now 
reduced to size of a pea. 

Cervical glands much smaller. 

Aching like needle-pricks in the back. 

tPrickly feelmg/n skin of back. 



TUBERCULINUM 


523 


Weakness in lumbo-sacral region 

Sticking pain over both scapulae ,\ g^am in region of spleei^ 
vague pains in back and on chest, with sensalion'of pre'ssuV^ 

Sticking in back. 

Pain in back with palpitation. 

(Sensation on his back a s if the clothing were moist — Bac,) 

Three red patches on 1 side of back became^uch deeper. 

Violent reaction, during which pains in loins <C by pressure; 
(case of Addison’s disease, two injections given. — Pick, 

Tuberculosis of sacrum greatly improved.— 

\^Large boib on back of neck/mt^sely painful, discharge of 
green pus and did not heal for two months 
'"'"TBeating," throbbing pain under inferior angle of right 
scapula. 

Severe pain in left trapezius muscle, from nape of neck to 
occiput 

When waking after first sleep at 3 A m neck and back stiff 
and painful, wears off during the day. * 

Unable to turn the head to the left, and when turning to the 
right, the left side is painful. 

Wakened at midnight with twitching at angle of left scap- 
ula. passed to right scapula and down the right arm like a 
convulsive tremor shaking the arm. 


Indurated cervical glands / 

Lump, size of a walnufton cord of neck/is%movableAnd 
^^occasionally itc he s^iy— 

UPPER LIMBS. — Aching in forearms, vague, stitching pain. 

Diminution of inflammation above elbow-jomt, disappear- 
ance of abscess over olecranon, sinus connected with radius 
discharging freely a thick yellow pus 

Sensation of luxation with severe pains in r. carpal joint, < 
by effort to move it; ceasing by rest. 

V Trembling of hands ^ 

iTandV alnTa^^ am unable to write; must s uppo rt 

riglxt wrist with left hand in raising a cup or glass to my 
mouthy and passing dishes at table. 

"^Unable to dress myself from weakness of the arms. 

LOWER LIMBS. — During night pain referred to r. knee; r. 
leg rotated m and flexed slighted at hip and knee; movement 



524 


TUBERCULINUM. 


of r. hip-jomt free, 1 P. m., L hip much more painful and 
tender, more flexed, abducted and rotated out (disease of 1 
hip in girl of five). 

Aching m the hip-joints. 

Pam r. knee without swelling (Heron, a non-tubercular 
case). 

The knee became easily movable and could be bent to a 
right angle (tuberculous affection of r. knee). 

Swelling and tenderness of both knee-joints. — He7'07i, 

Sensation of formication in arms and legs. 

Great weakness in limbs after dinner. 

Sensation of fatigue and famtjiess in all limbs. 

Pams in limbs, "fatigue (3 to 4 h after injection) 

Pams m limbs (2nd d,). 

Pams in ulnar nerve and calves of legs and knees, 1 great 
toe much affected, and became very red and turgid. 

Trembling of limbs (in an alcoholic). 

Twitching in the limbs 

XDull pain m bones, -aggravated from walking and tnuch 
worse every afternoon and evening. 

"’^^"eft leg painful on walking, must keep weight off it as 
much as possible, worse sitting than when walking, but pain 
always worse after exercise 

Severe pain across sacrum, as if parts were massaged with 
a fist, 

% L ame feeder three weeks, would s^alk or stand on sides l)f 
feet toTest them 


Cramps in calves 



hausting sweats, family history of phthisis — Bnmett. 

II Tuberculous disease of 1. knee, for eleven months had 
been limping; knee much enlarged and very tender, teeth 
dirty and carious; strawberry tongue . — Burnett 
SKIN. — Eryth ematous eruption hk^measles or scarlatina. 
Erythema wltli subcutaneous indurated nodules. 

Great bronze patches on the forefiead ancftemples. . 
Bronze finger-points. 

Finger-points as if touched by Argentum mtricum. 



TTJBERCULINUM. 


525 


Itching all over the body in the evening in bed, changing 
place after rubbing 

“ Rash on chest and abdomen similar, patient says, to what 
came out when disease first appeared.” 

Rash on abdomen and back, commencing very red; speedily 
becoming brownish, resembling ordinary skin eruption of 
secondary syphilis 

Edematous condition of upper hp. 

Edematous condition of eyelids. 

Nose swollen^ tense, erysipelatous-looking epidermis in 
lupus patch raised by yellow fluid. 

In two cases, at least during the febrile action, old chil- 
blains became again inflamed 

Slight attack of jaundice (several cases). 

Site of injection slightly painful and red (2nd d.) 
Erythematous blush confined to lupus parts, which were the 
seat of throbbing pain. 

It has repeatedly caused general erythematous eruptions^n 
the skin, and in some, nodular effusions into the cellular 
tissi^ 

'“"Boil on right hand near base of little finger; whole hand in- 
tensely swollen. Boil opened in about a week, discharging 
large quantities of green pus. 

S, Eczema ?*j.tching, buming,_ smarting; in patches two or three 
indies in diameter on lower legs from knees to ankle. < by 
lieatrtoricti cold’ water, patches elevated, oo^g, 

^tery fluid which forms dry, scab s; red, so sensitive cannot 
be rub b ed or patched; < by thinking of it 
’""Eru^ion “eczematous; itching ^radiating from patch to 
patch, burning, stinging, creepi ng, re d, hot, swollen, with 
nerve'shocics all over body; severe~stinging sensation over 
whole body where there ‘is ho irritation, > by cold bath or ice 
bags. 

The Itching imtatmn runs over t_he^ limbs and through the 
body," terminating jn involuntary shudde rs tha t creep over the 
body continuously"; at times limbs burn* and throB; there are 
intervals of a fevv hours, sometimes a day or two, when hos- 
tilities cease only to be renewed with increased vigor without 
intervals. 



526 


TUBERCULINUM. 


At night about 10 o'clock or later, after drinking cold water, 
there is an acid sensation in stomach like heartburn, limbs 
are swollen from knees down; look as if the skm had dried, 
severe^^reflex irritation over whole body, cannot bear the 
least heat, this sensitiveness to heat seems to be increasing. 
Since the skin symptoms became so intensely irritating the 
normal secretions of the vagina have been greatly lessened. 

A fine,i^red, scaly^/eruption\in patches/about an inch in 
diameter'l^over the entire body/ itching intensely when skin 
was exposed to the air. Rubbing or stratching gave relief, 
but was followed by soilness 
A rash-like eruption on neck, both sides, for several days 
A fine, red eruption on right wrist extending up the arm in 
spots, with great itching 

II Very bad tempered; very much pigmented where sun's 
rays impinged upon him; teeth dirty, greenish . — Burnett 
Eruption of itching blotches all over body, with exception 
of face and hands. 

*1 Ringworm., 

ilEE? .—Great desire for sleep; drowsiness during day, after 
dinner. 

Inclination to sleep in mornings 
Shivering when beginning to sleep 
Cold feet in bed 
Troubled sleep; sleeplessness 
Sleep disturbed from 3 a. m 
Sleeplessness on account of constant coughing 
Many\^dreams:/%disturbed sleep,- interrupted by fearful 
dr^ms,\^gIoomy " dreams, dreams of shame, cries out in 
3feams 

Intense restlessness, worse from 3 A, M. until morning 
Great restl essn ess every night, with distressing frightful 
dreams, worse towards morning. 

Sleepy in the day-time, can sleep all day, but it is unre- 
freshing 

Waken from 3 to 4 A M. with terrible dreams, of snakes 
a m^ng u pon my. sister^ from hack; of dark-green Tnakes 
®ee and four feet long, two inches in circumference, they 
seem like the snakes in my own country, Colombia. 



TUBERCULINUM. 


527 


Awake weeping with fear. 

Restless and wakeful after 3 A. m. 

Awake with sensation of fear that some evil is impending to 
my family. 

Disturbed distressful sleep — Burnett. 

FEVER.— Shivering, when beginning to sleep; cold feet in 
bed. 

Freezing and heat alternately, cold and heat for months. 

11 Fever. 

Violent attack of ague, lasting almost an hour. 

Freezing on the back in evening. 

Freezing during whole day. 

Sensation of heat m evening in bed 
Flush of heat from back to head. 

Feverish, nausea, thirsty, with headache, no vomiting 
(Heron). 

Flushes of heat after eating. 

High temperature, abating m twelve hours 
Lowering of temperature after each injection (Heron). 
Lowering of temperature after a rise (Heron). 

Temperature seven hours after injection, 103 8® accompan- 
ied by thirst, rigor, increased cough, headache, and pains in 
joints (Heron). 

Sweat m the night. 

Much sweat, esp. on head in night 
Profuse sweat after light exertion 
A little walk and slight efforts produce sweats. 

Short sweats m morning, while walking. 

Profuse sweats dunng slight exertion. 

Chilly all day, most severe up and down the spine, foUowed 
in Sternoon and evening by fever, pulse 104, temperature 102, 
with thirst and intense restlessness. 

\ Great coldnes^f hands and feet/with general chilliness, 
compelled to retire in haste 

Wanted much covering with hot applications to feet; hands 
are cold to waist, as if plunged into ice water, cold sweat on 
palms of hands 

Fever all afternoon and evening ; temperature, 99 4-10; 
pulse, 86 



528 


TUBERCULINUM. 


NERVES.— Suddenly became unconscious while sewing or 
talking, began screaming, tearing her hair, beating her head 
with her fists, or trying to dash it against the wall or floor; 
attacks daily for a month, then spasms set in, with rolling of 
head from side to side and moaning, continuing five weeks, 
lollowed by a recurrence of fainting fits, at least twice a week; 
a few hours before an attack of fainting, a shuddering like a 
chill seemed to go from brain down spine, when questioned 
about an attack, she said head would suddenly seem to swell 
over eyes and pain became “ horrid*’ and she knew no more, 
between attacks she was free from all complaints except fa- 
tigue and an ever-present frontal headache. — Swan. 

GENERALITIES.--rFeeling of fatigue.' 

Malaise, depression, headache, somnolence, oppression of 
breathing, tightness of chest, nausea. 

General fatigue m morning; ^ sensation of faintness; great 
weakness in lower extremities, esp from knees down to feet. 

Terribly tired, so that she can scarcely walk. 

General excessive fatigue after a short walk, so that he 
must lean on his companion. 

Emaciation (lost six pounds in fourteen days, twenty pounds 
in five weeks). 

In parts affected ^robbing pain. 

Leucocytosis, diminution of oxyhemoglobin. 

S'xyhemoglobin first diminished then increased (Henoque). 

Feeling well, but decidedly losing flesh. 

Acts principally by^ very acute irritation^f internal organs 
affected (in the same way as in external organs), causing in- 
tense redness and great swelling. 

"^Actual inflammatory pro^sses (not mere hyperemias), and 
esp. active proht^ations, occur to an intense degree, in (1) 
edges of existing ulcers, in (2) neighboring lymphatic glands, 
esp. bronchial and mesenteric. 

Lymphatic glands present a quite unusual degree of en- 
Jarpment, and notably that form of medullaiy s welling, char- 
acteristic of acute irritations, which is cause(f*^;^ra|^ pro- 
liferation of the cells in the interior of the glands. 

Leucocytosis. various infiltrations of white blood corpuscles 

' - HV V i 1 

over affected parts, esp. around the tubercles themselves. 



TUBERCULINUM. 


529 


Enormous dangerous swellings in parts near ulcers (even 
where the surface of the ulcer becomes clean), causing dan- 
gerous constriction. 

Phlegmonous swelling resembling erysipelatous edema of 
glottis and retropharyngeal abscess. 

Where tubercle is associated with any other specific disease, 
reaction is so slight as to be scarcely discernible (Heron) 
Syphilitic cases are refractory to reaction (Heron). 

Children bear the treatment well (Wendt) 

Tuberculinum^ typical case. /Howard L., 28 years of age, 
a resident of Attleboro, Mass. /was indisposed m the fall of 
1898, troubled with hoarseness and gastric ailments. A neigh- 
boring physician was called who had attended the young 
man’s family for many years This physician commenced in 
September, 1898, to inject Tuberculin (Koch’s), and up to 
December had injected his toxin twice a week for several 
weeks, and then once in two weeks the remainder of the time. 

The result^ At the time of the commencement of this 
treatment Mr. L. could work and eat comfortably, soon his 
stomach rebelled against food and the ^wels became consti- 
pated, his hoarseness increased and distressing, suffocative 
spells set m every forenoon, lasting an hour or so^ he would 
tfien be able to breathe well the rest of the day 

In January, 1899, I was summoned hastily in the night and 
found him l^oring for breath, the noise of his breathing 
alible from "the street.' His first words were. ‘'My God, 
help me, relieve me, Doctor, or I shall die ” Expectoration 
was scanty, dark green, lumpy, tubercular matter. Examina- 
tion of the throat revealed a larynx full of tubercular nodes. 

I saw that his end was near, and told his parents with whom 
he lived I would rather they would call their family physician. 
But as they insisted on my keeping the case, I prepared some 
medicine which relieved him, but the next morning he was 
again worse, and from that time on was in agony from efforts 
to get breath. To relieve him intubation (through the 
mouth) was resorted to, but he could not keep the tube in 
He died that afternoon, his great agony being > only by re- 
sort to chloroform applied locally. This man had^ been wild 
in his youth, had had gonorrhea several times, and of diathe- 

35 



530 


USTILAGO. 


sis tubercular. I asked him if he had told his former physi- 
cian these things and he said he had. This case is typical as 
far as the use of Tuberculin by injection is concerned, of a 
score I could mention who have died under the hypodermic 
use of Tuberculin in this vicinity the past two years. 


USTILAGO. 

MIND. — Depression of spirits in afternoon. 

II Very sad, cries frequently, \exceedingly prostrate<^from 
sexual abuse and loss of semen, sleep restless. 

Could not bear to see or talk to any one 

Irritability, being asked a question or to repeat anything. 

The day seemed like a dream. 

Melancholia; depression of spirits; oppression and faintness 
in a warm room. An aversion to or < from warmth in gen- 
eral. 

Partial or complete loss of control over the functions of 
vision and deglutition. 

Great irritability, mental weakness and depression. 

HEAD. — Vertigo in attacks, sometimes with double vision, 
sometimes white specks blot out everything else, later attacks 
of vertigo with internal heat. 

I Vertigo at climaxis with too frequent and profuse menstru- 
ation. 

Headache: all the morning, at 7 a. m , in evening, < fore- 
head; < walking. 

I Nervous headache from menstrual irregularities m nervous 
women. 

Frontal pain, in morning; in forenoon, with smarting in 
eyes; all day, with aching distress in eyeballs and with fulness 
of head in morning; with distress in epigastrium. 

Scalp dry, head congested, with loss of hair. 

Scale-head, watery serum, oozing from scalp 

Prickling in 1 temple. 

Loss of hair. ^ 

Bursting congestive sensation to the head, and 
parts of the body. 


various 



USTILAGO. 


531 


Upward surging of blood with bursting m the head. 

Vertigo from such causes, especially at climacteric. 

Feeling of fulness with dull pressive headache < by walk- 
ing. 

The headache and vertigo appear to be reflex from ovarian 
or uterine condition 

Frontal headache, < by walking. 

Violent frontal headache as if forehead would burst open. 

Sharp flying pains in forehead, congestion of the brain. 

Pam on top and side of head, climaxis. 

Falling of the hair and nails, ^complete alopecia, not a hair 
on the head. 

Headache in temples 

EYES. — Attacks of twitching in eyes,^ they appear to look 
(revolve) in circles and dart from one object to another. 

Continual watery flow from eyes and nose with occasional 
chills. 

Spasms, with vanishing of vision and head seems to whirl. 

Aching in eyes and lachrymation 

Aching and smarting in eyeballs, with profuse secretion of 
tears 

Hot feeling on closing lids. 

Weakness of eyes 

Lachrymation in open air. 

Lids agglutinated in morning. 

Vision of spots dancing to and fro. 

Things whirl before the eyes, appear double; white specks 
come into view and blot all else. 

Dull aching pain in r eyeball. 

EARS AND HEARING. — Constant dull pain m 1. ear, caused by 
extension from inflamed tonsil 

NOSE. — Bod in r. nostril. * 

Dryness*"of nostrils in forenoon, with dry feeling in skin. 

Bright epistaxis, > pressure. 

Rhinitis, bitter taste, offensive odor noticeable to patient 
himself. 

Dryness of nostrils as if he had taken cold. 

Pains jLt root of nose, extending m toward canthi, and up 
and out at each eyebrow. 



532 


USTILAGO. 


FACE. — Sudden pallor in face when sitting, and in evening. 
Burning of face and scalp from congestion. 

Flushes of heat, the face becomes red and hot. 

TEETH. — Sometimes looseness of teeth. 

Aching all day in decayed upper first and second molars, 
which have ached before 

Shedding of teeth (in animals) 

MOUTH. — ^Tongue coated in morning 

Prickling in tongue, with feeling as if something were press- 
ing the roots upward, with dryness of nostrils. 

Salivation, thin, bitter, profuse. 

Taste: coppery, in morning, slimy coppery. 

Slimy, slimy, with burning distress in stomach. 

THROAT. — Tonsils congested, inflamed. 

L. tonsil enlarged, congested, dark reddish, r. painful on 
swallowing at 2 p. m ; 1 painful at 9 p. m ; next morning con- 
gestion of 1. extending along Eustachian tube and causing 
pain in ear. 

Lancinations in r. tonsil (fauces were somewhat inflamed 
when the medicine was taken), next day fauces more hot and 
sensitive to motion 
Roughness of fauces. 

Dryness of fauces, with burning dryness in stomach, diffi- 
cult deglutition 

Dryness of fauces with difficulty in swallowing, feeling of a 
lump behind larynx, later frequent efforts to swallow, with 
feeling as if something had lodged in fauces, afterwards irrita- 
tion of fauces, and on swallowing feeling of a lump in larynx. 
Burning in esophagus at cardiac orifice. 

APPETITE. — Appetite craving; poor. 

Thirst at night 

Loss of appetite followed by canine hunger 
STOMACH. — Eructations- of sour fluid, of sour food 
Cutting in stomach. 

Pam in stomach, frequently in afternoon; on full inspiration 
Pam m epigastrium with drawing pain in joints of fingers 
Burning m sternum and cardia. 

Distress in stomach in forenoon; in afternoon, < by supper 
Hematemesis passive, venous, accomuanied by nausea, 
which IS > by vomiting. 



USTILAGO. 


533 


Weak, empty, all-gone sensation in the stomach. 

Burning in esophagus and stomach; extends to ovaries, 
heart, face and scalp 

Faint feeling in epigastrium, with pain in region of liver 
and bowels 

Repeated fine sharp cutting pains in epigastrium 
Constant distress in region of stomach. 

Burning distress in sternum and stomach, accompanied by 
fine neuralgic pains in same region, lasting about three min- 
utes at a time; come on every ten or fifteen minutes for 
several hours, sharp cutting pain in stomach. 

ABDOMEN. — Periodical cutting in umbilical and hypogastric 
regions at 6 p. m., < at 8 p. m. by a constipated stool, after- 
wards grumbling pain in whole abdomen. 

(Pain as if intestines were tied in knots.) 

Pam. in r lobe of liver, in umbilicus, in umbilicus before 
natural stool, in 1. groin when walking 
Drawing pain in r. hypochondrium all day 
Distress in umbilicus and r hypochondrium. 

Grumbling pains in abdomen all afternoon, followed by dry, 
hard stool, fine cutting colicky pains every few minutes all 
day, > by hard constipated stool, followed by dull distress in 
bowels. 

STOOL. — Natural stool at 4 a m 

Loose stool at 4 A. M , with pain and rumbling m abdomen. 
Light-colored diarrhea. 

Soft stool, next day dry, lumpy, two days later black, dry, 
lumpy 

Constipated: black, dry, lumpy stools. 

URINARY ORGANS. — Tenesmus of bladder and incontinence 
of urine. 

Urging, urine light-colored, increased 
No desire, but uneasiness. 

Urine, increased, scanty, red; acid, high-colored, scanty 
and dark. 

Frequent urination, with pain at meatus as the last drops 
we re p assing 

^MALE SEXUAL ORGANS.— IT^permatorrhea^af ter onanism;/ 
\emissions every night/ talking about women causes an emis- 



534 


USTILAGO 


Sion, very sad; cries frequently, says he cannot break off habit, 
has no control of himself when passion is aroused, knows it 
IS fast killing him; cannot work, is so prostrated. 

Genitals relaxed. 

Erections when reading at 4 o’clock, frequently during day 
and night. 

Scrotum relaxed and cold sweat on it. 

Pam m testes, < r. 

Pain in testes, sometimes neuralgic, m paroxysms, some- 
times causing famtish feeling 

Desire depressed. 

Chronic orchitis, irritable testicle. 

I Erotic fancies. 

I Seminal emissions and irresistible tendency to masturba- 
tion. 

Irresistible tendency to onanism; frequent emissions; is 
prostrated, dull, with lumbar backache. Despondent, irritable. 

Irritable weakness and relaxation of the male sexual organs, 
with erotic fancies and seminal emissions. 

FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS.- Yellow and offensive leucorrhea. 

Tenderness of 1. ovary, with pain and swelling. 

Burning distress in ovaries. 

II Intermittent neuralgia of 1 ovary; enlarged, very tender to 
touch. 

I Uterusr^hypertrophied/prolapsed; cervix sensitive, spongy. 

Menses, too scanty with^ ovarian irritation; too profuse 

and too early; blood clotted; as if everything would come 
through. 

Between periods constant suffering under 1. breast at mar- 
gin of ribs 

Vascular system of ovaries is most powerfully affected, pro- 
ducing congestion, enlargement, and great irritation, with 
ovaralgia, dysmenorrhea and especially menorrhagia. 

I I Oozing of dark blood, highly coagulated, forming occa- 
sional long, black, stringy clots. 

IlSj^reme painj^during period ;)^ow very profuse/and did 
not cease entirely until next period; most of time confined to 
bed*: 

Suppression of menses. 



USTILAGO. 


535 


11 Vicarious menstruation from lungs and bowels. 

1 Constant aching distress at mouth of womb. 

Menses that had just ceased returned, bright colored, sore- 
ness and bearing down in 1 side preceding the flow and 
partially ceasing with it. 

Menses copious,^, bright red, not coagulating easily (in a 
woman who thought she had passed the climacteric, as there 
had been no discharge for over a year), it stopped as suddenly 
as it began, no pain, only faintness and confused feeling m 
head. 

I Menorrhagia at climaxis, active and constant flowing with 
frequent clots. 

Bland leucorrhea. 

Abortion 

i Deficient labor pains, os soft, pliable, dilatable 
Constant flooding. 

Puerperal peritonitis 

II Lochia too profuse, partly fluid, partly clotted, prolonged 
bearmg'down pains; uterus feels drawn into a knot. 

I Hypertrophy and subinvolution of uterus with great atony. 
Hemorrhage: mixed character, partly liquid, partly coagu- 
lated. The flow is passive, slow, protracted. A tonic condi- 
tion of pelvic organs, deficient labor pains, with dilatable os. 
Metrorrhagia, with vertigo during climacteric. 

1 Menorrhagia, with displaced uterus 

The ligaments of the uterus are relaxed; prolapsus, with 
bearing down sensation, as if all the pelvic organs would be 
expelled 

Flabby, relaxed condition of pelvic organs, a tome condi- 
tion of uterus; a state of weakness, relaxation and atony. 

Flushes of heat, and disturbances of circulation similar to 
those occuring at the climaxis, or from premature suppression 
of the menses, ovaries inflamed, irritable, sensitive, and 
swollen; burning distress m both ovaries 

Sharp pains commence in ovaries and run down the legs. 
Aching distress referred to the uterus. 

[Metrorrhagia after miscarriage, confinement or at the 
climaxis. 

Discharge of blood on the slightest provocation; after 



636 


USTILAGO 


digital or mechanical examination, cervix swollen, bleeding 
easily when touched 

Uterus remains large after miscarriage Or confinement, sub- 
involution delayed 

Hemorrhage bright red, but more frequently dark, clotted 
and stringy, post-partum oozing from flabb}" atonic uterus 

Uterus hypertrophied, heavy, feels soft, spongy or boggy.' 

Complaints of the lying-in woman; profuse debilitating 
lochia 

Milk deficient or superabundant; nursing increases the 
lochial discharge 

Acute pain < in 1 ovary, with swelling, pains intermittent; 
shoot rapidly down legs 

Ovaritis, constant pains in ovar 3 % sharp pains passing down 
legs rapidly, ovary much swollen and tender, with scanty 
menstruation 

II Ovaritis; took cold after menstruation, constant dull pam 
in r groin and back, three or four times an hour, sharp neu- 
ralgic pains in ovary; walking painful, bowels torpid, very 
languid 

II Ovarian irritation, constant pain m 1 ovary passing down 
hip, has to limp when walking, pains sharp and at times pass 
down leg with great rapidity, every few days has quite a 
swelling in 1. groin, cannot bear pressure over ovary 

II Every day from 12 m to about 4 p. m , constant pain from 
L ovary to uterus, every few minutes, pain in ovary is in- 
tensely severe, cutting like a knife, pam in r ovary and hypo- 
gastric region, but all starting from 1. ovary, ovary can be 
distinctly felt m groin about as large as a hen’s egg and very 
Kard; when pressed upon gives intense pam; every day thinks 
she has fever with paroxysm of pam, but no chill; slight leu- 
corrhea, loss of appetite; constipated. 

Displaced uterus with menorrhagia; cervix tumefied; bleeds 
when touched. 

II Uterus hypertrophied, sensitive, blood bright, fresh, with- 
out coagula 

II Subse rous or interstitial fibroid of uterus (two cases), 
fibroid much diminished 

I Cervix tumefied, bleeds when touched. 



USTILAGO 


537 


II For days oozing of dark blood with small coagula; uterus 
enlarged, cervix tumefied or dilated 

I Chronic uterine hemorrhage, and passive congestion 

I Blood dark, but so thin as to scarcely color fingers. 

II Profuse menstruation, flow lasting from ten days to two 
weeks, at first very abundant, gradually wearing oS; always 
< from motion , discharge dark and quite painless 

II Menses every three weeks, with dark coagulum; profuse, 
with gushes of bright-red blood when rising from a seat, or 
after having been startled or frightened; two days before 
menses, a heavy backache with sharp pain across abdomen 
from hip to hip, followed by expulsive pains, pains diminish 
Ster flow commences and stop with it, between menstrual 
periods heavy dragging backache on exertion, pain shooting 
up back from hips to shoulder, abdomen tender to touch; ex- 
cessive bearing down, pressure in head; sensation of contrac- 
tion m vertex, and feeling as if head were lifting off. vertigo, 
excoriating, albuminous leucorrhea, < before menses, raven- 
ous appetite, excessive tired feeling, pulse 80 and weak, 
mental depression. 

II Subject to profuse menstruation, childless, large, fleshy, 
flabby, bloated-looking, with a very sallow complexion, in- 
clined to be (and formerly had been) dropsical from excessive 
loss of blood; profuse menstruation, which seems to her to be 
principally water and clots; says there is no outward flow 
when she lies still, but clots and water pass out of uterus 
when she gets up, feels so full in uterus that she must rise to 
get nd of clots; ^wed fearfully during night, very low, 
^arcely able to speak aloud 

II Severe menorrhagia for past twelve years at every men- 
strual period, lasting a week or ten days, sometimes longer; 
pale, thin, weak, very nervous. 

I j Profuse discharge of dark, clotted blood of fetid odor, 
wuth pam and tenderness m one or both ovaries 

I Dysmenorrhea of a congestive character, with much ova- 
rian irritation, severe pain in ovaries, uterus and back every 
few minutes, scanty, pale flow accompanied by false mem- 
branes; poor appetite, thickly-coated tongue. 

II Subject to headaches ever since menstruation appeared at 



538 


USTILAGO. 


age of fifteen, headache mostly on top of head; appetite poor, 
pain in 1. chest with some cough; total suppression of menses 
for last eight months, severe pain m back, is unable to ride in 
carriage, pain m uterine region, especially over ovarian 
region, < 1. side; vomiting of mucus and blood daily; no 
sleep, some leucorrhea, hysterical, no uterine displacement, 
but great congestion in pelvic region. 

I Suppression of menses without apparent cause; trouble- 
some cough; considerable expectoration; sometimes also dry 
cough, stitching pains in chest, especially 1. side, night 
sweats; loss of appetite; pam in ovaries, especially 1; general 
debility, headache; leucorrhea; chlorotic; anemic, as if in 
first stage of consumption. 

II Menses suppressed for last fourteen months; very irri- 
table and depressed, uneasiness in region of stomach, pam in 
ovarian region, especially!., skin hot and dry, constipation, 
stools dry and hard, no appetite; stitching pains in chest, < 
worse m 1 side, constant hacking cough; considerable expec- 
toration; night sweats; general prostration, great uneasiness 
in lower extremities. 

1 1 Mild leucorrhea. 

I Climaxis: vertigo; frequent flushing; metrorrhagia. 
PREGNANCY. PARTURITION. LACTATION.— Abortion: bear- 
ing-down pains, as if everything would come from her; in 
flabby constitutions; from general atony of uterus: with or 
without hemorrhage 

I [Has aborted a number of times at third month; is now 
about three months pregnant; for last ten days has had more 
or less hemorrhage every day, some days quite bad; not so 
much at night; blood passes a number of times through day, 
m dark-colored clots. 

I Post-partum hemorrhages from a flabby, atonic condition 
of uterus. 

I Constant flooding, every few minutes, expulsion of a large 
clot of bright red blood, with bearing-down pains. 

I Persistent hemorrhage of brownish blood, with want of 
uterine contraction. 

II One and a half hours after delivery commenced to flow 
violently. 



USTILAGO. 


5E9 


I Passive hemorrhage after miscarriage, blood m lumps, 
flooSimg for days and weeks. 

II Severe flooding two weeks after labor, large bright-red 
clots, no pam, very weak. 

Very profuse lochial discharge, very dark in color, almost 
black. 

11 Agalactia; chronic inflammation, and induration of mam- 
ma. 

/ Galactorrhea. 

""^11 Promotes expulsion of foreign bodies from the uterus. 

I Puerperal peritonitis, with constant flooding; high fever; 
secretion putrid, abdomen excessively tender and tympanitic. 

II Puerperal peritonitis, aborted about two days since, at 
about three months; constant fever, pulse 120; cannot bear 
least pressure on any portion of bowels; about six times to- 
day has had sharp, cutting pains in 1. ovary, has flowed con- 
stantly for two days, blood dark, not copious, nor attended 
with bearing-down pains, cannot move m bed, is compelled 
to lie upon her back; constant, dull, frontal headache, loss of 
appetite, tongue furred. 

II For last year vertigo every day, some days so bad she has 
to go to bed; menses every three weeks for last year; last 
about ten days and profuse; flows as much again as she did 
when in health; constant aching distress under 1. mamma; 
rheumatic pains m shoulders and back, very weak, not able 
to work. 

I Fibroids and induration of os 

II Discharge of blood from uterus, bright-red, partly fluid, 
partly clotted; passive congestion of uterus, so that there is a 
slight oo^mg of blood after each examination; tissues of uterus 
feel soft and spongy; os patulous 

Gave Mrs. Ustilago Im., four doses, for aching distress 

and extreme soreness of os uteri. After twenty-four hours 
she was cured, but had the following symptoms, never before 
felt by her- Headache in temples. Pams at root of nose, ex- 
tending in toward canthi, and up and out at each eyebrow, 
Pam in back of neck. Great pains in bones all over body, 
and especially in calves, which are somewhat cramped Pain 
in both shoulders, especially in raising arms. Stiffness in 



540 


USTILAGO 


shoulder-jomts on bringing^ down the arms on waking—the 
arms are extended over head when sleeping. Thirst for cold 
drinks Felt chilly externally, but not internally. Frequent 
urination, with pain at meatus as the last drops were passing. 

CHEST. — Spasmodic tearing at top of 1 side and passing to 
sixth or seventh rib, at 3 p. m when standing or reading, < 
breathing 

Pain in 1 mfraclavicular region in morning. 

Drawing pain in 1 inframammary region, waking me at 8 
A. M., > turning on back from r. side 

Aching, burning distress m sternum and under it in stom- 
ach, with neuralgic pains. 

Oppression along median line. 

Constriction with pain. 

Heat and pressure. 

HEART. — Sudden flying pain from heart to stomach, arrest- 
ing breathing 

Burning pain in cardiac region. 

RESPIRATORY ORGANS. — Feeling as if there were a lump be- 
hind larynx, which produces constant inclination to swallow. 

BACK. — Pam in back extending to extreme end of spine 

Revere rheumatic pamyn lumbar reg:onj^< by walking, 
aching distress in small of back. 

Pain in back of neck 

Pain in region of r kidney, < sitting still, next day in re- 
gion of L kidney, > moving about, with heat, fulness, sore- 
ness on deep pressure (but it relieved the pain), with uneasi- 
ness in 1. thigh, frequent desire to urinate, stream very small, 
the following day it requires considerable effort of will to 
empty the bladder, which is done slowly, pain and soreness in 
L loin continue, heavy in lumbar region, m bed with uneasi- 
ness about bladder (had had no desire to urinate on going to 
bed), woke early in morning with distended feeling in blad- 
der, micturition slow and difficult, urine scarcely colored, pain 
in back < next night, < l}ing on face, > lying on r. .side. 

Bearing down m sacral region as in dysmenorrhea, chang- 
ing to 1. ovarian region and graduallv extending through hip. 

UPPER LIMBS . — Pain m both shoulders, especially in raising 
arms. 



USTILAGO. 


541 


Pam in shoulder joints; rheumatic, m muscles of r shoul- 
der, all night. 

Intermittent, numb tingling sensation in r arm and hand 
every day 

Stiffness in shoulder-jomts on bringing down the arms on 
waking— arms extended over head when sleeping. 

Pam m r elbow, < by motion 

Stitching along metacarpal bone of r. index. 

Rheumatic drawing pain in finger-joints, < second joint of 
r. index, all afternoon. 

1 Hypertrophy or loss of nails. 

Rheumatic pains in arms, hands and fingers. 

Dull rheumatic pains m r. elbow joint on motion 

Severe drawing pains in joints^Of all fingers./ 

Fine, sticking pains along metacarpal bone of r. forefinger, 
every few seconds. 

Sharp, cutting pains along metacarpal bones of r hand 

LOWER LIMBS. — Pam m 1 knee when walking, increasing to 
cramp, obliging me to lean upon the arm of a friend, the pain, 
with occasional cramps, lasted all the evening, < raising foot 
so as to press upon toes. 

Cramp-like stiffness in 1. leg, < raising foot so as to press 
upon toes. 

Feet swollen m morning. 

Cutting m bones of r. hand and foot. 

Frequent rheumatic symptoms m arms, fingers and legs. 

Rheumatic pains in legs. 

Flying rheumatic pains in metatarsal bones of r. foot. 

Great pains m bones all over body, and especially m calves 
w^ich are somewhat cramp^. 

SKIKT. — The scalp became one filthy mass of inflammation, 
two-thirds of the hair came out, the rest matted together, 
with oozing of watery semen from scalp, eruption like rubeola 
on neck and chest, gradually extending to feet, thickest on 
chest and joints, itching < night, rubbing any part brought 
out the eruption, on face and neck it was in patches like ring- 
worm, but not vesicular. 

Tendency to sm all boils . 

Soils on nape. 



542 


USTILAGO. 


Congested feeling in skin 
Skin dry and hot; congested 
Painful, destructive disease of nails. 

Paresthesia of the skin; pricking, burning, itching, a marked 
erythema of the skin of the uncovered parts of the body, fol- 
lowed by a parchment-like, dark brown skin with rhagades < 
by warmth 

Roullin observed loss of hair and sometimes the teeth oc- 
curred both in animals and men, that mules fed on it often 
cast their hoofs, and that fowls laid eggs without shells, it has 
caused loss of hair on animals, and cured complete alopecia. 

Pustular ulceration of the skin, scald-head and various forms 
of eczema. 

Copper-colored spots /on skin; secondary syphilis, macula, 
l^egro, urticaria of six years’ standing, troubled more or less 
all the time; every night itching, scratching parts produces 
large pale welts on body, arms and legs 
SLEEP. — Difficult falling asleep and then unpleasant dreams. 
Restless night; with fever, with troubled dreams. 

Sexual dreams, without emission, and disgusting, waking 
him, arose and urinated with difficulty and tenesmus 
FEVER. — Chills running up and down back 
Heat at night, during sleep. 

Internal heat, with vertigo; < eyes, which are inflamed 
and sensitive to light, eyeball sore to touch; intermittent; 
pulse normal 

Burning in face and scalp 
Skin dry; at night, and hot 

Relapsing agues, very profuse sweat; slight nausea; op- 
pression of chest, cerebral disturbance, and great irritability. 
Thirst for cold drinks. 

Chilly externally, but not internally. 

GENERALITIES. — Neuralgic pains in forehead, hands and 
feet. 

Rheumatic pains all up and down 1. side, with cutting in 1. 
knee and calf if I pressed any weight upon toes or flexed knee 
with any weight upon it. 

Rheumatic pains in muscles of arms, hands, fingers, and 
small of back, those m back < walking. 



USTILAGO. 


543 


Symptoms of a cold 

Malaise as if I had taken cold; felt sick with a cold, con- 
tinual watery flow from nose and eyes, with occasional chills. 

Languor during the day, with headache, < noon, and 
with burning frontal headache at 9 p. M ; in morning on ris- 
ing; at 2 p. M. 

Faint feeling at 11 A. M. in a warm lecture-room. 

Faint spells beginning in epigastrium, with small pains in 
hypochondrium and bowels 


compare: 


siecArE 


USTirAOO. 


Burning, in all parts of the body, 
as if sparks of fire were falling on 
patient. 

< warmth, covering affected parts, 
<; from heat, all diseases. 

Adapted to thin, scrawny, feeble, 
cachectic women, irntable, nervous, 
pale, sunken countenance. 

Hemorrhage, cog^^J^s, thin, black, 
watery, decomposed, bloody, hem- 
orrhagic diathesis, the slightest 
wound may bleed for weeks, defi- 
bnnated 


Burning, in esophagus, stomach, 
ovaries, heart, face, scalp, less on 
the skin. 

Faintness and oppression in a warm 
room, < from warmth less marked. 

Adapted to weak, relaxed, atonic 
patients, irritable, despondent, 
weak mentally 

H emorrhage , passive , oozing, 
dark, clotted, bloody, forming long, 
black, string clots, partly dark, 
partly clotted and stringy, or thin 
and watery. 


RELATIONS— Compare: Mel., Med , Mez , Psor , Vine m., 
in crusta lactea and other scalp affections of childhood; Bry., 
Ham., Mill., Phos , in vicarious menstruation: Agar , Mur., 
Sep., in bearing down and uterine collapse, Helon., Lys., 
Natr. h , Sec , delayed subinvolution, Malan., Sec., affections 
of the hair and nails. Act , Caul., Thuj., Sul , Vib. o. , in 1. 
ovarian pain, Bov., Elaps, Graph , Ham., in intermittent 
flow; Sang., Urt. ur., pain and rheumatic affections of r shoul- 
der, Sang., 1. inframammary pain extending to scapula. Lac 
c Kali bi.. Puls , erratic rheumatic pains, Sul., faint all-gone 
sensation at 11 a m., Cob., backache and seminal emissions; 
Bov., flow midway between the periods; Canth., Pyr , Sec., 
in expelling foreign bodies from the uterus. 



544 


VARIOLINUM, 


VARIOLINUM. 

Dr Fellger gave Variolinum reports, giving Vanolmum to 
hundreds of people, and none of them were ever attacked 
with small-pox. In one family where the father had confluent 
small-pox, he gave Vanolmum as a prophylactic, and of the 
others, although not one had been vaccinated, not one of 
them took the disease 

He reports case of a broker in Philadelphia who was well 
pitted from small-pox, when a child he was vaccinated, and he 
became idiotic in consequence When sixteen years old he 
had a violent attack of small-pox, after which he recovered his 
reason. 

Vanolmum is indicated mWnall-pox where there iS^not much/ 
\pain/ the patient can even eat fairly well; the skin looks nat- 
ural between the pustules, the appearance of the eyeball is 
white and natural; ^he mild uncomplicated cases of small-pox 
are the ones calling for Variolmum 

MIND. — Delirium with initial fever. 

Fear of death; wild excitement and begging to know if he 
was to die, and before the sentence was complete drops into 
a heavy sleep with loud breathing 

HEAD. — V ertigo 

xSyncope/in attempting to rise 

Forehead very hot, face red and bloated, carotids pulsating 
violently. 

Headache, with or after a chill; all over head, particularly 
in forehead; severe in vertex; as if a band tightly encircled 
head; severe lancinating, throbbing, < with every pulsation. 

Intolerable pam in occiput. 

Crazy feeling through brain, hard to describe. 

EYES.-^|;eraj:itis,/with small-pox and after vaccination./ 

! I Chronic ophthalmia with loss of sight. 

1 1 Pupils contracted 

EARS. — Deafness. 

FACE. — Skin of face and neck deep dark-purple hue. 
falling when asleep, with trembling when aroused. 

I once made a beautiful cure of a most intractable case of 



VARIOLINUM, 


545 


acne with Variolinum, which I was led to prescribe because 
the man’^^face^ was so disfiguredA^ 3 |cicatricial marks/so as to 
resemble one who had been afflicted with 'small-pox — W L 

-Si- *, » (1 1. t 1 1 , , 

Guernsey, 

TEETH. — Teeth covered with thick brown slime. 

MOUTH. — II Thick, dirty yeUow coating on tongue. 

1 1 When asleep tongue protruded, black coating, when 
raised it is with difficulty drawn back, looks like a mass of 
putrid flesh 

I Tongue coated white, as with a piece of white velvet, m 
variola with headache, backache and high fever 

THROAT. — Throat very sore, redness of fauces. 

II Pharynx and fauces deep purplish crimson, with gangre- 
nous appearance, breath horribly offensive 

Painful deglutition. 

Sensation as if throat were closed. 

Sensation as of a lumpjn r side of throat/ 

Diphtheria with horrible fetor oris. 

APPETITE. — Food, esp water, tastes sickish sweet. 

ST0MACH.-^oreness4n pit of stomach and across epigastric 


region. 

Severe pain in precordial region, frequent nausea and vom- 
iting of bilious and bloody matter. 

II Frequent bilious vomiting. 

As soon as he drinks milk he vomits it up. 

STOOL. — Thin, bloody stools 

Several brown, green, at last grass-green stools, painless, 
loose, of intolerable fetid odor; no thirst; last stool slimy, 
with small quantity of blood. 

1 1 Dysentery. 

^^Constipation 

UfoMARY ORGANS. — Urine, high-colored, like brandy, turbid 
and offensive, stains a rose tea-color, difdcult to remove. 

MALE SEXUAL ORGANS.-^nlafgement>of testicle/ 

Hard swelling of 1. testicle in consequence of a contusion. 

RESPIRATORY ORGANS.— Oppressed respiration. 

1 1 Asthma. 

N^roublesome cougl^with serous and sometimes bloody 
sputa 

36 



646 


VARIOLINUM. 


Hawking up thick, viscid slime, smelling bad 
NECK AND BACK.--^Stiffness of neck* with tense drawing in 
muscles, < on motion 

Pain in base of brain and neck 

Chills like streams of ice-water running down from between 
scapulae to sacral region 

Vintolerable achinMn lumbai^nd^acral region/ 

Pain in muscles of back like rheumatism, < on motion. 
UPPER LIMBS • — Hands icy cold during invasion. 

Swelling of arm which had been half-paralyzed. 

LOWER LIMBS. — Muscular rheumatism, < on motion. 
Petechial eruptions, erythematous, on lower abdominal 
region, apex of triangular form being at pubis, and the base 
crossing the abdomen transversely, in neighborhood of umbili- 
cus, also on lateral surface of trunk to axilla, invading folds of 
axilla, corresponding portion of arm and pectoralis major 
II T^ible |)am^^ back^n r sid^f spine^^nd over and 
below shoulder blade, muscles sore to touch, nausea, pains all 
oyei^pecially m legs/tongue clean; pulse 120; Variolin. cm.; 
Body c^pletely" covered with large pustules, face one mass of 
confluent pustules, pulse still high, constant expectoration of 
viscid mucus, mouth and fauces lined with pustules, even 
tongue covered with them; bowels constipated, mild delirium 
at times; eight days later temperature 104J4 , pulse 120, very 
weak and stopping at intervals ,^great fear of death^^ be gging 
to know if he must die, and before sentence was completed 
would 'drop into a heavy sleep with stertorous' breathin^/aw 
pupils contracted, teeth covered "v^li 
tEu^ brown slime, centre of tongue perfectly black, mucous 
membrane of mouth and pharynx of a deep purplish-crimson, 
with gangrenous appearance and breath horribly offensive, 
skin of face and neck of a deep dark purple, odor from body 
like a fetid stream, little control over tongue or jaw, latter 
hanging down, and tongue protruding like a mass of decayed 
liver when asleep, an effort to speak when^f bused up caused 
violent trembling of jaw and tongue, which was dra'wn'baci 
into liiouth with "difecurty, was stiff, but looked like a mass of 
putrid flesh, urine dark colored, passing freely through whole 
attack; had.continued the cm. till now, gave one dose cmm. 



VARIOLINUM. 


547 


dry on tongue; next day almost convalescent, made a good re- 
covery with but few marks. 

II Severe chill followed by high fever; severe pam in back as 
if broken, pain all over head, very severe and constant m 
occiput; frequent bilious vomiting; thick, dirty, yellowish 
coating on tongue, wild delirium and spasms; night before 
eruption appeared obstinate constipation; on third day very 
thick eruption of small-pox pustules, soon assuming confluent 
form, Vanolin. cmm. 

II Small-pox; peculiar smell causes intense sickness of 
stomach, congestion toward head, palpitation of heart, two 
hours after took a dose Variolin. 30, an hour later crawling in 
back and feeling of coldness in lower extremities, cold feet, 
lame, heavy feeling in 1. arm; no appetite; sleep disturbed by 
heat, toward morning some perspiration over body, next day 
continuous pressing headache, especially in occiput, pulse 
somewhat irritated; disinclined to mental work; when reading 
heat in head and forehead; weak when walking, pam in joints 
of upper and lower extremities, as if lame, toward evening 
again feverish, pressing pam m small of back down to sacrum 
(Glonoin ^^reheved headache); in bed, drawing in upper jaw 
and teeth, sleep full of dreams; toward morning again per- 
spiration, urine smells ammoniacal, on fourth day red pimples 
on back of 1 hand, staying for several days without filling 
with pus, mental work still causes heat m forehead and press- 
ure in head; escaped smallpox 

11 On third day of eruption, when pustules had filled, and 
were confluent on face, ^intense itching^# Variolinum Im. in 
water, every two hours, on second day itching nearly gone, 
pustules shrinking, third day drying, fifth day crusts fell from 
face, seventh day other crusts fell off, and tongue clean 

Have used and seen it used in many and severe cases, and 
when treated with\yariolin. 200^ disease is shortened nearly or 
quite one-half, sufferings of patients much mitigated, second- 
ary fever either absent or very much lighter, pustules do not 
burst, but wither or wilt and fall off, suppurative stage im- 
measurably hastened and shortened, and patients are not 
marked. 

Mrs and Miss took Variolinum m. (Fincke), one 



648 


VACCININUM. 


dose, Nov. 22 and another dose Nov 23. On the 24 a vesicle 
appeared on left side of neck, which became sore and itched 
severely where top was broken. It was red and angry, with a 
sharply defined areola about an inch in diameter; from the in- 
flamed base were light-yellow, ray-like scales, like psoriasis. 
It ran its course in about two weeks Several similar spots 
appeared on different parts of the body, with intense itching 
at times, but without systemic symptoms On both, the 
eruption was similar in character and ran the course Both 
had been vaccinated years before, but neither had any erup- 
tion of any kind. 

SKIN. — Exanthema of sharp, pointed pimples, usually small; 
seldom large and suppurating, dry, resting on small red 
areola, frequently interspersed with spots of red colour, some- 
times severe itching. 

Petechial eruptions 

Var 30 warded off an attack of small-pox after intense sick- 
ness of stomach had been caused by the smell of a case 

Var. Im in water every two hours, given on third day of 
eruption of a confluent case, cut short the attack. 

Shingles. 

FEVER. — Very severe chill, followed by hot fever. 

Inte^nse fever, commencing with chills running down back 
like streams of cold water, causing shivering and chattering of 
teeth. 

Fever with intense radiating heat, burning hot to touch. 

Hot fever, no thirst. 

Very profuse, bad-smelling sweat. 


.^ACCINmUM/ 

MIND. — Cr ying. 

Ill-humor, with restl ess s leep. 

Nervous depression, impatient, irritable; disposition to be 
troubled by things. 

’^Morbid fea^f taking small-pox.y 
Confusion, she does not rememoer things at the ' time she 
wants them. 



VACCININUM. 


549 


HEAD. — Frontal headache. 

Forehea3 feit as if it would split in two in median line from 
root of nose to top of head. 

Stitches in r. temple. 

Eruption like crusta lactea. 

Aching and heat in whole head, especially forehead. 

Stinging in both temples. 

Aching in forehead the whole forenoon. 

In middle of night, waked up by pain in forehead and eyes 
like split, and stinging in both temples. 

Severe headache all over head. 

Prickling in 1. temple, as if going to sleep. 

EYES. — Tinea tarsi and conjunctivitis in a woman, aet 28, 
remaininglas result of variola m infancy, conjunctiva painfully 
sensitive. 

Weak eyes; falling out in forehead as if it were split. 

Inflamed eyelids 

Redness of eyes and face, with small pimples on face and 
hands. 

Keratitis after vaccination. 

Pam m forehead and eyes as if split 

Gausy sensation before eyes in morning, cannot see well. 

\ PuffedAp d face. and ^red eyes^with small pimples \on face j 

Soreness in inner corner of left eye. 

Peculiar dull sensation at 1. lower lid 
NOSE.— Full feeling of head, with running of nose 
Bleeding at nose preceded by a feeling of contraction above 
and between eye-brows, soon after eating meat; menses 
rather profuse and too frequent, cured by revaccination 
NECK.— Swelling of the neck under right ear (parotid gland), 
with sensation'like being cut. 

Coolness at throat, anteriorly down the breastbone, in and 
outwardly. 

FACE.— Redness and distension of face, chill running down 
back, till afternoon 

Pufied red face and red eyes, with small pimples on face 
and hands. 

MOUTH.— Tongue coated, dryish yellow, with pa^ha show- 
ing through coat. 



650 


VACCININUM. 


Dry mouth and tongue. 

APPETITE.-*-Appetite gone,^disgust to taste;- smell, and'.ap- 
pearance of food. 

Coffee tastes sour. 

Good appetite 

STOMACH. — Aching in pit of stomach, with short breath. 
Bellyache. 

ABDOMEN. — A stitch in hepatic region, at margin of last 


lower rib, axillary line. 

Stitch in splenic region. 

B^lown up with flatulence. 

URINARY ORGANS. A-Nephritis'* with albuminuria, hematuria, 
andkdropsyydeveloped eleven daystafter vaccination;, child re- 
covered. 

RESPIRATORY ORGANS. — Short breath with aching in pit of 
stomach, and pressure in region of heart. 

\Whoopmg-cough«/ 

CHEST. — Stitch in L side of chest, anteriorly* under short 
ribs 

Stitches in r. side under short ribs in front from r. to 1., then 
at corresponding place in 1. side, but from 1. to r., lasting five 
minutes, felt in liver and spleen. 

Drawing down 1. side of chest and back. 

HEART. — Febrile action of heart and arteries. 

Aching at heart, 

BACK.-\Backache/ 

Aching pain in back, < in lumbar region, extending around 
waistr 

’’"Twisting pains in lower back. 

Weakness in small of back coming on suddenly > by lying 
down. 

UPPER LIMBS. — Severe pains in 1. upper arm at vaccination 
mark, could not raise it in the morning. 

I, Rheumatic pains Jinl wrists and hands/ 

Sensation of neat passing from dorsum of hand, as of steam. 

Cheloids on re-vaccination marks. 

Left upper arm feels stiff, somewhat tremulous. 

Redness on left upper arm. 

Slight tearing from L wrist into forepart of radius ante- 
riorly. 



VACCININUM. 


551 


Prickling in 1. fourth finger, as if going to sleep, also in 1. 
middle finger. 

Aching of 1. fourth finger. 

Drawing at 1. elbow up arm. 

Left hand feels hot. 

Left fourth finger burns; a warmth streams through left 
arm. 

LOWER LIMBS.— Tearing in 1. thigh downward. 

Soreness of lower extremities, as if heated or over-exerted, 
i Legs achec^immoderately/ hardly able to get about, a 
break-bone sensation, and a feeling as if bones were unaer- 
gomg process of comminution 
Twisting pains in both knees. 

SKIN. — Skin hot and dry. 

A general eruption similar to cow-pox. 

Small pimples develop at point of vaccination with fourth 
dilution. 

Red pimples or blotches m various parts, most evident when 
warm. 

^ruption of pustulea^ith a dark-red base and a roundish or 
oblong elevation, fillea with pus of a greenish-yellow color, at 
1, side of trunk, between shoulders, on 1 shoulder, behind r. 
ear, resembling varioloid, some as large as ^a pea, some less, 
without depression in the centre, coming with a round, hard 
feel in the skin (like a shot), very itchy. 

Tingling burning in skin over whole body, most intense in 
skin of forehead and in lower and anterior portion of hairy 
scalp, which parts are tinged with a scarlet blush, or efflores- 
cence, similar to the immediate precursor of variolous erup- 
tion. ^ 

Vaccinmum 6, in water, for one day with strict diet, re- 
peated for eight days, acted as preventive in six hundred 
cases 

Treated a great many cases of variola and vajmloid during 
last eighteen years, some of them of the most desperate char- 
acter, and yet never lost a case when employing vaccine virus 
as a remedy; moreover, none of the cases so treated were 
ever troubled with hemorrhage, or with delirium, or secondary 
fevers, or were ever disfigured with pitting 



552 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY, 


Vaccinmum 200th quickly > severer symptoms of variola 
occurring in a child, aet. six months, two days before appear- 
ance of eruption had been re-vaccmated (after an interval of 
eight days) on a navus near r. nipple, deglutition difficult 
through implication of tongue and fauces; pustules, many of 
large size, scattered over scalp, face, body, and limbs 

Eruption of small, red vesicles on left upper arm and chest, 
dying off after a few days 

Pustule filled with matter, with a depression in centre and 
red halo on 1. shoulder 

Pustules suddenly much depressed. 

Eruption all over body of small pustules, some with a cen- 
tral depression, some brown 

SLEEP. — Waked in middle of night by pain in forehead and 
eyes as if split, and stinging m temples. 

Restless sleep. 

FEVER.— Fever, with heat, thirst, tossing about, crying, 
aversion to food 

Chill with shaking. The following night she could hardly 
get warm. 

After lying down profuse perspiration broke out, after 
which chill, redness, and pimples disappeared. 
""GENERALITIES. — Restlessness. ^ 

General malaise. 

Languor, lassitude. 


\Tired all ovei^with stretching/gaping feeling; unnatural 
fatigue. 


joud wants to be earned. 


Many persons faint when being vaccinated 
Weakness. 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 

If Constantine Bering had never given the homeopathic 
profession anything but his admirable pathogenesis of Lache- 
sis he would have been remembered in gratitude for all time 
by the homeopathic world. 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


553 


If Bernhardt Fincke had never given the homeopathic pro- 
fession anything but his proving of the X-ray, his name, too, 
would be held m grateful remembrance by posterity, for jts 
possibilities in the cure of many of the most obstinate of 
chronic diseases appear almost limitless 
We are indebted to Dr. John B. Campbell, one of the origi- 
nal provers, for the discovery of the great value of this 
dynamic agent in rousing the reactive vitality of the system, 
both mentally and physically, and thus bringing to the sur- 
face suppressed symptoms of persons laboring under a com- 
bination of dyscrasia, the miasms of Hahnemann This is 
especially true of the ^ep-seated constitutional ailments, 
sycotic in character, which so. often terminate in malignant 
disease, especially cancer. 

When the sycotic or syphilitic virus is grafted on a psoric 
or tubercular diathesis; when from the paucity of presenting 
symptoms it is almost impossible to be certain of the predomi- 
nant diathesis, in consequence of which the best selected an- 
tipsoric, Calcarea, Medorrhmum, Psormum, Sepia, Sulphur, 
Syphilinum, or Tuberculmum, fails to relieve or to rouse the 
overpowered vitality to a sufficient degree to throw off or 
bring to the surface the predominant toxine, the X-ray bids 
fair to be our curative remedy. 

Every physician who has had even a limited experience in 
the treatment of the toxic effect of the X-rays on either a 
bone or soft tissue will not need any proof of its deep-seated 
character and the extreme difficulty under any form of treat- 
ment of arousing the overpowered vitality and effecting a 
cure. An X-ray burn, so-called, whether of the bone or skin, 
is almosF*^mpossible to heal, and despite the best eSorts of 
the abTesr practitioner, the best treatment known to medical 
science of the present day, is often fatal 

Here is a field of action in which the potentized dynamic 
remedy bids fair to be unrivaled, for Aere is no known homeo- 
pathic agent, either crude or potentized, that in its primary 
1S:ion is so\deep"seared.6«^ng-actton results Neither is 
tll^e any k5^:;;;r^enf th^'wiH t^e surely suppress and 
render incurable many chronic diseases as this, or none which 
better illustrates what Shakespeare said so long ago, that, 
“Fools rush in where angels fear to tread,” or where 



654 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY 


“A little learning is a dangerous thing, 

Drink deep or touch not the Pyerion spring ’’ 

There is no therapeutic agent that so often cures, and so 
often fails where we think it ought to cure, in its empirical 
use, as this. If when its empirical use has roused latent vital- 
ity and restored suppressed symptoms we could correctly ob- 
serve and interpret them, and for them find the similimum, 
what possibilities he in the future ? 

As maintained by Hahnemann, Hering and Fincke and 
demonstrated by the work of the Austrian Pro vers’ Union, the 
dynamic potentized drug is the chief factor in both proving 
and healing. Like Magnetis Polus Australis and other im- 
ponderabilia, electricity and the X-ray are both capable of 
potentization, and the potentized dynamic remedy is just as 
superior to the crude drug as Aurum, Lycopodium, Silicea or 
Sulphur. 

A very able description of the discovery of the X-ray by 
Professor Roentgen was given in Homeopathic Physician 
(March, 1896), by Dr Walter M. James, and concluded with 
the words: 

Why should not the homeopathist seek to procure a prov- 
ing of the effects of the X-ray upon the animal economy of 
the human being } An inviting field is there opened up to the 
experimenters of our school. May it soon be cultivated !” 

March 27, 1897. A drachm vial filled with absolute alcohol 
was exposed to a Crook’s tube m operation for half an hour, 
and then brought up to the sixth centesimal potency. With 
this smallest globules were moisFened and the vials contain- 
ing them presented to the members of the Brooklyn Hahne- 
mannian Union, which met the same evening m regular 
session. 

Of course everyone was curious of trying the new remedy 
and took a small number of globules on the tongue at once, 
and lo! it began to reveal its existence immediately, and dur- 
ing the two hours of our being together a number of symp- 
toms were observed, which were at once announced and taken 
down by our diligent Secretary. Some of the members from 
that time have been seriously affected, that they would not 
for any consideration try any more of that mysterious power. 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


555 


The following is a narrative of its action upon the several 
provers, being perfectly healthy up to that time, which lasted 
from the beginning to two months. The action reveals not 
only new symptoms, but also hunted up many old ones 
If it is assumed that glass is opaque to the X-ray, it was not 
so in our case, for the alcohol in the vial was certainly affected 
by it, as the result of the provings show. If the X-ray pene- 
trates certain tissues of the body in order to make the condi- 
tion of the opaque organs, such as the bones and foreign 
bodies contained in the body, visible, it also shows its pene- 
tration into that invisible interior of the human being, which 
is under the dominion of the life-force. 

Dr. Alice B. Campbell, one of the pro vers, said: 

‘*Dr Fincke presented each of us with a bottle of the 
X-rays, and said: ‘ It is a sample, you can take a dosej,’ Each 
of us took a dose. I thought it was such a low potency that 
it would not have any effect, and that was the reason I took 
it. We did not know what it was going to do. I took just 
the one dose ” 

I was in the best of health and spirits when I began to use 
the X-ray, was a healthy girl, never had a doctor until preg- 
nancy 

Nov. 24, 1906 A lady, aged 56, hereditary cancer in her 
family, mother died of it at 52. For an injury of right breast, 
which resulted in a tumor, which would probably develop 
into cancer, the X-ray was used for months, reduced its size 
and entirely relieved the pain. Some time after a stiffening 
of neck on left side appeared, to which little attention was 
paid. Suddenly one morning it went to right side, with 
intense pain, from which I have never been free for a moment 
since. \Pa in sever^very night, and occurs in paroxysms dur- 
ing the day. Sudden Tcricks’^ attack first one side, then the 
"^her <C on getting ccn3^ and turning the head nearly pro- 
duces convulsions. The pain is more severe behind the ears, 
the mastoid process. A sickening g rati ng is heard between 
the bones of the cervical spine on turning the head. Sl^n be- 
hind the ears red and sore to touch. 

^**^he grating is heard and felt in nearly all the joints, espe- 
cially the shoulders; toe pains are steady, but at times will 



556 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


appear in sharp * 'cricks/’ then in streaks down the course of 
the nerves < by moving head or neck, moving the head on 
pillow at night is agony. Sometimes the pain is relieved on 
keeping perfectly quiet, again gentle motion relieves. 

Have read all the stiff neck symptoms m Lippe, Hering, 
Raue, T. F. Allen and other works; the indicated remedy has 
failed to give me slightest relief. 

Dec. 1, 1906. Last three days left side of head and neck 
pain intensely and constantly, at times paroxysms of cramp- 
ing pain in cord, from left shoulder to head, and sharp shoot- 
ing pain in head, back and above left ear. Cords feel too 
short. Only relief I have is in walking the floor Skin is so 
sore, cannot bear the slightest touch, though hard pressure 
relieves for an instant. I am nearly mad with pain (Dr. 

*<j has said frequently m the last month that he was afraid 

that I was getting too much X-ray, I though not, although 
I thought it very queer he could not relieve my pain. ) 

, Jan. 9, 1907. Have taken no X-ray treatment since Nov. 
23d Have not been out of the house for six weeks. Suffered 
torture for four weeks at every motion of head, neck or 
shoulders. The neuralgic pains were torturing, and the best 
selected remedies had little or no effect. Spigelia partially 
relieved seventy of pains, but they appeared on the right side 
of head and neck, yet never left the left side for an instant. 
Atropin relieved the right sided pain for 24 hours, but neck 
and shoulder are still lame. I now have no severe pain, if I 
lie still on left side of face and body, but am unable to lift 
head from pillow without taking my hands, and then only by 
a slow circular motion. 

I can sit up or stand for 15 or 30 minutes, and then clutch- 
ing, shooting, aching pains begin behind 1. ear, and in muscles 
of left side of neck, and I must he down on left side, and in a 
few minutes am free from pam. The stinging, contracting of 
the muscles relieved, but the pain in back of head is still per- 
sistent. Massage, at times, has given slight relief, at other 
times the slightest touch is so painful that it cannot be borne. 
Heat relieves the pains at times, but Arsenic does not. 

Jan. 14. Improving some; yesterday could he with a much 
higher pillow, first time in six weeks. Should be able to bear 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


557 


the pains could the darting, aching, clutching pam in the 
bone behind the left ear, which makes its appearance every 
time I sit up over twenty minutes, be relieved. The stinging, 
contracting pam is better, and notwithstanding all the suffer- 
ing from the last few weeks, I do not look as if I had been ill; 
color good and gaming weight. 

The tumor m breast is softening some, and decreasing m 
size 

The X-ray treatment was always the very lightest possible, 
and never once colored the skin red, although tanning it very 
brown. Took it at first but once a week, the effect being so 
good, applied it every third or fourth day. The first pam I 
had wls a slight stiSness of neck on left side In March it 
was only felt on turning in bed at night; increased slightly 
and gradually until Nov. 1st; though I had one severe par- 
oxysm of pain m right side of neck m May, relieved by hot 
applications, which still give some relief at times Sitting m 
the hot sun shining on my neck gives some relief. Have suf- 
fered intensely of late from flushes of heat, similar to those I 
had during climacteric; better afternoons and evenings The 
back of head at times seems perfectly well— next moment can- 
not bear slightest touch or lift my head from the pillow with- 
out great pam on both sides in muscles of neck. 

1 Dr, B L, B B,, after one dose of X-ray 6 cent. 

A magnetic thrill in right hand extending up forearm, im- 
mediately. 

No particular symptoms the next day. 

Next morning awaked earlier than usual by dull aching m 
the left side of occiput, and immediately in left sacro-iliac 
region, then on posterior aspect of left thigh and calf, a dull 
ache. These pains extend from above downward, not severe, 
lasting fifteen minutes 

In afternoon suddenly a sharp ache in left side of occiput 
on a small area. This occurred two or three times at inter- 
vals of some hours without regularity 

After that in the course of two or three days a trouble 
which he had once before, a catarrhal condition of inflamma- 
tion of rectum with discharge of mucus, slightly bloody, after 
action of bowels. 



558 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


Corns on soles of feet more sensitive than formerly, consist- 
ing of thickening of cuticle, and sometimes a little pin- head 
depression which does not scale off. 

2. Dr. Miss Alice B C , after one dose X-ray 6 cent. 

A feeling on the external orbital margin as if it might be an 
ache, immediately 

Buzzing in right ear with pressure extending to temples. 

Bearing down of eyelids 

Woke with headache next morning, continuing at intervals 
during whole day. 

A pressing across forehead, with a miserable feeling gener- 
ally as though going to be sick. 

Sleepy with headache. 

Bloody mucus from nose. 

No appetite for anything, only sweet pudding or cake most 
tolerable. 

Aversion to meat. 

Heaviness and fullness m lower abdomen after eating small 
quantity. 

Uneasy feeling in lower abdomen at intervals like fomenta- 
tion, as though diarrhea would follow 

Most distress after midday and evening meal. 

Abdomen distended with full feeling 

(Pulsatilla, which a year ago helped for months a tram of 
symptoms, had only very slight effect, ) 

Drawing gnawing in the region of appendix as though in- 
flammation were beginning. 

Sensation in right lower abdomen as though bubbles were 
forming and wanting to burst (relieved by Taraxacum for 
twenty-four hours) 

Flatulence with ineffectual desire for stool. 

Seven days after taking the medicine was roused out of bed 
at 4 A M. with desire for stool, and complete evacuation of 
immense quantity followed by nausea and vomiting, profuse 
sweat 

Colicky pain m right lower abdomen, sometimes extending 
behind hip, and retained urine. 

Tenesmus vesicse continuing for twelve hours to 4 p m , 
when the urine came freer 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


559 


Vomiting ceased though colic-pains remained for twelve 
days 

Moving aggravated pains especially on right side of abdo- 
men, which seemed to adhere to the walls, feeling as if being 
torn off Had to keep a large towel-pad between abdomen 
and thigh to support abdomen and prevent the excruciating 
pam 

Ate nothing for three days. 

Thirst for cold drinks, though nothing tastes good. 

Tongue thickly coated. 

Breath foul 

Only snatches of sleep during these twelve days, always fol- 
lowed by terrible mental depression, did not want to answer 
questions, did not want to see anybody nor speak to anybody, 
misanthropy 

Chills as soon as beginning to sleep running up back, pre- 
venting sleep 

Dreams of distressing nature. Recurrence of a dream that 
used to trouble her many years ago. This dream was re- 
peated at wide intervals over twenty years ago Now it came 
every night for five times 

Seven days from beginning of the attack had a return of 
renal colic with vomiting, continuous nausea, cold sweat and 
retention of urine on left side. A clutching pain from kidney 
to bladder that never relaxed for four hours, causing the wild- 
est demonstration of agony, ghastly face, blue rings around 
sunken eyes, violent trembling, frightful restlessness, cold 
sweat, urine retained in ureter, giving a perfect picture of 
Tabacum which also relieved the symptoms. As soon as the 
pains in the ureter relaxed, the urine seemed to fill up the 
bladder and then passed without pain. Some spasm remained 
and was relieved by Cantharis in five minutes. (He had 
something like this before, about a year ago, by all means not 
so severe, a mere strangury. ) 

Varicose veins inside of knees and legs, with swelling and 
soreness (after years returned). 

' The palms of the hands, which were rough and scaly and 
bleeding at times, became entirely smooth during proving. 
Healing action After that the hands went back to former 
condition while general health improved. 



560 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


Prostration for a long time. 

During the continued action of the X-ray she suffered so 
much that for some time she had to take medicine to counter- 
act it. All these symptoms have been thrown out 

3. Dr John B. C., March 28th, 1897, took X-ray 6 cent., 
three doses in globules ten minutes apart. 

Five minutes after second dose. 

Sensation of fullness of head with slight full feeling in both 
ears, worse in right ear 

Feeling m head and nose as if coryza were about to com- 
mence, with some slight desire to sneeze. 

Sense of pressive fullness starting from posterior promi- 
nence of vertex in a straight line to bridge of nose, followed 
by fullness in entire vertex extending to bridge of nose. 

Tingling in both arms as of an electric current, or as if 
asleep. 

Intermittent, slightly burning rheumatic-hke pain in right 
carpo-metacarpal articulation extending from index-finger up 
outside of forearm. 

Aggravation of fulness over vertex worse along centre to 
nose, worse stooping. 

Dull pain in right sciatic nerve, worse on walking. 

Wandering pains in chest, sticking in character, worse on 
right side. 

Sticking pains in different parts of head and face. 

Rheumatic pains in different parts of head and face. 

Rheumatic pains in front of right thigh. 

March 29th. Bad taste in forenoon. 

Disagreeable fulness of head all morning, with bland coryza 
and stoppage of nostrils. 

General tired and sick feeling. 

Symptoms gradually increasing in severity after noon. 

Headache gradually extending to frontal region, worse in 
centre of forehead. 

Sense of pressure in centre of forehead. 

Dull headache in morning, worse stooping and after rising* 

Symptoms all intermittent in character, they have all re- 
turned. 

Sensation of sulphur-vapor in nose, with much sneezing. 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY 


561 


Aching pain across top of head, coronal suture, on blowing 
nose and after it . < ’ 

Pain in dorsal region 

Sulphur-vapor sensation in throat and nose. 

Intermittent noise as of deep steam whistle m left ear, and 
ringing in head. 

Mental processes not clear, writes wrong words in letters. 
Stitching pain in right upper chest, going through to upper 
part of scapula. 

Rheumatic pain in left wrist and forearm 
Lame and stiff m back. 

Aching whole length of spine 
Chilly while undressing in warm room 
March 30. Constant ache m vertex, worse on waking, also 
worse coughing, sneezing, motion or head low. 

Rheumatic twinge in last two phalangeal articulations of 
index and middle finger for a short time in forenoon 
Appetite diminished. 

Nose stopped, worse on left side. 

Throat painful on swallowing. 

Sense of painful lump about left tonsil, worse swallowing. 
Very vivid lewd dreams repeated night after night 
Dreams of strife, busy dreams 

Sleep not unrefreshing, though apparently dreaming all 
night. 

Remark of the P rover. This medicine resurrects old trou- 
bles that have been long dormant, and remedies that formerly 
helped have little, if any, effect against the renewed difficulty. 
In five provers old symptoms were brought to light In some 
cases the symptoms had been absent one year, some six, 
twelve or even thirty years 

May 24 No appetite for breakfast (an old symptom absent 
for years) 

Re-appearance of an old slight pimply eruption on left side 
of forehead. 

Persistent exhaustion and languor; this last was marked 
and not attributable to spring i 

Return of a slight eruption on outside of lower legs, burn- 
ing when scratched, worse after scratching (absent for 
months). 

37 



562 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY 


Observatiofi of the P^^over. It seems this medicine might 
be used m three ways: 1. To develop old troubles or those 
which might become latent from any cause including sup- 
pression 2 To develop acute symptoms already present as 
against its own pathogenetic phenomena. 3. As an antipsoric 
somewhat like Sulphur 

4. Dr Miss C , March 27, 9 p m , one dose X-ray 6 cent. 

An indescribable sensation in esophagus, immediately. 

Pain m right side of head above temple. 

Palpitation during evening, causing cough 

Pulsations greatly diffused and violent, provoking an ex- 
clamation which was repressed, accompanied with a desire to 
walk m open air, and entirely relieved by lying down. 

Before going to sleep, dull pain m upper jaw on right side. 

Scraping pain in ^.ateral incisor, aggravated by noises and 
jarring of cars 

March 28. After waking at daybreak next morning sensa- 
tion in dorsal region of spine, as if its convexity were anterior 
and drawn far forward, lasting but a minute, and followed by 
a very uncomfortable feeling m that region, lasting a much 
longer time. 

In morning after rising and before eating, a cough caused 
by an irritation m larynx, accompanied by a pain m right side 
just above crest of ilium; eating relieved cough, but side felt 
bruised when bending, or jarring, or pressing it. 

Red, smooth eruption on right side of face. 

Sore pain in cartilage of left ear, felt when pressing it, later 
in right ear. 

March 29. Pam darting upward in region of left ovary, 
when sitting, walking or standing 

March 31. After eating at noon, a sensation of a long and 
narrow foreign body lodged in pharynx, unmoved by swallow- 
ing, aggravated by swallowing. After this passed away, 
pharynx felt hollow and sore on deglutition 

Sharp pain at apex of heart, better by lying on left side 

Had always heat and swelling of feet in spring which is bet- 
ter now. Healing action. 

5. Dr, St. C., after one dose X-ray 6 cent. 

Threatening headache, pressure through temples, immedi- 
ately. 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


563 


Aching of extensor muscle of forearm, going up to shoulder. 

6. Mrs E C , after one dose of X-ray 6 cent 
Drawing, aching discomfort m right thigh through hip and 
knee down through toes, immediately. 

Sciatic pain in right hip 
Palpitation of heart 

In less than a week began to cough, with tearing sensation 
in bronchi, hoarseness, palpitation 
Chilliness on moving or from draft 
Eyeballs sore 
Lame and sore all over. 

Wave-like sensation as if would break out m perspiration. 
Stools green though normal in consistency. 

Teeth covered with a gray-green deposit 
Menses dark green one day. 

Second day of menses violent sick headache, pulsating 
pressure outward m forehead as if bursting, vomiting, pam 
relieved by hot water application 

Phlegm of greenish hue causing cough in crawling up 
7. Dr. L M. L., after one dose of X-ray 6 cent. 

Drawing in and heaviness across brow approaching nose 
and resting there 

Ears more clear from ringing and from dullness of hearing 
than for many years. Healing action. 

Rheumatic pains in right wrist and arm 

Headache across brow and a different pain in temples 

Eyelids feel sleepy, and heavy 

Tingling like pins and needles m left hand 

Improvement of hearing continues 

8 Dr F. H. L . , after one dose of X-ray 6 cent 
Tingling in right hand, immediately. 

Pam across brow over bridge of nose. 

9 Dr. Miss R. After one dose X-ray 7 cent 

Lower part of both legs asleep, tingling feeling as if from 
electric battery increased m right, immediately. 

A feeling as if some one were drawing icy hands over the 
thigh downward aggravatingly slow. (Return of an old symp- 
tom twelve years ago after a nervous shock which did not re- 
turn for five years ) 



564 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


Three years ago proved Uranium nitrate Up to that time 
had never missed a regular menstruation, but it has been 
irregular ever since Had not menstruated for six months till 
after taking X-ray, when it was almost prostrating. 

Three or four days previously felt from waist down as if 
bursting and wanting to hold herself up, with distention and 
weight m abdomen, relieved by flow, violent, profuse, without 
pain Flow lasting seven days 

Mental condition upset, felt as if she would like to kill some- 
body. 

Heavy pressure on vertex as from a hand (old symptom 
absent a year) 

10. Mr, Davis S. took one dose X-ray 6 cent 1897, March 
28. Next day mental irritability. 

Trembling all over. 

Body tired and exhausted. 

Pam on right side of head passing around base of brain to 
left ear, followed by paralytic numbness 

Nervous 

Powerlessness of limbs. 

Slightly sick of stomach. 

A sensation of hyperesthesia or nervous concentration in 
bridge of nose. 

Sore feeling across loins as after a heavy cold. 

Fullness in ears, worse m right ear, worse by inserting 
finger. 

Pressing outward in ears 

Sensation as of a cool drop of sweat going down left side of 
spine. 

Sense of contraction across middle chest. 

Chills going down back, followed by paralytic feeling in 
right cheek. 

Muscles feel soft subjectively. 

Tongue felt dry, rough, sore, scraped 

Soreness in small of back. 

Sleepy and unable to sleep for some hours after retiring. 

On rising in morning expectoration of considerable mucus. 

Generally worse in open air. 

Nasal discharge thin. 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


565 


Mentally irritable. 

Headache and soreness worse toward afternoon. 

Mental and physical aggravation markedly pronounced 
toward evening. 

Bitter taste. 

Pain in left temple, worse at 8 p m 

Contraction of chest at night, relieved by belching. 

Slight electric current sensation in left side of tongue and 
face, passing over and disappeanng on right side of face at 
8.25 p. M 

Much expectoration of tough lumps as large as fingers’ ends, 
whitish like gelatine, raised easily 

At first had desire for sweets. 

The sleeplessness, which was getting constant and trouble- 
some, seemed to be relieved permanently by a bottle of Pabst 
Malt Extract. 

May 1st. Drowsy at night when sitting up. 

Drowsiness leaves the instant he lies down, so he cannot 
sleep 

Reappearance of many symptoms which occurred during an 
attack of inflammatory rheumatism, twenty-five years ago. 

Painful bulging of left chest over the cardiac region. 

Sensation in right eye as though bulging. 

Right eye sore to touch. 

On closing eye in dark sees old women’s and old men’s ugly 
faces. 

A paralytic sensation extending from spine down left leg. 

Twitching internally in various parts of body 

All symptoms worse towards evening and at night 

On inside of left knee sensation in different spots, painful as 
if hairs were being pulled out, worse on walking, better on 
rubbing and scratching 

Sexual desire lost. 

Raising of jelly-like mucus, worse in forenoon, tenacious 
and tough. 

Grayish expectoration 

While lying on left side, heart-sounds keep him awake. 

Goes to sleep on right but wakes on left side. 

Symptoms better after Bell, or Aeon for a short time, 
better from ale, which puts him to sleep. 



566 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


Sleepy during day. 

Waking frequently at night from no apparent cause 

Spells of feverishness, perspiration and weakness 

On straining at stool, a sore sensation m nates. 

Rheumatic-like fever in trunk, pain steady and dull going 
steadily from trunk to legs and finally to heels, worse left 
knee, worse stepping on heel, on underside. 

Head feels empty as though scraped out, worse at night in 
bed. 

Can’t hold things in left hand, being powerless or clumsy. 

All symptoms worse in bed. 

Third day after taking 

Slight nose-bleed on left side at 4 30 P. M. 

Sensation of swooning at times during day and night, feel- 
ing like dying. 

Rheumatic pains in limbs (an old symptom of rheumatism 
resurrected even to an old soreness in heels). 

Soreness worse in legs and arms and around heart, dull and 
constant 

No hunger, goes till he feels faint, can eat plenty but does 
not enjoy it. 

Frequent urination, worse after getting into bed 

Testes relaxed, impotent feeling 

Pressure in small of back as from congestion about kidneys. 

Sharp stabbing pain m left temple, which staggered him, 
followed by clearing up of mental functions— the heart im- 
mediately felt this impulse 

Left chest bulged out (like enlargement of heart in old 
rheumatism twenty-five years ago) 

A sensation in left side as if fingers pressed the cartilages 
in, followed by sensation as though something broke inside, 
with temporary relief. 

Sensation of drops of water trickling down on inside of 
chest. 

Wind around heart, flatus and flatulence as though diarrhea 
would commence. 

Unnatural lewd or disgusting dreams, occurring on several 
nights, or several times in one night. 

MIND AND DISPOSITION* — Mental irritability. 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


567 


Clearing up of mental function after sharp stabbing pain in 
left temple staggering him, the heart feeling the impulse im- 
mediately 

Mental depression after snatches of sleep for twelve days 
Mental processes not clear, writes wrong words in letters. 
Mental condition upset during profuse menstruation, would 
like to kill somebody 

Misanthropy during renal colic, did not want to answer 
questions, did not want to see anybody or to talk to anybody, 
being completely prostrated. 

HEAD. — feeling at right external orbital margin as if it 
might be an ache, immediately (the first symptom observed). 

A pressing across forehead with a miserable feeling gener- 
ally as though going to be sick 
Awoke with headache next morning, continuing at intervals 
through whole day. 

Sleepy with headache 

Headache gradually extending to frontal region, worse in 
centre of forehead. 

Sense of pressure in centre of forehead 
Dull headache m morning, worse when stooping and after 
rising. 

Headache and soreness, worse toward afternoon. 

Head feels empty as though scraped, worse at night in bed. 
Sensation of fullness of head with slight full feeling in ears, 
worse in right ear. 

Pam in right side of head above temple 
Threatening headache, pressure through temples 
Headache across brow, and a different pain in temples 
Pam m right side of head, passing around base of brain to 
right ear, follow ed by paralytic numbness. 

Pain m left temple, worse 8 pm 

Sharp stabbing m left temple, followed by clearing up men- 
tal function, the heart immediately feeling the impulse 

Feeling in head and nose as if coryza would set in, with 
slight desire to sneeze 

Sense of pressive fulness starting from posterior prominence 
of vertex in a central straight line to bridge of nose, followed 
by fulness m entire vertex extending to bridge of nose. 



568 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY 


. Aggravation of fullness over vertex, worse along the centre 
to nose and when stooping over. 

Disagreeable fulness of head all morning, with bland coryza 
and stoppage of nostrils 

Aching on top of head across along coronal suture on blow- 
ing nose and after it 

Constant ache in vertex, worse on awaking, also on cough- 
ing, sneezing, or head low. 

Drawing in and across the brow approaching nose and rest- 
ing there, immediately 

Pam across brow over bridge of nose 

Heavy pressure on vertex as from a hand (old symptom, 
absent a year) 

Sticking pains m different parts of head and face 

Sickening grating between the bones of the cervical spine 
on turning the head 

Pams steady, but at times appear in sharp '‘cricks,” then 
in streaks down the course of the nerves < by turning the 
head or neck, moving the head on pillow at night is agony; 
> keeping perfectly quiet, again by gentle motion 

Pam m left side of head and neck, intensely and constantly, 
at times paroxysms of cramping pam in cord, from left shoul- 
der to head, back and above left ear Cords feel too short. 

Cannot bear slightest touch, though hard pressure relieves 
for an instant, > by walking the floor 

Pain > by lying on left side of face and body. 

Unable to lift head from pillow without taking hands, and 
then by a slow circular motion. 

Pain in back of head > at times by massage slightly, also 
by heat. 

Back of head at times seems perfectly well, next moment 
cannot bear slightest touch or lift my head from the pillow 
without great pain on both sides and in muscles of neck. 

Morning awaking earlier than usual with dull aching m left 
occiput, and immediately m left sacro-iliac region, lasting fif- 
teen minutes. 

Suddenly sharp ache in left occiput on small area, recur- 
ring two or three times at intervals of some hours, without 
regularity 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


569 


Violent sick-headache second day of menses, pulsating 
pressure outward in forehead as if bursting, vomiting, pain 
relieved by hot water applications 

Neuralgic pains 

NECK. — Stiffness on left side of neck, turning in bed 

Stiffness on right side of neck, with intense pain at night; 
occurs m paroxysms during the day > somewhat by hot ap- 
plications. 

Sudden “cricks” attack first one side of neck, then the 
other, < on getting cold, turning the head nearly produces 
convulsions. Pams more severe behind the ears — the mastoid 
process 

Aching pains in left side of neck 

Clutching, shooting, aching pains begin behind left ear and 
in muscles of left side of neck on sitting up over twenty 
minutes, > by lying on left side 

Pain on both sides and in muscles of neck when lifting head 
from pillow. 

Pain relieved on keeping perfectly quiet, sometimes by gen- 
tle motion 

Stinging contracting pain. 

EYES. — Bearing down of eyelids 

Eyeballs sore 

Sensation in right eye as if bulging 

Right eye sore to touch 

Congestion of eyes in forenoon, worse on rising 

On closing eyes in dark sees old men’s and women’s ugly 
faces 

Eyelids heavy and sleepy 

EARS.— Sore pain in cartilage of left ear when pressing it, 
later in right ear. 

Pressing outward in ears 

Buzzing in right ear with pressure extending to temples. 

Fullness in ears, worse in right ear, worse by inserting 
finger. 

Fullness in ears, more right, and fullness in head. 

Intermittent noise as of deep steam-whistle in left ear, and 
ringing in head. 

Ears more clear from ringing and dullness of hearing than 



570 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


for many years, an improvement lasting up to this day. Heal- 
ing action. 

nose. — B loody mucus from the nose. 

Sensation of sulphur-vapor m nose with much sneezing. 

Sulphur-vapor sensation m throat and nose 

Congested sensation in head and nose as before coryza. 

Nose stopped on left side 

On blowing nose and after it aching across top of head 
along coronal suture. 

Sensation of hyperesthesia or nervous concentration in 
bridge of nose. 

Nasal discharge thin. 

Flowing coryza with stoppage of nostrils and fullness in 
head, forenoon. 

FACE. — Dull pain in right upper jaw. 

Paralytic feeling in right cheek, preceded by chills going 
down back. 

Slight electric current sensation in left side of tongue and 
face, passing over and disappearing in right side of face. 

Red, smooth eruption on right side of face. 

Stinging pains in different parts of head and face. 

MOUTH. — Tongue dry, rough, sore and scraped. 

Scraping pain m lateral mcisor, aggravated by noises and 
jarring of cars. 

Teeth covered with a gray-green deposit. 

Tongue slightly coated. 

THROAT. — Sulphur-vapor sensation in nose and throat 

Throat painful on swallowing. 

Sense of painful lump about left tonsil, worse swallowing. 

Indescribable sensation in esophagus, immediately. 

Foul breath. 

After eating at noon, sensation of a long and narrow foreign 
body lodged in pharynx, removed by swallowing, aggravated 
by swallowing After this passed away, pharynx felt hollow 
and sore on deglutition. 

APPETITE. — No appetite for anything except sweet pudding 
or cake. 

Aversion to meat. 

Ate nothing for three days 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


571 


No appetite for breakfast (old symptom absent for two 
years). 

Appetite diminished. 

Desire for sweets. 

Most distress after midday and evening meal. 

No hunger, goes till he feels faint. 

Can eat plenty but does not enjoy it. 

More thirst than usual 

Thirst for cold drinks, though nothing tastes good. 

Bad taste m forenoon. 

Bitter taste. 

NAUSEA, VOMITING . — Nausea and vomiting with profuse 
sweat after immense stool at 4 A. m , seven days after taking. 

Slightly sick at stomach. 

Vomiting ceased, though colic pain remained in lower ab- 
domen for twelve days. 

ABDOMEN. — Abdomen distended with full feeling. (Pulsa- 
tilla, which a year ago helped for months a tram of symptoms, 
had only very slight effect.) 

Flatulence with ineffectual desire for stool. 

Heaviness and fullness in lower abdomen after eating small 
quantity 

Uneasy feeling in lower abdomen at intervals like fomenta- 
tion, as though diarrhea would follow. 

Wind around heart, flatus and flatulence as though diarrhea 
would commence. 

Drawing gnawing in region of appendix, as though inflam- 
mation were beginning 

Sensation in right lower abdomen, as though bubbles were 
forming and wanting to burst (relieved by Taraxacum for 
twenty-four hours). 

Flatulence with ineffectual desire for stool 

Colicky pains m right lower abdomen, sometimes extending 
behind the hip, and retained urine. 

Moving aggravates the colic pains, especially on right of 
abdomen, which seemed adhered to walls, feeling as if torn 
off Had to keep a large towel pad between abdomen and 
thigh to support abdomen and prevent the excruciating pain. 

Pam in right side just above crest of ilium, with an irrita- 



572 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


tion in larynx causing cough in morning after rising, and 
before eating; eating relieved cough, but the side felt bruised 
when bending, or jarring, or pressing it 

STOOL. — Catarrhal inflammation of rectum, with discharge 
of mucus slightly bloody after action of bowels, in course of 
two or three days (a trouble he had once before). 

Seven days after taking medicine roused out of bed at 4 
A. M. with desire for stool and complete evacuation of im- 
mense quantity, followed by nausea and vomiting, profuse 
sweat, pain m right lower abdomen, retained urine, vesical 
tenesmus continuing for twelve hours, till 4 pm, after which 
urine became freer, vomiting ceased; colic pains remained for 
twelve days 

Stools green, though normal in consistency. 

On straining at stool a sore sensation in nates. 

Ineffectual urging to stool, with flatulence 

URINE. — Retained urine, vesical tenesmus after enormous 
evacuation, vomiting for twelve hours to 4 p. m 

Seven days from beginning of attack return of renal colic 
with vomiting, continuous nausea and retention of urine on 
left side. A clutching pain from left kidney to bladder that 
never relaxed for two hours, causing the wildest demonstra- 
tion of agony, ghastly face, blue rings around sunken eyes, 
cold sweat with trembling, frightful restlessness, urine re- 
tained in ureter (giving a perfect picture of Tabacum which 
relieved at once). As soon as the pain m ureter relaxed after 
it, urine was filling up the bladder and then passed without 
pain. Some spasm remained and was relieved by Cantharis 
in five minutes. (She had something of a like trouble a year 
ago, but not so severe as this, only a strangury. ) 

Great prostration followed this attack, 

Frequent urination, worse after getting into bed. 

Pressure as from congestion about kidneys 
MALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — Sexual desire lost m man. 

Testes relaxed, impotent feeling 

Unnatural or disgusting, lewd dreams on several nights, or 
several times in one night 

FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS. — Menses dark green one day. 

Pain darting upward in region of left ovary when sitting, 
walking or standing. 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


573 


Second day of menses a violent sick headache, pulsating 
pressure outward m forehead as if bursting, vomiting (pain 
relieved by hot water application). 

After cessation of menstruation for six months it reappeared 
again, violent, profuse, without pain but prostrating, the flow 
lasting several days 

Three or four days before menstruation, felt from waist 
down as if bursting with distention and weight in abdomen, 
and wanted to hold herself up, relieved by the flow. Mental 
condition upset, she would like to kill somebody (three years 
ago she proved Uranium nitrate. Up to that time had never 
missed a regular menstruation, but irregular ever since) 

Flushes of heat, better afternoons and evenings. 

AIR PASSAGES. — Cough caused by palpitation during even- 
ing. 

In morning after rising and before eating, a cough caused 
by irritation in larynx, accompanied a pain in right side just 
above the crest of ilium, eating relieved cough, but side felt 
bruised when bending, jarring or pressing it. 

In less than a week a cough with tearing sensation in 
bronchi, hoarseness, palpitation. 

Phlegm of greenish hue causing cough in crawling up. 

On rising in morning expectoration of considerable white 
mucus. 

Much expectoration of tough mucus as large as fingers’ ends, 
whitish like gelatine, raised easily 

Raising of jelly-like mucus, worse in forenoon, tenacious 
and tough. 

Grayish expectoration. 

In two cases of gonorrhea, obstinate m character, deficient 
m symptoms, on which to make an accurate prescription, due, 
probably, to the deep sycotic diathesis, the X-ray not only 
developed all the acute symptoms of original attack but 
revealed the remedy (Merc, cor ) which promptly and per- 
manently cured the disease and an old catarrhal deafness as 
well. 

In two other cases, which had resisted the best of treat- 
ment for months, the remedy developed numerous sycotic ex- 
crescences on glans and the symptoms calling for the simil- 



574 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


imum were sharply indicated, and it cured permanently. The 
physical and mental incubus, which for months had made one 
patient’s life a burden, was immediately removed on the re- 
appearance of the condylomata, which had followed suppres- 
sion by injections and were subsequently disbursed by cauter- 
ization. 

CHEST. — Wandering sticking pains in chest, worse on right 
side 

Stitching pain in right upper chest going through to upper 
part of scapula. 

Sense of contraction across middle chest. 

Contraction of chest at night relieved by belching 

Left chest bulged out like enlargement of heart (old symp- 
tom of inflammatory rheumatism twenty-five years ago). 

Sensation of drops of water trickling down on inside of 
chest. 

Sensation m left side as if fingers pressed costal cartilages 
in, followed by sensation as if something broke inside, with 
temporary relief 

HEART. — Palpitation during evening causing cough. 

Pulsations greatly diffused and violent, provoking an ex- 
clamation, which was suppressed, accompanied with a desire 
to WTlk m open air, and entirely relieved by lying down. 

Sharp pain at apex of heart, better by lying on left side. 

Palpitation with a cough with tearing sensation in bronchi 
and hoarseness 

Painful bulging of left chest over cardiac region (old symp- 
tom of inflammatory rheumatism twenty-five years ago). 

Heart’s sounds keep him awake while lying on left side 

Dull and constant soreness around heart, and worse in legs 
and arms. 

Wind around heart; flatus and flatulence as though diarrhea 
would begin. 

BACK. — Awakened earlier than usual by dull aching in left 
occiput, and immediately in left sacro-iliac region, then pos- 
terior thigh and calf for fifteen minutes. 

Pam m dorsal region. 

Lame and stiff m back 

Aching whole length of spine. 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


575 


After waking at daybreak next morning, sensations in 
dorsal region of spine as if its convexity were interior and 
drawn far forward, lasting but a minute, and followed by a 
very uncomfortable feeling in that region, lasting a much 
longer time. 

Sore feeling across loins as after a heavy cold. 

Sensation as if a cool drop of sweat going down left side of 
spine 

Soreness in small of back 

A paralytic sensation extending from spine down left leg. 

Rheumatic-like fever in trunk, steady dull pain going steadily 
from trunk to legs, and finally to heels, worse m left knee, 
worse stepping on heel, on underside of heel (old symptom 
of inflammatory rheumatism twenty-five years ago). 

Pressure in small of back as from congestion about kidney. 

UPPER EXTREMITIES.— Magnetic thrill in right hand, ex- 
tending up forearm. 

Tingling in both arms as of electric current, or as if asleep. 

Intermittent, slightly burning, rheumatic-like pain in right 
carpo-metacarpal articulation, extending from index finger up 
outside of right forearm 

Rheumatic pain in left wrist and forearm 

Rheumatic twinge in last two phalangeal articulations of 
index and middle fingers for a short time in forenoon. 

Grating heard in shoulder joints, as well as nearly all other 
joints of the body. 

Aching extensor muscles of right forearm going up to 
shoulder. 

Rheumatic pain in right wrist and arm 

Tingling like pins and needles in left hand. 

Tingling in right hand. 

Can’t hold things in left hand, powerless or clumsy. 

Palms of hands, which were rough and scaly and bleeding 
at times, became smooth and natural during the proving. 
Healing action (Afterward they went back to former state 
when general health improved.) 

LOWER EXTREMITIES.— Lower part of both legs asleep, 
tingling, as if from electric battery more in right, immediately. 

Sciatic pain in right hip. 



576 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


Rheumatic pains m limbs 

Dull aching posterior aspect of thigh and calf in morning, 
from above downward 

Pain in right sciatic nerve on walking* 

Rheumatic pains in front of right thigh. 

Drawing aching discomfort in right thigh through hip and 
knees down through toes, immediately. 

Feeling as if somebody were drawing icy hands over thigh 
downward, aggravatmgly slow. (This occurred first twelve 
years ago after a nervous shock and did not return for five 
years. ) 

Varicose veins inside of knees and legs, with swelling and 
soreness (returned after years) 

Had always heat and swelling of feet in spring, which is 
better now, although it is spring. Healing action. 

On inside of left knee sensation m different spots painful as 
if hairs were being pulled, worse walking, better rubbing or 
scratching. 

Rheumatic-like fever in trunk, steady dull pain going stead- 
ily down to legs and finally to heels, worse m left knee, worse 
stepping on heel, on underside of heel (old symptoms of in- 
flammatory rheumatism twenty-five years ago). 

FEVER. — Chills as soon as beginning to sleep, running up 
back, preventing sleep 

Chilly whilst undressing in warm room. 

Chilliness on moving or from draft. 

Chill going down back, followed by paralytic feeling in 
right cheek. 

Wave-hke sensation as if it would break out in perspiration* 

Profuse perspiration on getting into bed, keeping him 
awake. 

Spells of feverishness, perspiration and weakness. 

SLEEP. — Kept awake by heart’s sound while lying on left 
side. 

Sleepy with headache 

Only snatches of sleep during these twelve days, always 
followed by mental depression, duntig suffering from ne- 
phralgia. 

As soon as she begins to sleep, chills running up back pre- 
venting sleep. 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


577 


Sleepy, but unable to sleep for some hours after retiring. 

Sleeplessness constant and troublesome* (relieved perma- 
nently by a bottle of Pabst Malt Extract) 

Drowsy all night while sitting up. 

Drowsiness leaves the instant when lying down, so cannot 
sleep. 

Goes to sleep on right side, but wakes on left side. 

Symptoms worse when getting into bed, worse after sunset. 

Profuse perspiration on getting into bed, keeping him 
awake 

Sleepy during day. 

Waking frequently at night from no apparent cause. 

All symptoms worse m bed 

Frequent urination, worse after getting m bed. 

(Symptoms better after Bell or Aeon for a short time; 
better from ale, which puts him to sleep.) 

Dreams of distressing nature. 

Sleep not unrefreshing, though apparently dreaming all 
night. 

Awaking with a headache lasting all day 

Recurrence of a dream which used to trouble her many 
years ago. (This dream was repeated at wide intervals over 
twenty years ago, now it came every night for five times.) 

Dreams of strife, busy dreams. 

Very vivid lewd dreams, repeated night after night 

Unnatural lewd and disgusting dreams, occurring on several 
nights and several times in one night 

GENERAL SYMPTOMS.— General tired and sick feeling. 

Persistent exhaustion and languor, not attributable to 
spring. 

Lame and sore all over. 

Trembling all over. 

SKIN —Reappearance of an old, slight, pimply eruption on 
left side of forehead 

Return of a slight eruption on outside of lower legs, burn- 
ing when scratched, worse after scratching. 

August 28, I took a dose of a few globules of X-ray 45m. for 
some urinary trouble, which ameliorated without being re- 
moved. September 13 I felt a stinging and smarting on a 

38 



578 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY 


place behind the left hip joint while sitting at the dinner table. 
In the course of the afternoon this symptom disappeared and 
reappeared on the right side, precisely corresponding to the 
place on the left side Toward evening it burned like fire, 
and, on examination, a place as large as a silver dollar on the 
right buttock was red and tough as if the skin were abraded. 
On going to bed a blister as large as a hickory nut, not unlike 
a fish bladder, was present, from which smaller blisters ex- 
tended down in a curve The redness and roughness was en- 
larged to about three inches in diameter On being quiet 
there was no pain, but on the least motion or friction, the 
part burned like fire, or a severe burn. In the night the blis- 
ter opened, and another had come opposite to the first, as 
large as a chestnut. The pains on motion, touch, or friction, 
continued like a real burn The skin was red, rough and in- 
flamed, like raw meat, for four inches down, with small blis- 
ters of different size extending downward The large blister 
discharged gradually, and a scab formed, which, under cessa- 
tion of pain, fell off, so that by the end of September the skin 
was as sound as before 

This reminds me of a similar experience observed from re- 
peated action of the X-rays upon the skin, resulting in a 
denudation of the tibia for the space of about six inches, as far 
as the leg was exposed to the rays, because it would not heal 
from an ulcer consequent upon an injury. 

On the red erythematous surface elevations begin to ap- 
pear, of different sizes and which may be acuminate or papu- 
lar. ^ In the early stage they are barely visible, and resemble 
ordinary congestion papules If, however, their surface is 
scratched with a needle, a yellow serous slightly opaque fluid 
exudes and the papule disappears. These elevations, though 
of small size, are m reality vesicles. They occur in groups or 
disseminated over the surface, and ultimately develop into 
vesico-bulle, or vesico-pustules which have the appearance of 
an ordinary eruption." 

‘‘In a weeping eczema the exudation disappears after one 
to four exposures, and does not return," 

In pruriginous eczema the itching often ceases after a 
single application." 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


579 


“On dry eczema the effect of the rays is most marked ” A 
single application is frequently sufficient. “ It is in the more 
obstinate, chronic, and recurring types that they are the most 
useful.” 

To quote now from Dr. Hall-Edwards: 

“The disease generally makes its first appearance in the 
form of a mild erythema around the roots of the nails. The 
nails begin to thicken and their substance to degenerate, until 
they become shapeless masses. The skin becomes uniformly 
red, and later small warty growths appear. These gradually 
increase in size and number, whilst the skin generally becomes 
dry and wrinkled. At this stage, apart from the disfigure- 
ment, the patient suffers no inconvenience The warty 
growths continue to increase in size, and the skin loses its 
elasticity to such an extent that it cracks with the slightest ex- 
ertion These cracks are very painful and difficult to heal. 
Pam of an almost indescribable character, which appears to 
come from the bones, and which is aggravated by holding the 
hands downwards, is felt Loss of power in the arm muscles 
IS also experienced At this stage the skin between the warty 
growths exhibits marked telangiectasis, is considerably thick- 
ened, and is tied down to the subjacent tissues There is an 
ever-present sensation of burning and extreme itching, so that 
it requires no small amount of self-control to keep from 
scratching The bases of some of the larger warts become in- 
flamed, and the thickened mass may come away, leaving an 
ulcer which takes months to heal. These ulcers are so tender 
and painful that words fail to convey any idea of the suffering 
of the patient. They occasionally refuse to heal, become 
gradually larger, and may assume malignant characteristics, 
which demand operative interference.” 

Dr J. T Pitkin, in a paper read before the “American 
Roentgen Ray Society,” in 1903, thus graphically describes the 
sufferings of this terrible disease 

“For a description of the pain and suffering, hyperesthesia 
and paresthesia, no language, sacred or profane, is adequate. 
The sting of the honey bee or the passage of a renal calculus 
IS painful enough, but they are comparative pleasure; being 
paroxysmal, they have a time limitation Extreme tenderness 



580 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAV 


to the slightest touch, hot and cold waves and Hashes, warmth^ 
tingling, pricking, throbbing, stinging, crawling, boring, and 
horning sensations, as if the parts were on the and contained 
bugs and other living things, feelings as il the auatonncal 
structures were being removed from one position to another, 
all of these sensations are proportionate to the de])th of the 
inflammatory process 

GENERAL SYMPTOMS.— General tired and sick feeling 

Persistent exhaustion and languor, not attributable to 
spring 

Lame and sore all o\er. 

Trembling all over 

Body tired and exhausted. 

Nervous powerlessness m limbs 

Sensation of swooning at times during day and night, feel- 
ing like dying. 

Prostrated for a long time 

All symptoms worse in bed. 

All symptoms worse toward evening and at night. 

Mental and physical aggravation marked!} pronounced 
toward evening. 

Symptoms intermittent in character, the first observed 
symptoms have all returned at irregular intervals. 

Muscles feel soft objectively. 

Generally worse m open air. 

Twitching internally in various parts 

Symptoms gradually increasing m severity after noon. 

For many years have removed the sensitiveness of nervous 
persons in electric storms with electxicity cm. 

Case of Dr John Jk CampbclL A patient for thiee years 
has gout, which is the summing up of a history of suppressed 
chills. He got X-ray 30th cent., which seems to have helped 
him somewhat. Swelling of legs and knees disapi>eured, after 
being present for weeks. Some of the pams were better, 
1897, March 29th, 2:80 p. m , took X-ray 30 cent., one powder; 
at 5 p. M., the second— no symptom— at 1 p. m. the third, which 
produced little itching. At 10 P. m took a hot bath with 
some improvement, and 11 p. m. the fourth powder, all of the 
30 cent 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


581 


After that decided glow of heat all over body with some 
itching 

Little rash on both legs, with decided pricking on both legs 
from knees to toes 

Pain m region of spleen for one hour which passed away m 
bed, during which time no twitching or jerking of muscles, 
could stretch out both legs comfortably 

Very good night’s sleep. 

March 30th, 7 a. M., slight perspiration on legs from knees 
to toes. 

March 31st, took the remaining powder of same potency. 

Some itching on left shoulder blade and arm from shoulder 
to elbow, with considerable increase of pain in elbows and 
hands, and sensation of heat all over body, but no fever 

Stiffness of back and neck, necessitating moving of whole 
body to turn his head 

Slight rash on left leg above knee. 

Some itching of arms and chest in bed, especially when be- 
ginning to get warm 

Could walk a little better the first two days after taking 
medicine. 

More thirst than usual 

Had no chill since 21st, until today, when he had a slight 
•chill from 2 to 4 p M ; no fever thirst or sweat. 

Appetite and bowels extremely good. 

Some itching or prickling pains above knees. 

The swelling from legs and feet has gone down immensely, 
though pain does not abate. 

RELATIONS. — Compare, the Calcareas, Caust,, Hepar, Med., 
Nat. mur , Psor., Puls., Sili., Sulph , Thuja, Tub , for its 
power to reproduce old or suppressed symptoms and condi- 
tions, Act., Lil , Lac can., Plat., Sep., Pyr., for nervous 
reflexes and neuralgic conditions from ovarian or uterine 
irritation, Agar , Cur., Tar., Zinc., for irritation of the cord, 
spinal reflexes, neurasthenia, electric storms, thunder storms, 
Agar., Med , Nat. c , Phos., Psor., Rhod., Sep , Sil , Syph., 
Thuja.' 

ANTIDOTES.— Nux, Sulph. and the dynamic potencies of 
the remedy. 



582 


PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


AGGRAVATION. — In bed; towards evening? and at nigiit (both 
mental and physical); m the open air; m the afternoon, 

“Six years agfo I received a severe X-ray burn on my left 
hand and finger. Eighteen months afterwards warts ap- 
peared — one seedy old chap, near knuckle of left index finger, 
second joint, gave me much concern Various remedies were 
tried. Five months ago it became exceedingly annoying to 
me, and then I looked up the Materia Medica carefully, and 
there, sure enough, was the remedy I took Causticum 200, 
and one dose, after awhile, of the cm. I am usually a high 
potency man The result was a cure Then I recalled the 
article of Dr W. P. Wesselhceft, in October issue, 1906, 
Medical Advance, under “Reminiscences/’ and had I remem- 
bered it I could have been cured of the unsightly warts long 
before. Some day I may write up the case for the Medical 
Advance, It may help out some one suffering from these X- 
ray warts, so common from X-rays. ’* — Sgd.~y. 1 1 \ /OnjTf Af, I), 
Kienbdck lays down this axiom: “The stronger the dose 
given at a stance, the shorter the period of latency, the 
sharper the reaction, and the longer its duration.*^ 

“ The first degree of intensity is characterized by hyperemia 
and infiltration of the skin, accompanied by exfoliation of 
minute scales and a considerable amount of itching. Atrophy 
of the appendages of the skin — glands, hair and nails — may 
follow. 

“The second degree of dermatitis is characterized by the 
occurrence of vesiculation and phlyctenule. Inflammatory 
signs are severe, the tension considerable and the pain intense. 
Under the phlyctenule the bares chorion appears red and dis- 
charging. 

“The third degree is characterized by total destruction and 
sloughing of the irradiated tissues. These show the usual 
signs of dry gangrene; the sloughs separate slowly, leaving 
behind an ulcer of a very torpid nature, which sometimes 
remains unhealed for years. 

“In radiotherapy one should endeavor to irradiate the^ tissue 
with the exact quantity necessary to produce a definite result. 
In the use of other therapeutic agents we are often obliged to 
vary the dose. A given drug may have a tonic action in a 



PROVINGS OF THE X-RAY. 


small dose, an emetic action in a moderate dose, and a poison- 
ous action in a large dose The same may be said of X-rays 
Take, for example, their action on the scalp. In small frac- 
tional doses they have a stimulating effect on the hair, 
whereas in large doses they cause epilation, and m still iarger 
doses vesiculation, ulceration, and sloughing.” 

SCALP.— “ At first sight it may seem contradictory that the 
same agent will, m one case, cause the hair to fall out, and in 
another case favour its growth. The contradiction, however, 
is only apparent, as the results depend on the amout of rays 
absorbed by the hair papilla and the consequent inflammatory 
reaction. It is evident that if this factor is varied the results 
will be altered.” 



