







A DICTIONARY OF 
PRACTICAL MATERIA MpDICA 



The amount of matter dealt with tn this volume having been 
found to require much more space than was anticipated {upwards 
of 1, 600 pages), it has been deemed advisable to bind it \n iwo 
parts. It is paged throughout as one. * 



A 


DICTIONARY 

of) 

PRACTICAL 

MATERIA MEDICA 


BY 

JOHN HENRY CLARKE, M.D. 


IN TWO VOLUMES 


VOLUME 11,-IN TWO PARTS. 
PART a— PBNTEOBmi nDonns-cuu. 


LONDON 

THE HOMEOPATHIC PUBLISHING COMPANY 
12, WARWICK LANE, PATEBNOSTEB BOW, E.C. 


1902 



[Entered at Stationers' Hall] 



PENTHORUM, SEDOIDES 


737 


Penthorum Sedoides. 

Penthorum sedoides. Virginia*Stone-crop. N, 0 . Crassulaceae, 

^ Tincture of fresh plant. 

Clinioal. — Coryza. Diarrhcea. Haemorrhoids. Headache. Posl-nasal catarrh. 
Sacrum, pain in. Varicocele. 

• Characteriatios. — Penth. was proved by Dr. D. B. Morrow (twice), 
Dr. Scudder, and a young man, who all took substantial doses. The 
majority pi the symptoms are Morrow’s, including the catarrhal 
symptoms, which have been verified in practice : A peculiar wet 
feeling in nares as though a violent coryza would set in,” but it did 
not ; the secretion became thickened and pus-like but not increased. 
The same wet feeling” was experienced at the same time in trachea 
and bronchi, which passed from above down as if coryza would set 
in, followed by a slight feeling of constriction in the chest, which also 
passed from above down. The next day the nose felt stuffed. The 
third day the first symptoms were repeated, and the discharge 
became thick, pus-like, and streaked with blood, and there was an 
odour in the nose as if from an open sore. Scudder had fulness in 
nose and ears.” Morrow experienced itching at anus, liLemorrhoids, 
and pains and sensations in rectum, sacrum, and sacro-iliac joints ; his 
first proving cured heat and soreness in sacrum with a dull, heavy 
headache.” Hale says Penth. is reputed to be curative in catarrh and in 
diarrhoea. A scalded sensation in the tongue is one of the symptoms. 

A sense t)f levitation was also produced. The symptoms proceed , 
from above downward. Morrow {Med. Adv,^ xviii. 540) reports these 
cures : (i) Miss P., 17, blonde, had severe cough of several weeks’ 
duration. < Talking or singing. Frothy, greenish sputa. Pul. and 
Plio. failed ; Peulh. s. soon cured. (2) Decrepit old lady, 75, sufferer 
Xl'QUi eczema for twelve years. Previous winter cured of asthma 
(probably from suppressed eczema) with Sul. am. Now paretic 
right side, for which Pho. was given. But Pho. did not relieve a 
loose, continual, rattling cough, caused by tickling at bifurcation of 
bronchi, with raising much thick, frothy, gi*eenish sputa. Penth, <(> 
pellets quickly cured. 

Relations. — Compare : Sedum., Hydrangea. In scalded sensation 
on tongue, and in catarrh. Sang. Catarrh, Puls. Levitation, Can. i., 
Coccul., Phos. ac., Sticta, Sul., Thu. Jerking of limbs, Meny., Pso. 

SYMPTOMS. 

* I. Mind. — Dull ; discouraged ; desponding. — Mind is dull, study im- 
possible. 

2. ¥lead. — On closing eyes, felt like floating ; vertigo. — Dull, heavy 
headache, with heat and soreness in sacriiin (cured during proving).— Catarrhal 
aching in forehead. — Weight in sinciput.— Itching of hairy scalp. 

3. Eyes. — Inner, upper tarsal borders itched and burned. — Full schsa- 
lion m supra-orbital region. 

VOL. II. 


48 



PENTHOkUM SEDOIDES 


738 


4. Ears.— Ringing and singing in both ears. 

5I Nose.— Discharge from nares thick, pus-like, streaked with blood, 
and an odour as if from an open sore. — A peculiar wet feeling in nares, as 
though a violent coryza would set in, \yhich did not ; the secretion from the 
nose became thickened and pus-like, but not increased. — Nose : stijffed as, if 
swollen ; fulness of nose and ears. — Contractile feeling of muscles of side of 
nose affected with catarrh (a secondary symptom). — Itching in nares. 

8. Mouth. — Prickling, burning sensation on tongue as though scalded. 
— Increased flow of saliva (bloody). 

9. Throat. — Posterior nares feel raw as if denuded of epithelium. 

11. Stomach. — Appetite increased. — Forcible eructation and dejections 
of small quantities of odourless flatus. — Disgust and nausea. . 

12. Abdomen. — Borborygmus. — Parieties of abdomen felt thickened. — 
A clawing, uneasy sensation about umbilicus, which gradually passed to lower 
bowel. — ^I'witching in muscles of abdomen. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Crawling in lower rectum as though a worm 
tried to escape. — Burning in rectum at stool, continuing after. — Itching of 
anus ; haemorrhoids with aching in sacrum and sacro-iliac joint. — After being 
constipated, semi-fluid evacuation next morning. — Constipation ; an atonic 
condition of bowels and rectum. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Dull aching in kidneys. — Bladder sore to pres- 
sure. — Urine increased ; burning along urethra when micturating. — Urine 
alkaline. 

k 15. Male Sexual Organs. — Sexual orgasm. — Erethism, almost saty- 
^sis; followed by long-continued depression, approaching impotence. — 
IRricocele (cured). < * 

17. Respiratory Organs. — (Connected with wet feeling in nose) we I 
feeling in trachea and bronchi ; passing from above down, as if a coryza 
would set in, folloWed by a slight feeling of constriction, which passed from 
above down through chest. — In morning a cough (dry, as though he would 
cough his insides out ”) from deep in chest, with soreness throujghout chest.^ 

^0. Neck and Back. — ^Aching through basilar reg’on from back to 
front. — Aching in sacrum and sicro-iliac joint. — Heat in sacrum with head- 
ache (cured), 

22. Upper Limbs. — Arm numb. — Hand felt swollen. • • 

23. Lower Limbs. — Trembling feeling of legs for several days, with 
soreness of knees. — While on lounge muscles of 1. leg suddenly contracted^ 
jerking foot up as in stepping; in a moment r. leg performed .same 
manoeuvre. 

24. Generalities. — General malaise, headache, weakness of limbs, 
inability to attend to business. 

25. Skin. — A long-cured impetiginous eczema reappeared on^both legs. 
— A few hot prickings in skin. — Itching on face and forehead. 

26. Sleep. — Dreams ; fantastic ; voluptuous and increased d^ire sym- 
pathetic with urinary excitement. 

27. Fever.— A very few cold chills rushed in succession up* spinal 
column. 



PERSICA 


739 


Pepsinum. 

• 

A* proteolytic ferment found in the gastric juice. The Pepsin in 

f eneral use is extracted from the stomach of the pig. 
Alcohol, tannin, and the alkaline carbonates destroy its 
power. It is prepared in granular form or in glycerinated 
extract for general use. Homoeopathic attenuations may be 
made by triturating the secretory layer of a fresh pig^s-stomach ; 
by triturating the granular Pepsin with sugar of milk ; or by 
making the lower attenuations of the liquid extracts with dis- 
tilled water.] 

Clinical.—Dyspepsia. 

Charaoteristios. — Pepsin, has been supposed to act purely as a 
digestwCf but recent discoveries in regard to the action of the sarcodes 
makes this now scarcely tenable. Pepsin, may digest the contents of 
the stomach ; but, like the secretions of other glands, it will in all 
probability act also, by its specific affinity, on the secretory tissues 
of the stomach itself. 


Persica. 

\mygd2tlus persica. Peach. N, 0, Rosaceae. Tincture of the * 
flowers. Infusion of the bark. Infusion of the leaves. 

t 

Glinioal. — Eyes, irritation of. Gastric irritation. Genital weakness. Smell, loss 
of. Sprains. Taste, loss of. Toe-nails, alfections of. Vision, disordered. 'W’’rists, 
affections o^ 

ChaFact6rji||tios. — The symptoms were obtained by Demeures 
whilst poundingjthe flowers for the purpose of making a tincture, and 
from later provings with the tincture on himself. The sense of vision 
. was disordered and the eyes irritated. The senses of smell and taste 
were abolished. Pains in vertical lines in abdomen, heart, limbs ; 
weak wrists ; pains under great toenails and persistent itching were 
4he chief effects observed. O. S. Haynes (if. R,^ v. 214) relates a case 
apropos of remarks by C. C. Edson on the value of an infusion of 
'Peaeh hark in the gastric irritability of^Children. An infant in its 
second summer had acute dyspeptic diarrhoea, with persistent vomit- 
ing* of all food. No remedy helped, and the child was sent to the 
jnountaiifs ; but the change made it worse, and death was hourly 
expected, when an old local practitioner was called in and prescribed : 
Two or three fresh Peach leaves to be put into a cup of boiling water ; 
the infant to have a drink of the infusion at frequent intervals. The 
effect^was rapid ; food was soon retained and the child got well. 

Relations. — Compare : Amyg. (the peach is hardly distinguishable 
from^the almond, ^4. communis^ botanically ; almonds have been known 
to have fleshy drupes), Pru. spi., Pru. virg. 



740 


PERSICA-PETIVERIA 


T SYMPTOMS. 

S 

3 . Eyes. — Pressure and itching in eyes from readings evening ; sensa- 
tion of foreign body in eyes.— Lachrymation from reading.— Dazzling before 
eyes ; objects wave in zigzags ; reading Impossible ; < candle-light. 

4. Ears. — Tumour size of nut on lobe of r. ear, very painful to touch. 

5. Nose. — Nasal cartilage and upper jaw painful as if bruised (only when 
touched) ; nasal cartilage feels thinner than usual. — Persistent loss of smell. 

6 . Face. — Raw pain middle of lower lip. — Swelling on 1. lower jaw. 

8. Mouth. — Persistent loss of taste. 

12. Abdomen. — ^Vertical internal pain in line from tip of I, tenth rib 
cartilage to anterior superior spine of 1. ilium. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — During stool ejaculation of s6men, without 
erection, followed by empty feeling in hypogastriuni and pain in genitals as 
after excess ; painful lassitude in legs, then pain above hips, < in sacral region. 

18. Chest. — During dinner stinging pain under false ribs, as from a sharp 
point, also under scapulne. — Severe deep-seated prickings above 1. nipple. 

ig. Heart. — Sharp vertical pains in heart region. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Wrists sprain easily. — Fatiguing pains in both 
wrists, and at same time in feel. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Vertical lancinations in r. thigh. — Pain in , both 
knees and r. ankle. — Pricking and lancinations, numbness, stiffness of legs. — 
Itching and sharp pains under great toenails. 

24. Generalities. — single glass of wine is sufficient to intoxicate him. 

25. Skin. — Obstinate, intolerable itching on different parts of body, 
pimples appear. — Sudden local itching. 

Persicaria Urens, Polygonum. 
Pestinum. 

Plagiiinum. Nosode of Plague. Trituration of the virus. 

Clinioal.- Bubo. Plague. Typhus. 

CharaoteristiOB. — The prophylaxis and treatment of plague with 
injections of more or less modified virus of plague by old-school prac- 
tioners affords evidence that the nosode of plague is available, like 
other nosodes, for the treatment of cases of the disease from which it 
is derived. 


Petiveria. 

Petiveria tetrandra (Gom.). Erva de Pipi. JV. 0 . Phytolc^jpcacese. 
Trituration of fresh root. 

Clinical.— Conjunctivitis, Paralysis. Paraplegia. e 

Charaoteristios.— Mure proved Petiv.^ and I have given his ter- 
minology. Allen says in a note that it is probably identical with the 



PETIVERIA 


741 


Mexican and West Indian species, P. alliacca, Mure^s figuroKJOrre- 
sponds to this, and he says the roots, which are branching and 
fibrous, “ smell strongly of garlic.” P. alliac, (according to Treas, of 
BoL) is called “ Guinea-hen Weed ” in West Indies,^’ and ^^Raiz de 
Gpine ” in Brazil, in which coutitry “ it is put into warm baths to 
restore motion to paralysed limbs.” Mure does not mention these 
. names or this fact ; but his proving brings out some strongly con- 
firmative symptoms in numbness and paralytic sensations ; weariness 
. and weight of eyelids. Cold saliva ; internal coldness ; coldness inside 
bones were experienced. The symptoms in general were < by 
movement ; in the morning on waking and on rising ; after breakfast 
and during and after dinner ; bending backward. 

Relations. — Compare: Botan., Phytolacc. In paralysis, Rhus. 
Cold saliva, Cist. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1 . Mind. — Excessive gaiety ; inclination to sing, laugh, jest ; followed 
by sadness and tears. — Vanishing of thought. 

2. Head. — Head heavy. — Compressed feeling as if head bound with a 
warm cloth. — Head feels as if it would split. — Headache > by motion. — Sen- 
sation of hot water on scalp penetrating to brain. — Weight at vertex pressing 
into brain. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes half-closed, swollen, surrounded by blue rings, esp. 
next to nose. — Rapid inflammation of 1. eye while at dinner, lasts three days. 

• — Weigl^ on lids compelling to close eyes ; on doing so sees a variety of 
figures. — Pain in eyes as if the balls were pushed out of their sockets. — 
Painful burning at margin of lids, < on closing them. — Lachrymation. — Con- 
junctivitis. — Dim sight. 

4. Ears. — R. ear deaf, as if stopped. 

5. N&se. — Coryza. — ^Veins of nose swollen, bluish. — Redness of 1. wing 
of nose and cheek. — Dull pain over root of nose, evening. —Nose slightly 
inflamed and shining. — Intense and sudden itching of bridge of nose. 

• 6. Face. — Redness of 1. cheek. — Bruised pain in zygomatic process. — 
• Sensation as if needle stuck in upper lip from within out. 

8. Mouth. — Burning tongue as if scalded, morning, on rising. — Dry 
mouth. — Flow of watery cold saliva, depositing ashy sediment and whitish 
'granules. — Offensive breath. 

j. Throat. — Sensation in throat as after eating something astringent. — 
Pain in throat with difficulty of swallowing saliva. 

;ri. Stomach. — Sharp lancinations in epigastrium from within out ; 
evening ; ^ter dinner ; on rising. — Stomachache with sensation of internal 
'Coldness. 

j:2. .^bdomen. — Long blue horizontal spots on r. hypochondrium. — 
Lancinations : in hypochondria ; through spleen from below up. — Bor- 
borygjjai, on moving in bed.— Dull pain in hypogastrium. — Circumscribed 
acute pains in groins. — Colic of descending colon. 

13. Stool. — Diarrhoea of dark mucus, mixed with fecal matter in separate 
hard^ieces. — Constipation. 



742 


PETIVERIA— PETROLEUM 


14. ^Urinary Organs.— Micturition every five minutes from ii a.m. till 
evening, with heat in urethra. — Urine : pale, copious. 

17. ^Respiratory Organs. — ^Voice seems to come from afar. — ^Voice 
hoarse from coughing.— Suffocation, with cold feet. 

18. Chest.— Deep-seated, dull pain beneath sternum, < moving neck or , 
bending head forward. — ^Violent lancinations under r. breast at each inspi- 
ration. 

19. Heart. — Contraction and throbbing in region of heart, evening. 

20. Back. — Strained feeling in spine, < sitting upright and bending 
back, > bending forward. 

21. Limbs. — Paralytic numbness, heaviness, and weariness in all limbs ; 
after rising from bed.— Bruised pains in arms and legs. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Twitching sensation in shoulder-joint'on stooping. 
—Pricking, burning, crampy pains in arms ; with inflammatory redness. — 
Numbness ; at r. arm ; at wrist ; at fingers (r.) ; at finger-tips. — Lancinating 
and heat as from whitlow at tip of r. thumb. — Itching in 1. palm. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Weakness of lower limbs. — Sudden numbness of 
knees with dull pain in tibia. — Numbness, itching and weakness of legs; from 
knees to soles. 

24. Generalities. — General rigor when lying down. — Prostration as 
from drowsiness but without inclination to sleep. — When walking seems ^s if 
she does not touch the ground and would fall. — On lying down body numb. 

25. Skin. — Itching, pricking, and formication of skin. 

26. Sleep. — Drowsy ; all day ; with frequent yawning ; after dinner.— 
Sleep deep and prolonged. — Dreams ; of corpses and starts up in cold sweat ; 
sad ; unpleasant ; of quarrels. 

27. Fever. — Excessive coldness of hands and feet piercing to bones. — 
Cold feeling in interior of bones. — Febrile heat with paleface and cold hands. 
— Dry heal all over, esp. of palms. — Profuse cold sweaf all over, with shudder- 
ing, after first sleep. — Sweat in palms. 


Petroleum. 

Oleum petrae. Rock-oil. Coal Oil. Trituration and tincture of the 
rectified oil. (Preparations of the non-rectified oil should also 
be made.) 

Olinioal. — ^Addison’s disease. Albuminuria. Ancemia, Angina pectoris. 
Anus, fissure of. Bed-sores. Breath, offensive. Burns. Chilblains. Chlorosis. 
Constipation. Cracks^ tn skin. Deafness. Diarrhoea. Dysmenia. Dyspepsia. 
Ear, affections of. Eczema. Face, rough. Facial paralysis. Feet, soles painful. 
Fester, tendency to. Fistulas. Frost-bite. Gastric ulcer. Gonorrhoea. Hsemor- 
rhoids. Hands, chapped. Headache ; occipital. Herpes. Heipes ^reputialis 
Irritation. Jaw, easily dislocated. Myopia. Nose, sore. Otorrhoea. Perspiration, 
offensive. Pregnancy, sickness of. Presbyopia. Prostatitis. Psoriasis. ^Rheuma- 
tism. Sea-sickness. Skin, affections of. Sprains. Syphilis. Tabes mesenterica. 
^o^ache. Urethra, stricture of ; chronic inflammation of. Varices. Vomiting. 

GhaPaoteristios. — The Petrol, proved by Hahnemann is made by 
agitating the liquid commercial Petroleum with Sulphuric Acid* and 



PETROLEUM 


743 


then rectifying the portion which this acid does rtot act upon- It is 
“ a light oily fluid, colourless or of a pale straw colour, an^strong 
characteristic naphthalic smell. Dropped on white paper it evapo- 
rates completely, leaving no greasy stain. Under Pakaffi*n I have 
described the relation between*P<?/ro/., Naph.^ and Paraff, Commer- 
cial Petroleum and commercial Parafifln oil ” are one and the 
same. The Petrol, of homoeopathy is this substance purified and 
rectified. But in the pathogenesis are included effects observed on 
those engaged in petroleum works, and those who use Paraffin oil 
in various trades ; it would therefore be well to have also a prepa- 
ration of the crude, non-rectified liquid. Petrolatum (Vaseline) con- 
sists of hydrocarbons of the Paraffin series, obtained from residues 
after distillation of lighter oils from crude petroleum ; or deposited 
from crude petroleum on standing. The affections met with in 
petroleum extractors and refiners are — (i) Diseases of the skin and 
subcutaneous tissue ; depressed nutrition, anaemia, dyspepsia, nerve 
troubles, irritability, insomnia, respiratory affections. In addition to 
these is a species of intoxication. A man, a patient of mine who suffered 
from inveterate ec2enia, and who had formerly been employed in a 
factory where much petroleum was used, noticed that his eczema was 
much better whilst working with petroleum. He told me that the 
vapour had the singular effect of making some of the workmen insane, 
causing : Desire to kill ; hallucinations, they will see things not 
actually visible ; for instance, they will see the rails in a station when 
a train is on them.” Boys (who are much affected) will jump at a 
straight wall and try to scramble up it. A rickety boy, set. 2I, who 

• had an unconquerable desire to drink anything liquid within his 
reach, look one day a good draught of paraffin oil. An Ipecacuanha 
emetic and a Castor Oil purge got rid of a good deal of it, and a month 
after he was brought to me with these symptoms : Appetite bad. 
Pale, dark rings round eyes. Every now and then seems to collapse ; 
goes intcf a corner and will not play ; after tea quite bright. Cold 

' sweat in bed ; complains of burning heat ; then goes cold and clammy. 
I prescribed Phos, 2, In three weeks he was brought back much 
•better. He had lost the pallor and dark rings round the eyes, and 

, had ceased to mope ; but he had come out all over small boils which 
discharged, the discharge having the odour of paraffin. There was a 
slight recurrence of the old symptoms a fortnight later, and after that 

• I did not see the boy again till a year later, when he was brought to 
me for diphtheritic paralysis. Two years after this he was brought 

• to «ie again. He was now well growp and had no sign of rickets, 
but some of the old symptoms came b^k ; Languid ; inclined to be 
quiet ; avei'se to play. At times clammy all over body. This time 

^ Petrol, fo soon put him right. In the case of a woman who drank 

• paraffin oil when intoxicated, there was epigastric pain so severe that 
ske thought she would go out of her mind, > lying with knees drawn 
up ; tenderness of ileo-caecal region and of epigastrium ; swollen 
feeliiig of abdomen, without actual swelling ; blood and albumen in 
urine ; pain in back j^,nd slight return of menses, which had ceased a 
week before. These cases show the profound action of Petrol, on the 
or^nism. It is one of Hahnemann’s leading antipsorics, and is 



744 


PETTIOLEUM 


especia^ closely related to Graph. It is suited to long-lasting, deep- 
seated, wasting diseases ; lingering gastric and intestinal troubles with 
or without ulceration. In my experience no remedy corresponds to 
more cases of chlorosis in young girls^ with or without ulceration of 
the stomach. Petrol, (says Kent) corresponds to low conditions in 
which there is inability to throw out eruptions on the skin ; or condi- 
tions in which an eruption has disappeared without improvement in 
health : to reflexions of disease on mucous membranes setting up 
catarrh. Ozaena ; intestinal catarrh. Soreness and cracks about 
muco- cutaneous orifices. Irritability of skin and irritability of mind 
are both found in Petrol, , as in many" other remedies : Excitable ; 
angry at trifles. Anxiety with fear. Mental weakness and forgetful- 
ness are also very characteristic, and are generally met wfth in con- 
nection with deep-seated disease. An illusion that there is another 
person, or another baby in bed, is very characteristic of the remedy, 
and has led to cures with Petrol, of cases of typhoid and puerperal 
fever, Falling out of the hair is a characteristic symptom of 
Petrol.j and accounts for the popularity of Petroleum hair- restorers. 
[Petrol, “ probably acts on the sebaceous rather than the sudoriferous 
secretions of the skin, and its local action is on parts where 
the sebum is abundant.^^ — R. T. C.]. The use of these h^,ir- 
restorers has caused many violent headaches. So has the use 
of*‘CoalOiP' (a tablespoonful to a bucketful of water) by washer- 
women to improve the colour of linen. M. T. Bleim (quoted H. W.^ 
xxvi. 318) thus describes the result in one case : Severe occipital 
headache, loss of strength, emaciation, diarrhoea, dyspepsia with 
fulness on eating very little ; accumulation of gas ; very severe attacks 
of suffocation, > by eructations of gas. The headaches of Petrol. 
may be in any part, but they are most marked in occiput. Heaviness 
like lead ; pressure, sticking ; pulsating ; < on shaking head or any 
jar. Pain travels from occiput to eyes, and is associated with tem- 
porary loss of sight and fainting. The vertigo and heaviness of Petrol^ 
are often associated with nausea and bilious vomiting. This (nausea 
with or without vomiting) is one of. the grand characteristics of the 
remedy. It is < by motion in a carriage or on the sea ; hence Petrol, 
is one of the first remedies in train-sickness or sea-sickness. The 
other side of this nausea is another grand characteristic: Awful 
ravenous hunger, the sinking of the chief antipsorics. It is par- 
ticularly noticed immediately after a stool, in diarrhoea, nervous 
affections, spinal disease, &c. (Kent). In pulmonary affections Petrol 
has gained much repute of late in the form of an emulsion. A leading 
indication for it is “ Oppression of the chest ; < in cold air.” Petrol 
has a peculiar cough, not infrequently met with in young gjrls and 
boys, coming from deep down in the chest, and frequently waking 
the patient up at night. A student who had a deep, hollow-sounding, 
hacking cough, excited by laughing, waking him up in the middle of 
the night, I cured with Petrol 30 after Arg. n, and Arg, met had failed 
to do anything. The cough had persisted some time and caused his 
family no little anxiety. The discharges of Petrol are thick, purulent, 
and yellowish green. For the cracked nostrils accompanying ^nd 
following cold in the head I find the application of vaseline more 



PETROLEUM 


745 


often useful than other forms of unguent. The localities ^dtCPetroL 
are very like those of Graph, : Scalp, behind ears, scrotum, ^nitals. 
The modality “< in winter” has given Nash the key to severd 
cases of eczema, chapped handg, chilblains, and one case of chronic 
diarrhoea, as soon as he discovered that the patient had eczema of the 
hands in winter. Petrol, 200 was given. The skin is extremely sen- 
sitive ; all clothing is painful ; slight injuries suppurate. Alienas 
Appendix quotes an important case reported by O. Lassar in Virchow's 
Archiv, A man used for four days extensive inunctions with Petrol, 
to relieve himself from scabies. A week later his feet began to swell, 
and the dropsy, increasing rapidly, spread over abdomen and thorax. 
In a fortnight it disappeared, but eight days later returned and per- 
sisted till death, four months after the inunction. The urine was 
highly albuminous, and contained hyaline and granular cylinders ; but 
the necropsy revealed no lesion of any organ to account for the 
dropsy. The body was extremely cedematous ; there was oedema of 
the lungs and dropsy of the cavities, and whilst in hospital the wrist 
pulse was small, empty, and of low tension ; the blood corpuscles 
were few, but their relative proportions were normal. Temperature 
normal, and the skin showed localised areas of inflammation. Along 
th^ veins and lymphatics a small-celled growth existed, and in all the 
layers of the cutis there was a widely distributed nuclear proliferation. 
Peculiar symptoms are : Brain as if wrapped in a fog. As if everything 
in head were alive. As if head made of wood, or as if bruised. As if 
a cold breeze were blowing on head. As if head would burst. Veil 
, before eyes. Sand in eyes. As if skin over bridge of nose drawn 
stiff and tight. As if something were tearing off from pit of stomach. 
As if a cold stone at heart. Splinter in heel. Upper and lower limbs 
as if stiff without joints. Jaw as if distended. There is great weak- 
ness ; fainting ; tremor ; twitching of limbs ; catalepsy ; tonic spasms ; 
left-sidecjj paralysis. The notes of the skin affections are : Itching ; 
burning ; rawness ; bleeding. Burning sensations are very marked ; 
and as Petrol, is accountable for so many burning accidents it is 
fitting that it should make a very good application for burns in the 
iForm of vaseline, cosmoline, or Petrol, mixed with equal parts of olive 
oil. Petrol, is suited to : Persons with light hair and skin. Especially 
for lean, slender persons. The symptoms are < by touch ; by con- 
tact of clothing ; by scratching ; by riding in carriage or ship. Pinch- 
‘ ing the parts > haemorrhoids. < From mental exertion. Headache 
^ < on shaking head ; > by epistaxis ; < from light and noise. After 
stool : hunger immediately. Ravenous, hunger ; frequently awakened 
bx it at night ; easily satisfied, with aversion to meat, fats, cooked or 
hot foofj ; desire only for dainties, which are eaten with avidity. 
•Eating > gastralgia. Gastralgia comes on whenever the stomach is 
empty. ^ Empty, weak sensation in stomach. < After eating or 
drinking. After eating : giddiness ; heat in face ; cutting in abdomen ; 
eructations ; drowsiness ; uneasiness. Cabbages, saurkraut diar- 
rhoei. Colic > by bending double. Exertion, motion, riding, sitting 
<. Lying down < cough, and distension of abdomen. Vertigo 
when head lies low. < Cold air. < Winter. < Open air. < 
Before and during thunderstorm. < Bathing. > Warmth and 



746 


PETROLEUM 


warm ai*r. < Warmth of bed (itching). Cough is < at night and 2, 
4, and ^5 a.m. Smoking befogs him ; = cough. < After coitus 
(nervous irritability). Cough < by laughing (cured). < During day 
(diarrhoea and dysentery). Throat affections go ri^t to left. Head- 
ache back to front. • 

Relations. — Antidoted hy: CoccuL, Nux, Phos. (in my case), 
Antidote to : Lead poisoning (one of the best remedies), Nit, ac. 
Complementary: Before Sep. Compatible: Bry., Calc., Lyc., Nit. ac., 
Nux, Puls., Sep., Sil, Sul. Compare : Graph., Naph., Paraf., Eupn., 
Kreas., and other Carbons. In sea-sickness, Arn., Coccul., Tab. 
Nausea of pregnancy, Coccul., Sep. Cracking of joints, Caust. Gas- 
tralgia > by eating, Chel., Anac., Graph., Lach. Imagines he has a 
limb double ; illusions of ^ape, Bap., Stram. Epistaxis >• headache 
(Borax <). Aversion to hot food, Pho. (opp. Lyc.). < From 
thunderstorms, Pho,, Merc., Sil., Rho., Pso. Head as if made of 
wood ; eruptions behind ears and on genitals, Graph. Cold feeling 
about heart, Nat. m. (< when exerting mind), K. chlo.. Graph., K. nit., 
Ruta. Diarrhoea in early morning, Sul. (Petro. also during day). 
Loses his way in well-known streets, Glo. (from heat or sun). Moist 
eruptions about genitals, Thuj. Hot, burning eructations, K. ca., Sep. 
Faintness during or connected with evacuations, Crot. t., Dulc., Ox. 
ac., Sul. (these have it with scanty stools ; the rest with copious stools :) 
Apis, Nux m., Pul., Spi., Ver. Sinking immediately after meals, Ars., 
Cina, Lyc., Sil., Stp., Urt. ur., Calc., lod. Brownish scattered spots 
on dark-haired people. Nit, ac. Loquacity, Lach. (Petrol, on one 
subject). Hunger after stool (Alo. during stool). Symptoms appear 
and disappear rapidly, Bell., Mag. p., Lyc. — opp. Plat., Stan. ‘lipagines 
two babies in bed, Val. Vertigo on rising, Bry. Skin sensitive to 
clothing ; every injui7 suppurates, Hep. Tender feet, which are 
bathed in foul-smelling sweat, Graph., Sanic., Sil. Heat and burning 
of soles and palms, Sang., Sul. Sian < in winter, > in summer, Aim. 

Causation. — ^Vexation, Riding in carriage or ship. Nitric acid 
(deafness from). Cabbage. Suppressed eruptions. Sprains. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1, Mind. — ^Anxious and timorous disposition. — Sadness and mental 
dejection. — Great irresolution, — Uneasiness respecting the future. — Hypo- 
chondriacal humour. — Inclination to anger and to scold. — Violent, irascible, 
insolent temper. — Frequent tears ; on slightest provocation. — Loss of memory. 
— Does not know where she is in the street. — Unfitness for reflection. — Weak- 
ness of apprehension. — Delirium ; thinks another person is lying with him 
in bed (or that he is double, or one limb is double) ; or always and continu- 
ously delirious talk of the same distressing subject. — Imagines he hSs a third 
leg which will not keep quiet. — Desire to kill. — Hallucinations of vision. 

2. Head. — Head bewildered. — Feeling as if brain wrapped ifi fog,— 
Frequent vertigo, esp. on raising eyes.— Vertigo, like that produced by a 
swinging motion.— Vertigo on stooping, or on rising from bed, or from d^seat. 
— Headache after a fit of anger, or when fasting in morning, as also after a 
walk in evening.— Attacks of semi-lateral headache, which compel patieqt to 



PETROLEUM 


747 


lie down.-— Heaviness and fulness in head in morning, and when stopping,— 
Pressive or lancinating pressive pains in head, esp. in occiput. — He^ache < 
by all kinds of intellectual labour, to the extent of complete stupefaction. — 
Tension in head, as if dura mater were tightened.— Cramp-like; drawing, 
pinching pains in head— Neuralgic headache, beginning in occiput and 
extending forward. — Occipital headache, extending to vertex, with vertigo. — 
Occipital headache, with nausea, esp. in sea-sickness. — Pulsative headache, 
esp, in occiput (cerebellum). — Pressing stinging in the cerebellum. — Sensation 
as if all were alive in head. — Scalp painful to touch, as if bruised or ulcerated 
(followed by numbness and very sore on scratching, < in morning and on 
becoming heated). — Headache in forehead ; every mental exertion causes him 
to become quite stupid. — Drawing pains in head, forehead, and temples, 
extending Into teeth. — Seborrhoea of scalp. — Eruption on head and nape of 
neck. — CEdematous swelling and scabs on scalp. — Hair falls off. 

3. Eyes. — Itching in eyes.— Itching of lids ; obliged to rub them. — (Lids 
everted.) — ^Aching, smarting, shooting, and burning pain in eyes. — Conjunc- 
tivitis and blepharadenitis. — Inflammation of eyes (with itching and stitches 
in eyes). — Lachrymal fistula (with dryness of r. side of nose). — Lachrymation. 
— ^Jerking and quivering of eyes and lids. — Convulsion of eyes. — Myopia or 
presbyopia. — Diplopia. — Scintillation and appearance as of a veil before sight ; 
or* sparks and black spots. 

4. Ears. — Inflammation and painful swelling of meatus auditorius. — 
Otalgia, with cramp-like and jerking pain. — Dryness, and distressing sensation 
of dryness, in interior of ear. — Discharge of blood and pus from ears. — Erup- 
tion of ears. — Redness, excoriation, and oozing behind ears. — Deafness. — 
Tinkling, rolling, roaring, ringing, rumbling, cracking, and buzzing in ears. — 
Excessive secretion of cerumen. 

5. Nose. — Epistaxis. — Slight epistaxis > headache. — Purulent blisters 
on nose. — Ulcerated nostrils (and stopped catarrh). — Ozsena, scabs, purulent 
mucus, cracked nostrils. — Swelling of nose, with discharge of pus, and pain 
above root of nose. — Stoppage of nose. — Dryness, and distressing sensation of 
•dryness, in nose.— Much mucus in nose. — Itching on tip of nose, — Coryza 
with hoarseness. 

» 6. Face.— Heat in face, sometimes after a meal, and with thirst. — Dry- 

ness and constriction of skin of face and eyelids as though covered with a thin 
layer of albumen ; cheeks look glazed and contracted. — Pale, yellowish com- 
plexion. — Facial paralysis (from inflammatory products in Fallopian canal). — 
Eruption of pimples on face, — Scurfs around mouth. — Scabby pimples, with 
shooting pain on lips, and commissures. — Furuncles on lower lip. — Swelling 
of 'Sub-maxillary glands. — Easy dislocation jf maxillary joint in bed in morning 
with sharp pains. 

7. ^Tccth. — ^Toothache from contact with open air, < at night, with 
, swelling of cheek.— Numbness of teeth, with pain on clenching them. — Pus- 
tule above a hollow tooth like a fistula. — Fistulous vesicles in gums. — Swelling 
(3 gurns, with shooting pain on being touched. 

8. Mouth. — Fetid breath, sometimes like garlic. — Ulcers on inner 
surAce of cheeks (painful when closing teeth). — Much mucus in mouth and 
throat. — ^Tongue coated white. — Painful soreness on chewing.— Great dryness 
of^mouth (and throat in morning) with violent thirst (for beer). 



748 


PETROLEUM 


o 


0 . %roat.—Sore throat, With shooting pain during deglutition.— Swell- 
ing and ^eat dryness of throat. — Swelling of the submaxillary glands. — 
Rawness (stitching and burning) in pharynx, < on swallowing.— Tickling on 
swallowing, extending to car;- Dryness and burning in pharynx.— When 
swallowing the aliment rises towards nasal fossae. — Hawking up of mucus in 
morning. 

10. Appetite. — Putrid, mawkish, mucous, or else bitter or acid taste. — 
Excessive thirst for beer. — Bulimy. — Hunger with speedy satiety. — ^Voracity. 
— Daintiness. — Anorexia. — Repugnance to meat and fat, also to hot and cooked 
aliments ; < by eating cabbage. — Uneasiness during digestion, after almost 
every kind of food, however little may have been eaten.— After a meal : 
obscuration and vertigo ; nausea ; heaviness and pressure at stomach ; sleep ; 
or colic, with eructations ; or sour risings, congestion in head, cramp in 
chest, &c. 

11. Stomach. — Noisy eructations, — ^Sour (or bitter eructations or) risings 
and regurgitations. — Pyrosis. — Frequent nausea, esp. in morning, often with 
accumulation of water in mouth, obstructed respiration, sour risings, tongue 
dry and white, stitches in hepatic region, heat in face, vertigo, &c. — After 
eating, vertigo and giddiness. — Nausea from motion of a carriage. — Nausea 
and vomiting of pregnant women. — ^Water-brash. — Heartburn towai'd even- 
ing. — Inclination to vomit. — Greenish, bitter vomiting — Aching of stomach. 
— Cramps in stomach. — Pressure on the stomach ; colic (at night). — Sensation 
of emptiness and weakness in stomach. — Weak digestion. — Diarrhoea from 
suppressed eruptions. — Pain in epigastrium, as if something were being torn 
away. — Swelling of epigastrium,^ with pain when touched. — Sensation of 
fulness in epigastrium. 

12 . Abdomen. — Pain (cutting) in abdomen, shortly after a meal. — Sen- 
sation of great emptiness in abdomen. — Distension and tension in abdomen, 
with cramp. — Pinchings and cuttings in abdomen, sometimes with pressing 
W'ant to evacuate. — Colic, with diarrhoea, at night, towards morning. — Colic 
> from bending double. — Borborygmi in abdonien, with sensation as if 
abdomen were entirely empty. — Inguinal hernia. — Fetid flatus. — Sensation of 
coldness in abdomen. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Difficult, hard, knotty, and insufficient evacua- 
tions. — Frequent diurnal stools, sometimes with evacuation of serous, yellowish 
matter. — Diarrhoea, often preceded by cuttings (colic only during the day). — 
Mucous stools, often mixed with blood. — Burning pain in rectum after evacua- 
tion.— Itching tetters in perineum.— Diarrhoea < from riding in carriage.— 
In anus burning itching ; pressure.— Weakness of rectum. — Piles with great 
itching, < at night from heat of bed ; < from rubbing or scratching. — 
Fissure with great rawness. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Constant dribbling of urine after micturition. — 
Discharge of mucus with the urine.— Frequent emission of urine, with scanty 
stream of a red or brown and fetid urine. — Urine bloody and tur|>id ; it 
deposits a red, slimy sand, that adheres tightly to vessel ; urine contains 
albumen, hyalin, and granulated Casts ; covered with a glistening filmland 
with a red sediment.— Involuntary discharge of Urine, — Emission of urine at 
night.— Wetting the bed. — Burning in urethra. — Stricture of urethra.— (Chronic 
urethritis.) 



PETROLEUM 


749 


15. Male Sexual Organs.— Burning pain, itching, redness, eMoriation, 
and oozing, or itching pimples and tetters, on scrotum and betweeif scrotum 
and thigh. — Diminished sexual desire. — Frequent pollutions. — Discharge of 
prostatic fluid, — (Prostatitis.) — Weakness and nervous irritability after coition. 
— Reddish eruption on glans, with® itching. 

16. Female i Sexual Organs. — Itching, soreness, and moisture on 
external parts. — Repugnance t<;v coition. — Catamenia too early, with a. men- 
strual flux which excites itching.-^Leucorrhoea like white of egg. — Leucorrhoea 
with lascivious dreams. — During pregnancy diarrhoea and vomiting. — Itching 
and furfur on the mammas ; the nipples itch, and have a mealy coating. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Hoarseness, with or without coryza. — 
Cough, with dryness in throat, — ^Vexatious cough that takes away the breath ; 
cannot cough it out.-^Suffocatmg cough at night. — Dry cough at night, or in 
evening, after lying down. — ^At night dry cough, coming deep from chest, 
caused by a scratching in throat. — Cough from low down in chest. — Hollow, 
hacking cough, coming on when laughing, waking him in middle of night 
(cured). — Dry cough, with shootings under sternum. 

18. Chest. — Respiration obstructed in cold air. — Rattling and snoring in 
trachea, — Sensation of heaviness, anxiety, and uneasiness in chest. — Oppres- 
sion of chest at night. — Shootings in sides of chest. — Herpes on chest. 

• 19. Heart. — Palpitation of heart. — Feeling of coldness about heart ; 
as if there was a cold stone in heart. — Fainting, with ebullitions, heat, 
pressing on heart, palpitation. 

20. Neck and Back. — Herpes on nape of neck.— Heaviness and pain 
in nape of neck. — Painful drawing extending from nape to occiput. — Swelling 
of glands’and eruption on nape of neck. — Sacral pains, which do not permit 
standing upright, — Coccyx painful on sitting. — Stiffness in coccyx. — Pain in 
back, which obstructs every movement. — Weakness and stiffness in back and 
loins, — Suppuration of the axillary glands. 

21. Limbs. — Cracking of the joints. — Inflexibility of the joints.— Sprains ; 

chronic Sprains. ^ 

* 22. Upper Limbs.— Fetid sweat of axillae. — Drawing pains in arms and 

fingers. — Great weakness of arms. — Stiffness of arms and fingers. — Erysipe- 
latous inflammation in arms. — Brown or yellow spots on arms. — Furunculi on 
forearm, — Tearings in hands. — Burning sensation in palms of hands. — Sweat- 
ing of hands. — Pain in wrist-joint as if sprained. — Brown spots on wrist. — 
Bleeding fissures in hands and fingers, esp. in winter. — Salt-rheum, red, raw, 
burning ; moist or covered with thick crusts. — Chilblains and warts on fingers. 
— Pricking and pain in warts on fingers, evening in bed. — ^Arthritic stiffness 
in joints of fingers. — Finger-nails painful ^^en touched as if bruised. — Finger- 
tips rough, cracked, fissured, with sticking, cutting pain. 

23. JLower Limbs.— Cracking in joints of legs.— Cramps in thighs, 
calves, and feet (all day ; in soles at night). — Furunculi in thighs and calves. 
— Ten|ion in the ham. — Lancinations in knee. — Weakness of knee. — Herpes 
on knee. — Tuberous, itching eruption on calves of legs. — Herpes on ankle 
bon^s, — Burning sensation in soles.— Profuse perspiration on feet. — Foetid 
perspiration of feet with teiiderness.- Coldness of feet.— Swelling of feet. — 
Hof swelling of soles,'— -dwelling and redness of heel with burning pain and 
sliootings, < by walking.— Heels blistered.— Sensation -of splinter in heel. — 



750 


PETROLEUM 


Chilbbuxte on toes, esp. when they itch and are moist ; itch and burn ; 
inflamed in cold weather. — Ulcers on the toes, originating in blisters on the 
toes. — Corns on feet. — Burning and stitching in corns, — Obstinate superficial 
ulcers on toes, with elevated margins and r^ bases, with oozings. — Eruption 
between toes. 

24. Generalities.— Affections in general of any kind, appearing on the 
r. eye ; internal or external occiput ; behind ears ; inner surface of thighs ; 
ball or under part of toes ; knee-joint. — Drawing pains in limbs. — Stiffness 
and tendency to numbness of limbs. — ^Crackingpf joints, with arthritic rigidity 
and drawing, tearing pains. — Swelling and induration of glands, also after a 
contusion. — ^Jerking of limbs by day and during sleep. — Catalepsy ; tonic 
spasms. — Epileptic fits. — Fainting fits, with ebullition of blood, he^it, palpita- 
tion, and pressure at heart. — Great weakness after least exertion, sometimes 
with confused sight, trembling of body, buzzing in ears, and nausea. — ^Weak- 
ness, nausea, and other sufferings, from motion of a carriage.— Weakness in 
morning in bed. — Many of the symptoms appear, or are <, during stormy 
weather. — Transient heat, ebullition of blood, and perspiration after a walk, 
or after a fit of anger. — Emaciation ; also in children. — Sensation of insupport- 
able and general uneasiness, with trembling and dejection. — Heaviness and 
lassitude in all limbs. — Great lassitude morning and evening. — Great tendency 
to take cold. — Repugnance to open air, with shivering when exposed to it.— 
Several symptoms manifest themselves in morning. 

25. Skin. — Swelling and induration of the glands ; also after contusions. 
— Great sensibility of the surface of skin. — Miliary urticaria. — Itching tetters. 
— Itching, excoriated, ahd riinnirtg spots on skin. — Brown and yellow spots 
on skin. — Eruption of itching and burning pustules. — Pruritus 4>f the 
aged.— Dreadful irritation all over body, very intense in vagina, anus and 
perineum, preventing sleep (cured— R. T. C.).— Papular eruptions, esp. 
on face and lips. — Skin sore, crawling sensations. — Rhagades. — The skin is 
hard to h’eal. — Skin unhealthy ; every injury tends to ulceration.— Furunculi. 
—Ulcers with shooting pains ; often deep ulcers, with raised edges. — Proud 
flesh in ulcers.— When a person complains of eruption or itching at night 
(affecting scrotum particularly), the eruption being either dry or moist. — 
Chilblains particularly where they itch a good deal and are moist. — Exanthema 
corroding and spreading ; very difficult to heal— Sensibility of the skin in 
general. — Sores produced by lying in bed. — Warts. — Corns on feet. — Chil- 
blains, sometimes painful. 

26. Sleep. — Disposition to sleep by day and in evening when sitting 
quietly (yawning).— Broken and agitated sleep at night, with many viyid, 
anxious, and frightful dreams (as if somebody were lying alongside of him in 
bed), frequent awakening with a start, and heat with anxiety.— Sensation in 
morning as of having slept too short a time. 

27. Fever.— Shivering with headache, and coldness in hands and face. — 
Chilliness in open air. — Frequent shivering over whole body, and, on ber^oming 
warm, excessive itching of skin. — Shivering or coldness, generally in evening 
(with heat at the same time), and sometimes with blueness of nails,— Sweat 
imnlediately after shivering.— Intermittent fever : Violent chilliness and cold- 
ness of hands and face at 10 a.m. ; half an hour later heat in the face, esp. in 
the eyes, with thirst— Shaking fits, 7 p.m., followed by perspiration, firsf in 



• PETROSELINUM 751 

face, later all over, except in legs, which are quite cold.7-Fever in^vcning, 
with hot face and cold feet, after shivering, — Frequent flushes of heat. — Heat 
after midnight and in morning in bed. — Fever, with full pulse and burning 
sensation in skin.— Pulse accelerate(J from every exertion ; as soon as reposing, 
pulse becomes again slow. — Nocturnal heat. — Nocturnal sweat. 


Petposelinum. 

Carum petroselinum. Petroselinum sativum. Apium petroselinum. 
N, 0 . Umbelliferae. Tincture of whole fresh plant when 
coming into bloom. 

Clinical. — Catheter fever. Cystitis. Dysuria. GleeU Gonorrhoea. Gravel. 
Intermittent fever. Night-blindness. Priapism. 

Chapacterifitios. — Petrosel. is referred to by Hahnemann as a 
gonorrhoeal remedy when frequent desire to urinate exists. It was 
proved by Bethmann. He obtained only thirty-six symptoms, all 
in the genito-urinary sphere, but these were very characteristic, and 
hafe given the remedy a definite place in homoeopathic medicine, 
especially in gonorrhoea and gleet. The leading indication is : Sudden 
urging to urinate ; and drawing, tingling, crawling, or itching in 
navicular fossa. During micturition, burning and tingling from peri- 
neum through whole urethra. After micturition cutting biting in 

• fossa njivicuiaris. Milky or yellow discharge. Parsley tea is a re- 
cognised remedy for gonorrhoea in domestic country practice. Parsley 
eaten after meals, with or without salad oil, is reputed to act as a 
solvent on uric acid if there is a tendency to its formation in the 
urine. I have seen a case in which this effect was apparently pro- 
duced. hi gonorrhoea and gleet I have confirmed its efficiency, given 
in ten-drop doses of the tincture. In a case of dysuria from prostatic 
enlargement (quoted in Critique^ vii. 84) there was frequent urging to 
urinate every half to three-quarters of an hour, with burning pains 

^ in bladder and urethra. Petrosel, 4X, three drops every hour, took 
away all the pains and relieved the tenesmus in a few days. The 
prostate gland itself was not influenced. Hering has collected 

• symptoms from other observers. Farrington says Petrosel is a great 
“ baby medicine ” in urinary difficulties. It has cured numbers of 

• cases of intermittent fever ; and traum^c or other urethral fevers. 
[Parsley is said to be poisonous to ferrets. Fresh butter and parsley 
ajfplied warm is an old remedy for bruises. An infusion is given to 
all children recovering from scarlatina by the matron of a suburban 
infectious hospital. An old gleet has been known to disappear from 
parsley^nfusion ; and an old Edinburgh surgeon used to give it in all 
nephritic and vesical diseases that were chronic. — R. T. C.] 

Relations. — Compare : In gonorrhoea with sudden and frequent 
urging, Cann. s., Canth^, Merc. Screams before urinating from irrita- 
tion of mucous membrane, Aco,, Caust., Borax (Sars., Lyc., and Benx. 
ac.Tiave screaming before urinating when due to gravel). Gonorrhoea, 



752 PETROSELINUM— PHALLUS IMPyDICUS 

strangjMy, frequent urging to urinate ; white stools, Dig. (Dig. has 
slow plilse ; often puffed prepuce ; Sul, indurated prepuce). Cystitis, 
Con. (Con. has intermittent urination ; Petrosel. has inflammation that 
has" travelled back, sudden, irresistible desire). Bubbling in back ; 
urinary disorders, Berb. Uric acid tendency, intermittent fevers, 
Urt. ur. 

SYMPTOMS. 

3. Eyes. — Blind at night, with swelling of eyes. 

4, Ears. — Shrill singing in ears, like a bell ringing out of tune, which 
affects the whole organism, 

ii. Stomach. — Thirsty and hungry, yet as soon as they begin to eat or 
drink they lose all desire. — ^I'witching, jerking pains in epigastrium, flatulent 
eructations, colic, nausea, and vomiting. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Whitish evacuations, like clay ; chronic diarrhoea. 
— Burning at anus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Sudden urging to urinate.— Child suddenly 
seized with desire to urinate ; if not gratified immediately, jumps up and 
down with pain. — So much pain when he passes urine as to cause him to 
shiver and dance round room in agony. — Discharge of a milky fluid from 
urethra. — ^Albuminous yellow discharge from urethra ; gonorrhoea. — Orifice 
of urethra agglutinated with mucus. — Creeping and crawling throughout 
whole length of urethra. — Frequent and almost fruitless want to urinate, 
every half-hour, — Tingling, lancinating, pressure and drawing, in urethra. — 
Crawling and pressure in region of Cowper’s glands in morning in bed, > 
while standing and sitting, — During micturition, burning and tingling from 
perineum through the whole urethra. — Drawing, afterwards itching in fossa 
navi«ulafis ; burning in navicular fossa while urinating. — Frequent desire to 
urinate, caused by crawling stitch behind navicular fossa. — Frequent volup- 
tuous tickling in navicular fossa. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Priapismus, without curvature of penis. — 
Pollutions ; profuse emission toward morning. 

20. Back. — ^Jerking (or bubbling sensation) in muscles of back and arms. 

25* Skin. — Urticaria. 

26. Sleep. — Sleep late, with many anxious dreams. 

27. Fever. — Ague, esp. quotidian ; marked periodicity ; stages regulai* ; 

acute fevers from defective assimilation or perverted innervation, accom- 
panied by flatulent dyspepsia. — Inter mittents, complicated with abdominal 
affections.— Intermittent fevers; complicating traumatic or chronic inflamma- 
tion of urethra, or even stricture. ^ 

Phallus Impudicus. 

Stinkhom. AT, 0. Fungi. Tincture or infusion of whole fungus. 

Clinical.— Gastro-enteralgia. Sweat, viscid. Vertigo. Vomiting. w 

Gha>raot6ristios. — Kalieniczensko took five or six teaspoonfuls of 
an infusion of Phallus in twenty-four hours, and the symptoms o£ the 



PHASEOLUS 


753 


Schema are the effects pbserved There is a general rese^lance 
to the effect of the Agarici — ^vertigo, disordered vision, gastroenteric 
disturbance and viscid sweat. 

SYMPTOMS. 


a. Head.— Vertigo. 

3. Eyes. — ^Vision ; difficult ; obscured. — Objects seem coloured grey, 
as in smoke. 

8. Mouth. — Profuse salivation. 

g. Throat.— Great dryness of throat, with irritation as from black 
pepper. 

II. Stomach.— Loss of appetite.— Devouring thirst. — Violent vomiting 
with profuse salivation. — Gastro-enteralgia. 

Z2. Abdomen. — Painful sensitiveness of whole abdomen. 

13. Stool. — Watery diarrhoea. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine deep red, depositing a sediment of urates 
of Ume and soda. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Dry, oppressive cough. 

24. Generalities. — Great feebleness of whole body. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepiness. 

Fever. — After four days all the pores became opened, profuse, viscid 
perspiration. 


Phaseolus. 

Phaseolus nanus. Dwarf -bean. N.O. Trituration of the dried 
bean. Decoction of dried beans and pods. 

Phaseolus vulgaris. Kidney-bean. Leguininosae. Trituration 
of Ihe dried bean. Decoction of dried beans and pods. 

Ghnical.— Albuminuria. Breast, tumour of. Diabetes. Dropsy. Haematuria. 
Headache. Heart, affections of ; failure of ; palpitation of. Hernia. Hydrothorax. 
Impotence. Pericarditis. Pleurisy. Prostate, diseases of ; haemorrhage from. 
Wounds, punctured. 

• 

CharacteFistics. — I have included under the heading Phaseolus 
both P, nanus and P, vulgaris^ as I cannot discern any ditference in 
•their action. The proving of P. vulg, is by Demeures. Some effects 
^of eating mildewed beans in a child recorded by W. Dale are distin- 
*guished in the Schema by (D). A. M. Qttshing proved P. nanus, but 
has only published the symptoms observed on the heart These are 
dis^ingui^ed by (C). Cured symptoms are bracketed. Some symp- 
toms observed in patients taking the remedy are included in the 
Schema. The New Eng. Med. Gaz. (quoted by Lambert, H. W., xxxi. 
laj) pufilished a translation of a pamphlet by Dr.' Heinrich Ramm on 
the uses of Bean tea.” A lady whom Ramm had treated in vain for 
mitral disease with liver and kidney complications and dropsy, pre- 
sented herself one day apparently cured by drinking Bean tea. This 
led Jiamm to try it in other cases, and he found that renal and cardiac 
VOL. n. 49 



754 


PHASEOLUS 


dropsies were speedily relieved; urine largely increased in quantity, and 
in cas(s of albuminuria, the albumen quickly disappeared. Dropsical 
effusion into pleura, pericardium, and peritoneum, according to 
Ramm, also yield to it ; and all chronic disorders of the urinary tract 
from kidneys to urethra ; pyelitis, vesical catarrh, gravel, calculi, uric 
acid, he says, quickly disappear ; Ramm considers Phas. a most 
important remedy in gout and in diabetes. Ramm used a decoction 
of the whole dried ripe pod “ of the taller variety.” He names it P. 
vulgaris. [The inside of the pod rubbed on warts is said to cure them. 
— R. T. C.j We owe to A. M. Cushing (New Eng. Med. Qaz.^ January, 
1897) the best definition of the power and sphere of action of this 
remedy. He names it from Gray P. nanusj the common white bean.” 
His paper was read in Boston, and he refers to the bean-eating city” 
and to its reputation “ for sudden deaths from brain or heart trouble,” 
and for premature ageing of young men. I am not quite sure 
whether this was jest or earnest, but it points the action of the remedy 
which in Cushing^s proving caused disturbance of the nervous system, 
genital organs (impotence), stomach, bow^els, and kidneys, and this 
symptom, which brought the proving to an abrupt close : “ I suddenly 
felt a curious sensation in the region of the heart. It was so sudden 
and strange I immediately felt my pulse, and found it very irregular 
and feeble, so much so I think I was frightened ; at least, I did* not 
take any more of the medicine.” “ Irregular, weak pulse,” Heart 
failure,” are the chief keynotes of the remedy in heart cases, and 
correspond with the one heart symptom recorded by Allen, Demeures 
in his proving experienced severe headache from fulness in the brain. 
Cushing relates two experiences bearing on this, (i) He gave a 
decoction of the dried pods in a hopeless case of uterine cancer with 
severe general dropsy with apparent relief. Calling one day and 
expecting to find the patient comfortable, he found her dead. ** She 
suddenly screamed, ^ Oh, my head ! ' grasped it with both hands and 
was dead.” (2) A lady doctor, 30, married, no children, never ill 
except with children’s diseases, had had much mental trouble two 
years before, and had done much cycling. Since then her heart had 
given trouble. About five times in a minute the heart would give one 
hard, unpleasant throb, then omit one beat. During the night it was 
much worse and prevented sleep. Phas. 10 was given. Thirty-six' 
hours later the heart would beat a hundred beats without varying, 
and improvement continued ; but the patient had to give up the 
remedy on account of the headache it caused, “ as if something were 
pressing hard against each temple, much worse after each dose qf the 
medicine. The patient was never subject to headaches. Other cases 
of Cushing’s were : (3) Man, 45, dropsy, heart, and other complica- 
tions. Bean pod decoction enabled him to lie down on a couch, and 
markedly diminished the dropsy. (4) Clergyman, 69, many years 
invalided on account of heart disease, after unusual exertion jvas 
greatly exhausted, and became entirely pulseless, and so remained 
four days in spite of treatment till Phas. gx was given. few 
hours pulse returned. In thirty-six hours it was regular and strong, 
and so remained till his death, which occurred two weeks later. (5) 
Lady, 50, weak, tired, badly acting heart for some years. Phe^s, gx 



PHASEOLUS 


755 


was given, and in forty-eight hours “ her heart wheeled into Jine all 
right and remains so.'^ (6) Lady, 87, heart acted t&dly, every third 
beat omitted. After taking Phas. two days pulse quite right. (7) 
Confinement case, primapara, urine loaded with albumen, frightful 
convulsions, forceps delivery. Two hours later the heart failed and 
no stimulants would start it. Phas. qx was given, and in ten minutes 
the heart was all right. Twice in the night the dose had to be 
repeated, but that was all. The albumen rapidly disappeared and a 
quick recovery was made. (8) Man, 92, had been passing bloody 
urine (apparently as much blood as urine) for a week. Had pre- 
viously had urinary troubles, urinating several times in the night, and 
passing catheter twice in twenty-four hours ; but for a little time past 
had not had to use the catheter. Cushing diagnosed prostatic trouble 
and gave Phas, 4X, No. 25 globules in water, a teaspoonful every two 
hours. (9) Another case of prostatic haemorrhage in a man, 70, was 
cured by Phas. 4X globules dry on the tongue. Well in four days. 
(10) Cushing gives an interesting account {Med, Vis.^ xiii. 375) of Phas, 
as a vulnerary. Fifty years ago he accidentally ran one tine of a hay 
fork into the top of his foot. A backwoods doctor promised to have 
him all right next day. He split a medium-sized white bean, bound 
one half, the flat, split side, on the wound. The pain was so severe 
Cushing became delirious, went to sleep, and woke well. In forty- 
one years of practice he has tried it in punctured wounds by rivets, 
nails, &c., and with perfect success every time, (ii) A lady, 30, took 
a tablet containing gr. 12J of Morphine placed in the middle of a 
baked bean with suicidal intent. It was in the evening, having fasted 
since noorf. She went to sleep and woke at 7 a.m, next morning, 
surprisea to find herself in this world. She slept again till ii a.m., 
when she had to get up, but could not walk. A doctor was sent for. 
She vomited a little mucus, some dark specks like blood, and a small 
piece of lettuce, eaten the previous noon. Query : Did Phas, antidote 
Morph, f ii2) Robust man, 50, had grippe, which developed rheuma- 
tism, worse in arms, occasionally below elbows. Pain so severe he 
could not lie in bed at nights. Drank much water. Passed much urine, 
which Cushing found to contain 3*5 per cent, of sugar. Phas, sx 
every four hours removed all but a trace of sugar in eight days, and 
’the patient was in other respects well. S. R. Stone {Amer, Hom,^ 
xxiv. 123) reports the case of Mr. T., 69, whom he found semi-con- 
scious, yet suffering severely, having been seized with distress in heart 
region ; respiration laboured ; pulse 51. Had had attacks previously, 
but lighter, and the pulse in them had alyirays been slow. Phas, ox 
was given, at first every half-hour, then every hour. Next day patient 
wa» nearly well, and said he could feel every dose working.^^ In a 
case reported by Cushing, a nurse, 50, had fearful time with her 
heart palpitating and feeling as if she should die Phas, isx cured, 
PaPltent ^ never took anything in her life that did her so much good 
(ff. R., xii. 237). Remarkable symptoms of the proving were : Sore- 
ness foncA-^yeballs, right rib, epigastrium, right humerus. The 
headache was < by movement of the head or any mental exertion, 
reading, writing, &c. Pressure <. Breathing slow; pulse slow or 
extinct. 



756 


PHASEOLUS 


BelatioiiB.— Co>n^ar« ; The Leguminosae. In heart, Dig., Cratasg., 
Spig., Lach., Thyr. Punctured wounds. Hyper., Led. Diabetes, 
Syzyg., Thyr., Nat. suL, Uran. nit. 

BTMPTOHS. 

1. Mind. — Could only be roused by speaking loudly (D). — Frightened 
by irregular action of heart (C). — (Feeling that she would die, with palpi* 
tation.) 

2. Head. — Headache, chiefly in forehead and orbits, from fulness of 
brain ; < every movement of head ; from 12 noon to bedtime ; > in bed, < 
again 10 a.ni. next day. — Pain r. side forehead while writing. — Severe head- 
ache, as if something pressing hard against each temple, much < after 
each dose of P/ras. (in patient cured of heart symptoms, not a subject of head- 
aches). — Suddenly screamed, Oh, my head ! " grasped it with both hands, 
and was dead (in cancer case taking a decoction of Phas,, including dried 
pod, C). 

3. Eyes. — Eyeballs (esp. r.) painful to touch as from a blow. — Scalding 
pain in r. orbit. — Pain in r. orbit when wrinkling skin of forehead. — Very 
smart itching in inner canthi. — Pain over r. orbit < by any mental exertion. — 
Pupils widely dilated and insensible (D). 

6. Face. — Features expressed suffering (D). 

11, Stomach. — Pain in epigastrium when touched, esp. in region of 
pylorus. — {Severe, dull pain in epigastrium, vomiting, &c., Phas, 4X cured.) 

12. Abdomen. — Pressure on abdomen apparently gave pain, child 

shrank from it and drew up legs (D). — Pain like hernia in r. inguinal ring, 
lasting all day. * 

14. Urinary Organs. — Bloody urine.—Diabetes. — Uric acid gravel. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Complete impotence (C). — Prostate, en- 
largement of. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Breathing slow and sighing (D). — (Respira- 
tions eight a minute.) 

iS. Chest. — Cartilage of last true r. rib painful as if bruised. — hard, 
rounded, projecting, movable tumour, painful to touch, appears suddenly, 
above r. nipple, in full state of development (15th day).-— (Hydrothorax.) 

19. Heart.*— Pulse at wrists rapid and almost imperceptible (D). — Sudden 
curious sensation in region of heart ; so sudden and strange he immediately 
felt his pulse and found it very weak and irregular ; was frightened and dis 
continued the proving (C). — (Sick feeling about heart with weak pulse.)— (Last 
stage of heart disease, pulseless. — Phas, 9X restored pulse, and it remained good 
till death, three weeks later.) — (For two years, about five times each minute 
heart would give one hard throb, then omit one beat ; < nighj, Phat k) 
cured this and caused headache.) — (Restored heart action in case of puerperjal 
convulsions and albuminuria when heart failed.)— (Unconscious, pulseless, 
respirations eight a minute.)— (Distress in region of heart, pulse very slow.— 
Stone.)— Dropsy of pericardium.)— (Fearful palpitation and feeling that she 
should die.) ® 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pain to touch in extremity of head of r. humerus. 

27* Fever* — Bedewed with cold perspiration (D), ^ 



PHELLAND'RIUM 


757 


Phellandrium. 

CEnanthe phellandrium. Phellandrium aguaticum. Water drop- 
wort. Fine-leaved water-hemlock. Horse-bane. N, 0 . Um- 
belliferae. Tincture of fresh ripe fruit. 

CUllieal*-— Abdomen, coldness in. Asthma. Breasts, affections of. Bronchitis. 

; Catarrh. Ciliary neuralgia. Cory/a. Cough. Headache. Influenza. Inter- 
mittent fever. Hippies, painful. Phthisis. Sleeplessness, excessive. Tongue, 
soreness of. 

Charaoteristios. — Phelland. which, like (Enanthe croc.^ grows in 
moist places, and even in the water itself, has not shown the poisonous 
properties of the latter. The provings were made by Nenning and 
Richter with tincture of the seeds. The symptoms show a general 
resemblance to those of the poisonous Umbelliferae — vertigo, head- 
ache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, drowsiness and weakness, but 
Phelland. is easily distinguished from the rest in its particular features. 
The provings developed many symptoms in both mammae, especially 
the right, stitches shooting inward being most marked. Clinical ex- 
perience in nursing women has further brought out its characteristics. 
The^keynote is Intolerable pain in lactiferous tubes between the acts 
of nursing.’* It has also Pain in nipples on each application of 
child.” Either breast may be affected, but the right breast and nipple 
were more affected than the left. The breast and chest symptoms 
have led to the use of Phelland. in phthisis and other chest affections, 
and it is jn right-side affections that Phelland. has done its best work. 
The cough is continuous and suffocating ; the sputa punilent and 
horribly offensive. There are also offensive eructations, smelling of 
bed-bugs. There is burning as from vesicles on the tongue, and again 
the right border is most affegjed. Nausea ; sick, empty, faint feeling 
at epigastrium. Burning and stitches. “ Desire for acids ” is a 
leading symptom. The headaches and eye-pains are a leading feature 
of Phelland. Headaches involving the eyes ; with inflammation of 
the eyes. Heavy headaches ; as if a crushing weight were on vertex ; 
as if the head would be drawn back by a weight in the nape. Ciliary 
neuralgia. Obscured vision. Phelland. has the sense of enlargement 
of the head with fulness. Abnormal sleepiness following confinement 
has been cured by it. Goullon, junr., calls attention to the value of 
Phelland. as a cough remedy {H. i?., iii. 151). He regards it as a 
** universal cough remedy,” but particularly useful in phthisicy coughs. 
He gives this case : Mrs. E., of spare build, has almost always a slight 
cough, and has had repeated attacks of influenza of weeks’ and even 
months’ duration. Of late she suffers early in the morning with con- 
tinuous cough for an hour or more accompanied by dyspnoea and 
prflstratibn. Phelland, 2x in water, thrice daily, effected a rapid cure, 
Phelland. 2X also cured a young teacher who was harassed by a 
chronic persistent cough, A. J. T. (H. R., i. 170) with Phelland. 
200 removed in an inveterate coffee-drinker this symptom : “ In the 
evenjng turns purplish-red in the face, with staring eyes and extreme 
diflSculty in breathing,” He found in an old repertory under 



PHECLANDRIUM 


758 

PhellaAd. : Livid redness of face 7 to 8 p-m.” Ussher {H. W., 
xxiv. 20) had a patient who suffered from excessive sleepiness after 
the birttt of her last child. She would even go to sleep standing oyer 
her washtub. Phelland, and l^ter 200^ repeated thrice daily^ 
quickly relieved her. Peculiar sensations are : As if head were moving 
to and fro. Sound in brain as if striking a piece of silver. As if a 
stone or lump of lead on vertex. As if a red-hot iron were moved 
close to left side of neck. As if blood-vessels in whole body were in 
vibrating motion. Though there were many symptoms of heat and 
burning, symptoms of coldness are also pronounced. Coldness of 
head with headache (also sweat with headache) ; coldness in abdomen, 
with movements ; icy coldness after stool. Phelland. is suited to : 
Persons of a feeble, irritable, lymphatic temperament, with weak and 
deficient nutrition. The symptoms are < in open air ; after dinner ; 
during and after eating ; on appearance of menses ; sitting ; stand- 
ing ; lying down ; after spirituous drinks ; after drinking water ; while 
swallowing ; after stool (coldness in abdomen). > In open air 
(vertigo and head symptoms) ; during dinner (headache) ; eating 
bread (sore throat) ; motion, in open air ; lying on left side ; scratch- 
ing ; rubbing. Chilliness predominates, and the catarrh and asthma 
of Phelland. are > in warm and < in cold seasons. Open = 
sense of intoxication ; < vertigo. < During increasing moon. 

Relations. — Aniidoied by : Rheum (diarrhoea). Compare : Breast 
symptoms, Con., Phyt, Bry., 01 . an. ( 01 . an. has stitches shooting out ; 
Phelland. stitches shooting tn). Painful nursing, Crot. t. (pains in 
breast go through to back when nursing), Bov. (empty feeling). 
Stitches, K. ca. Headache involving eyes, Onos. Pains «in right 
chest, Zn. (right apex. Calc., Ars. ; r. middle, Sep. ; right base, Chel., 
Lachn., K. ca., Sep. ; left apex, Ars. ; left base. Ox. ac., Sul.). Last 
stage of phthisis, sputa terribly offensive, Sil. Offensive breath with 
cough. Caps. Sleepiness, Op., Nux m. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Character sad, anxious, profoundly meditative, sometimes 
given to extravagant merriment. — Peevish arrogance. 

2. Head. — Confusion in head, as from intoxication. — Heaviness of head, 
as if too large and too full ; as if it would be drawn back by a weight in nape. 
— ^Vertigo, which almost occasions falling backward, forward, or sideways, 
esp. to side to which one turns in room ; < (sometimes » in open air,«^ b}^ 
lying down. — Sound in brain as if one were beating on a metal that was freely 
swinging, which woke him, after which the sound died away (5 a.m.).*— Head- 
ache, which disappears in open air, and during dinner.-— Headache with per- 
spiration on top of head, fifteen minutes after dinner, soon followed by 
coldness of the head. — Dizzy headache in (1.) forehead with increased wasmth 
of head and hands without perspiration. — Headache involving nerves going 
to eyes, crushing feeling on vertex with burning of eyes and lachrymation, — 
Pai^ul heaviness of vertex as if a hard body were lying on it. — Pain like 
weight on vertex with aching, burning, shooting pains in temples. — ^Conmres- 
sive pain in sides of head.— Digging pain in head.— Ebullition of blood, with 



PHELLANDRIUM 


759 


heat and throbbing in head.*— In occiput : intermitting pressure ; -tfurning, 
constrictive sensation ; tearing ; burrowing ; stitches. — Itching, biting like 
flea-bites in scalp. 

3. Eyes.— Itching in eyes.— Burning sensation in lids, morning and 
evening. — Frequent twitching of 1 . lids. — ^Twitching of lids, which close easily 
from a sensation of heaviness and sleepiness. — Dryness of eyes, with shooting 
and burning pain. — Frequent tearing in upper r. orbital margin in the bone. — 
Ciliary neuralgia, < attempting to read or sew ; fearful intolerance of light ; 
lids swollen and half-closed. — Lachr3rmation, esp. in open air. — Sight cloudy, 
as if directed through a fog, < when looking intently at any object. 

4* Ears. — Tearings and boring in ears. — Singing and noises in r. ear. 

5. Nose. — Nostrils red, burning, and (with upper lip) swollen. — Itching, 
confluent vesicles in nostrils. — Loss of smell. — Coryza, with obstruction of 
nose, can only breathe through mouth. 

6. Face. — Heat in face. — Livid redness of face from 7 to 8 p.m. — 
Tension in skin of face. — ^Violent, and almost tearing, quivering in cheek. 

8. Mouth. — ^Toothache with tearing or shooting pain. — Gums red, 
swollen, and painful. — Dryness of mouth and throat at night. — Increase of 
frothy saliva in mouth, which it is necessary to expectorate. — Burning pain 
and burning vesicles on tongue (r. margin towards lip). — Clammy or cheese- 
liktf taste. — Sweetish taste after drinking water. — Beer has a bitter taste. 

9. Throat. — Sore throat, with pressive and shooting pain when not 
swallowing, and during empty deglutition, but not when swallowing food. 

11. Stomach. — ^Thirst for milk and for beer, with repugnance to and 
dread of water. — Desire for acid drinks with thirst. — Disgust and nausea with 
inclination \o vomit and to eructate. — Offensive risings, which have the smell 
of bugs, or with taste of food. — Pain in stomach, as if it were empty. — 
Sensation as if stomach were full of water, that would run up, followed by 
a sensation as if a large round body were twisting about in stomach, that 
afterwards fell downward, followed by rumbling in stomach. — Burning pain 
in stomaefi. 

12. Abdomen. — Pinchings in the abdomen. — Sensation of coldness in 
the abdomen, with movements in intestines. — Icy coldness in intestines ; after 
stool ; after spirituous drinks. — Burning extending from abdomen up into 

* stomach, following eructations of the drug. — Pinching and cutting pains as if 
diarrhoea would come on. — Cutting and pinching in hypogastrium. — Dull 
stitch in r. flank ; on bending to that side violent shock in r. inguinal region, 

* after dinner. — Incarcerated flatus in hypochondria and lumbar region. 

* x^. Stool and Anus. — Hard faeces, with clawing and pressure at anus. 
— Liquid evacuation, with tenesmus, followed by pain as of excoriation in 
anps.— Abundant expulsion of flatus during and after the evacuation. — Burning 
in anu^s. — itching in anus that becomes a burning after rubbing. 

• 14. Urinary Organs. — Pale and scanty urine. — Desire to urinate, but 
omb^ veiy little passed, with violent burning in evening. — Urine pale, almost 
greenish. 

I5ft Male Sexual Organs. — Itching on prepuce, > by scratching. 

Id* Female Sexual Organs.— Menses too early.— At commencement 
of menses, lassitude, 3rawning, and bruised pain in thighs. — She could neither 
sit, Stand, nor lie for the pain.^Menses flowed only morning and evening, 



76 o 


PHELLANDRIUM 


and ratHer more profusely than usual.— Menses that had just begun ceased.— 
Menses twelve days early, lasting only a day and a half, very scanty, though 
without any difficulties, quite unusual. — Pain in nipples on each application of 
child,— Always after nursing intolerable pain in r. breast along course of lac- 
tiferous tubes ; physical and mental distress ; hysterical weeping ; this 
occurred some time after micturition, the nipples were sore with purulent 
discharge, the pain appearing after nipples were healed. — Intolerable pains in 
lactiferous tubes between the acts of nursing. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness and roughness in throat and 
fluent coryza. — Suffocating, dry cough, with shortness of breath. — Nocturnal 
cough from accumulation of mucus in throat. — Frequent expectoration of 
mucus, without cough, in morning. — Shortness of breath, esp. when walking. 

z8. Chest. — Oppression of chest when standing and taking a deep 
inspiration. — Stitches in chest. — (Phthisis, esp. of r. lung ; cavity ; burning on 
breathing ; continuous cough ; profuse sweat ; diarrhoea ; vomiting of food ; 
copious purulent sputa, terribly offensive ; emaciation.) — Pressure on side of 
chest in bed in morning, which disappears when lying on the side affected. — 
Sharp stitches, extending inward beneath 1. mamma, not affected by breath- 
ing. — Painful tearing stitches extend through whole 1. mamma. — ^Violent 
stitch through r. mamma, near sternum, extending to back between shoulders, 
then down into r. side of sacrum, that was very painful on breathing, im- 
mediately after dinner. — Biting sticking in r. nipple, evening before lying 
down. 

ao. Neck and Back. — Sensation on 1. side of neck below jaw as if red- 
hot iron were moved along close to the part. — Tearing in 1. side of neck to 
jaw. — Stitches : between shoulders ; in lower end of 1. scapula ; in s^prum, — 
Pain as from a bruise in loins when seated. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Tearing in shoulders and arms. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Tearing along anterior surface of r. thigh. — ^Vibra- 
tion in calves. — Sensation as of congested blood in knees. 

24. Generalities. — Tearing pains in limbs. — Sensation of treinbling in 
all the vessels of the body. — The majority of symptoms appear when patient 
is quietly seated, standing, or lying down ; they are > by movement and in 
open air. — Great dejection and lassitude. 

25. Skin. — Itching, sometimes burning or smarting, disappearing quickly 
when the parts are scratched. — Small blue spots, like petechias. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepiness during day, with frequent yawning. — So sleepy 
would fall asleep standing at work, lasting an hour. — Retarded sleep.— Fre- 
quent and early waking, or prolonged sleep in morning. — Dreams : of light- 
ning with fright ; of a robbery in which he received many blows. 

27. Fever. — Predominance of shivering, sometimes with shaking chills, 
generally neither accompanied nor followed by heat or thirst. — Shuddering, 
generally in evening, sometimes as if cold water had been poured over body.'' 
— Inability to urinate the day after ague attack. — Accelerated pulse, o 



PHENACETINUM 


761 


Phenacetinom. 

Para-acetphenatidine. CeH^OCaHsNHCaHjO. 

Clinical* — Cyanosis. Face, eruption on. Fevers. Headache. Perspiration, 
excessive. Typhoid fever. Uraemia. 

OhaPaoteristios. — Phenacet. belongs to the Aniline group, and 
was introduced into old-school practice as a remedy in febrile 
states and neuralgias, free from the dangers of Antjeb,^ Attiipyr,, 
Exalg.y &c. Though not so dangerous as these, it is not free from ill 
effects. These have been well summed up by F. G. Oehme (//. /?., 
XV. 506), and I have put them in Schema form, and added a symptom 
observed by myself on a young lady who had taken PhenaceL for 
headaches : A circumscribed rash on both cheeks which came out 
red, lasted four days and then peeled, and as soon as it was clear the 
process was repeated. I tried many remedies with varying success, 
but it finally disappeared under Aim. 30, one powder at bedtime. 


SYMPTOMS. 


1. Mind. — Anxiety. 

2 . — ^Vertigo, faintness. — Headache and flushed face. 

3. Eyes. — (Edema of lower lids and fingers. 

4. Ears. — Permanent deafness. 

6. Face. — Circumscribed, erythematous, exfoliating eruption on both 
checks ; fading away and recurring for several weeks (finally cured with 
Aim. 30). • 

xz. Stomach. — Nausea ; epigastric pains. 

14. Urinary Organs.— Large doses may cause uraemia. — Frequent 
urination at night (cured in two cases). 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Dyspnoea. 

19. Heart. — Decrease of cardiac vigour ; pulse slow, almost impercep- 
tible. 

24. Generalities. — Severe cyanosis, esp. of limbs, chilliness, nausea, 
epigastric pains, faintness, vertigo. — Trembling from nervous excitement. — 
Weakness and numbness of whole body, cold perspiration, collapse. 

^25. Skin. — Febrile exanthema; patches profusely scattered on limbs, 
scanty on»trunk ; disappearing on pressure, headache, flushed face (from five 
grains daily). 

%^26, ^leep. — Incessant 3rawning ; drowsiness. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness. — Sweating ; frequently profuse in low states of 
the sptem. 



762 


PHOSPHORICUM ACIDUM 


Pblorizinum, 

Phlorizin. (A substance discovered in the fresh bark of the Apple, 
Pear, Cherry, and Plum.) C^Ha^O,,. Solution. Trituration. 

GUnioals — Diabetes. Herpes preputialis. Intermittent fever. 

Charaoteristics. — Phloriz. exists in fine, silky, four-sided, colour- 
less needles, soluble in water. It has a bitter and slightly astringent 
taste, and has been used in old-school practice as a remedy for inter- 
mittent fever, and whilst being administered for this it has produced 
glycosuria. This observation has led to its successful use by homoeo- 
paths in cases of diabetes. Successes with the 3X and 6 have been 
reported. A patient to whom it was given by Burnett accused him of 
having given him a preparation of apples. The man discovered it because 
it produced herpes along the dorsum of the penis, an effect which in- 
variably occurred whenever he ventured to eat apples. V. Mering. 
{H, IF., xxiv. 535) pxoduced glycosuria in dogs with Phlor, ; but if 
Syzyg. was given simultaneously with Phlor,^ no glycosuria appeared. 


Phosphoricum Acidom. 

Phosphoric acid. H3PO4. Dilution. (The dilute acid of B.P. forms 
the homcBopathic i x. In U.S. the first solution is made of 
glacial Phosphoric Acid.) 

Clinical.— Asthma. Boils. Brainfag, Bronchitis ; capillary. 
Chancre. Chilblains. Cholera. Climacteric flushes and vertigo. Coccygodynia. 
Condylomata. Corns. Cough. Coxalgia. Debility. Diabetes. Diarrbfea. Dys- 
pepsia. Emissions. Enteric fever. Enuresis. Feet^ sore. Flatulence. Ganglion. 
Gout. Gravel, Hair^ falling off. Headache ; of school children. Hectic. Herpes. 
Hip^oint disease. Homesickness. Impotence. Joints^ scrofulous. Lactation defec- 
tive. Levitation. Lienteria. Locomotor ataxy. Love, disappointed. Masturba- 
tion. Mental weakness. Mercurial syphilis. Navel, pains in. Neurasthenia* 
Nymphomania. Osteo-myelitis. Perspiration^ profuse. Phosphaturia. Physometra. 
Pimples. Pregnancy ^ diarrhoea of; nausea of. Prepuce, warts on. Psoas abscess. 
Puerperal eclampsia. Purpura. Rheumatism. Sciatica. Scurvy. Self abuse. 
Spermatorrhoea. Spinal caries. Sycosis Hahnemann!. Syphilis. Tetters. Typhus 
fever. Ulcers. f7n«e, phosphatic. Uterus, prolapse of. Varices. Vertigo. 
Warts. Wens. Worms. 

ChttraotoristiOB. — Phos, ac, is less poisonous than Phos, Our 
chief knowledge of it is derived from Hahnemann^s provings in 
Af, M, P, These show a marked action on the emotional and 
sensorial faculties, a drowsy, depressed, apathetic state being pro- 
duced, such as is not unfrequently met with in typhoid fevers.' Tbt 
keynote of the Phos, ac, stupor is that the patient is easily aroused 
and then is fully conscious. Indifference ; prostrated and stuMfied 
with grief ; effects of disappointed love. Home-sick. The mmd is 
confused ; thoughts cannot be connected ; thinking makes him diazy. 
The legs tremble in walking and the limbs are as difficult to confrol 



PHOSPHORICUM ACIDUM 


763 


as the thoughts. Many symptoms of vertigo are produced, and one 
is pecuKan Phos, has a sensation as if the chair he was sitting on 
was rising ; Phos. ac. has this : Sensation as if the feet were rising 
until he stood on his head. TJiis very symptom occurred in a patient 
of Skinner^s su|6ering from small-pox. The disease had been cut 
short by VarioL^ when the patient, a lady, complained that her feet 
were rising to the ceiling, and begged her nurses to keep them down. 
Phos. ac. speedily put her straight. Phos. ac. causes illusions of the 
senses as well as of the sensorium, bells are heard, ciphers, sparks, 
&c., are seen. At the same time there is exalted sensitiveness to light, 
sound, and odours ; odours take away his breath.^^ A remarkable 
effect was noted by Becher, one of Hahnemann^s provers (the same 
who experienced the topsy-turvy symptom just mentioned), namely, 
that the right pupil became widely dilate while the left remained 
normal : the more he strained the eye the wider the pupil became 
until the iris almost disappeared. Franz had this symptom : Sees 
things lying near him (outside the sphere of vision) moving.” Meyer 
had a somewhat analogous mental symptom : When reading a thou- 
sand other thoughts came into his head, and he could not rightly com- 
prehend anything ; what he read became as if dark in his head, and he 
irj^mediately forgot all ; what he had long known he could only recall 
with difficulty.” Such states of mind and the senses are frequently 
observed in those under the influence of grief and other depressing 
emotions ; from over-study ; and in the subjects of venereal excesses 
and seminal loss. But whilst these losses produce extreme weakness 
of mind. and body, and an abashed, sad state of mind with despair 
of cmpe, there is one drain which does not debilitate — a diarrhoea. 

Persistent, painless, watery diarrhoea, often containing undigested 
particles of food, and which does not debilitate,” is a keynote of 
Phos. ac. Another characteristic in connection with the debility of 
Phos. ac^ is that though the weakness is very great the patient is rested 
by a short sleep. {Phos. also has > by sleep, but not so markedly by a 
mart sleep.) The copious discharges of Phos. ac. appear in the sweat 
and urine. The keynote of the enuresis of Phos. ac. is that the child 
passes a great quantity of urine. The polyuria and dry mouth and 
throat give leading correspondences for Phos. ac. in diabetes ; and 
when there is in addition a history of sexual excess, or of severe 
mentol or emotional over-strain, the indications will be very clear. 
White, milliy urine ; and also white stools, are very characteristic of 
^ Phos. ac. The urine may be passed clear but turns milky at once, 
and is very offensive. If flatulence is to K)e regarded as an excretion 
^at is another instance of the excess of Phos. ac. There is meteoristic 
distension and passing of flatus in large quantities ; sometimes with 
. odour of ®rlic. Meteoristic distension ; rumbling or gurgling and 
{miSe jis if there were water in abdomen, < when touched and when 
tne body is bent backward and forward.” A case quoted from 
H. Maandblad. illustrates the action of Phos. ac. in gastric affections. 
A lilarried woman, 36,^ mother of eight children, had for some time 
been so melancholy and depressed as to be unable to fulfil her house- 
held duties. There was no discoverable mental cause, though her 
condition had been made < by a sudden death in the family. The 



764 


PHOSPHORICUM ACIDUM 


beginning of the illness was apparently a weakness of the stomach : 
small appetite ; always pain and distension after eating ; the food 
seemed to lie long in the stomach undigested Phos, ac. 6x, ten drops 
three times a day, soon restored the patient. In connection with the 
flatulence of Phos. ac. there is even bloating of the uterus with gas. 
The menses are excessive and premature ; and there are many syinp- 
toms connected with the pregnant and puerperal state, including 
debility from lactation. Phos. ac, has many respiratory symptoms, 
and this is a keynote : “ Weak feeling in chest from talking, coughing, 
or sitting too long ; > by walking.” Hoarseness and nasal voice ; 
dyspnoea ; capillary bronchitis. The cough seems to be caused by 
tickling of a feather from middle of chest to larynx, low down in 
chest, about ensiform cartilage, pit of stomach ; is < evening after 
lying down ; expectoration muco-purulent ; salty ; bloody ; offensive. 
Every draught of air = fresh cold. Cough sss headache ; nausea and 
vomiting of food ; spurting of urine. A very prominent sensation 
running through the proving is that of pressure ; pressure as from a 
crushing weight in vertex, forehead, sternum. Pressure in eyes ; in 
navel ; in left breast. Squeezing above the knee ; in the sole. The 
haemorrhages of Phos. ac. are dark, profuse, with passive haemor- 
rhages. A case of land scurvy {quoted Amer. Hom.j xxii. 421) con- 
tracted in mining camps presented the usual condition of the gums, 
and also purpureal spots covering the whole body. Patient was able 
to be about, and had little pain, but was despondent. Pulse weak, very 
slow. Had been months ill under old-school treatment. Merc, sot 
was given but did not relieve. Phos. ac. given strong enough to taste 
acid speedily cured. A peculiar symptom of Phos. ac. is involuntary 
biting of tongue in sleep. The sphincters are weakened, and there is 
involuntaiy escape of faeces and urine, the latter especially on cough- 
ing or movement. Peculiar sensations are ; As if intoxicated. As if 
head would burst. As if feet going up. As if weight in head. As if 
brain crushed. Bones as if scraped with a knife. As if eyeballs too 
large. As if white of egg had dried on face. As if lower jaw were 
going to break. Nausea as if in soft palate ; in throat. As if stomach 
being balanced up and down. Heavy load in stomach. Ants crawl- 
ing over body. Uterus as if filled with wind. Tickling in chest as 
with a feather ; as with down in larynx. Red-hot coal on arm and 
shoulder. Phos. ac. is suited to : (i) Persons of originally strong con- 
stitution weakened by loss of fluids ; excesses ; violent, acute diseases ; 
chagrin or a long succession of moral emotions. (2) Persons of mild 
disposition. (3) Children and young people who have grown tbo 
rapidly, tall, slender, and slim ; with pains in hack and limbs as if 
beaten ; growing pains. Lutze (Hahn. Adv., 1900, 664) cured with 
Phos. ac. a German woman, 66, of chronic^ early morning, painless 
diarrhoea after the failure of Pod. and partial success of Gels. The 
patient had been ill two years, dating from the time she came fb 
Brooklyn from Germany to be near her daughters. One of the latter 

£ ve Lutze the keynote the case by telling him that her mother Ivas 

me-sick, and wanted to return to Germany y though she had not a single 
relative there. — ^The Symptoms are : < By music (every note las stitch jn 
ears ; violent p£uns m head). Slight shock or noise a pressure in 



PHOSPHORICUM ACIDUM 


765 


head to be extremely violent. Odours ss vomiting. Bad* news ; 
depressing emotions = cough, diarrhoea, &c. Touch <. Movement 
of child SK escape of stool. Many symptoms are < evening and 
night > After short sleep. Many symptoms are > walking. Sitting 
<. Standing <. < Lying oh left side. < Side on which he lies. 
< Talking. < From mental affections ; suppressed eruptions ; lo^s 
of .fluids, especially seminal ; masturbation ; perspiration ; urination. 
There is desire for warm food ; which > pressive pain in stomach. 
Warm room <. Warmth of bed > pains in bowels. Aversion to 
uncover in heat. < By draught ; wind ; snowy air. Cannot bear 
draught on chest. Every draught = fresh cold. Catching cold in 
summer = diarrhoea. Least cold =: arthritic pains. Coldness of 
part < pains. Fresh air = invigoration. 

Belations. — Antidoted by : Camph., Coff., Staph. Compatible : 
Chi,, before or after, in colliquative sweats, diarrhoea, and debility ; 
after Nux in fainting after a meal ; after Rhus in typhoid. Followed 
well by : Ars., Bell,, Caust., Lyc., Nux, Puls., Sep., SuL, Calc, p., 
Fer. p., K. ph., Nat. p. Compare : Effects of grief, &c., Ign. (Phos. 
ac. deeper, more settled despair, hair turns grey, crushing weight on 
vertex). Growing too fast, Calc. (Calc, fast and fat ; Phos. ac. fast and 
tall). School headaches, Nat. m.. Calc. ph. Typhoid and typhus, 
Rhus (both have nose-bleed at beginning of typhus, with Rhus it > ; 
with Phos. ac. not ; Phos. ac. follows Rhus ; both have > by move- 
ment). Cina (bores Angers in nose), Pho. (Pho. has more dryness 
of tongue, more sensorial excitement and intolerance of noises or 
odours ; if diarrhoea is present it is blood-streaked and looks like flesh 
water)<^ Nit. s. d. (sensorial apathy) ; Arn. (more developed stupor) ; 
Op, (srertor ; countenance deeper red, almost brownish red ; Phos. 
ac. sunken hippocratic). Home-sickness, Caps. (Caps, has red 
cheeks). Lienteric diarrhoea, Chi. (Chi. exhausts rapidly ; Phos. ac. 
not). Loss of seminal fluids, Chi. (Chi. acute ; Phos. ac. chronic 
effects). • Tuberculosis, Pho. (Phos. ac. better than Pho. when there 
is cough from tickling at ensiform cartilage, < evening and lying 
down at night ; weakness causing dyspnoea ; < from draught on 
chest). Diabetes, Lact. ac. Growing pains, Guaiac. Bad news, effects 
of, Coloc., Gels. As if white of egg had dried on face, Aim., Bar. 

* acet. Affections of palate, Mang. Aversion to bread ; effects of 
masturbation, Nat. m. Effects of music, Ainbra, Pho* Over- lifting, 

* Calc. Nausea at sight of food, especially during pregnancy, Eu. perf. ; 
at sight of food, Colch., Lyc., Mosch., Phos. ac., Saba., &pi. ; at smell 

* of food, Colch., Eu. perf. Inquietude abou^ health and life, Calc., Pho. 
Apathy, K. ca. (Phos. ac. sensorial ; K. ca. from exhaustion — puer^ 
pcral mania, puerperal fever). Cerebro-spinal exhaustion from over- 
work, Pic. ac. Apathy with indifference (Mur. ac. taciturnity with 
"indifference ; Sul. listless ; Hell. n. not easily roused). Mild, yielding 
disposHion, Puls. Headache > by lying down, Bry., Gels., Sil. 
Neurosis in stump after amputation, Cepa. Masturbation when 
patient distressed by culpability of act, Dros,, Staph. Sycosis, Thuj., 
Sabi. Escape of urine during cough, Caust., Nat. m., Puls. Nausea 
in throat, Cupr., Cycl., PuL, Stan. Feet as if in air, Passif. 

* OEuaatlon. — Bad news. Grief. Chagrin. Disappointed love. 



766 


PHOSPHORICUM ACIDUM 


Separation from home. Loss of fluids. Sexual excesses* Injuries* 
Gyrations. Over-lifting. Over-study. Shock, 

SYMPTOJjIS. 

X, Mind. — Disposition to weep, as from nostalgia.— Bad efFects from 
grief, sorrow, unfortunate love, with great emaciation, sleepiness, and morn- 
ing sweat. — Sadness and uneasiness respecting the future. — Anxious inquiries 
respecting the disease under treatment.— Restlessness and precipitation.— 
Silent (sadness) peevishness and aversion to conversation. — Great indifference. 
— ^A complete indifference to everything ; not a soporous, delirious, or irrit- 
able condition, but simply an indifferent state of mind to ail things ; patient 
does not want anything, nor to speak, shows no interest in the outside world 
(may occur in any disease in fevers of very low type). — Difficulty of compre- 
hension, patient will think a little while about a question, perhaps answers it, 
then forgets all about it ; dizziness of the mind. — ^When reading, a thousand 
other thoughts came into his head, could not rightly comprehend an3rthing ; 
what he read became as if dark in his head and he immediately forgot all ; 
what he had long known he could only recall with difficulty. — Inability to 
endure noise or conversation. — Dulness and indolence of mind, with want 
of imagination. — ^Weakness of memory.— Imbecility. — Cannot connect his 
thoughts. — Paucity of ideas and unfitness for intellectual labour. — Illusions of 
the senses ; hears a bell pealing ; sees only ciphers before his eyes. 

2. Head. — ^Vertigo : head sinks forward or backward ; on closing eyes ; 
at climaxis with flushes and sweat ; in typhus ; when lying in bed, as if feet 
were going up and he was standing on his head ; after reflection.-^tupefac- 
tion in forehead, with somnolency without snoring, eyes closed^^Head 
bewildered, as after intoxication or immoderate pollutions. — Sensation as if 
intoxicated, evening, in warm room, with humming in head, which feels as if 
it would burst when coughing. — Stunning vertigo when standing and walk- 
ing, esp. in evening. — Pressure as from a weight in head, or as if yprtex had 
been beaten. — Headache in morning.— Aching with tingling in head. — Head- 
ache^usually from behind forward. — Constant headache, which compels to lie 
down, < to an insupportable degree by the slightest commotion or by noise. 
—Heaviness of head, as if full of water. — ^Violent pressure in forehead in 
morning on waking. — ^As if temples and sides of head were squeezed together 
by forceps. — Cramp-like and hard pressure in head, < by pressing on head 
and by turning it ; also by meditation and by going up stairs, but esp. after 
midnight, in the part which presses pillow.— Compression in brain.— Tearing 
headache. — Lancinations in temples or above eyes. — Stitches over one (the r.) 
eye. — ^Jerks or shocks, blows and hammering in head. — ^jClrawing pains in 
bones of occiput.— Grey, lank hair, like tow.— The hair becomes grey early ^ 
flaxen, and ve^ greasy, falls off; also hair of, beard, esp. after grief and 
sorrow. — ^Pain in bones of skull ; it feels as if somebody scraped the swollen 
and tender periosteum with a knife, < at rest, > from motion ; c^ies^f skall 
with burning pmn.— Itching of scalp. 

3* Eyes.— Eyes duU, glassy (but without lustre), downcast— Pressi^e in 
eyes, with sensation .as if eyeballs too large ; as if eyeballs were forcibly 
pressed together and into head.— Coldness in internal surface of lids,— B;yes 



PHOSPHORICUM ACIDUM 767 

da2jeled on looking at bright objects.— Burning pain in lids and their, anglesi 
esp. by candle-light in evening. — Inflammation in eyes^ with congestion of 
veins in internal angles. — ^Agglutination, mornings. — Inflammation of lids. — 
Hordeolum.— Yellow spot in sclerotica.— Lachrymation. — Pupils dilated. — R. 
pupil much dilated, 1 . pupil constantly normal. — Fixed look.— Sight confused 
as if directed through a mist. — Myopia. — Black band before eyes ; ciphers ; 
sees objects lying near him (outside sphere of vision) moving. — A dull, shoot- 
ing» burning pain forced r. eyeball to its outer canthus ; could then see nothing 
with this eye but a limitless white expanse with fiery points falling on it ; later, 
expanse became fiery and the falling points dazzling white. 

4. Bars. — Shootings in ears, sometimes with drawing in cheeks, jaws, 
and teeth, < only by sound of music. — ^At every stroke of a bell or musical note 
stitches in ears like earache, also on singing himself ; non-musical sounds had 
no effebt. — Cramp-like drawings in ears. — Inability to endure music, noise, 
and conversation. — Every sound re-echoes loudly in the ears. — Nervous 
deafness, shrill sounds most painful and most distressing (R. T .C.)« — Deaf- 
ness for distant sounds. — Squeaking in ear on blowing nose. — Roaring in ears 
with difficult hearing. 

5. Nose.— Swelling on bridge of nose with red spots.— (Redness of 
tip of nose with dyspepsia. — R. T. C.)— Each dose (3X) goes to his nose as 
effervescing waters do, and < the redness (agg. — R. T. C.). — Scabs on nose. 
— disposition to put fingers into nose. — Itching on point of nose ; must scratch 
there.**— Fetid exhalation from nose. — Discharge of (bloody) pus from nose. — 
Epistaxis (dark blood).— Violent coryza, with redness of margins of nostrils. 
— Fluent coryza, with cough and burning pain in chest and throat. 

6. Face. — Face pale, wan, with (lustreless) hollow eyes surrounded by 
a blue cfircle, and pointed nose.— Drawings in cheeks and jaws. — Irregular 
features. — Heat of side of face on which he is not lying.— Heat in face, with 
tension of skin of face, as if the white of an egg had dried upon it. — Large 
pimples on face. — Burning pain in cheeks. — Humid and scabious tetters on 
cheeks, lip^, and commissures. — Lips dry, scurfy, covered with suppurating 
cracks, with pains as from excoriation. — ^Yellow-brown, crust-like eruptions, 
with pus on lower lip towards corner of mouth. — Pimples and scabs on red 
part of lips. — ^Violent burning pain in r. lower lip, persisting when moving it, 
—Pimples on chin. — Swelling of sub-maxillary glamds. — Pain in lower jaw as 

* if dislocated. 

7. Teeth.— Toothache with tearing pain (burning in the front teeth), 
, < by heat of bed and by cold or hot things. — ^Violent pains in incisors at 

night. — Violent aching in a hollow tooth when particles of food get into it, 

* going off when they have been removed. — T^e teeth are yellow. — Gums 
bleeding easily, swollen, stand off from teeth. — Painful nodosities in the 
gdms. 

S. , Mouth. — Dryness of mouth and palate without thirst. — ^Viscid, tena- 
cious phlegm in mouth and on tongue.^ — Shootings and burning sensation on 
tdilgue.— Involuntary biting of tongue at night. — Swelling of tongue, with 
pain when speaking. — Red streak in middle of tongue, widens in front — 
Nasaft tone of voice.— Smarting in mouth during mastication of solid food.— 
Excoriatton and ulceration 6f velum palati, with burning pain. 

• Throat*— Pain as from excoriation in throat, with smarting, scraping, 



768 PHOSPHORICUM ACIDUM 

and shooting, esp. during passage of food.— Contractive pain in pit of throat 
—Hawking up of tough mucous phlegm. 

10 . Appetite. — Loss of appetite, — Putrid, acid, herbaceous taste.-^Pro- 
longed after-taste of food, and esp. of bread. — Repugnance to bread, which 
seems bitter.— Aversion to coffee.— Violent thirst for cold milk or for beer, as 
well as in general for cool and juicy things ; bread appears too dry.— In- 
satiable thirst, excited by a sensation of dryness in whole body. — ^Apids excite 
bitter risings and other inconveniences.— Ate heartily, much Oppressed after 
with flatulence.— After a meal pressure, or a sensation of wavering in stomach, 
with confusion of head, uneasiness, fulness, and disposition to sleep, or 
dejection, as if about to faint 

11. Stomach. — Sour, incomplete, or burning risings. — Constant nausea 
in throat.— Nausea which compels lying down. — Nausea at sight of food. — 
Vomiting of food. — Sour vomiting. — Pressive pain in stomach, as from a 
weight, when fasting, and after any food whatever (with sleepiness), as also 
on touching pit of stomach. — Sensation of coldness or of burning in stomach. 
—Feeling in stomach as if everything had stuck fast and was dry. 

12. Abdomen. — Spasmodic aching, with (pressure and) anguish in 
hypochondria, and esp. in liver. — Sensation as if liver were too heavy. — 
Shootings in regions of liver and spleen.— General tympanites with enlarged 
spleen,— In navel periodical aching, squeezing.— Contractions in abdomen on 
both sides ' of umbilical region. — Spasmodic pains in abdomen, esp.*^ in 
umbilical region. — Shootings and cuttings in abdomen.— Sensitiveness in 
lower csBcal region.— Burning sensation in hypogastrium.— Meteoristic dis- 
tension of and frequent grumbling and borborygmi in abdomen, as if from 
water in it ; esp. when it is touched, and when the body is benU backwards 
and forwards.— Production and expulsion of much flatus, esp. after eating 
acid things. — Swelling of inguinal glands. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Hard faeces in small portions, difficult to 
evacuate.— Frequent evacuations.— Diarrhoea, particularly painless, which 
maybe very fetid.— Diarrhoea lasting a long time, apparently without any 
weakening effect, — Stools : loose, slimy, whitish-grey ; undigested, greenish- 
white. ^Yellowish and very offensive. — Escape of stool when child is moved 
or turned. Involuntary stools of the consistence of pap (bright yellow), with 
sensation as if flatus were expelled,— Choleraic diarrhoea as if rectum 
remained open.— (Chronic diarrhoea, thin and greenish, almost involuntary with 
gastric irritability. — A, E. Small.). — In evening great discharge of garlic- 
smelling flatus ; great yawning.— Protrusion of haemorrhoidal tumours from 
rectum during stool. — Intolerable pain in haemorrhoids when sitting. — After 
stool tenesmus ; sickening pain about navel.— Tearing, smarting, and itching 
in anus and rectum. — Itching prick on outer circumference of anus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urgent want to urinate, with scanty emission of 
urine, paleness of face, heat, and thirst. — Frequent and profuse emission of 
aqueous urine, which immediately deposits a thick and white cloud.— Urine 
like milk, with sanguineous and gelatinous coagulum.— Fetid urine.-^low 6f 
urine with spasmodic pains in loins. — Urgent and irresistible desire to 
urinate,— Urine like that which passes in diabetes mellitus. — ^Anguish^ and 
uneasiness before urinating.— Nocturnal enuresis.— Children pass sl great deal 
of water in bed at night ; persons get up in the night to urinate and pags a 



PHOSPHORICU'M ACIDUM 


769 


great dealr-Bt^ning pain in urethra during and alter emission of urine ; 
outting before. — Creeping in urethra when not urinating. — Spasmodic (painful) 
constriction of bladder (without urging). — Incisive pains in urethra whbn 
making water. • 

13. Male Sexual Organ8.~-Lancinating pains in glans.~Pine pricking 
at point of penis. — burning cutting in glans with an out-pressing pain in both 
groins. — feeling of heaviness in glans, esp. when urinating. — Tingling and 
oozing vesicles round frsenum, — Sycotic excrescences with heat and burning. — 
Crop of warts on prepuce. — crop of pedunculated warts come round corona 
glandis after taking P/m?. ac, in summer drinks (agg. — R. T. C.). — Condylomata. 
— Eruption on penis and scrotum. — Inflammatory swelling of scrotum. — Pain 
in testes when touched. — ^Gnawing pain in testes. — Swelling of testes (L). 
while spermatic cord is enlarged, hard, and tightened. — Absence of sexual 
desire. — Frequent erections (in morning in bed ; in morning when standing), 
without desire for coition. — Weakness of sexual organs, with onanism, and little 
sexual desire. — Exhaustion after coition. — Frequent and very debilitating 
pollutions, esp. where the patient is much affected by the flow.—Onanism ; 
esp. when patient is much distressed by the culpability of the act. — Discharge ^ 
of semen when straining during an evacuation. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — ^Oophoritis, metritis, or prolapsus from 
debilitating or emotional influences ; amenorrhoea. — ^Very irritable uterus. — 
Uterine ulcer, with copious, putrid, bloody discharge, itching or corroding 
pain, or no pain. — Hepatic pains during menses. — Menses too early and too 
long ; too copious ; too late ; dark clotted ; preceded by leucorrhoea, and for one 
or two days by griping and rumbling in abdomen. — Yellowish, itching leucor- 
rhoea aftsr menses.— Distension of uterus as by gas.— Itching pricking like 
flea-bites between mammae, obliging her to rise at night. — Dysuria during 
pregnancy ; cutting pains. — Vomiting at sight of food during pregnancy. — 
Puerperal convulsions ; albuminuria ; haemorrhage. — Scanty milk witli 
debility and great apathy. — Deterioration of health during nursing. — Con- 
stant vomi&ng of milk in a suckling ; waxy face ; blue rings round eyes ; 
child does not cry ; mother has litfeisanilk. — Sharp pressure on 1 . breast ; and 
nipple. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Voice nasal.— Great hoarseness and rough- 
ness in throat. — Pain in pit of throat, which contracts throat. — Cough excited 
by a tickling and a scraping in larynx ; or above epigastrium, which is dry in 
evening, and with a yellowish-white expectoration in morning. — The cough is 
< morning and evening ; during rest if one sits or lies long in the same 
position ; after sleeping ; from cold air ; from loss oi fluids. — (Cough after food 
of any kind.) — Cough with (nausea) vomiting of food and headache ; in- 
voluntary emission of urine.— Curing cough expectoration (of dark blood, or 
of tough white mucus, tasting acid), having an herbaceous smell and taste. 
•^•< 5 ough with purulent (very offensive) expectoration and pains in chest. — 

expectoration in morning. 

1 4 . Chest*— Shortness of breath and inability to speak long, from weak- 

qf chest. — Capillary bronchitis, < evenings, with fever, pain under 

sternum, then violent sneezing, thirst and coryza, profuse, purulent secretion. — 
Spasmoji^c and contractive oppression of chest, as if tightened. — Weakness in 
chesj after speaking,— Pressure at chest often spasmodic or incisive,— Pressive 
VOL. IL 50 



770 PHOSPHORICUM ACIDUM 

pain in middle of chest, < when expiring ; felt as if sternum would be pres^d 
out ; < by pressure with hand, stooping, coughing, &c.— ^essure behind 
sternum rendering inspiration difficult.— Lancinations in sides of chest— 
Burning and pressure in chest. ^ 

19. Heart and Pulse*— Stitches through heart.-*Palpitation : in yomrg 
persons growing too fast; after onanism. — Pulse irregular, with irregular 
beating of heart; pulse intermitting. — ^Swollen veins. 

20* Neck and Back.— Tension and cramp-like drawing in muscles of ^ 
neck, csp. on moving head. — Miliaria on neck.— Boils under axillae ; on nates. 
— Boring pain between scapulae. — Spondylitis of cervical vertebrae.— Eruption, 
painful to touch, on back, shoulder-blades, neck, and chest. — Burning pain in 
a spot above small of back. — Itching stitch in coccyx ; fine stitches in coccyx 
and sternum.— Crawling (formication) tingling in back and loins. 

21. Limbs.— Bruised feeling in hips, thighs, arms, nape, like growing 
pains ; at same time repeated single tearing stitches in all these parts at once ; 
the stitches occur on commencing to walk, esp. to go up stairs ; bruised pain 
continues all the time,— Bruised pain in all joints in morning, and in arms 
and legs.— Burning, gnawing, tearing pains in bones of extremities.— Weak- 
ness of extremities after loss of fluids. 

22 * Upper Limbs. — Boring, digging, drawing pain in 1 . shoulder-joint, 
intermittent, < lying on 1. side, > moving arms.~-^ramp-like pressufe in 
arms, hands, and fingers. — Drawings and jerking tearings in arms and fingers. 
—Eruption of pimples on arms.— Drawing, incisive pains in joints of elbows, 
hands, and fingers.— Sharp, shooting, boring pains under 1. forearm near 
elbow, < at rest.— Numbness in course of r. radial nerve.— Weakness and 
trembling of arms.— Trembling of hands (when writing). — Gangliop on back 
of hand, — Skin of hands and fingers dry, shrivelled, parched. — Fingers dead, 
sometimes on one side only, and within well-defined limits.— Lancinations 
(stitches) in fingers and joints of fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs« — Swelling and furunculi on buttocks. — Contusive 
pains in hips and thighs, esp. when walking or rising from a seaf. — On 1 . hip- 
joint and 1. thigh, a neuralgic or rheumatic pain, from gluteal muscles or hip- 
joint, running down leg to knee, and often to calf or ankle ; gets a littie > 
after walking, but is still very bad.— Cramp in coxo-femoral joint, with tearing 
throughout the limb, insupportable when seated, and during repose,— Aching, 
cramp-like pains in thighs, legs, feet, and toes.— Teai’ing throughout leg, with 
heaviness in joints.— Weakness of legs, so that a false step (or tripping) occa- 
sions falling.— Burning tearing in tibia at night. — Pimples on knees and legs* 
which become confluent, and are transformed into easily bleeding ulgers.v 
Itching ulcers on legs.— Burning sensation in feet and soles, with excoriation 
between toes. — Swelling of feet. — Feet swollen and sore on putting on 

ing shoes.— In evening spasmodic drawing in feet, < r. sole and ball of gi'eat 
toe, preventing sleep till midnight.— Sweating of feet.— Corns on feet — 
Blisters on balls of toes.— Chilblains on toes. — Swelling of joint of ^eaMoe, 
with burning, throbbing, and incisive, dull pains on being touched. 

24. Generalities.— Affections of any kind in inner navel ; lower^part of 
chest, buttocks, thighs, external side. — Squeezing ori^contracting pain j lassi* 
tude of the body ; feeling very weak. — ^Drawings and jerking tearings in 
limbs.— Cramp-like, pressive pains.— Painfulness in general in bonfes or 



PHOSPHORICUM ACIDUM 


771 


periosteum. — Sensation as if the periosteum were scraped with a Jcnife ; after 
contusions. — Aching, burning, tearing pains at night. — Swelling (and spongi- 
ness) of the bones or periosteum ; burning sphacelus. — Caries with smarting 
pains. — ^Neurosis of stump after amputation,— -Ulcers with stinking pus ; pain- 
less. — Burning through lower half of body from small of back and pit of 
stomach downwards, while extremities are cold to touch, — Weakness from 
loss of fluids without any other pain than burning. — Swellings of glands. — 
Contusive pain in limbs and joints, as from paralysis, or like growing pains, 

* esp. morning and evening. — Numbness and‘weakness of limbs. — Heaviness in 
limbs and joints, with great indolence. — Great fatigue after walking. — Great 
general weakness, physical or nervous, with strong tendency to perspire, 
during day (esp. in morning), or with burning sensation in body. — ^Very pale 
face ; nausea in throat. — Emaciation, with sickly complexion, and eyes sur- 
rounded by a livid circle. — Sensation as if body and limbs were bruised, as 
from growing, esp. in morning. — Formication in different parts. — Agreeable 
feeling of buoyancy and lightness. — ^Violent ebullition of blood, with great 
agitation. — ^The pains are < during repose, and > by movement, and those 
which manifest themselves at night are > by pressure. — Symptoms < from 
mental affections ; after suppression of cutaneous* eruptiohs, i,e,, any bad 
result that ensues from such suppression ; from loss of fluids, particularly 
seminal ; sunlight ; masturbation ; after perspiration ; sexual excesses, talking, 
esp. when it causes a weakness in the chest ; while urinating. 

25, Skin. — Insensibility of skin. — Crawling tingling under skin. — Formi- 
cation of skin. — Red and burning spots on limbs. — Eruption like scarlatina. — 
Erysipelatous inflammations. — Eruption of small pimples, and of miliary 
pimples golfected in clusters and red. — Eruption of pimples with burning 
pain, or pain as from excoriation. — Scabious vesicles. — Humid and dry tetters, 
squamous; variola. — Corns with shootings and burning pain. — Chilblains. — 
Wens. — Warts ; large, jagged, often pedunculated, exuding moisture and 
bleeding readily ; indented. — Condylomata. — Furunculi, — Flat, indolent 
ulcers, with*secretion of a dirty-looking pus, and having a serrated bottopi. — 
Itching ulcers. 

26. Sleep. — Great tendency to go to sleep during day, early in evening, 
and in morning, with difficulty in waking. — Coma. — Retarded sleep and sleep- 
lessness at night, caused by agitation and dry heat.— Arithmetical figures 
appear before eyes on falling asleep. — Profound sleep ; can scarcely be 
roused in morning.— Jerking and involuntary movements of hands, moaning, 
talking, and singing, or an aspect during sleep at one time of laughing, at 

another of weeping, with eyes half-opened and convulsed. — ^Anxious dreams 
of death, with fear on waking. — Lascivious drealns, with emissions. — 
Awakened by : canine hunger ; dry heat ; sensation of falling ; sad thoughts. 
— Patient though quite weak is rested by a very short sleep. 

• 27. Fever. — Pulse irregular, sometimes intermitting one or two beats, 
geilgfaU^ small, weak, or frequent, at times full and strong. — Violent ebulli- 
tions with great restlessness. — Swollen veins. — Shuddering and shivering, 
sqmet^es with shaking, or with coldness in hands and fingers, generally in 
evening, and without thirst (followed by heat without thirst, or by excessive 
beat, depriving one almost of consciousness). — Sensation of coldness on one 
side •of the face. — Sensation of coldness, with shiverings and coldness in 



772 PHOSPHORICURI ACIDUM— PHOSPHORUS* 

abdomen.— Internal dry heat without being hot to touch ; and without any 
complaint at any time of the day.— General heat with loss of consdouaoe^ and 
somnolence. — Heat in head with cold feet. — Febrile heat in evening, without 
thirst, with anguish, and great activity of the circulation. — Shiveringalternatdy 
with heat. — Malignant (typhus) fever with great weakness (quiet d^rium 
with dulness of head), apathy, stupidity, aversion to conversation, diarrhoea, 
&c.— Tertian ague with profuse perspiration, anxiety of look, thirst and 
vomiting. — Night-sweat. — Sweat in morning. — Perspiration mostly on back« 
part of head and in neck, with sleepiness during the day. — Profuse perspira- 
tions during night and in morning, with anxiety.— Oreat inclination to 
perspire during day and night ; clammy perspirations. 


Phosphorus. 

The Element. P. (A. W. 30.96). Saturated solution in absolute 
alcohol. Trituration of Red amorphous Phosphorus. 

GUnioaU — Alopecia areata. Amaurosis, Amblyopia. A naemia^ acute pernicious. 
Anus, fissure of. Antrum, disease of . Arteries, disease of . Asthma. Bone, diseases 
of. Brain, affections of; softening of. Brain-fag. Breast, abscess of ; fistulas of. 
Bronchitis ; membrsLnous. Cancer; of bone. Cataract Catarrh ; intestinal ; nasal. 
Chilblains. Chlorosis. Chorea. Ciliary neuralgia. Coccygodynia. Cold. Con- 
stipation. Consumption. Corpulency. Cough. Croup. Dandrufi. Diarrhcea. 
Dropsy. Ecchymosts. Enteric fever. Ephelis. Epilepsy. Erotomania. Exoph- 
thalmos. Exostosis. Eyes, affections of. Fainting. Fatty degeneration. Fistula. 
Flatulence. Fungus haematoides. Gastritis. Glaucoma. Gleet. GumSi ulceration 
of. Hcemoglobinuria. Haimorrhagic diathesis. Headache. Heart, degeneration of; 
murmurs of. Hydrocele. Hydrocephalus. Hysteria. Impotence. Intussusception. 
Jaundice ; malignant ; of pregnancy ; of anaemia. Jaw, disease of Joints, affec- 
tions of. Keratitis. Lactation, disorders of. Laryngitis, Levitation. Lightning, 
elEfects of. Lienteria. Liver, diseases of ; acute yellow atrophy of . Locomotor atat^. 
Lumps, hcemorrhage from ; oedema of ; paralysis of. Marasmus. Menorrhagia. 
Menstruation, symptoms before. Mollitics osstum. Morpheea. Mitscce volitanics. 
Ncevus. Nails, ulcers round. Neuralgia. Nightmare. Nipples, sore. Nose, bleed- 
ing from. Numbness. Nymphomania. Odour of body, changed. (Esophagus, pain 
in. Ozaena. Pancreas, disorders of. Paralysis; pseudo-hypertrophic ; general of 
insane. Periostitis. Perspiration, abnormal. Petit mal. Plague. Pneumonia. 
Polypus. Pregnancy, vomiting of. Proctalgia. Proctitis. Progressive nmsculii 
airpfhy. Pruritus ani. Psoriasis. Puerperal convulsions. Purpura. Pylorus, 
thickening of Retinitis. Rheumatism; paralytic. Rickets. Screaming, Scurvy, 
Shwerings. Sleep, disordered. Somnambulism, Spine, curvature of. Spleen^ 
^largement of. Sprains. Stammering. Sterility. Syphilis. Syringp-myelia, 
Throat, mucus in. Tobacco habit. Trachea, tickling in. Tuberculosis. Tumour^: 
erectile ; polypoid ; cancerous. Typhus fever. Ulcers, Urethra, stricture of. 
vaccinia. Vanola. Voice, loss of. Whitlow. Wounds. Yellow fever. ^ 

Characteristics. — Phosphorus (Light-bearer, Morning Star) ** was 
discovered in 1673 by Brandt, an alchymist of Hamburgh, and sborUy 
afterwards by Kunkel, in Saxony.” Teste, frpm whom I qt«le,^ys 
that attempts were made to use Phos, in medicine immedmtely after 
discovery. Kunkel made it into his ^^uminous pills,” and Ilramer 
claimed to have cured with it diarrhcea, epflepsy, and malignant 
fevers. Teste gives a list of old-school cures,^ which include : Con- 
tinuous, bilious, and intermittent fevers; general oedema; m^es } 



PHOSPHORUS 


773 

I 

two cases of pneumonia of left lung, with ataxic symptoms ; chronic 
rheumatism of the legs ; apoplexy ; hydrocephalus ; periodic head- 
aches (in one case with menstrual irregularity) ; catalepsy ; epilepsy ; 
gutta Serena ; asthenia facilis ; chronic lead poisoning, — a list which 
Slows a very good idea of the rahge of action of Phos. Hahnemann^s 
proving brought out the fine indications, without which the generals 
are of little service, and to Hahnemann^s symptoms have been added 
those of later provings and of numerous cases of poisoning, and the 
• effects on workers in match factories, especially necrosis of the lower 
jaw* The vapour given off by unignited Phos. is Phosphorus oxide. 
The jaw affection, called “ Phossy-jaw ** by the workpeople themselves, 
is accompanied by profound adynamia, and not unfrequently ends in 
death. The form of the disease differs according to whether the 
upper or lower jaw is attacked. In the former case it pursues 
generally a chronic and mild course, ending in exfoliation, cicatrisa- 
tion, and cure. In the latter the necrosis may be either acute or 
chronic, but is always severe, and the patients usually die of “ con- 
sumptive fever ” (C. D. P.). Here is a typical case quoted in C. D, P, 
from B, y. /f., iv. 287 : J. D., 21, had been four years in a match 
factory. For two and a half years he had only laryngeal irritation 
from the local action of the fUmes. He then began to cough very 
mu^ and expectorate thick white mucus. Then most violent tooth- 
ache set in, with swelling on right side of face. A molar was extracted 
but without relief, and one tooth after another dropped out. He 
became too weak to walk. A swelling as big as an egg formed below 
right orbit,^ burst in a fortnight, and discharged a large quantity of 
white pu^. * He grew worse ; all the teeth fell out ; gums of lower 
jaw were retracted. Examination found right cheek swollen. At 
right angle of lower jaw an opening discharging laudable pus, through 
which a probe can be passed two inches along bare bone, and two 
inches anterior to this another aperture leads to the same. On open- 
ing mouth •the whole lower jaw as far as ascending rami and down to 
reflection of mucous membrane is denuded and of leaden greyish 
colour. On right upper jaw probe can be passed over bare bone. 
Pareira (C. D, P.) has observed in phosphorus workers ** a peculiar 
i^llow, bloated complexion, with duU expression of eye and gastric 
derangement,'' when there was no affection of the jaws. [Wagner 
found Phos. symptoms long before local disease appeared, ^.g., car- 
•dialgia, anorexia, eructation of gas smelling of Phos, ; also dizziness, 
faintness, and cachectic appearance. The first symptoms in the jaws 
Slt'e tearing pains, the teeth being sound, swelling and suppuration of 
the gums, and loosening of the teeth follow, aim the bone becomes 
deluded. Langenbeck objects to the term necrosis," stating that it 
is. a periostatics in which bony deposit occurs, enclosing the jaws 
or less as in a sheath. There is no exfoliation. This osteo- 
pertesflHs may arise from rheumatism.— /iT/m. Woch^ Jan. 2,' 1872.] In 
cases of acute poisoning the most remarkable effect noted is acute 
fatty degeneration of the liver and engorgement of the lungs. At first 
there is tenderness of the live^^ but as it shrinks this parses away. 
The^rk^t lung is more affected than the left. The symptoms of 
acnii Phos. poisoning are exceedingly painful if consciousness is 



774 


PHOSPHORUS 


retained; violent tearing pains in oesophagus, chest, stomach j 
vomiting and diarrhoea ; rectal, vesical, uterine tenesmus ; bloat* 
ing of abdomen ; sensitiveness to touch ; haemorrhages from all 
orifices. Death may take place in a few hours, or it may be delayed 
for months. In the case of a child of 2^ who had sucked the heads 
of matches, two days afterwards there was some feverish excitement, 
later violent convulsions, lasting three hours, oand ending in death. 
There were found after death no fewer than ten invaginations of the 
small intestines, which, however, were empty, and there was no sign 
of strangulation (C. D, P.), In a woman, 45, who swallowed the Phos: 
from 120 matches, Ozanam found a typhoid febrile state, profound 
prostration ; inability to raise herself ; dry tongue ; much thirst ; 
stomach sensitive ; vomiting of black, sooty matter. Death took 
place on the second day (C. D, P.). A man, 48, inhaled vapour of 
burning Phos, Among his symptoms were : A sensation as if some- 
thing twitched under skin or was creeping between skin and flesh. 
Twitching of single bundles of fibres at different times like playing on 
a piano. Tongue when speaking often refuses to move, so that he 
stammers (C. D, P,), A case reported by J. O. Muller and translated 
in C. D, P, brings out some very characteristic symptoms of Phos, A 
strong woman, 30, took about three grains of Phos. from matches. 
Among her symptoms were ; After eight hours violent and noisy 
vomitings. Prostrated, cold, pallid, as if moribund and unconscious. 
Cold, clammy sweat, general ; skin here and there waxy yellow ; 
complexion leaden grey ; dark blue rings round eyes ; pulse small, 
hard, slow, unrhythmic, intermitting. Abdomen distended, very sen- 
sitive all over, the slightest touch causing violent pains ; could not 
bear weight of nightdress. Senses and mind in unconscious apathy ; 
could only be roused by loud calling into her ear. Aco. 1 every ten 
minutes revived her. She complained of very violent burning pain 
in lower chest (oesophagus ?), stomach, and whole abdomen < by 
every touch or change of posture. Vomiting and diarrhoea had 
ceased, but she still had retching and ineffectual straining at stool with 
burning like fire in large intestine and anus. She passed with difficulty 
small quantities of dark yellow urine, smelling strongly of garlic, aftet 
mictufition vefy severe burning. Boring, burning pains in bones, 
especially of skull, palate, nose, jaws, and teeth, < taking cold or 
warm things into mouth or chewing, only tepid liquid nutriment could 
be borne. At times numb pain in teeth ; they felt loose as if they' 
would fall out. Apathy alternating with angry words and actions. 
After menses, burning leucorrhoea that made the parts sore. ^f£ 
part9 of joints swollen. Considerable rigidity of joints. The skin, 
which had been pale, put on a yellow tint, bloated swellings appeared 
m pla^s on eyelids and face, pitting on pressure. On nape, back 
other parts the skin could be raised by the fingers in large folds' 
which slowly smoothed down again. Finally a peculiar e:mSh8fea 
appe^ed on the skin about the joints like eczema ; vesicles in groups 
turned rapidly into scabs and frequently recurred. SuM. was Wn 
and gradual recovery occurred. In a youth poisoned by Phos. there 
was na^ea and sour taste ; milk tasted burnt ; every smell (tobacco 
Wine, beer) < the nausea. One of the provers had,; Loathing ol 



PHOSPHORUS 


775 


butchePs meat and bad appetite. Phosphorus burns ar^ among the 
most painful of all burns, and the burning sensations of the poisonings 
are prominent also in the provings : Glowing sensation throughout 
epigastrium and chest.’' flame seemed passing through me.” 

** Warming sensation right side of heart and below left clavicle. 
This heat spread to apex of left scapula and to acromion, when it left 
the heart.” From xi a.m. till 4 p.m. remarkable numb feeling in 
left leg from knee to foes, sometimes sensation as if hot blood flowed 
into it.” Other symptoms from the provings are : “ Drawing forcing 
towards pelvis and rectum as if menses coming on.” Intense sexual 
excitement in men with erections, emissions ; later impotence. Dr. 
Sorge, 34, had this symptom : Weight in occiput and nape, down 
whole spine a dull feeling as if over-filled with blood, and in sacrum 
a peculiar paralytic feeling like what one feels in the limbs when 
exposed to unavoidable danger ; heaviness of feet, which were not 
placed on ground with usual energy. Walk less strong, often stumbled 
on a smooth road. Diminished sexual appetite, and feeling as if the * 
penis would not become erect when excitement was present. Mental 
indifference (quite unusual).” E. R. Heath had some decidedly 
“phosphorescent” symptoms : Darting, cutting pains, causing mucli 
distress, starting from different points and flashing over whole 
abdomen ; imagined an aurora borealis and seemed to hear distinctly 
voices shouting “ Beautiful, oh I was not that splendid ? ” as the pains 
became more severe and lasting. He sprang from bed and tried to 
collect his thoughts ; had numbness all over with sensation of myriads 
of needles slightly pricking him. Throat dry and parched ; a flame 
seemed tc 5 pass through him. Feet seemed glued to the floor. With 
great difficulty he reached the vessel, and as soon as the bowels 
began to act the pains changed to cramps. Stools were like scrapings 
of intestines, almost constant, with tenesmus, for over two hours, 
after which he lay down in bed, weak, sore, almost helpless. The 
same prever had : Intolerable thirst ; drink did not quench it, but 
caused cold, clammy sweat to exude the moment the water entered 
the stomach. Later : Involuntary passages, periodic ; rectum insen- 
sible ; sphincter paralysed ; slight prolapse after each stool. Stools 

^ inodorous save for a slight mouldy smell. H. Noah Martin proved 

* Red amorphous Phosphorus, The symptoms do not differ from those 
of transparent Phos.j and are included in the Schema.— Such are the 
materials out of which the picture of the great remedy known in 
homoeopathy by the name Phosphorus has been drawn, the charac- 

• tejpistic features being pointed up with the added light and shade of 
clinical experience. The types of constitutidh in which Phos, has 
been found particularly swi/ad/tf are strongly marked : (x) Tall, slender 
persons, of sanguine temperament, fair skin, blonde or red hair, quick> 
lively perceptions and sensitive nature. (2) Young people who grow 
too iWlpidly and are inclined to stoop ; chlorotic ; anaepiic. [In ex- 
periments on young animals Phos. has produced rickets. Kessel 

xxxi. 394) gave Phos. to young dogs, in whom it caused fatal 
qisturbanc^ of digestion and fatty liver, and ** marked atrophic process 
where bone was being deported.”] (3) Persons of waxy, translucent 
sfin ; half anaemic, half jaundiced. (4) Tall, slender, narrow-chested, 



PHOSPHORUS 


776' ^ 

phthisical patients ; delicate eyelashes, soft hair. (5) Tall, slim, dark^ 
haired persons, especially women, disposed to stoop. (6) Nemus, 
weak persons who like to be magnetised. (7) Haemorrhagic patients; 
slight wounds bleed profusely. Fhos. profoundly affects the nutrition 
and function of every tissue, notably the hardest (bone) and the 
softest (nerve and blood). It causes irritation, erethism, exaltation of 
all the senses, and later a typhoid state and fatty degeneration. In 
fevers of typhoid type and in pneumonia Phos, has an important 

E lace. It is indicated especially when the morbid action becomes 
>calised in the right lung, particularly the lower lobe. In the year 
1876, in the coui*se of a severe attack of typhus fever during my 
residence in Liverpool, my state, as I am told (for I was in delirium), 
suddenly became very critical through pneumonic consolidation of 
the right lung. Phos, was the remedy selected by Drs. Drysdale, 
Hayward, and Hawkes, who attended me, and under its action I 
made a rapid recovery. — Hard, dry cough, rusty sputa ; < at twilight 
and till midnight ; < lying on left side ; > lying on right side ; abdomen 
distended^ sore^ very sensitive to touch ; stools offensive, bloody, involun- 
tary ; the anus appearing to remain open. Each one of the symptoms 
I have italicised is a keynote of Phos, When any of them are present 
(with or without the pneumonia) Phos, is likely to be the remedy. The 
delirium is low, muttering, stupid ; or violent ; or there may be a state of 
ecstasy ; or odd ideas, that his bones are in fragments and he cannot 
fit the pieces together. As a leading constituent of nervous matter 
Phos, has a deep action on the organ of mind and sensation. It pro- 
duces an excitable condition, exaltation of mental faculties, and the 
condition which follows over-exertion. The mind, like the special 
senses, is too excitable and impressionable. Easily angered and 
becomes vehement ; actually gets beside himself with anger and 
suffers physically in consequence. At other times anxious and rest- 
less, especially in the dark and at twilight (the restlessness of Phos, is 
universal ; patient cannot sit or stand still a moment ; it belongs to 
the stage of irritation, and is succeeded by apathy if the condition is 
not arrested). Imagines he sees faces grinning at him from the . 
corners of the room. Such conditions are found in cases resulting 
from losses of fluids ; over-work of brain ; sexual excesses and abuse, 
and take shape in general paralysis of the insane with mania of gran- 
deur; and in apoplexy and its sequelae; in Duchenne’s pseudo- 
hypertrophic paralysis, in locomotor ataxy and other paralyses. A 
very characteristic condition of Phos, in nervous cases is fibrillary 
twitching of individual bundles of fibres in muscles. Numbness and 
forrmcation in paralysed limbs indicate it in hemiplegia and para- 
plegia. Spasms on paralysed side. In other cases the burning pains 
of Phos, are prominent : burning between the scapulae ; burning in 
spots along the spine ; feeling of intense heat running up the baqp, (no * 
other remedy has exactly this symptom). The uncertain •‘gailf 
neuralgic pain, arid fuzzy feeling of the feet, give the correspondence 
with locomotor ataxy, when the conditions correspond. Epilepsy 
from masturbation. Petit mal ; epilepsy with consciousness. ' Man 
of Itzehoe (H, /?., xv. 268) cured this case of sciatica : An elderly ladv 
had for eight weeks a continual burning pain running along back of 



PHOSPHaRUS 


777 


left thigh and leg, compelling her to spend most of the day in bed 
Entire limb so weak tiiat she could hardly walk. < Lying on left 
side. > Lying on right side or on back. < By movement < By 
cold air. > Being warmly covered. < In evening. Phos. 6x, every 
two hours, caused aggravation for the first three days, and after that 
gave relief, but did not cure. Phos. 30, one powder every evening, 
completed the cure in a week. But the action of Phos. is not confined 
to the brain and spinal cord, it also affects the cranial bones and 
. spinal column. I cured mainly with Phos. im a case of spinal caries 
with paralytic symptoms in a lady aged 67. That is, I cured the 
caries and removed the paralysis, though the curvature remained 
There was a history of a strained back thirty-five years before, and of 
lumbago and sciatica five years before I saw her. She had many pains 
in the scapula and chest, and could not walk unless supported about 
the waist. Incidentally Phos. set up a symptom of its own : Dryness 
of mouth, lips, and throat. Phos. has burning thirst for cold water ; 
cold water relieves, but as soon as it becomes warm in the stomach it is 
vomited. This is one of the keynotes of PAos., and distinguishes it 
from all other remedies in cases of vomiting. Desire for cold foods 
and preference for cold meat is very characteristic of PAos., and the 
cold food, like the cold drink, may be vomited as soon as it becomes 
wartn inside. Ice cream > the gastric pains. There is nausea on 
putting hands iilto warm water ; sneezing and coryza from putting 
hands in water. Regurgitation of ingesta in mouthfuls. During 
pregnancy the sight of water ss vomiting. The appetite of Phos. is 
remarkable : Musi eat often or he faints. Hungry soon after a meal ; 
hungry in the night, must eat. Craving for salt {Phos. remedies the 
effects of excessive salt-eating). The sinking, faint feeling of Phos. is 
felt in the whole abdominal cavity ; also in head, chest, and stomach. 
The stools of Phos. are peculiar, whether constipated or diarrhoeic : 
Long, tough, hard faeces (like a dog^s) ; voided with great difficulty 
and straining. Diarrhoea as soon as anything enters the rectum ; pro- 
fuse pouring away as from a hydrant ; watery with sago-Uke particles ; 
with sensation as if the anus stood open ; involuntary ; during cholera- 
time ; painless ; morning of old people ; bloody stool ; blood-streaked 
stool ; stool like shreddy membranes. With the stool there is burn- 
ing in the anus and tenesmus. There are also pains of all descriptioiis 
in the anus, notably stitches shooting up rectum. A man suffering 
^rom pneumonia, to whom I gave Phos. 3, after a few days developed 
attacks of violent pain in rectum and anus, with distension of abdomen 
andtlesire for stool ; stool light, lumpy, constiMted, only passed by 
aid of glycerine* enema ; after stool, complete relief of pain ; some- 
times the attack waked him from sleep. With Phos. 200 I cured a 
very severe proctalpa coming on at every menstrual period. During 
urination, and also when not urinating, there is burning in the urethra. 
Adbtti^Tvery characteristic burning of Phos. is burning palms^ cannot 
bear to have the hands covered. Flashes of heat beginning in hands 
and spreading to face. The fever is more of the yellow fever, typhus, 
or typhoid, nervous or hectic,, type. In intermittents when there is 
heat^at night beginning in stomach ; faint and hungry in night ; heat 
of hands. There is also chilliness towards evening ; icy coldness of 



PHOSPHORUS 


778 

hands, knees, and feet, even in bed. Sweat is anxious, profuse^ 
exhausting on slightest exertion ; profuse at night ; cold and clammy, 
smelling of sulphur or of garlic. Phos. corresponds to yellow fever tn 
many particulars j disorganisation of the liver and blood with jaun^cc \ 
haemorrhages. It has caused acute fatty degeneration of the liver ; 
and corresponds also to fatty degeneration of pancreas with gastric 
symptoms and oily stools, and fatty and amyloid degeneration of the 
kidneys. Pho$. stands at the head of haemorrhagics, and corresponds 
to *the haemorrhagic diathesis. The blood loses its coagulability. ^ 
Very small wounds bleed profusely. Blood-streaked discharges are 
very characteristic when from lungs, nose, bowels, or other orifices. 
Haemorrhoids. Menses are more profuse and longer-lasting than usual. 
There may be vicarious menstruation in the form of haemoptysis, 
epistaxis, or haematuria. Left ovarian pain. Leucorrhoea which 
causes blisters. Sexual excitement is great in both sexes, going to 
the extent of satyriasis and nymphomania. Frequent erections in 
men, and sexual thoughts entirely beyond the patient^s control. 
Erections in spite of efforts to control passion in young men. Impo- 
tence from over-indulgence or from celibacy. The female breasts are 
the seat of many burning, shooting, cramping pains, and Phos. has 
proved a leading remedy in mammary abscess and fistulae. The charac- 
teristics are : Erysipelatous appearance ; red streaks starting from 
opening ; thin, ichorous discharge. The hzemorrhagic action of Phos. is 
seen in many forms of pulmonary haemorrhage and congestion : blood- 
streaked or rusty sputa ; tasting salty ; when patients with delicate 
chests bring up phlegm tinged with blood whenever they take cold 
Phos. will generally clear up the case. Phthisis florida may ^}so need 
Phos, It has also a stomach- or liver- cough ; cough comes on 
after eating, and starts from a tickling in pit of stomach. Cough < 
when strangers enter the room. Cough < from strong odours (part 
of the general sensitiveness of the drug). Bronchial catarrh > in all 
grades may require it. Cough — tearing pain under sternum as if 
something was being torn loose. Suffocative pains in upper part of 
chest with constriction of larynx and engorgement of lungs ; mucous 
rales ; panting and laboured breathing, even emphysema. After the 
cough an asthmatic attack. The Conditions of Phos, will generally 
decide when it should be given, T. D. Stow (J, of Homceopathics] 
August, 1890) reports the case of H. B., 52, farmer, who had for six 
months a sharp pain with soreness in third intercostal space, three«. 
inches to left of sternum, limiting inspirations. Dyspnoea on exercise ; 
dry cough during the day till 10 p.m. Thick, yellow, sweetish sputa? 
from 6 a.m. to 10 a.m. Cough < lying on left side ; when talking ; 
when eating and just after eating ; on going into cold air ; by change' 
of weather. > In fairly warm room ; lying on right side, Prefm 
cold food. Has become alarmed by the persistence of the attack and 
loss of flesh. Three doses of Phos, 500 (Dunham), taken 
successive cured. This case was translated in Hahn. Month.. 
September, 1890, from Alg. H, Zeit. : Whilst walking rapidly against 
the west wind three months before, X. felt a pain under middle of 
sternum with sensitiveness of the part to pressure. Pulse rapid. 
Pkos. 6 removed the symptoms for two weeks, when pain and 



PHOSPHORUS 


779 


tiveness returned, and with the pain a sensation as though would 
rise from epigastrium. PAos. 3 cured. W. A. Nicholas (H. M 7 ., xxv. 
495 ) reports the case of T. B., 51, whom he saw after a four months' 
illness, which began with congestion of the brain on the sudden 
death of his wife, and was followed by bronchitis. During all 
this time he was heavily drugged. A rather long walk brought 
on a severe attack of angina pectoris. Bell ix gave much relief. 
Nicholas noticed the patient at times put his hand to the back* 
of his neck. Phos, i relieved entirely. PAos. corresponds to head- 
ache and other sufferings from grief. Hot vertex after grief. It 
has shocks in occiput ; coldness in cerebellum ; congestion of 
brain seeming to rise from spine into head. Phos, has splitting 
headache caused by cough." Neuralgic pains of many kinds, and 
impending paralysis. The attacks are induced by mental exertion ; 
worry ; washing clothes ; and are < by music ; noises ; strong odours. 
Gale, of Quebec, discovered in Phos, a remedy for “ washerwoman's 
headache " {Organon, iil. 30). His patient had these symptoms : 
Whenever she washes clothes or walks fast she has — rush of blood to 
head, red face and eyes, heat on head, scalp sensitive to touch, sudden 
shooting pains, especially in vertex. Phos, cm cured. I cured a 
somewhat similar case (H. W., xxiv. 455) with Phos. 30 every four 
hours ; only in my case the headaches always appeared the morning 
after washing : violent shooting pains left side of vertex, > wrapping 
head in flannel. I had given several medicines previously which had 
improved the general health, but had done very little for the head- 
aches. Phos. affects all parts of the eye — retina, choroid, vitreous and 
ci7stalli«ie lenses, cornea, and conjunctivae. It has arrested cataract 
and glaucoma, and cured retinitis albuminuria from suppressed 
menses. The leading symptoms are : Colours appear black before 
the eyes. Always sees green. Halo round candle. Letters appear 
red whilsjt reading. As if a grey veil over everything. Blindness 
after typhoid ; sexual excess ; loss of fluids ; lightning. Twitching of 
lids. Pustule on cornea. Burning pains. The characteristic skin of 
Phos. is waay, and either clear and pale or yellow. Under a “ PAos- 
phorus treatment " which was in vogue a generation ago, patients had 
•a peculiarly waxy, fine, clear complexion ; and in one case which 
came under my observation there was also very marked enlargement 
of the liver. In a case of rheumatism in an old lady who had waxy 
^pallor, Cooper gave PAos. and set free all the joints. All kinds of 
^eruj)tions may be set up. Exanthema with pustules (like small-pox), 
*iilcers, psoriasis, lichen, eczema, blood boils, pujpura. Hansen cured 
a case of purpura in a girl of ten {H. W., xxxv. 105). The disease 
began witli loss of appetite and pains in the stomach, but as soon as 
the purpura spots appeared the pains ceased and the appetite returned. 
Tihejjjiner aspects of the thighs were affected, Phos. 2 cured. The 
ulders of Phos. bleed easily at the slightest touch, and open cancers or 
fungus haematodes with this characteristic have been cured with 
PA<^. ‘ Large ulcers surrounded by smaller ones." Ulcers affecting 
the nails. Inflammation and eruptions about joints. Fistulae with 
callous edges from glands. The joints most affected by Phos. are the 
hip and knee. The left side of the lower jaw is more affected than 



^ T T T r» 

7^50 jniv^«vv-/o 

the right. Caries and exostoses of spine and other parts have beeh 
cored with Phos, De Noe Walker cured with Phos. 6 a large exostosis 
of the femur which had been pronounced osteo-sarcoma by old-school 
authorities. There are some forms of rheumatism which only 
can cure. These are characterised by great stiffness of the joints, 
more stiffness than pain. A drawing, tearing, tight feeling in parts. 
Stiffness of old people. Paralytic rheumatism from exposure to rain. 
The tight sensation appears in the girdle pain of spinal affections ; 
tightness of skin of face and forehead. (Also stiffness in brain ; in 
eyes.) Allied to the rheumatic symptoms of Phos, is its sensitiveness 
to effects of storms, especially thunderstorms. Phos. has cured more 
cases of headache always coming on when thunderstorms are about 
than any other remedy in my experience. It has also cured blindness 
from lightning stroke. The headaches from inhaling the steam of a 
washtub perhaps come in the same category as effects of vapour- 
laden air when storms are about. Mills (quoted if. W.^ xxxi. 33) 
relates a typical case of thunderstorm effect : Mrs. F., tall, thin, dark, 
of mild and gentle disposition, was seen by the doctor during a 
thunderstorm. He found her sitting on the stairs, trembling and cold 
and bathed in cold, clammy sweat, full of nervous dread, and almost 
beside herself. One dose of Phos. cm cured. Some weeks later she 
witnessed a worse storm with complete unconcern. The power of 
Phos. over septic conditions is illustrated in a case of Howard 
Crutcher’s (quoted H. IT., xxxiii. 405). A girl, 16, had perforating 
appendicitis, operation having been delayed too long in consequence 
of opposition of friends. Al&ough he deemed it useless he, was per- 
suaded to operate, and found a large abscess behind the colon, freely 
communicating with the peritoneal cavity. Up to the fourth day the 
patient progressed favourably. Then there was a collapse : pulse 
130, mind wandering, urine and faeces passed without restraint. The 
patient was rapidly sinking ; Arsen, gave no help. The doctor sent 
word to the students who were nursing the patient that ttfey might 
try a hot saline enema. On attempting to give it the rectum was found 
to be open^ no resistance being offered by the sphincter. Greyish-white 
fmcal discharges^ watery and offensivCy passed constantly. “ The students, 
recognising the indication for P/ws., gave a dose of that remedy, and . 
instead of dying the girl got well.” Peculiar sensations are : As if 
about to die. As if immersed in hot water. Anxiety as if below left 
breast. As if he had been lying at night with head too low. As if 
everything had stopped in head. As if chair were rising. As if eyes 
would be pressed out ; or pressed down by weight about them. ** 
if painful nodes under scalp. As if pulled by hair. As if head wotdd 
burst. As if something exploded in head. As if skin of face too 
tight. As if something were pulled tight over ears. As if dust in, 
light eye ; sand in left eye ; eyeballs large. As if something la^ 
before ears ; foreign body in ears. As if nose stuck together, ifc^xf 
nails driven into jaws. As if food did not digest properly. .As if 
heavy weight in stomach. Stomach as if freezing. As if sometHing 
cooking in stomach. Anus as if open. Larynx as if lined widx fur. 
As H skin on larynx. As if a piece of skin hanging loose in larynflt. 
As if something in middle of sternum torn loose. As if heart had 



PHOSPHORUS 


781 


grown fast. As if chest eviscerated. As if a narrow band encircled 
body and lay upon heart. As if great weight lying on middle of 
sternum. Back as if broken. As if quicksilver moved up and down 
spinal cord. Coccyx as if ulcerated. Soles as if he had walked too 
much. Feet as if asleep. Ankles as if sprained. Suddenness is a 
feature of Phos, : Sudden prostration such as may occur in diphtheria, 
measles, scarlatina, or any disease in which the system has sustained 
a profound shock. The left side is somewhat more affected than the 
right, the venous more than the arterial system. The symptoms of 
PSos. are < from touch (cannot bear touch of nightdress) ; from pres- 
sure (but pressure > feeling as if something before ears and pains in 
chest). Rubbing >. Mesmerism >. Rest < pain in arms and 
shoulders. Lying down sr intense pains in eyes ; < colic and tear- 
ing in jaws ; > heat of scalp and incarcerated flatus. Weakness after 
stool and after urinating, compelling lying down. Lying on back < 
diarrhoea ; asthma ; > pneumonia ; pain in arm. Lying on left side 

< ; on right side >. Sitting <. Motion ; exertion ; walking, 
especially fast walking, <. Exertion physical or mental <. Laugn- 
ing < (cough). Coughing » headache. Talking < pain in larynx. 

< From spraining parts. < Lifting arms. < Before sleep, > after. 

(Some symptoms are < on waking, but this is less characteristic.) < 
Morning ; evening (especially twilight) ; before midnight. Heat < 
boring in teeth ; back pains ; itching spots of skin. Warm food and 
drink < (but hot drinks > flatulent colic). Warm water, putting 
hands in s= toothache. Warm wraps > neuralgia of head and heat 
of scalp. , Weather changes (either "way) <. Open air > pain in 
forehead ; hemicrania ; stuffed feeling in nose ; < vertigo ; tooth- 
ache ; cough ; = tearing in labia ; ss taking cold easily. Wind <. 
Thunderstorm <. Washing with cold water >. Washing clothes ; 
wet weather <. < Light ; noise ; music ; piano playing. > In the 

dark. 

Relaftions . — Antidoted by: Nux, Coff., Tereb. ; Kali permang. well 
diluted and given freely (Dr, Antal). It antidotes : Tereb., Rhus 
ven., Camph., lod,, Nat. m. (excessive use of salt), Petrol. Complemen- 
tary : Ars., Cepa (all three have alliaceous odours), Carb. v., Ipec. 
^Incompatible: Caust. Compatible: Ars., Bapt., Bell,, Bry., Calc., 
Carb. V., Chi., K. ca., Lyc., Nux, Pul., Rhus, Sep., Sil., Sul. Compare : 
Ars., Merc., Petr., Sul. Asthma after cough, Ars. (Ars. before and 
'• after). Fancies himself in pieces, Bapt. Stitches up vagina, Sul., 
Sep., Pul., Nit, ac.. Alum., Berb., Am. c. Weakening night-sweats, 
*Cl!i., Calc., Lyc. Sweats towards morning. Calc., Lyc. (Phos. on 
awaking). Tongue glazed, Lach. (Lach. redf Phos. dry, cracked, 
black). Lienteria, Chi. Cough < entering cold air from warm room 
(Bry. opposite). Fear of darkness. Am. m.. Calc., Stro., Val., Stram. 
f ear^ f ghosts. Pul. Sense of insecurity in bowels, Alo. Piles during 
mSflSes, Collins., Ign., Lach., Pul. Effect of raising arms high to lift 
things, Rhus. Chilblains ; general paralysis. Agar. Headache with 
incfbased intellectual powers (Phyt. with increased hearing). Hunger 
at tti^t, Chi. s., Pso., Pul., I^n., Lyc. (Pho. unappeasable hunger with 
ft^mle heat). Left ovarian pain, Coloc., Thuj,, Lach., Bry. ^mnam- 
buHsm, Can. i,, Sul., Luna. Sensation of anus open, Phos. ab., Apis 



782 


PHOSPHORUS 


flLach. as if vagina open). < Walking fast, Pul. Regurgitation of 
food, Sul, Nocturnal salivation, Cham., Nux, Rhus. Difficult swallow- 
ing of liquids, Bell., Caust., Can., Hyo., Ign., Lach., Lyc. Blood from 
bowel, Merc., Nit. ac., Sul, Caps., Merc. c. Menorrhagia, Calc. 
Laughs at serious things, Anac., Ly<f., Nux m., Plat. Haemorrhage, 
blood does not coagulate, Sanguisuga. Fatty changes in blood, kid* 
neys, spinal cord ; brain-fag ; crawling and tingling sensations ; 
sexual excitement with erethism ; backache as if it would break 
Pic. ac. (Phos. has more irritability and over-sensitiveness to external 
impressions with the weakness ; the senses are too acute, or if failing, 
accompanied by photopsies ; Pic. ac. has more intense erections and 
less lasciviousness than Phos.). In general features ; taciturn and 
distrustful ; inclined to be angry and scold ; sensation of tension ; 
nervous weakness and restlessness, Caust. (Phos. has great soreness of 
larynx, fears to cough or talk ; Caust, has cough > by cold drink, 
Hoarseness of Phos. is < evening, of Caust. < morning). Scrofula, 
tuberculosis, swelling of glands, indolent ulceration, difficult learning 
to talk and walk (Phos. has delicate, refined skin, features sharp and 
rather handsome ; Calc, large, swollen lips). Small ulcers surround- 
ing large ones (Hep. pimples round sore eyes). Phthisis florida, Fer. 
(Fer. has apparent plethora with great oppression of chest from least 
exertion). Weakness and goneness in stomach at ii a.m. ; softening 
of brain ; enervation accompanied by trembling ; restlessness, Zn. 
(Zn. has ptosis ^ < from wine ; restlessness of feet, Phos. of entire 
body). Functional paralysis from fatigue or emotion, Stan., Coccul, 
Ign., Nat. mur., Collins. Hoarseness, < evening, weak chest, cough, 
copious expectoration, hectic, Stan. (Phos. has more blood-streaked 
sputa ; tightness across chest). Bone disease, abscess, especially of 
breast, with fistulous openings ; over-excitability of nervous system ; 
cough excited by spewing, Sil. Phthisis ; rapidly growing young 
people, lod. (Phos. is nearest lod. in phthisis). Aphonia with raw- 
ness of larynx, Carb. v. Heat at vertex ; imperfect growth'-of tissue ; 
morning diarrhoea, Sul. (Sul. has hunger at 1 1 a.m. with the heat at ver- 
tex, Phos. has not ; Phos. has green painless stools, Sul. stools changing 
colour, and raw sore anus). Irritation of respiratory tract, sore 
larynx (Phos. has irritation lower down ; sore larynx, < from„ 
talking or pressure, Bell, only from pressure). Capillary bron-*^ 
chitis, Ipec. (Phos. more inflammatory). Prostration, Chi. (Phos. 
sudden, Chi. not). Vicarious menstruation, Bry., Puls., Senec. 
Typhoid, Rhus ; and erotic mania, Hyo. Cold ; cerebral softening, 
Nux (Phos. follows Nux in both ; if cold goes to chest in spite^of 
Nux). Cough from reflex nervous influence, Anibra (Amb. < when 
strangers in room). Irritability ; intolerance of mental strain, Nux. 
Vomiting : after drinking cold water, Ars. (Ars. immediately ; Pho. as 
soon as warm in stomach), Bism. (immediately after eating, with burn- 
ing cardalgia), Kre. (of undigested food hours after eating). DilRPttea 
as soon as he eats, Ars. Weakness after stool. Con., Nux. Sensitive 
to storms and electricity, Rhod., Merc., Morph. Polypi. Teuc., Gale., 
Sang., Psb., Lemn. > From cold drinks and food (Lyc. opposite). 
Hysteria, ^gn. Deafness, especially to human voice (Ign. opposij^e). 
Small wounds bleed much, Lach. < Putting hands in water, Lac. d. 



PHOSPHORUS 


• 783 

Apathy ; weakness and prostration from loss of fluids, Pho. ac. (Phos. 
has more dryness of ton^e and sensorial excitement). Diarrhoea blood- 
streaked and looking like flesh water, Canth., Rhus. Shreddy, mem- 
branous diarrhoea, Ars., Caust < Twilight, Puls. Hepatisation of 
lungs, Ant. t., Sul., Lyc. (these'* correspond to the later breaking-up 
stage). Can only lie right side (Merc, can only lie left). Levitation, 
Phos. ac., Stict. pul. Desire for acids, Phell. Affections of skin about 
joints, Sep. Tongue as if burnt. Sang. Deafness after typhoid, Ars., 
Petrol. Nymphomania, Calc, ph., Orig. Tuberculosis, Bacil., Tuberc. 
Explosion in head, Alo. Jerks in head during stool, Indm. Numb, 
stiff feeling in brain, Graph. Duchenne^s paralysis, Curai\ Growing 
ends of bones, Conch. Effects of hair-cutting, Bell. Teste puts 
Phos. in three of his groups, of which Puls., Ipec., and Fer. are the 
types. 

Gaufiation, — Anger. Fear. Grief. Worry. Mental exertion. 
Strong emotions. Music. Strong odours. Gas. Flowers (fainting). 
Thunderstorms. Lightning (blindness). Sexual excesses. Loss of 
fluids. Sprains. Lifting. Wounds. Exposure to drenching rains. 
Tobacco (amblyopia). Washing clothes. Having hair cut. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Affections of the mind in general; amativeness; dizziness 
of the mind.— Nymphomania. — Melancholy sadness and melancholy, some- 
times with violent weeping, or interrupted by fits of involuntary laughter. — 
Laughs at jserious things. — Stupor, low, muttering delirium ; loquacious. — 
Thinks be is several pieces, and cannot adjust the fragments. — S^por from 
which he could be aroused for a moment only to lapse back into a muttering 
lethargy ; and forgetfulness. — Great apathy ; very sluggish ; dislike to talk ; 
answers slowly or not at all. — ^Anguish and uneasiness, esp. when alone, or in 
stormy weather, principally in evening, with timorousness and fright. — 
Anguish respecting the future ; or respecting the issue of the disease. — Sus- 
ceptibility to fright. — Fear ; in evening ; of darkness ; of spectres ; of things 
creeping out of corners. — Hypochondriacal sadness. — Disgust to life. — Apathy 
alternating with angry words and acts.— -Becomes easily vexed and angry, 

• which makes him exceedingly vehement, from which he suffers afterwards. — 
Any lively impression ss heat, as if dipped in hot water. — Great irascibility, 
anger, passion, and violence. — Involuntary and spasmodic weeping and 
laughter. — Misanthropy. — Repugnance to labour. — Shamelessness, approach- 
ing insanity.— Great indifference to everything, and even to patient’s own 
family. — Great forgetfulness, esp. in morning.— Great^flow of ill-assorted ideas. 
•^Zoomagnetic condition ; state of clairvoyance. — Ecstasy. 

a. Head. — Cloudiness and dizziness, esp. in morning.— Vertigo when 
rising from bed in morning ; when rising from a seat, with faintness and 
the floor ; < morning and after meals. — Dulness of head > washing 
face with cold water. — Frequent attacks of vertigo at different times, and at 
different hours in the day, esp. in morning, in middle of day, and in bed in 
evening.— Vertigo when seated ; with hypochondriasis, during which chair 
apj^ar s to rise.-*-Vcrtigo with nausea and pressive pains in head. — Obstinate 
v&tigo ; falls back whenever he attempts to rise from bed. — Vertigo very 



784 


PHOSPHORUS 


pronounced; up and down vertigo; things move up and down, or else 
patient feels sinking through the floor (R. T. C.). — ^Apoplectic unchan^ng 
vertigo (R. T. C.) — Vertigo with loss of ideas. — Stupefying headache, morning, 
when moving, and < on stooping ; ceasing for a short time after eating ; > 
when lying down and in cold air, — Attacks of headache, with nausea and 
vomiting, and throbbing, jerking pains. — Nocturnal headache, preceded by 
nausea in evening. — Headache caused by vexation. — Headache in morning, — 
Headache with increased mental power, — ^Weakness of head, which is fatigued 
by music, laughter, a heavy step, a warm room, 8ic . — Pain in brain as if it liad 
been bruised. — Stunning headache, sometimes with violent ebullition of blood, 
and paleness of face. — Congestion to head, with burning, singing, and pulsations 
in head, red face, puffiness under eyes, < morning when sitting and in evening 
in bed. — Sensation of emptiness in head with vertigo. — Headache as if too full 
of blood from intense study, — Headache above 1. eye with floating spots before 
vision. — Numb, dizzy sensation in brain, inability to work. — Feeling as if 
everything had stopped in brain. — Jerks in head, esp. during stool. — Sensation 
as if brain stiffened on remaining in open air. — Sensation of heaviness, of 
fulness, and pressure in head. — Tearing in head, and esp. in temples, or semi- 
lateral. — Lancinations in different parts of head, esp. in evening. — (Incessant 
shooting pains through brain with sensation as if eyes being pulled out, 
beginning in forehead, lasting day and night, with vomiting, > by either 
warmth or cold. — R. T. C.) — Shocks in occiput, loud snaps ; shocks in whole 
head, with shattered sensation as if something had exploded ; brought on by 
over-work or worry. — Washerwoman’s headache. — Burning in forehead, with 
pulsations, morning and afternoon, after eating < in warm room, > in open air. 
— Pulsation in head, with singing and burning in it, mostly in foreliead, with 
nausea and vomiting from morning till noon ; < from music, while masticating, 
and in warm room. — Congestion in head, with beating, buzzing, heat, and 
burning sensation, esp. in forehead. — Splitting headache from cough. — 
Sensation of coldness in head. — The headaches are > by open air. — 
Neuralgia of head, when it must be kept warmly wrapped up nighfandday. — 
External shootings in side of head. — Distressing sensation, as if skin of fore- 
head were too tight, and tension in face, as if the skin were not large enough, 
frequently only on one side ; < from change of temperature and while 
eating ; > after eating, with anxiety. — Tendency to suffer from a chill in 
head, with a sensation in open air as if brain were congealed. — (Sensation of 
coldness in cerebellum, with sensation of stiffness in brain.) — Inflammation of 
brain with pulsations and singing in head ; the heat enters head from the 
spine, and from it extends to feet ; < in warm room, > when moving about 
in cold air. — Headache over 1 . eye. — Headache extending to eyes; to root of 
nose. — Itching in scalp, < from scratching, with dandruff. — Falling off of 
hair (in large bunches on forepart of head, and) esp. above ears (alopecia 
areata). — Dry scabs and great scaliness of scalp, — Dry, painful heat of scalp, 
compelling one to uncover head ; temperature^ of body not increassA.^ > 
when lying down. — Clammy perspiration on head only, and in palms of 
hands, with discharge of much turbid urine. — Sensation as if pulled by the 
hair.— Exostosis on cranium. ^ 

3 . Eyes. — Pains in eyes, as if in orbital bones. — Pressure in eyes as 
from a grain of sand. — Frequent itching in eyes. — Pressure as if eyes would 



PHOSPHORUS 


785 


be pressed out.— Shootings, smarting, heat, and burning sensation in eyes, 
esp. in external canthi. — (Eyeballs feel sore, with tendency to cold sweat and 
giddiness. — R. T. C.) — Eyes sore to touch and feel full (cured. Qy. glaucoma ? 
— R. T. C.). — Congestion of blood in eyes. — Redness of sclerotica and of 
conjunctiva. — Yellowish colour of tfclerotica. — (Episcleritis shifting from one 
eye to the other. — R. T. C.). — Inflammation of eyes of various kinds (with 
pressing and burning pains), — Lachrymation, esp. in open air, and when facing 
the wind. — ^Agglutination of eyes, morning, with lachrymation in open air, < in 
* wind. — Sees better in morning, in twilight, or by shading eyes with hand. — 
Small burning spots on eyeballs. — Balls seem large, difficult to get lids over 
them. — Stiffness in eyes. — Nocturnal agglutination of eyes. — Hordeolum. — 
(Styes constantly appearing ; suppurate. — R. T. C.). — Quivering of eyelids and 
of their angles. — Difficulty in opening eyelids. — Swelling of eyelids. — Pupils 
contracted. — CEdema of the lids and about the eyes. — Amblyopia. — ^Weakness 
of sight on waking in morning. — Eyes give out while reading. — Myopia. — 
Diurnal blindness, which is sometimes instantaneous (as from fainting) ; every- 
thing seems to be covered with a grey veil. — As if a black veil were before 
the eyes. — Clouded sight by candle-light. — Weak-eyed people who see a halo 
around the lamplight. — Shortsightedness ; momentary loss of sight. — One 
sees variegated colours when there may be only one colour. — Black reflections 
or sparks, and black spots before sight. — Sensibility of eyes to both daylight 
and candle-light (aversion to light). — Greenish (or red) halo round candle.^ 
Cataracta viridis. 

4 . Ears. — Otalgia.— Acute tearings and shootings in ears and head. — 
Beating and pulsation in ears. — Congestion of blood in ears. — Sensation of 
dryness in ears. — Yellow discharge from ears, alternating with deafness. — 
Acutenesjf of hearing. — Strong echoing of sounds, esp. of human voice, in 
ears, with vibration in head. — Deafness, esp. to human voice. — Feeling as if 
something were in front of the ears. — (Deafness after typhoid, &c.) — Deafness, 

1. ^de, and throbbing headache (produced. — R. T. C.). — Deafness from cold in 
head. — (Deafness with decayed teeth. — R. T. C.) — Murmuring before ears.— 
Blazing in ears. — Roaring, ringing in the ears. — Aching ; tickling ; itching 
in ears. — Frequent tinnitus sometimes changing into beautiful tunes.— (Never- 
ceasing tinnitus like steam ; seems to cause vertigo and feeling of falling 
through floor. — R. T. C,), 

* 5. Nose. — Nose red, swollen, and painful to touch. — Dry and hard 

scabs in nose. — Polypus in nose (bleeding easily).— Excoriation at angles of 
^nose. — Ulcerated nostrils. — Numerous freckles on nose. — Fetid exhalation 
from nose, — Blowing of blood from nose (every time it is blown). — Profuse 
nesrtleed ; slow bleeding. — Epistaxis, sometimes during a stool or in even- 
ing. — Acute sense of smelling, esp. during the headfehes. — Foul imaginary 
smells. — Loss of smell. — Uncomfortable (painful) dryness of nose. — Constant 
(profuse) discharge of yellow, greenish, bloody, purulent mucus from nose ; ' 
wijpiout coryza. — Coryza ; with inflammation (soreness) of throat and dulness 
(confffSfSn) of head; fluent a'nd dry alternating. — Frequent’ sneezing. — 
Obstruction of nose, esp. in morning. 

Face. — Face pale, wan, sallow, earth-coloured, with hollow eyes, 
surrounded by a, blue circle. — The colour of the face is very changeable. — 
Palctfiess, alternately with redness of face, and transient heat. — Redness and 
VOL. II, 51 



786 


PHOSPHORUS 


burning heat of cheeks.— Circumscribed red spots on cheeks.— Ashy, anaemic; 
blue lips ; waxy.— Bloaledness of face, esp. round eyes. — ^Jerking of muscles 
of face. — ^Tension of skin of face and forehead, sometimes on one side only. — 
Desquamation of skin of face,— Painful sensibility of one side of face on 
opening mouth.— Painful, drawing, and fearing shootings in bones of face, 
esp. in evening, or at night in bed, or after the slightest chill. — The pains in 
face are renewed by speaking or by slightest touch. — Eruption of pimples and 
of scabs on face.— Lips bluish. — Lips dry and parched, swollen, covered with 
brownish scabs.— Cracked lips ; crack in middle of lower lip. — Tetters and 
pimples round the mouth. — Ulceration of corners of mouth. — Cramp in jaw. 
— Necrosis of lower jaw, more rarely of upper. — Necrosis of 1. lower jaw ; 
swelling of jawbones. — Engorgement of submaxillary glands. 

7. Teeth. — Drawing or tearing (pricking, stinging) toothache, or else 
gnawing, boring, pulsative, jerking, and shooting, esp. in open air, or in 
evening and morning, sometimes at night only, esp, in heat of bed, or else 
from contact with hot food. — Toothache after washing clothes ; from having 
the hands in cold water. — Toothache with salivation, after slightest chill. — 
Pains as of ulceration in teeth during a morning meal. — Caries in teeth. — 
Teeth become very loose. — Bleeding of teeth. — Grinding of teeth. — Painful 
sensibility, inflammation, unfixing, ulceration, swelling and ready bleeding of 
gums. — Gums separated from teeth, and bleed easily, esp. from touch. 

8 . Mouth. — Excoriation of mouth. — Bitter taste in mouth ; sour after 
milk ; bloody erosions on inner surface of cheeks. — Accumulation of saliva, 
which is watery, saltish, sweetish ; or excessive dryness of mouth. — Soreness 
of mouth.— Spitting of blood.— Viscid mucus in throat. — Haemoptysis. — Puru- 
lent vesicles in palate. — Skin of palate shrivelled, as if about to be detached, 
— ^Tongue swollen, dry, loaded with a blackish brown coating. — ^The tongue 
swells (agg, — R. T. C.). — Stinging in tip of tongue. — Tongue : chalky white ; dry 
and white ; dry and red ; dry and brown in centre ; coated yellow. — Difficult 
articulation ; speech slow ; tongue refuses to move so that he stammers. 

9. Throat. — Dryness of throat day and night. — Aching rin throat. — 
Smarting, scraping, and burning pain in throat. — Burning in oesophagus. — 
(Spasmodic) stricture of oesophagus. — Tonsils and uvula are much swollen. 
— Hawking up of mucus in morning, — Pain as from excoriation in throat. 

10. Appetite. —Clammy or cheese-like taste. — Bitterness in mouth and 
throat after eating, with roughness.— Taste saltish, sour, or sweetish in mouth, 
esp. after a meal, — Loss of taste. — Want of appetite from a sensation of ful- 
ness in gullet and violent thirst. — Excessive craving for cooling things.—^ 
Longing for acids and spicy things.— Hunger after a meal. — Bulimy, even at 
night (during an attack of gout), with great weakness, so great that he -fewfts 
if the hunger is not soon allayed. — Thirst, with longing for something refresh- 
ing. — Sensation of faintness and softness in abdomen after breakfast. — ^After 
a meal drowsiness and indolence, heat and anxiety, burning sensation 
in hands, acidity increased, pressure and fulness in stomach, chest, and 
abdomen, accompanied by obstructed respiration, vomiting of food^TMaSon 
of abdomen, or headache, risings of sour ingesta, hiccough, debility, colic, 
and many other sufferings. — ^Throwing up of ingesta by mouthfuls. • 

XI. Stomach. — Risings, with pain in stomach, as if something were 
being torn out of it.— Tobacco smoke produces nausea and palpitatign of 



PHOSPHORUS 


787 


heart.*— Frequent risings, generally empty, esp. after a meal and after drink- 
ing ; sometimes also abortive, or spasmodic, or else sour, or with taste of the 
food. — Sour regurgitation of food. — Pyrosis. — Hiccough. — Nausea of various 
kinds, esp. in morning or in evening, or else after a meal. — Nausea with 
violent hunger or thirst, which disappears on eating or drinking water.— As 
soon as the water (or food) becomes warm in the stomach it is thrown up. — 
Waterbrash, esp. ^ter eating acid things. — Vomiting with violent pains in 
^ stomach and great weakness. — Greenish or blackish vomiting. — Vomiting of 
*acid matter.— Vomiting of food, esp. in evening.— Vomiting of bile or of 
mucus at night, sometimes with coldness and numbness of hands and feet. — 
Vomiting of blood. — Vomiting with diarrhoea. — Pain in stomach, esp. when it 
is touched and when walking. — Violent pains in stomach, > by a cold drink. 
— Sensation of contraction in cardia ; the food, scarcely digested, returns into 
throat. — Fulness in stomach. — Shootings and pressure in stomach, esp. after a 
meal, with vomiting of food. — Pain in scrobiculus when it is touched, also in 
morning. — Sensation of coldness, or heat and burning sensation in stomach 
and scrobiculus.— Inflammation of stomach. — Ulceration of stomach in 
anaemic girls (R. T. C.).— Spasmodic pain, sensation of clawing and con- 
traction in stomach, sometimes with choking. — The pains in the stomach 
are > by cold food (ice-cream, ice). — General uneasiness, but which is felt 
more particularly in stomach. — The pains in stomach manifest themselves 
chiefly after a meal, as well as in evening and at night. — Oppression and 
burning in epigastrium. — Drawing pain in pit of stomach, extending to chest. 

12. Abdomen. — A very weak, empty, or gone sensation, felt in whole 
abdominal cavity (this is an indicative point whether found existing among a 
complication of troubles or occurring alone, and esp. when accompanied by 
sensation of heat in the back between shoulder-blades. — H. N. G.). — Sharp 
pains through abdomen. — Shootings in hepatic region. — Distension of 
abdomen, esp. after a meal. — ^Abdomen hard and distended. — (Distended 
abdomen with bilious tendency. — R. T. C.). — Acute yellow atrophy 
of the liver.-i-Enlargement and induration of liver, with pain. — Pain in 
hepatic region on pressure. — Enlargement of spleen. — Sensitiveness in 
hepatic region, < when lying on r. side, with pain on touch. — Painful pulsa- 
tion in r. hypochondrium. — Contractive pain in abdomen. — Spasmodic colic. 
— Pinchings, cuttings, and tcaririgs in abdomen, esp. in morning, in bed at 
night, and in evening, and often with urgent want to evacuate and diarrhoea. 
— Shooting pains in abdomen, sometimes with pallid face, shiverings, and 

^ headache.— Sensation of coldness, with heat and burning sensation in 
abdomen. — Inflammation of intestines. — Intussusception. — Uneasiness in 
abdOTHtn after breakfast. — Pressure outwards against sides of abdomen. — 
Soreness of abdomen to touch when walking. — Flacci^ity of the abdomen. 
— Obliged to lie down from weakness across abdomen. — Inguinal hernia.— 
Large yellow spots in abdomen. — Swelling and suppuration of inguinal 
glands. — Incarcerated flatus. — Flatulent colic, deeply seated in abdomen ; 
< wtieff^ying down, with grumbling (rumbling and rolling in bowels) 
and borborygmi.— Flatus in general. 

13. Stool and Anus.— A very characteristic symptom is found in the 
stool, which is long, slim, hard, and dry, and is evacuated with a great deal of 
difficulty ; it may be compared to a dog’s stool in appearance and in manner 



PHOSPHORUS 


7&S 

of evacuation, is often accompanied with the same straining, trembling of the 
limbs, &c. — Diarrhoea : in great quantity, like water from a hydrant, and is 
very exhausting to the patient (often accompanied with a very weak, empty, 
or gone feeling in abdomen) ; painless ; stools large ; involuntary ; mucous.-— 
(Emaciating diarrhoea, skin dry and h^d.— E. A. Small).— Constipation. — 
Faeces hard, small, slow, interrupted, difficult to evacuate, and much 
too dry (like a dog’s). — Urgent and distressing want to evacuate, — Pro- 
longed looseness of bowels. — Faeces of the consistence of pap. — Serous 
diarrhoea.— Diarrhoea with diminished strength « in morning). — Mucous 
diarrhoea. — Bloody diarrhoea. — Undigested faeces. — Greenish, grey (or whitish- 
grey), or black faeces (with flakes of mucus). — Stools watery, with whitish- 
yellow and cheesy masses ; lumps of white mucus. — Stools odourless save for 
a slight mouldy smell. — Stools like scraping of intestines. — Involuntary 
evacuations. — Discharge of mucus from anus, which remains continually 
open. — Tenia, or ascarides from rectum, during stool. — Discharge of blood 
during the evacuation. — After stool : pressure, burning pain, and tenesmus in 
anus and rectum, with great exhaustion. — Dartings and shakings in rectum 
and anus (this may occur in children, causing them to cry out, is usually < 
in evening or night ; they appear to have worms ; they will put their hands 
to the seat, and show by various signs where and what the matter is). — Nettle- 
like stitches in rectum when not at stool. — Stitches in anus. — Biting and 
itching in anus. — Tearing in rectum ; and genitals, even to sinking down. — 
Pain in anus so violent it seemed as though the body would be torn asunder, 
with cutting and movements in whole abdomen, constant ineffectual desire 
for stool, heat in hands and anxiety ; > only by application of warm cloths. 
— Shaking and clawing 1 . side of anus. — Crawling stitches. — ^Pruritus ani. — 
After stool, frightful tenesmus for some time. — Paralysis of lowe!^ intestines ; 
of liphincter ani. — Anus wide open. — Sensation of rectum paralysed. — Cramps 
and contraction of rectum. — Protrusion and ready bleeding of haemorrhoidal 
tumours in rectum and anus, with pain as from excoriation, when sitting or 
lying down. — Fissure of anus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Increased secretion of watery urine. — Frequent 
emission of a scanty stream of urine (only a small quantity each time). — 
Urine with white, serous, sandy and red, or else yellow sediment. — Turbid 
urine, with sediment like brick-dust.— Pale, aqueous, or whitish urine.— 
Variegated pellicle on surface of urine. — Haematuria (with acute pain in region 
of kidneys and liver, and jaundice). — Smarting and burning sensation when 
urinating. — Tension and jerking, or burning pain in urethra when aot < 
urinating (with frequent desire to urinate). 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — ^Very strong sexual desire, with d&SStant 
wish for coition. — Impotence after excessive excitement and onanism.— Erec- 
tions which are too energetic in evening or morning. — Frequent (involuntary) 
pollutions.— Feeble erections or none at all.— Feeble and too speedy emission 
during coition.— Pains in testes and swelling of spermatic cord.— gvdrq^ele. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Nymphomania. — Aversion to coitus,— 
Tearing in genital organs, and stitches upward from vagina into uterus,— 
(Small pustulation of vulva with great irritation.— R. T. C.).— Cfidema of 
labia (< 1.), later gangrene. — ^Catamenia too early and too profuse (and of 
too long duration), or too early and too scanty and serous.— [PAos. ^a^ients 



PHOSPHORUS 


789 


generally menstruate regularly but profusely, and not uncommon symptoms 
are, vertigo on rising in morning, with weakness of legs, so that for a few 
moments after getting out of bed, they cannot stand. — H. N. Martin.] — Dis- 
charge of blood from uterus during pregnancy. — Catamenia of too long dura- 
tion, with toothache and colic.— Before menses : abundant bleeding of ulcers ; 
leucorrhoea ; want to urinate ; and weeping. — Frequent and profuse metror- 
rhagia. — On appearance of menses ; incisive, griping pains in the back and 
•vomiting. — ^After menses : weakness, blue circles round eyes, and anxiety. — 
Menses : of too short continuance ; retarded. — During menses : shooting 
headaches ; fermentation in abdomen ; expectoration of blood ; pains in 
(small of) back ; soreness of limbs ; great lassitude and fever ; or palpitation 
of heart ; shiverings ; swelling of gums and cheeks, and many other suffer- 
ings, — Sterility on account of excessive voluptuousness, or if the menstruation 
comes on too late and is too profuse. — Smarting, corrosive leucorrhoea (draw- 
ing blisters). — Hard and painful nodosities in breasts. — Inflammation (erysipe- 
latous) of breasts, even after formation of pus. — Erysipelatous inflammation of 
mammae, with swelling, burning pains, and shootings. — Anxious feeling beneath 
1. breast, with bitter eructations. — Burning, pinching in r. breast, heat mounting 
to head. — Cramp pain in breast, high up, under sternum, with eructations. — 
At 3.30 p.m. pain from 1. nipple to r. nipple, thence to r. shoulder and r. little 
finger .»-Pain below nipple shooting like electricity. — Nipples hot and sore. — 
Papular eruption on breasts. — Abscess in mammae, also with fistulous ulcers ; 
bluish colour. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness and scraping in throat, some- 
times prolonged. — Aphonia, so as to be unable to speak except in a whisper. — 
Catarrh wit]i cough, fever, and fear of death. — Very painful sensibility of 
larynx, which prevents speaking. — Stitches, soreness, roughness, and dryness 
in the larynx. — Croup ; bronchitis. — Great sensibility of larynx with burning 
pain. — Dryness in trachea and chest. — Expectoration of mucus from larynx. 
— Cough excited by a tickling and itching in chest, or with hoarseness and 
sensation as iPchest were raw. — Hollow, hacking, spasmodic, tickling cough, 
esp. if caused by tickling in chest ; at night, preventing sleep. — Cough with 
shootings in throat, chest, and scrobiculus, sometimes only at night. — Dry 
cough every day, which continues several hours, with pains in stomach and 
abciomen.— Cough with stitches over one eye. — Cough from a change in the 
weather and from strong odours; from lying on 1. side or on back. — 
Cough from going from warm into cold room (H. N. Martin). — Dry, 
•'Shaking cough, with sensation as if head were going to burst, excited by cold 
air, by drinking, or by reading aloud. — Cough with vomiting. — Cough excited 
by laughing. — Dry cough, as if caused by tubercles, or chronic pneumonia. — 
Cough in paroxysms, brings up a viscid, muco-purulent expectoration, 
branched like the bronchial tubes. — Cough with purulent and saltish expec- 
toration, esp. morning and evening. — Cough with expectoration in morning, 
with^t^xpectoration in evening; expectoration frothy, pale red, rust- 
coloured, streaked with blood ; white and tough ; cold mucus, tasting sour or 
sweet ; tjansparent mucus in morning after rising. — Greenish expectoration 
from cough. — Cough with expectoration of slimy mucus or of blood, with 
smarting in chest. 

z8. • Chest.— Noisy and panting respiration. — Difficult respiration, esp. in 



790 


PHOSPHORUS 


evening, with anguish in chest, < by sitting down. — Respiration oppressed, 
quick, anxious.— Difficult inspiration ; heaviness, fulness, and tension on 
chest. — Obstructed respiration and oppression of chest of various kinds, esp, 
in morning or evening, as also duriqg movement. — Spasmodic asthma. — 
Constrictive spasms in chest. — ^After a cough, asthma. — Fits of suffocation at 
night. — Pressure at chest — Heaviness, fulness, and tension in chest.~-»Con* 
tractive spasms in chest. — Tearing in chest. — Lancinations in chest, and esp. 
in 1 . side, sometimes prolonged, or else when the parts are touched. — Burning" 
pain as from excoriation in chest. — Inflammation of lungs ( 1 . side). — Pneu- 
monia nervosa (lungs hepatised). — Tuberculosis (phthisis mucosa). — Sensation 
of fatigue in chest. — Anguish in chest. — Congestion in chest, with sensation of 
heat which ascends to throat. — Pain under 1 . breast, when lying upon it. — 
Yellow spots on chest. 

ig. Heart and Pulse. — ^Anxiety about heart with nausea and a peculiar 
hunger, somewhat > by eating, distressing even in bed. — Sensation of warmth 
about r. side of heart. — Pressure ; heaviness ; aching in heart. — Rush of blood 
to heart and palpitation, that becomes very violent after eating. — Palpitation 
of heart of different kinds, esp. after a meal, morning and evening, as also 
when seated, and after all kinds of mental excitement. — Palpitation of heart 
with obstructed respiration ; palpitation from every mental emotion. — ^Violent 
palpitation with anxiety, evenings and mornings in bed ; on slight mdtion. — 
Blowing sounds in heart. — Pressure in middle of sternum and about heart. — 
Pulse rapid, full, and hard ; small, weak, easily compressed. 

20. Neck and Back. — Rigidity of nape of neck.— Pressure on shoul- 
ders. — Swelling of neck, — Engorgement of axillary glands j^nd of those of 
nape of neck and of neck. — Itching and shooting under axillaB.~i:Fetid sweat 
under axillae. — Paralysed sensation in upper sacrum and lower lumbar 
vertebrae. — Contusive pain in loins and back (as if back were broken), 
esp. after having been seated a long time, hindering walking, rising up, 
or making the least movement. — Pain in small of the back when rising 
from a stooping position. — Burning in back or small of back (esp.^ with 
delayed menses). — Tabes dorsalis. — Burning pains in loins. — Sensitiveness of 
spinous processes of dorsal vertebrae to pressure. — Softening of spine. — Heat 
or burning in back, between scapulae. — ^Tearings and stitches in and beneath 
both scapulae. — Pain in coccyx impeding easy motion, can find no comfortable 
position ; followed by painful stiffness of nape. — Coccyx painful to touch as 
from an ulcer. — Transient pain from coccyx through spine to vertex that 
drew head back during the stool. — Backache and palpitations prevail 
(R.T.C.). 

21. Limbs. — Weakness in all the limbs as if paralysed ; esp. in joints, 

trembling from every exertion.— Swelling of hands and feet. — Bruised pain in 
limbs. — Extremities, esp. hands and feet, heavy as lead. — Numbness and 
falling asleep of limbs. — Exanthema on skin about joints. — Swelling of soft 
tissues of joints. — ^Joints stiff, * -m*.. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Stiffness in morning on washing, with pressure.-*- 
Rheumatic tearing (and lancinating pains) in shoulders, arms, aead hands 
(particularly in joints), esp. at night. — Burning pain in palms of hands and 
arms ; clammy perspiration in palms and on head. — Burning pain in hands 
and arms. — Numbness of arms and hands.— Lassitude and trembling tn arms 



PHOSPHORUS 


791 


and hands, and esp. when holding anything.—Furfuraceous tetters on arms. 
—Congestion of blood in hands, with swelling and redness of veins, esp. 
when allowing arms to hang down. — Wrenching pain in joints of hands and 
fingers, with tension.— Swelling of hands, even at night.— Heat in hands.— 
Coldness of hands at night.— Contraction and jerking of fingers. — Deadness 
of fingers. — Paralysis of fingers. — Numbness of finger-tips. — Skin cracked at 
joints of fingers. — Chilblains on fingers. 

23, Lower Limbs. — Uneasiness, weakness, < on ascending steps, with 
* heaviness. — Pain as from ulceration (suppurative) in buttocks when seated. — 

Pain in r. hip-joint. — (Exostosis of femur.) — Wrenching pain in coxo-femoral 
joints, and those of knees and feet, with external heat. — Swelling of tibia. 
— Bruised pain in periosteum of tibia. — Gangrenous periosteum of tibia, with 
fever ; the periosteum peeled off as far as knee, leaving the bone rough. — 
Painful fatigue and heaviness of legs. — Heaviness in hollow of knees. — Burn- 
ing sensation in legs and feet. — Tension and cramps in legs, esp. in knees. — 
Rheumatic stiffness of the knee. — Shocks in legs before going to sleep, day 
and night. — Drawing and tearing (rheumatic pain) in knees, extending into 
feet. — Paralytic weakness in legs, and arthritic rigidity of knees. — Tetters on 
knee. — Spots like petechiaj on legs. — Ulcers on legs, with surrounding small 
pustules. — Exostosis on tibia. — ^Jerking, and cramp in calves. — Tearings 
and •shootings in feet, esp. at night (in feet of a pregnant woman). — 
Swelling of feet, or only of the malleoli, esp. in evening or after a walk, 
sometimes with shooting pain. — Sprained pain in ankles on walking. — 
Easy dislocation of foot. — Coldness of feet, esp. at night. — Paralytic feeling in 
feet. — Pain (as if bruised) as from ulceration in soles when walking. — Shocks 
in feet da^ ahd night before going to sleep. — Numbness of tips of toes. — 
Inflammation and redness of ball of great toe with lancinations. — Chilblains 
and corns on toes. 

24. Generalities. — Affections of inner chest ; shinbones ; bones of 
legs ; of r. upper or r. lower extremity ; r. upper or r. lower side. — Profuse 
secretion of fnucus. — Affections of axillary glands ; inflammation of glands in 
general ; glands painful, particularly stitching pains ; hot swelling of glands. 
— Glandular diseases, esp. after contusion. — Bleeding from inner parts; 
threatened phthisis pulmonalis. — The pains of Phos, are continuous, or, at 
least, irregular as to time.— Arthritic and rheumatic tearings and stitching 
pains, principally in limbs, sometimes after a slight chill, esp. in bed at 
night. — Burning pain in limbs. — Tension, cramp, jerking, and distortion of 
«ome of the limbs. — Sprains, easy dislocations. — Ataxia and adynamia. — Con- 
vulsibns. — Rigidity of some parts. — Fits of paleness and numbness in some of 
theTimbs, which then appear dead. — Mucous membrane pale. — Trembling of 
limbs from least exertion, but chiefly during labour. — ^Tendency to strain the 
back, — Ebullition and congestion of blood, sometimes with pulsation through- 
out body. — Sensations : of fulness ; of itching or tickling ; of knocking, 
beaitinjgi or throbbing ; of darting ; darting pain ; of roughness — all occurring 
in inner parts. — Sensation of dryness or of festering in internal parts. — 
Bleedi^ from various (internal) organs. — Inflammation and stinging pain of 
inner parts, — Itching of inner parts. — Small wounds bleed much.— Blood fluid 
non-coagulable. — Bleeding from all cavities ; also from soft cancer. — 
Weailness and soreness in joints, esp, knees.— Great weakness and para- 



792 


PHOSPHORUS 


lytic lassitude, which sometimes come on suddenly, esp. in bed in morning, 
or after a very short walk. — Can only lie on the r. side. — Lying on the 1 . 
side at night causes anxiety. — Spasms of the paralysed side. — Paralysis, formi- 
cation, and tearing in limbs ; anaesthesia ; ^increased heat. — Exostosis, esp. of 
skull. — Hip-joint disease, oozing a watery pus. — Epilepsy with consciousness. 
— Fainting fits ; from strong odours. — Excessive sensibility of all the organs. 
— Hysterical lassitude. — General dejection and nervous debility. — Heaviness 
of limbs and sluggishness. — Paralysis with tingling in the parts affected. — 
Emaciation and consumption. — Inability to remain in open air, esp. when 
cold. — Strong tendency to take cold, which is often followed by headache 
and toothache, coryza, with fever, shivering, &c . — Effects of hair-cutting and 
chill to head. — Pains in limbs on change of weather. — The majority of symp- 
toms manifest themselves morning and evening, in bed, as well as after 
dinner, while several others appear at the beginning of a meal and disappear 
after it. — < : In morning ; evening ; before falling asleep ; on waking ; 
before breakfast ; after taking cold ; while coughing ; before or after eating j 
from violent bleeding ; from spraining parts ; while lying on back ; lying on 
1. side ; from laughing (often producing cough) ; from light in general ; light 
of the lamp ; warm food (“ very thirsty, takes water, likes it, feels better, gets 
warm in stomach and is vomited ”) ; reading aloud ; from strong smells ; after 
stool (exhausted, &c.) ; while swallowing drink ; in the wind ; when singing ; 
when the weather changes either way. — > : In the dark ; lying on r. side ; 
from being mesmerised ; from rubbing ; from scratching ; after sleep ; from 
cold things ; cold food ; cold water (till it gets warm). 

25. Skin. — Exanthema which comes out in pustules ; is scaly. — Ulcers in 
general, — Summer freckles. — Hard swellings here and there ‘ oi\ body. — 
Wounds which appear to have healed break out again and bleed ; wounds 
that continually heal and break out again. — Desquamation of skin. — Burning 
in the skin. — Excoriated spots on skin, with cracks and shootings. — Round, 
tettery spots over whole body. — Freckles (nose). — Dry, furfuraceous tetters. — 
Yellow or brown spots on skin (esp. chest and abdomen). — Copper-coloured 
or bluish spots, like petechiae. — Red spots. — Jaundice. — Pale skin. — Eccfiy- 
mosis. — Furunculi. — Lymphatic abscess with fistulous ulcers (which have 
callous margins, secreting a fetid and colourless pus) and hectic fever. — Large 
ulcers surrounded by small ones. — Ulcers bleed on appearance of menses.-r 
Fungus haematodes. — Copious bleeding even from very small wounds. — 
Polypus. — Chilblains (fingers and toes) and corns on feet, sometimes very 
painful. — Tingling in skin. — Nettle-rash. 

26. Sleep. — Falling asleep late. — Complaints preventing sleep. — Qj;pr- 
powering sleep coming on after dinner, if only a moderate dinner has been 
eaten. — Sleeplessness before midnight. — Sleepy at 7 p.ra. ; wakeful at night 
(produced. — R. T. C.). — Strong tendency to sleep by day, as from lethargy. — 
Stupefying sleep. — Sleep retarded in evening, and sleeplessness at night, or 
frequent waking, with difficulty in going to sleep again, caused by r^0e^s- 
ness, with anguish, tossing, heat, vertigo, and ebullition of blood. — Inability 
to remain lying on back or on side. — Coma vigil. — Sleep unrefrq^ing; 
sensation in morning as after insufficient sleep. — At night vertigo with 
nausea, painful sensibility of limbs, pains in stomach and abdomen, 
suffocating and spasmodic asthma, &c. — Frequent waking from feMing 



PHOSPHORUS HYDROGENATUS 


793 


too hot, without perspiration.— Frequent waking, with starts and fright.— 
During sleep, jerks in limbs, cries, talking, tears, complaints, lamenta- 
tions, and moans. — Dreams : anxious, distressing ; lascivious ; frightful and 
horrible ; or vivid and uneasy ; of ^imals which bite ; of robbers ; fire ; the 
business of the day (which he could not finish) ; bloodshed ; death ; quarrels ; 
creeping things, &c. — Nightmare. — Somnambulism. 

27. Fever. — Shuddering and shivering, esp. in bed, in evening (without 
• ^ thirst, with aversion to being uncovered and with swollen veins on hands), 
sometimes with yawning, followed by heat or otherwise. — Coldness of limbs. 
— Internal chilliness and chill not > by heat of stove. — Chilliness in evening 
till midnight, with great weakness and sleep. — Chill running down back. — 
Shiverings, followed by heat, with thirst and sweat, esp. at night, and in 
afternoon. — (Chronic feverishness with recurring albuminuria. — R. T. C.). — 
Internal or external heat of single parts. — Flushes of heat running 
up back. — Burning in back, between shoulder-blades.— Burning pain of 
external parts or of internal parts. — ^Transient or anxious heat. — Nocturnal 
heat (disturbing sleep).— -Flushes of heat over whole body, beginning in hands. 
— Perspiration most profuse on head, hands, and feet, with increased secre- 
tion of urine, — Perspiration on fore part of body. — Perspiration frequently 
smells of sulphur or of garlic.— Intermittent fever : heat and perspiration at 
nigbt, with faintness and ravenous hunger, which could not be satisfied with 
eating ; afterwards chilliness with chattering of teeth and external coldness ; 
the chilliness was succeeded by internal heat, esp. in hands, while the 
external coldness continued. — Fevers with soporous condition, dry, black lips 
and tongue and open mouth. — Typhus fever (often with pneumonia and 
bronchitis that developed into consumption). — Hectic fever, with dry heat 
towards the evening, esp. in palms of hands, sweat, and colliquative 
■ diarrhoea, circumscribed redness of cheeks (1. more than r.), &c. — Pulse 
changed ; quick, full, and hard ; occasionally small and weak. — Nocturnal 
and viscid sweat. — Sweat in morning. — Cold, clammy sweat. 


Phosphorus Hydrogenatus. 

Phosphoretted Hydrogen. Phosphine. PH3. Solution. 

CUnlealt — ^Amblyopia. Diarrhoea. Hyperaesthesia. Locomotor ataxy. Stam- 
mering. Teeth, crumbling. 

Charaoteristios. — Breunar (quoted by Allqri) relates the effects 
of inhaling this gas, given off in the preparation of some “ hypophos- 
phites.*^ The symptoms began to appear after three months in 
visional disturbances, diarrhoea, paralysis, and a complete state of 
loftoiiiotor ataxia, < on closing eyes. The teeth crumbled without 
pain. Articulation and swallowing were difficult. The diarrhoea was 
accompanied by weakness of the anus. 

RelationB. — Electricity antidoted the effects. Compare : Loco- 
motor ataxy, Arg. n., Aim., Helod. Visional defects, Benz, din., 
Cart), s. 



794 PHOS. HYDROGENATUS— PHOS. MUR. 

•* 

SYMPTOMS. 

3. Eyes. — Flickering points in field of vision, rapidly enlarging and 
rendering it impossible to fix .vision on any object, esp. in reading. — Optic 
nerves very irritable to reflex stimuli. 

4. Ears. — Auditory hyper aesthesia. 

8. Mouth.— Teeth, both healthy and carious, crumble, without pain. — 
Ataxia of muscles of articulation, great effort of will required to form the 
word. 

9. Throat. — Swallowing somewhat difficult. 

12. Abdomen. — Shooting pains in limbs and abdomen. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Diarrhoea with weakness and unsteadiness of 
arms. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Weakness and unsteadiness of arms, making 
difficult to write. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Limbs unsteady ; gait lojtering ; associated with 
undercurrent shooting pains in limbs and abdomen. 

24. Generalities. — Complete expression of ataxia ; stood with limbs 
separated ; walking wholly impossible when eyes closed ; would stagger and 
fall. — No anaesthesia ; electric irritability of muscles greatly increased. 


Phosphorus Muriaticus. 

Phosphorus pentachloride. PCI5. Solution. 

Clinical. — ^Asthma. Coryza. Ophthalmia. 

CharaoteristicB. — J. Meredith (H. W,, xxxiii. 127) has recorded 
the effects observed on a science student from grinding up this salt and 
inhaling the fumes. Eye-soreness, coryza, sore throat and chest with 
difficult breathing, were the main symptoms. They lasted fourteen 
days from the exposure ; and were cured by Bell 3X internally and 
a one per cent. Iodine lotion locally as a compress at night. 


SYMPTOMS. 

3. Eyes. — Great soreness of mucous membranes of eyes and nose, with 
copious intermittent runnings; lasts all night. — Shades eyes from light 
reflected from tablecloth at dinner. — Whites of eyes congested. • 

5. Nose. — Irritation and copious intermittent running. — ^The intolerable 
smell of the fumes cannot be forgotten at night, and sleep is impossible. 

9. Throat.— Throat and chest sore. ^ 

17. Respiratory Organs. — In morning breathing difficult ; lungs 
wheezy ; chest and throat sore. 

86. Sleep.— Symptoms kept him awake all night. ** 



PHYSOSfiGMA 


795 


Physalia. 

Physalia pelagtca. Portugut se man-of-war. N. 0. Physophoridae. 

Cllaical.— Urticaria. 

Charaoteristios. — G. Bennett was stung by the animal on second 
and ring fingers. The sensation was as if stung by a nettle, succeeded 
in a few minutes by violent aching, affecting the finger- joints and 
spreading up arm, involving elbow-joint. The pain was < by applica- 
tion of water ; < by motion ; and < when joints became affected. 
The pain spread to the shoulder-joint and pectoral muscles causing 
oppression of breathing. After half an hour the symptoms began to 
abate, leaving numbness of the limb and a vesicle at the spot which 
was stung. 

Relations. — Compare : Medusa, Urt. ur. 

Physostigma. 

, Physostigma venenosum. Calabar Bean. Esere. N, 0. Legu- 
minosae. Trituration of the bean. 

Clinloal. — Astigmatism. Bathing, effects of. Blepharospasm. Chorea. Ciliary 
spasm. Climacteric. Constipation. Coccygodynia. Dentition. Diarrhoea. Dys- 
pepsia. Epilepsy. Eyes^ affections of; injuries of ; strain of. General paralysis. 
Glaucoma. . Hasmorrhoids. Headache. Heart, affections of. Hemiplegia Jl.) 
HerpeSy^reputialis. Hiccough. Hysteria. Iris, prolapsed. Leucorrhoea. Levita- 
tion. locomotor ataxy. Myopia. Navel, inflammation of. Pam/yszs, /oca/ ; agitans ; 
spinal. Paraplegia. Progressive muscular atrophy. Prostration ; muscular. 
Sleeplessness. Spinal irritation. Spinal sclerosis. Stiff neck. Tetanus. Throat,, 
sore ; fish-bone sensation. Water, effects of. Wounds. 

Ohas^teristios. — The Ordeal-bean of Old Calabar, the Esere 
of the natives, is the type of a genus of Leguminosce of the tribe 
Phaseolece, with flowers very like Phaseolus^ except that its bearded 
style is terminated by a great oblique hood, covering the blunt 
stigma.^^ It is this hood which distinguishes the genus and gives it 
its name. P. ven. is a great twining climber, and has purplish 
flowers. Its seeds are very poisonous, and are used by the Calabari 
as an ordeal, suspected persons being compelled to eat them until 
they either vomit or die. In the latter case they are considered 
gttilty, in the former innocent. In cases observed in Calabar convul- 
sions have been noted, and twitchings, espefcially in the back, and 
death in thirty minutes. A number of cases of poisoning have 
occurred in this country, and in these the most notable feature was 
jpomplete muscular prostration. According to Brunton, the tetanising 
properties of the bean belong to an alkaloid, CalabaHnCf and the 
paralysis to Eserine (or PhysostigminCy as it is now called). In animals 
poisoned by it speedy general paralysis is set up, and death occurs 
from failure of respiration ; though the heart may be poisoned both 
directly and through its nerves. The paralysis is seated in the spinal 
cord itself. The muscles are affected by fluttering tremors ; involun- 



796 


PHYSOSTIGMA 


tary muscles are excited tp active movements and expulsive efforts. 
The intestines are often twisted up in knots. All the secretions are 
somewhat increased (C. D, P.). A crowd of children in Liverpool ate 
beans which they found among the sweepings of a ship from Africa. 
Forty-six were admitted to hospital with loss of muscular power, 
prostration, feeble, slow pulse, cold, perspiring skin, cold extremities ; 
vomiting in nearly all cases, diarrhoea in one-third of them. At first 
there was colic, but later on remarkable freedom from pain. Pupils 
contracted in many ; in one contracted during sleep, dilated when 
aroused. Only one (a phthisical boy) succumbed. He staggered as 
he walked, then fell, kicking and rolling as if in pain, but afterwards 
became quiet ; much purged ; pulse hardly perceptible ; skin cold, 
face livid ; quite conscious and able to swallow water. Directly after 
drinking he died without a struggle, some froth issuing from nose and 
mouth. After death the blood was found to be fluid ; the heart dis- 
tended with it, and its muscular substance very flaccid (C. D. P.). 
Many excellent provings have been made with Physo.^ among which 
one made by Christison on himself is remarkable. Simpson and 
Douglas MacLagan were sent for to attend him in his collapsed 
state, which Simpson could only compare to that produced by 
severe flooding, though Christison^s only sensation was one of 
extreme but not unpleasant faintness.^’ MacLagan thought it like 
Aconite poisoning. Christison could not get his will into his muscles 
except by a tremendous effort. Warmth to feet and a sinapism to 
whole abdomen gave great relief, and he was then able to turn on his 
left side ; but only remained there a very short time on account of 
the tumultuous action of the heart it set up. He became drowsy and 
slept ; but his mind was so active in sleep that on awaking he did not 
know that he had slept. The tumultuous action of the heart con- 
tinued on waking, but strong coffee quickly restored the whole condi- 
tion and made the heart regular. A symptom observed by Christison 
and many other provers was one of indigestion, as if large pieces of 
food had been suddenly swallowed.^^ It began under upper sternum, 
descending and increasing in intensity till it reached the epigastrium ; 
eructations then occurred, and a reversal of direction followed, the 
sensation ending where it began. With other provers there was a 
sensation of weight and hardness. Christison also had very much 
giddiness and dimness of vision. It is for its action on the eye, 
especially for its power of contracting the pupil, and thereby antago- 
nising Atropine^ that Physo. and its alkaloid Eserine are best known in 
old-school practice. The effects are more definite when the drug* 
(tincture, extract, or solution of alkaloid) is applied to the eye direct ; 
but one myopic prover had his myopia much diminished. In 
glaucoma it has been used with .signal success to diminish intra- 
ocular tension ; and especially when glaucoma has been the result oi 
injury. Dudgeon {B, y, H., xxxviii. 6o) relates the case of A. E.,* 26 , 
struck by the cork of a soda-water bottle on inferior and outer part of 
left eyeball. Intense burning pain and effusion into the eyeball foUov^ed. 
Under Am.^ prescribed by Mr. Engall, the effusion disappeared, 
and later the pain and inflammation subsided under Aco, and Merc,,e> 
The pupil was now egg-shaped, the long diameter perpendicidar, 



PHYSOSTIGMA 


797 


smaller end downwards ; vision extremely myopic. Bell, dilated 
the pupil, but had no effect on the vision. Engall sent the 
patient to Dudgeon, who found the pupil was sluggish, and a 
book had to be held within four inches of the eye to be read. 
Physo. 3x, every three hours, was given. After the first dose objects 
could be seen at a considerable distance, and next day sight was 
nearly as good as ever. Dudgeon considers that the lens was 
tilted by the blow, and that Physo. restored the over-stretched or 
paralysed portion of the ciliary muscle. Woodyatt {Org. iii. 99) 
states that Physo. has produced corneal astigmatism in a young 
lady, who found any attempt at close work caused redness of tarsal 
edges and a hot, sandy feeling in conjunctiva. Lil. t. 30 cured. 
Paralysis and tremors predominate over the cramps, twitchings, stiff- 
nesses, and tension of Physo. ^ but these are also characteristic, and 
tetanus has been cured by Physo. Paralysis of left side is very pro- 
eminent, and the numbness is more apparent on left side, especially in 
left arm ; which may be associated with heart symptoms. The apex of 
the left lung is also affected. A feeling of levitation was observed in 
one prover on stepping. Ataxic gait and shooting pains down limbs 
show its appropriateness in locomotor ataxy. The inability to get the 
will into the muscles is a striking feature of many paralyses. Spinal, 
sacral, and coccygeal pains were experienced, and associated with some 
of them, numbness of the womb. The association of muscular prostration 
(in any form, of which laboured respiration is one) with any affection 
is a keynote of Physo. This case was cured : Great muscular prostra- 
tion with continual inclination to sigh ; leucorrhoea < by exercising 
during the day, especially 4 p.m. ; sighing < when leucorrhoea is < ; 
dread 3 f cold water. This dread of cold water is a grand keynote of 
Physo. One of the provers (a water drinker) developed a perfect dis- 
gust for cold water and cold drinks ; and though used to a cold 
morning plunge, was obliged to omit it on account of his horror. 
Other provers felt uncomfortable after bathing, and had great reluc- 
tance to their bath. Weakness was felt on change of weather, and on 
cold, bracing days. A paralytic state of mind and body from grief 
has been cured with Physo. Sleeplessness of a peculiar kind occurs 
in Physo, Nash {Med. Adv.^ xx. 258) cured with Physo. 12 and 30 
•persistent sleeplessness in a patient who had been in an insane 
asylum, and feared she would have to go again. Her symptom was ; 
“ If she chanced to get a nap she awoke suddenly as if in a fright, 
and felt no > from what she had slept.^’ Peculiar sensations are : 
As if stomach were full. As if she must lose her mind. As if a ball 
were coming up throat. Lower limbs as if asleep. Back as if para- 
lysed. Tongue as if burnt (left margin) ; as if swollen and paralysed. 
Sensations of contraction and tension. Wavering in brain. Weak 
feeling in stomach. H. L. Chase, one of the provers, had a ** very 
Severe pain in the right popliteal space,’’ and he afterwards cured a 
patient who came to him with pain in the same region two years 
later {H, R.j xiii. 117). (Allen gives the symptom as in the left popli- 
teal space.) The symptoms are < by pressure (of finger between 
vertebrae causing wincing) ; by falls and blows. < Motion ; descend- 
irig stairs (wavering in brain). < Walking ; stepping ; jar of mis- 



PHYS0STIGMA 


798 

step; > Lying supine. < Lying 1. side ; > lying on r. side. < 
4 p.m. < Night (headache unbearable). If pain began at any hour 
it always continued till 12 o^clock following, either noon or midnight. 
< Cold water ; perfect horror of cold drink ; cold bath. < From 
bathing ; from change in weather ; onebracing days. < In church, 
> In cool open air. < On waking. > Closing eyes. > By sleep 
(hiccough). > Warmth to feet ; sinapisms to abdomen. 

EelationSs — Antidoted by : Coffee ; Sinapisms ; Arn. ; (emetics are 
of the first importance. Injection of Atropine antagonises its effects). 
Lil. t. cured astigmatism of Physo. Compare : Eserin. In paraWses, 
Lathyr., Oxyt., Strych., Ciner., Con., Gels. Heart, Phased., Phos. 
Eyes, Onos., Lil, t., Rut., Jabor., Bell. Headache with drowsiness, 
Brucea, Gins., Herac. Spinal irritation, hungry sensation, numbness, 
muscles of back rigid, wavering in brain. Act. r. Headache < by 
music, Phos., Phos. ac. (Physo. of organ.). Levitation, Phos., Phos. ac. 
Headache with inability to stop thinking (Phos. with increased mental 
power), Globus, Ign., Asaf. < Descending stairs. Borax. Increased 
irritability, tetanic spasms, cramp, tenesmus recti, stiff spine and legs, 
Strych. and Nux (Physo. has diminished reflexes, spinal paralysis ; 
unsteady gait with eyes closed ; death by paralysis, Strych. has death 
from respiratory spasm ; dilated pupils). Tetanus, Passif. Tongue 
as if scalded, Sang. 

Causation. — Emotions. Grief. Bathing. Injuries. Blows. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Uncommon mental activity. — Foolish actions, said it made 
him crazy. — Exhilarated in morning, gloomy towards noon. — Nothing was 
right, too many things in room ; continually counting them. — Irritable. — 
Nervous, cannot endure pain. — Exhaustion, cannot remember anything. — 
Disinclined to work. — Difficult thinking ; cannot concentrate the mind. 

2. Head. — ^Vertigo : on moving, with fainting and muscae yolitantes ; 
with nausea ; in evening, if people stepped in front of her in the doorway ; at 
night ; when reading ; on getting up after dinner ; when walking ; on 
descending stairs, with dim vision and unsteady gait ; wavering in brain ; as 
if drunk ; with sensation of wavering in brain. — Confusion and dizziness ; 
dull, heavy, oppressive headache. — Intolerable pain over both eyes. — Head‘ 
drooping listlessly. — Darting pain in various parts, < motion. — Aching in 
morning with epistaxis 1. side. — Bruised pain in brain all day, < a heavy 
step ; < 1. temple, with general fatigue and sensitiveness to cold or change of 
temperature. — Pressure encircling head, with sleepiness. — Constriction ms 
from a bandage or tight cap pressed down as far as temples. — Severe, dull, 
frontal headache, esp. in the morning. — Darting pain in forehead, < motion, 
and in temples. — Sharp pain in supra-orbital region, running off towards nose. 
—Pain : over r. eye, in morning on waking, by noon pain in whole cerebruxxi 
fulness of blood-vessels of brain, and contracted feeling in forehead, which 
extended to eyelids, causing an effort to open or close them ; in 1. side at 10 
a.m., with heat in abdomen and nausea, the pain is heavy at ii, pain<over 
whole head from 4 till 10 p.m., with nausea and general sweat, headache next 
day with lame, bruised feeling in region of kidneys.— Pain in temples ; shegtr- 



PHYSOSTIGMA 


799 


ing from r. temple to 2nd bicuspid* — In evening sound of the organ caused 
headache, < forehead and temples. — One-sided headache with fear of open- 
ing eyes lest it should < the pain. — -Inability to stop thinking with headache. 
-^Sensation of rush of blood to frontal and temporal regions. — Sharp, shooting 
pains in temples.— Throbbing of temporal and carotid arteries ; heart beats 
felt in head on lying down. — Intense, painful pressure in vertex and both 
temples, the pressure in vertex extending over to occiput. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes inflamed, first r., then 1. ; sclerotic dry, red, and 
• swollen ; eyeballs pain and smart ; lids feel sore. — Eyes bloodshot all the 

forenoon, with burning in them. — Pain on attempting to use binocular vision, 
as in reading, so that one eye must be closed, > by a weak concave glass. — 
Pressure ; with muscae volitantes, dark and light long worms or snakes, also 
tremulous vision. — Bright marks when looking at an object ; dark yellowish^ 
spots covering one or two letters when reading. — Sharp, shooting pains, and 
drawing, twisting sensation in eyes. — Eyes sore and painful when moved 
from side to side. — Pain deep in, over top of eyeball, running up from inner 
canthus to r. frontal eminence, then down obliquely outward into temple. — 
Sharp stitches in r. eyeball, > by motion in open air. — The muscularis 
internus seems not to do its work rightly, and the axis of the eyes differs in 
each ; eyes feel weak, with lachrymation. — Eyes convulsed. — Sight blurred, 
hazy, or misty, film over eyes ; objects mixed ; after which dull pain over the 
eyes''and between the eyes. — Aching in posterior part of orbit, extending back 
into the brain ; < on reading, causing nausea. — Lids (esp. 1.) heavy ; cannot 
bear to raise them ; twitching of lids (upper, < 1.). — Contracted sensation in 
lids with difliculty in opening them and lachrymation when wide open, diffi- 
culty in keeping 1. eye open. — Lids immovable. — Tight feeling in ciliary region 
as if something were creeping about in it, with sharp pain, < reading. — Con- 
traction of pupils ; in morning ; by small and rapid jerks, with sensitiveness 
to light; then mydriasis, < morning, seeming to depend on fatigue of 
sphincter, which was > during day by reflex stimulus of light. — Pupils 
dilated.-~Pu|3ils contracted when asleep, dilated when aroused. — Disturbed 
accommodation ; approximation of far point (myopia) and also of near point 
(the accommodation recovers before the pupil). — Vision abnormally acute ; 
double ; dim and indistinct ; blurred, hazy, misty. — (Lens dislocated by blow.) 

4. Ears. — Sharp, shooting pains in the ekrs. — Shooting in 1. ear ; in r. — 
Pain in r. ear when writing. — Hammering in r. in evening, with feeling in 
external car as from a hot wind. — Painful pressure on tympani. — Discomfort 
Jn r., with inclination to bore in with finger ; after removal of wax some pain ; 
with cmciaiion a sudden pain from throat along Eustachian tube to middle 
ear.'^Crawling in 1, ear. — Fulness. — Stopped feeling. — partial deafness of r. — 
Sensitive to every sound. — Singing or tuning like esdaping steam, at night 
after lying down. — Hissing, buzzing, ringing in the ears. 

5. Nose. — Fluent coryza, sneezing; burning, smarting, itching, and 
tin||ling of nostrils ; nose stuffed and hot. — ^Twitchmgs in nose and involun- 
tary expansion of nostrils. — Small boil inside r. nostril. — Epistaxis while at 
supper. — Smarting at end of nose, it feels as if burnt by hot liquid. — Tension 
in skiniof nose and forehead. 

6. Face.-^Face pale ; flushings of the face ; heat.— Neuralgic pain in 
Ti si<|p of face. — Sensation of cramps or spasms in face extending to neck ; 



8 oo 


PHY60STIGMA 


with numbness of 1. hand.— Sensation of contraction of 1. side of face, with 
numbness. — Severe pain in r. upper jaw like toothache (though all teeth on 
that side had been extracted), — Numbness of lips. 

7. Teeth. — Dentition : nervous children with vacillating pupils who 
have trouble when nursing or taking food ; pain in stomach as soon as they 
begin, but going off if they continue to nurse. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue sore on tip and rough. — Smarting of end of 
tongue ; feels as if burnt. — Scalding sensation 1 . side. — Tongue coated, more 
heavily at root.— Numbness and tingling of tongue and lips, with constant^ 
desire to moisten them. — Bad taste in mouth. — Profuse salivation ; thick, 
leathery saliva. — Difficult speech. — Power of speech retained long after 
inability to swallow. 

9. Throat. — Sore throat, painful swallowing. — Tonsils and soft palate 
dark red. — Burning, scraping, raw feeling in throat. — Tonsils enlarged ; 
swollen, elongated uvula. — Small ulcers, with yellow centres in pharynx. — 
Feeling as of a fish-bone in throat ; swallowing saliva very painful. — Con- 
striction of throat and dysphagia. — Pain extending from throat to 1 . ear when 
swallowing. — Feeling as if a ball were coming up in throat. — Submaxillary 
gland tender and tumefied. 

10. Appetite. — Hunger but can find nothing to satisfy it ; food has a 
flat taste. — No appetite, disgust for food, tobacco, and coffee ; and esp. for 
cold drinks. 

11. Stomach. — Tasteless eructations. — Burning in stomach with hot 
eructations. — ^Violent hiccough. — Nausea and vomiting. — In stomach : prick- 
ling, sharp pains ; darting pains, with paralysed feeling of 1. side ; heaviness 
and weight, as if undigested food were lying there ; hard pain ; griping ; 
emptiness and weakness ; sensation of nervousness and tremblingn—Soreness 
in region of stomach. — Sensation at epigastrium as when large pieces of food 
are suddenly swallowed. 

12. Abdomen. — Lancinating pains in hypochondria. — Hard, sore pain 
in splenic region ; descending to groin and across hypogastrium, < by 
motion.— Soreness and pain at navel, which was found much inflamed. — 
Severe pain in umbilical region. — Pain and soreness in umbilical region. — 
Stitches in 1 . side of abdomen. — Much rumbling and distension in abdomen, 
with discharge of large quantities of flatus. — Dull pain in transverse and 
descending colon. — Colicky pains, with feeling as if diarrhoea would occur. — 
Shooting pains in 1 . iliac region and down thigh. — Sharp, cutting pains in 
lower part of abdomen.— Dull pain in groins. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Stools : copious ; soft, thin ; watery ; yellowish ; 
bilious ; part natural, part black like tar ; lumpy, mixed with watery dischfffge ; 
dark and offensive, — Constipation ; from atony. — Sphincter ani swollen and 
rigid ; evacuation painful ; rectum protruding, swollen and very sensitive.— 
Tenesmus and burning, with diarrhoea ; also tenesmus of bladder.— Stool 
irregular and loose, anus sore and inclined to protrude ; piles (absenl^ for 
three years) return.— Severe piles following childbirth. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Bruised, sore feeling in region of kidneys. — 
Bladder feels distended,— Frequent desire to urinate, often ineffectual.— Fre- 
quent and copious urination.— Urine : yellow ; high coloured ; strong-smell- 
ing ; clear ; muddy ; pale and copious. 



physostIgma 


8 oi 


15. Male Sexual Organs. — Frequent erections with but slight desire. 

—Two emissions without dreams or excitement. — Strong-smelling sweat 
about genitals, prepuce tender and swollen, many small vesicles on glans 
with burning itching. ^ 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Leucorrhoea ; < exercising during day, 
csp. about 4 p.m. ; with inclination to sigh ; sighing < when leucorrhoea is 
worse ; dread of cold water. — Menses irregular. — Numbness of womb with 
pain in back, — Condition like that produced by flooding after delivery. — 
Metrorrhagia. — Pain as if menses were coming on. — Menstruation, with 
palpitation ; congestion of the eyes, with tonic spasms, rigidity, sighing 
respiration, consciousness retained. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Cough from tickling in throat. — Slight 
constant inclination to cough from filling lungs. — Laboured, sighing respira- 
tion ; yawning. 

z8. Chest. — Stitches in the chest. — Cannot fill 1. lung as inspiration ss 
dull pain at 1. apex, > by pressure. — Stitches under inferior angles of scapulae 
during expiration.-— Heavy weight at chest. — Twitches across pectoral 
muscles. — Stitches in 1. breast, and unable to draw long breath. 

19. Heart and Pulse. — Dull pain, uneasiness and distress about the 
heai’t. — ^Violent palpitation of the heart, with feeling of pulsation through 
wholp body. — As the fresh, bracing air strikes me, a choking sensation with 
fluttering of heart. — Heart’s action irregular and tumultuous, when lying on 1. 
side, > when lying on the back. — Pulse : variable ; accelerated ; small, 
frequent, slow, feeble, intermittent. 

20. Neck and Back. — Inclination to stretch out the neck. — Pain at 
base of brain* as if it were cutting off body from head ; going through to back 
part of throat, which is stiff and sore. — Stiffness in neck. — On waking, pain in 
r. head and neck as if latter was stiff. — While taking morning bath suddenly 
stiff neck (r.). — Drawing on turning head. — Rheumatic pains in 1. neck and 
shoulder. — Feeling of weakness passed down from occiput through back to 
lower limbs.^Cramp-like stitches up and down spine ; stiffness of 1. neck. — 
Chilly, creeping sensations up back, 7 p.m. — Back very weak, unable to stand 
erect. — Dull pain in back. — Backache (in renal region) kept him restless all 
night ; no > in any position ; passed copious colourless urine. — Creeping 
numbness from back of head down spine. — Cramp-like stitches up and down 
the spine. — Pain under r. shoulder-blade. — Dull, heavy pain in lumbar region ; 
also over 1. hip, extending to back. — Pain in back between hips, with numb- 

^ aess of womb. — Pain in (1.) sacral region, as if strained by lifting, < on 
motion. — Contractive pain of anterior surface of coccyx ; as if dysentery 
coming on ; (since verified). f 

21 . Limbs. — Limbs feel weary, as after great fatigue. — (Pleasant) numb- 
ness in all the limbs ; and paralytic feeling. — Neuralgic pains in the limbs. 
— Stiffness or bruised feeling in the joints. — Staggering gait. — Cold ex- 
tremities. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Wrists feel weak ; dull aching pain in them. — Sharp, 
shooting pain in 1. shoulder. — Itching of 1. palm. — Paroxysms of burning in 
palms,— ^Hands feel cold, then hot and red. — Pain in r. deltoid > only by 
violent motion. — Numbness in 1. arm. — ^Sharp pain in 1., then r. arm, 

^ , 23m Lower Limbs. — Unsteadiness from knee downward when walking, 

VOL. 11. 52 ^ 



8o3 PHYSOSTIGMA— PHYTOLACCA 

6sp. with eyes shut. — Dragging pain in 1. hip towards back.— Thrusts with 
aching down 1. thigh from iliac region. — Stiffness in hip and knee. — Cramp- 
like pain in 1. (and r.) popliteal space. — Sensation of a drawing cord behind 
leg and knee, impeding walking. — Gnawing in 1. tibia. — Legs feel asleep. — 
Numbness in 1. foot. 

24. Generalities. — Indescribable torpidity as from opium ; this is not 
debility but volition is inoperative (Christison's experiment). — Great sense of 
fatigue and weariness ; weakness. — Convulsive twitchings. — Constant fibril- 
lary twitchings of the muscles. — Violent trembling all over the body. — Great 
prostration of the muscular system. — Diminished reflex action. — Omits bath 
on account of horror for cold water. — Sore and stiff all over, as from a cold. — 
Severe, sharp pains in various parts of the body. — In nerves in front of body 
waves like tremblings going up and down ; at back neryes paralysed and 
numbed with pain as when the nerve of a tooth is being Idlled. — Stiff all over 
as after taking cold. — Paralysed feeling in 1. side. — On raising foot in walking, 
momentary feeling as if he were floating upwards, and on foot touching 
ground an unpleasant feeling making a shuddering sensation pass all over 
him. 

26. Sleep. —Irresistible desire to sleep; soporific sleep. — Restless sleep 
with dreams. — During sleep mind so active was unaware he had been asleep. 
— Falls asleep frequently, but awakes suddenly without relief ; following 
night scarcely closed eyes in sleep ; thoughts very active ; an idea once 
started kept on with unusual persistence. 

27. Fever. — Creeping, chilly sensation in back ; yawning ; every move- 
ment and draught =; shuddering. — Hands and feet cold. — Cold, clammy skin. 
— Heat in head and face ; flushed and hot. — Heat in face and down back 
with chilliness of legs. — Dry burning in hands. — Perspires very eafeily. — Cold 
sweat in drops over whole body. — Strong-smelling sweat around genitals. — 
Copious sweat all over body. 


Phytolacca. 

Phytolacca decaiidra. Virginian Poke. Poke-root. Red Ink Plant. 
Garget Weed. N. O. Phytolaccaceae. Tincture of fresh root 
dug in winter. Tincture of the ripe berries. Tincture of fresh 
leaves. Solution of the resinous extract, Phytolaccin. 

Clinioal. — Abortion, threatened Albuminuria. Angina pectoris. Anus,*fissurc 
of. Asthma. Barber’s itch. Both. Botie^ diseases of ; i\xmo\xT?> oi. Breasts^ affec- 
itons of. Cancer. Cholera. Ctcairtx. Ciliary neuralgia. Constipation. Corpulence, 
Cough. Dentition, difficult. Diarrhoea. Diphtheria. Diplopia. Dysentery. Dys- 
menia. Ears, affections of. Erythema nodosum. Eustachian tubes, affections of. 
Glands, enlarged. Gleet. Glossitis. Gonorrhoea. Gout. Granular conjunctivitis. 
Haemorrhoids. Headache. Hearing, altered. Heart, affections of ; hypertrophy 
of ; fatty. Impotence. Influenza. Intestinal catarrh. Itch, Lactation, abnormal. 
Laryngismus. Leucorrhoja. Lichen. Liver, affections of. Lumbago. Lupus. 
Mercury, effects of. Mouth, ulcerated. Mumps. Neuralgia. Nipples, sote : pain- 
ful. Nursing, painful. Orchitis. Ozaena. Panophthalmitis. Paralysis, diphtheritic. 
Parotitis. Prostate, affections of. Rectum, cancer of. Respiration^ abnormal. 
Rheumatism; syphilitic; gonorrhoeal. Ringworm. Rodent ulcer. Salmtion, 



PHYTOLACCA 


803 


Sciatica. Sewer-^as poisoning. Spinal irritation. , Spleen, pain in. Stiff-neck. 
Syphilis. Syphilitic eruptions. Tetanus. Throaty sore ; diphtheritic ; herpetic ; 
granular. Toothache. Tumours. Ulcers. Uterus, affections of. Warts. Wens. 

OharacteristiCB . — PhyL dec. is a branching herbaceous plant, with 
a thick perennial root, someti’aies larger than a man^s leg in diameter. 
The young shoots, though extremely acrid, are rendered harmless by 
boiling, and are eaten like asparagus in the United States. The 
berries have a popular repute as a remedy for cancer and rheumatism. 
The berries of P, octandra are used in Mexico and the West Indies as 
a soap. According to Raffinesque, quoted by Hale (who introduced 
the remedy into homoeopathy), the ash of the plant (which has been 
used as an escharotic in cancers, ulcers, &c.) contains 45 per cent, of 
caustic potash ; and the plant contains besides an acid, Phytolaccic 
acidy which is closely allied to Malic acid. The plant is common 
throughout North America, the Azores, North Africa, and China. It 
grows in damp places. Some rather severe cases of poisoning have 
been reported. Vomiting, diarrhoea, frontal headache, sore throat, 
are the most common symptoms observed. One boy who drank two 
or three drachms of a tincture of the root had none of these symp- 
toms, but developed complete tetanus : Extremities stiff ; hands firmly 
shut ; feet extended ; toes flexed ; lower lids drawn down ; teeth 
clenched ; lips everted and firm, general opisthotonos. Respiration 
difficult, rales heard all over the room. For an hour muscular rigidity 
increased generally, with convulsive action of muscles of face and 
neck ; chin drawn close on sternum. This condition would last five 
or ten minutes, to be succeeded by perfect relaxation, and return in 
twenty minutes more with the same violence. After cold-water 
affusio?!, cupping, and sinapisms, the boy slept about twenty-five 
minutes. On awaking some twitchings, especially of lower limbs ; 
pain in back of head and stomach. Next day he was quite recovered. 
A boy, 8, who ate a quantity of berries, was found in great agony, 
complaiijing that his stomach was ‘‘ pinched together.” He had 
nausea, violent vomiting ; throat sore and dry ; fauces dark red, 
tonsils swollen. After vomiting ceased, purging set in ; stools dark 
brown and thin ; severe pain in stomach on pressure, extorting cries. 
Later he had burning griping in umbilical region ; dim vision ; tongue 
• coated white ; spasmodic jerkings in arms and legs. In a woman, 45, 
who took Phyt. as a “ blood purifier,” a general rash, in appearance 
not unlike the rash of secondary syphilis, was set up. In a family of 
four poisoned by eating the root in mistake with their food, these 
symptoms were observed : Dread of movement ; seems stupid ; falls 
asleep after a paroxysm of cramping pain lias ceased ; pain in fore- 
head < after eating ; vomiting of clotted blood and slime ; copious 
discharge of blood and mucus which looked like scrapings of intes- 
tines ; involuntary stools from straining, which occurred even in 
dleep. In the mother of the family, seven months pregnant, it very 
nearly produced miscarriage ; the uterus could be felt contracting 
under the hand ; involuntary straining and haemorrhage from the 
vagma ; intense griping pain in small of back and cramps in legs 
coming and going suddenly, coldness and withered appearance of 
eiitremities, whole body cold. In all the above cases tlie spasmodic 



8o4 


PHYtOLACCA 


action of the drug is evident in some form. From inhaling the dust 
of the powdered dried root, or the odour given off on slicing the fresh 
root, intense irritation of eyes, nose, and throat, and severe headache 
and diarrhoea have occurred. Given to animals, PhyU has caused 
convulsive symptoms, vomiting, ancf vomiting of worms. Wild 
pigeons and other birds which eat the berries acquire a highly red 
colour and lose their fat. This last observation has led to the use of 
a tincture of Phyt. berries as an anti-fat, and many successful results 
have been reported. This observation may be taken as the key to 
one of the great spheres of the action of this remedy — the absorption 
of tissues, especially new growths. There are few remedies which 
have a wider range in the cure of tumours and indurations, particu- 
larly of the female breast. Hale tells us that among daiiymen in 
America the root is used to regulate any abnormality in the milk of 
cows — scanty ; thick ; watery ; curdy ; containing blood or pus. But 
its chief repute is in caked udders. In breast induration and abscesses 
of nursing women, and even in cancers (internally and sometimes 
externally as well), its action has been w^ell confirmed. But it must 
not be supposed that this action is purely physiological, as is the 
absorption of fat in birds. A patient of mine, about forty-five, took 
PhyL 30 for sore throat. After a few doses she was compelled to 
desist because of its effects on her breasts ; both became full and 
uncomfortable, and in the left one appeared a large lump in its upper 
segment, which lasted five days, and was only got rid of by dint of 
vigorous rubbing with camphorated oil. A case of cancer of the 
rectum has been cured with Phytolaccin 3X. In the uterus and the 
prostate gland (the male uterus) specific symptoms were evoked in 
the poisonings and provings. Muscles, joints, bones, brain, and 
spinal cord, as well as the special senses, were all more or less dis- 
ordered. The intense action of the drug on the throat has led to its 
being used as a routine remedy in diphtheria. It is not a specific ; 
but it has some very characteristic symptoms which will ilidicate it 
when present. Among these are : Great pain at root of tongue when 
swallowing ; pains shooting from throat into ears on swallowing ; hot 
feeling as if a red-hot ball in throat ; burning < by hot drinks ; dark 
redness of fauces. Eclectics (H. i?., xi. 429) give the expressed juice 
of the berries in “ spasmodic or membranous croup, or diphtheria.’^ 
There is one form of sore throat in which I have found it of the 
greatest service — the so-called ‘‘diphtheritic sore throat.” Dark red, 
swollen mucous membrane and tonsils, pain on swallowing, eruption 
of herpetic, whitish, or grey spots on fauces, swelling and tenderness 
of the glands externally at the angle of the jaw. With these symp- 
toms there are generally headache, backache, wandering rheumatic 
pains and fever. I have cleared up numberless cases of this kind with 
PhyU 30. Not infrequently epidemic influenza has taken this forpi, 
and then PhyU has been my most successful remedy. (Nash has 
relieved chronic follicular pharyngitis in public speakers when there 
has been much burning^ as if a hot substance in throat.) One of the 
provers had swollen and tender gland right side of neck ” ; and 
swollen and tender glands in many other localities have been reme- 
died with Phyt, The headaches of PhyU are chiefly frontal, pres^vc, 



PHYTOLACCA 


805 


involving eyes, < right side. One headache is peculiar, being asso- 
ciated with increased sense of hearing. The irritation of the mucous 
membrane of the throat extends to nose, ears, and eyes, producing 
characteristic symptoms in each. The discharges are tough, stringy, 
difficult to detach, and may take the form of clinkers. Offensiveness 
and acridity are also common features. The nervous irritability of 
PhyU has led to its successful use in disorders of dentition, a keynote 
symptom being : Irresistible inclination to bite the teeth or gums 
together. The pains of PhyL come and go suddenly ; move about, 
radiate from a centre, or change place. Pain in sore nipples of 
nursing women radiate all over the body when the child is put to the 
breast. When pain in intestines disappears pain in extremities comes 
on. Pain leaves heart and appears in right arm (this association is 
unusual, and therefore important). Pains in head and chest go from 
before backward. Pains run down spine from nape ; from sacrum 
down outer aspect of thighs to toes. The ow/er aspects of the limbs are 
chiefly affected. The shreddy discharge of PhyL mark it as a remedy 
in certain forms of intestinal catarrh and dysmenorrhoea. It is 
haemorrhagic and haeniorrhoidal, acting strongly on rectum and anus, 
curing tenesmus, bloody discharges and heat. One characteristic pain 
(noted in a case of constipation) is : Shooting pain from anus to lower 
part of rectum, along permaeum to middle of penis. Gurgling in the 
prostate gland, repeatedly in the afternoon,” was noted by oneprover, 
and pains in spermatic cords. Entire suspension of sexual appetite 
with relaxation of the genitals was caused. Stiffness is a characteristic 
effect of *Phyt,j noted in the tetanus case, and in others in less 
degree."* Stiff neck, especially right side. The prostration is so rapid 
and profound that it has led to the successful use of Phyt. in diph- 
theritic paralysis. Faint and dizzy when standing. Soreness of all 
the muscles. Restlessness, but he fears to move because motion < 
the pains* The rheumatic swellings are hard, tender, and intensely 
hot. Phyt, is suited to rheumatic or syphilitic subjects who are sensi- 
tive to damp weather. Peculiar sensations are ; Brain as if bruised. 
Right side of head as if pressed firmly. As if sand in eyes. As if 
eyes too large. As if lids granulated. As if tarsal edges raw. As if 
lids on fire. Nostril as if tickled with a stiff feather. Nose and eyes 
as if a cold would come on. Tongue as if scalded. As if a ball of 
red-hot iron in throat. As if lump in throat. As if apple core in 
throat. Throat so full it felt choked . Pharynx feels like a cavern ; 
chest as if it were a big empty cask. Body as if bruised ; pounded 
all over. As if joint were being chopped witfi an axe. The right 
side is most affected, and many symptoms were experienced in the 
liver ; there were also some severe ones in the spleen. The liver- 
pains were < lying on right (painful) side. The spleen pain was > 
lying on left (painful) side. Nash has removed many breast tumours 
by giving a single dose of PhyL cm during the wane of the moon. 
The symptoms are < by touch (liver, &c). There is great general 
sensitiveness. Pressure < pain in joints and ulcers. Pressure with 
hand > pain in breasts. Pressure on trachea facilitates expectora- 
tioll. . Rubbing > pain in hip. Riding < nose and breathing. < 
Stepping down high step. Rising from bed ss faint feeling. Sitting 



8o6 


PHYTOLACCA 


up =s sick and giddy. Standing = faint and dizzy. Gaslight < eyes. 
Swallowing <. After breakfast head and throat >, gastric symptoms 
<, Vomiting < headache, > nausea. Hunger soon after eating. 
(This is like the deadly sinking so ofte^ met with in the cancerous 
diathesis.) < At menstrual periods. Must lie down. < Lying right 
side. > Lying left side, > Lying on stomach. < Standing and < 
motion. < Walking. < Raising arm. < Night. < Morning ; 3, 
4, or 5 a.m. ; on waking. < Damp weather ; washing ; hot drinks. 

< Exposure to air ; open air (but it > eyes). The external use of 
Phyt. has been attended with good results in cases of ulceration, and 
I have found a gargle of a few drops of the ^ to a tumbler of water 
useful in many throat cases. A preparation of the leaves has been 
used successfully by Hurndall (H. W.^ xxxi. 217) as an external appli- 
cation for carcinomatous growths in dogs ; and an ointment prepared 
with a strong tincture of the leaves as well as the juice of the leaves 
have been used for malignant ulcers in human beings. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Milk, Salt, Coffee (vomiting), Nit. sp. 
dulc., Bell., Ign., Merc., Mez., Sul. (eyes). Op. (large doses). Com- 
pare : Botan., Petiver. Diphtheria, Ar. t., Lach. [Lach. has not the 
great pain at root of tongue when swallowing of Phyt. S. M. Pease 
(Med, Adv.j XXV. 2y) found bleeding from the buccal cavity n keynote 
symptom of Phyt. in one epidemic.] Hypertrophy of heart, Rhus 
(Phyt. has right arm numb ; Rhus has left arm numb, also Aco., Act. r., 
Puls.). Breast abscess, Bry. (Phyt. follows Bry. when suppuration 
seems inevitable ; pain goes from nipples all over body). < Motion, 
Bry. Tetanic spasms, Nux (Phyt. is slower than Nux, has , everted 
lips, alternate relaxation and spasm). Pain in breasts when suckling, 
Crot. t., Phell., Lac c., Borax (Borax, like Phyt., has > from pres- 
sure ; Borax alone has empty, sucked -out feeling). wSensation of apple 
core in throat, Hep., Nit. ac. Stringy discharges and clinkers, electric 
shocks, flying pains, K. bi. Desires cold water (Physt. opp.)r Symp- 
toms fly from centre outward (Abrot. opp.) Pains in breast at men- 
strual period. Calc., Con, Diarrhoea with shreddy membranes, Caust., 
Ars. < In damp weather, Rhus, Dulc. Pains in tibia, Carb. v., Lach. 

< After sleep, Lach. Loss of fat (Sabal ser. opp.). Loss of sense of 
delicacy, Hyo. Bruised, sore feeling, Arn. Hale says K. iod. is the“ 
nearest analogue (rheumatism, syphilis, wasting) ; Merc, and its anti- 
dotes are also closely related. 

Causation. — Exposure to cold and damp. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1, Mind. — Delirium. — Indisposition to mental exertion ; disgust for 
business on waking early in morning.— Melancholy, gloom.— Indifference <to 
life. — Great fear ; is sure she will die. — Loss of personal delicacy, complete 
shamelessness and indifference to exposure of her person. — Irritability ; rest- 
lessness.— Irresistible desire to bite teeth together. — Cannot be persuaded to 
take nourishment. — Over-sensitive ; pain intolerable. 

2. Head. — Vertigo : staggering with danger of falling ; with dim visr.m ; 
when rising from bed feels faint.— Headache : with nausea ; dull j heavy ; 



PHYTOLA'CCA 


807 


neuralgic ; rheumatic ; syphilitic ; with backache and bearing down ; weekly ; 

< from wet weather. — Sore pain over head, < on r. side. — Pain in vertex ; 
and sensation of soreness deep in brain as if bruised ; when slipping from a 
high step to ground. — One-sided pain, just above eyebrows, with sick stomach ; 

< in forehead, or above eyebrows (glabella most affected) ; comes every 
week. — Dull, pressive pain in forehead, with slight nausea, cold sweat on 
forehead and feeling of weakness. — Shooting pain from 1. eye to vertex. — 
Violent pain at back of 1. eye and over eyebrow extending down side of head. 
— Heavy aching in forehead after dinner. — Slight pain in forepart of head 
with increase of hearing. — Heaviness of head, with feeling in back part of 
tongue as if burnt. — Headache commencing in frontal region and extending 
backward. — Nausea and headache > by eating, but returning soon with 
vomiting which < headache and > the nausea. — Pressive pain on forehead and 
upper part of both eyes ; on vertex with dryness. — Pain in back of head and 
neck. — Head thrown backward. — Pain in occiput ; and stomach. — Rheuma- 
tism of r. frontal region with nausea, < morning ; of scalp when it rains, 
with depression. — Syphilitic nodes on skull. — Tinea capitis. — Crusta lactea, 
moist, fearful itching, with little raw tubercles on scalp, face, and arms. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes staring. — Blue round eyes. — Eyes sunk deep in sockets 
with livid circles. — Sclerotica dark yellow. — Sharp pain through ball of eye 
on reading or writing. — Dull aching in eyes, < from motion, light, or exer- 
cise. — Pressure around eyes in afternoon as if eyes too large. — Circum-orbital 
pains in syphilitic ophthalmia. — Panophthalmitis. — Aching along lower half r, 
orbit. — Orbital cellulitis. — Lids feel granulated ; tarsal edges feel scalded, hot, 
raw. — Burning and smarting sensation (feeling of sand) in eyes and lids, with 
profuse j^chrymation and coryza, which is > in the open air. — Smarting in 
inner canthi « 1.), < by gaslight in evening. — Lids agglutinated and swollen, 
as if poisoned. — Reddish-blue swelling of lids « 1.), < morning ; cannot 
close eyes without pain all forenoon, > afternoon. — Fistula lachrymalis. — 
Lids feel on fire. — Lupus, epithelioma, &c., of lids. — Pupils: contracted 
(tetanus) ;* much dilated. — Photophobia. — Motion of one eye independent of 
that of the other. — Double vision; with giddiness and headache. — Objects 
quintupled. — Far-sighted. 

4. Ears. — Shooting in r. ear. — Pains in both ears, < r. ; < swallowing. 
, — Obstruction in 1. Eustachian tube, rushing in 1. ear, a feeling as if hearing 
were dull, while at same time sensitive to minutest sounds. — Irritation in one 
Eustachian tube. — Increased sense of hearing (most r.) ; with pain in forehead. 
— Very peculiar pressure and tension in parotids. 

5. Nose. — Flow of mucus from one nostril while the other is stopped. — 
Drawing sensation at root of nose. — Feeling in nose and eyes as if a cold 
would come on. — Acrid, excoriating discharge. — Wakes 3 a.m. with nose 
stopped up, discharges clinkers from both nostrils in morning.— Sensation in 
nostrils as if tickled with a stiff feather. — ^Total obstruction of nose, wheij 
i?ding must breathe through mouth ; not > by blowing nose ; mucus dis- 
charged with difficulty.— Syphilitic ozaena with bloody sanious discharge and 
disease of bones. — Rodent ulcer. 

6. Face. — Face : pale ; sunken, blue, suffering ; hippocratic ; distorted. 
—Stupid. — Cool sweat on forehead. — Heat in face (1.) after dinner ; with red- 
n%8 of face, coldness of feet, eruption in upper lip (1.). — Face very red. 



8o8 


PHYtOLACCA 


almost purple ; alternately very pale. — Pains in bones of face and head at 
night, keeping her awake many nights ; proceeding esp. from ** nodes on 
frontal bone, very much like pains of periostitis. — Pains in upper jaws, — ^Jaws 
ached awfully the whole time, it seemed he could not open or shut them.-^ 
Blotches in face, < afteri«K>n, after washing and eating. — Swelling round 1 , 
ear and side of face, like erysipelas ; thence over scalp ; very painful. — Ulcers 
and scaly eruption on face. — Chin drawn closely to sternum by convulsive 
action of muscles of face and neck ; lips everted and firm (tetanus). — Eruption 
on upper lip. — Ulcers (cancerous) on lips. 

7. Teeth.— Teeth all ache ; feel elongated and are very sore. — Shooting 
pains in r. upper and lower molars. — Irresistible inclination to bite teeth 
together. — Difficult dentition ; crying, moaning, restless at night ; diarrhoea 
in hot weather ; > biting something hard. 

8 . Mouth. — ^The mouth fills with saliva ; tenacious, yellowish, ropy, 

with metallic taste. — Cold, sticky, stringy saliva. — No saliva. — Taste : dis- 
agreeable ; metallic ; burnt ; nutty ; bitter at first ; leaving smarting and 
coldness towards tip of tongue. — Burnt feeling on back of tongue (with heavy 
head). — Tongue : coated white ; furred ; thick at back ; dry, and lips ; feels 
scalded ; thick ; protruding. — Tongue feels rough, with blisters on both sides, 
and very red tip ; great pain in root of tongue when swallowing. — Roof of 
mouth sore. — Mouth dry. — Submaxillary glands swollen. % 

9. Throat. — Sensation of dryness in throat and the posterior fauces 
(provoking cough, with disposition to hawk and clear the throat) ; tonsils 
swollen. — Uvula large, almost translucent. — Fauces congested and of a dark 
red colour. — Sore throat (roughness and rawness), swelling of soft palate in 
morning, with a thick, white, and yellow mucus about the fauces. — Sensation 
of a lump in throat (when swallowing), causing a continuous desire to 
swallow ; also when turning head to 1 . — Could not swallow, throat so dry and 
rough. — ^Throat feels like a cavern. — < From hot drinks. — Difficult swallow- 
ing ; with every attempt excruciating shooting pains through both ears. — 
Sensation of apple-core in throat. — While riding in forenoon sensation of plug 
in throat, not > by hawking ; this sensation was replaced by increased dis- 
charge of mucus from posterior nares, discharged with difficulty, constantly 
exciting attempts to expel it. — Sensation of rawness and scraping in throat 
and tonsils. — Burning heat in throat as from coal of fire, as if red-hot iron, 
ball lodged in fauces and whole length of oesophagus ; catarrh in throat ; 
diphtheria. — Eruption on fauces and oesophagus. — Herpes pharyngalis. — 
Soreness of posterior fauces extending into Eustachian tube. — Fulness in 
throat. 

II. Stomach. — Intense thirst. — Canine hunger ; soon after eating. — 
Loss of appetite. — Eructations : of air ; sour fluid ; food in evening. — Hic- 
cough, with great inclination to vomit but no nausea. — Nausea followed by 
violent vomiting of mucus, bile, ingesta, worms ; of clotted blood and slime> 
with retching, intense pain, and desire for death to relieve.— Vomits un- 
digested food.— Frequent vomiting ; prostration, fainting, even convulsions, 
followed by ^ipes, cramps, vomiting of dark bilious substance.— In great 
agony ; said his stomach was pinched together.— Bruised and sore feeling at 
pit of stomach.— Heat in stomach.— Cutting in pit of stomach, tender to 
touch.— Pains in cardiac portion of stomach, < full respiration and % 
walking. — Pain in region of pylorus. 



PHYTOLACCA 


809 


12. Abdomen.— Intense vomiting and purging, with griping pains and 
cramps in abdomen. — Soreness and pain in r. hypochondrium (during preg- 
nancy).— Sore spot, r. hypochondrium, size of dollar, extremely sensitive to 
touch.— -Digging in upper and lowy portions of liven— Lying on r. side ss 
penetrating pain in r. hypochondrium.— Violent dull pressing pain 1. hypo- 
chondrium, cannot remain in sitting posture, lies on painful side all night and 
pain is gone in morning. — Heavy aching pain in hypochondrium which left 
as soon as leucorrhoea commenced. — Chronic hepatitis, with enlargement and 
induration.— Burning, griping pain in umbilical region. — Much rumbling, 
pain in umbilicus, stools of blood and mucus ; gastro-enteritis. — Bearing- 
down pains.— Violent pains in abdomen during menstruation in a barren 
female.— Rheumatism extending to abdominal muscles. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Constipation, hard stools.— Stool with mucus and 
straining. — Constipation habitual ; patient says the bowels will not move 
without the aid of purgatives; feeling of fulness in abdomen before stool, 
which remains after stool, as if all had not passed. — Constipation from torpor 
of the rectum. — Constipation ; of the aged ; of persons with weak heart. — 
Diarrhoea with sickly feeling in bowels ; passage only of mucus and blood, or 
like scrapings from intestines.— Tenesmus. — Continual inclination to stool but 
passes constantly fetid flatus. — Diarrhoea early in morning after lemonade. — 
Dysentery. — Intense vomiting or purging, with prostration and cramps, as in 
cholera. — Stools : thin, dark brown ; of mucus and blood ; of bile ; from i or 
2 a.m. till after breakfast ; mushy ; yellow, then greenish, then dark, bloody ; 
dark, lumpy. — Haemorrhoids permanent and obstinate ; bleeding and mucus. 
—Neuralgic pains in anus and lower part of rectum, shooting along perinseum 
to middle q/ penis ; in middle of night (with constipation). — Bloody discharge 
with heat in rectum. — Heat in rectum with burning in stomach, — Ulceration ; 
fissure. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Weakness, dull pain, and soreness in region of 
kidneys, < r,, connected with heat ; uneasiness down ureters ; chalk-like 
sediment in urine. — ^Albuminuria : after scarlatina or diphtheria ; chills at 
night without special fever, accompanied by a form of insanity, — Pain in 
bladder before and during urination. — Slight suppression of urine, with pains 
in loins.— Violent, painful urging to pass urine.— Copious nocturnal urination. 
— ^Xhick, chalk-like sediment. — The dark-red urine leaves a mahogany stain in 
the chamber. — Urine : acid and albuminous ; excessive or scanty ,* stains 
clothes yellow. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Sharp pains (and hard, grinding pain) 
running up each spermatic cord ; later continued soreness in place of the 
pains. — Gurgling sensation in prostate gland. — Con^^lete loss of desire, 
absence of erections and relaxation of parts during the proving.— Impotence. 
— Gonorrhoea ; gleet ; orchitis, with suppuration and fistulous ulcer. — 
Syphilis : chancres ; ulcerated throat ; ulcers on genitals ; bubo ; rheu- 
matiSm. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses: too frequent and copious; 
mamma^ painful ; increase of tears, saliva, bile, urine ; rheumatic subjects.— 
Menses : amenorrhoea complicated with ovarian irritation or disease ; very 
painful menstruation in apparently barren women when occurring in connec- 

With rheumatism ; shreds of membrane are passed with the menstrual 



8io 


PHYTOLACCA 


flow.— Leucorrhoea : uterine, thick, tenacious, irritating.— Profuse, thick, 
tenacious, from swollen Nabothian glands. — Threatened miscarriage ; bearing- 
down pains ; involuntary straining and haemorrhage per vaginum caused in 
woman seven months pregnant.— Sensatic^n as though menses would appear all 
the time,— Dysmenorrhoea accompanying erosion or ulceration of the cervix ; 
menses too often ; too profuse, with corresponding increase of the tears, 
and other secretions. — Metrorrhagia. — Inflammation, swelling, and suppura- 
tion of the mammae.— Neuralgia of breasts.— Mastitis, where the hardness « 
is very apparent from the first, with great burning ; very sensitive nipples 
or breasts, which are more or less painful ; even after suppuration these 
characteristics continue. — Fulness of both breasts ; lump in upper part of 1 . 
—Abscesses ; fistulce ; tumours ; cancer ; hypertrophy.— Irritable tumour ; 
very sensitive and painful; < at menstrual period. — Nipples cracked and 
excoriated ; intense suffering on putting child to breast ; pains radiate from 
nipple all over body. — Breasts hard as stones after confinement. — Breasts full 
of hard, painful' nodosities. — Suppression of lochia. — Pain in sacrum, down to 
knees and ankles, then up to sacrum, jerks here and there, after confinement. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Hoarseness and aphonia. — Tickling in 1 . 
side larynx with hacking cough, aching r. side of breast, great dryness of 
throat. — Sensation of roughness in the bronchia. — Laryngismus, thumbs and 
toes flexed ; features distorted ; eye muscles act independently. — Respiration 
difficult and oppressed ; loud mucous rales. — Faint, with sighing, slow 
breathing. — Panting. — Cough : hacking, dry, hawking ; from tickling in 
larynx or dryness in pharynx ; < night, on lying down ; dry, bronchial. — 
Cough with : scraping and tickling in throat ; burning pains in trachea and 
larynx, sensation of contraction of glottis, laboured breathing; sensation of 
ulcerated spot in trachea just above breast-bone, could only expectorate (pus) 
by pressing on this spot ; pains through mid-sternum. — Hoarse, croupy, 
barking cough, < at night ; < out of doors. — Expectoration : thick, tough ; 
thick, starch-like mucus, profuse and exhausting with pharyngitis. — Dryness 
of larynx and trachea, < evening. 

18. Chest,— Sharp pains through upper part of chest, preventing a long 
breath. — Stitch from r. chest to back. — Pain and suffocation in lungs, throat, 
and fauces. — Pains in lungs, 7 a.m. — Tenderness and lameness of muscles of 
chest, as if bruised. — (Chest feels as if it were a big empty cask.) — Rheuma- 
tism of lower intercostal muscles from exposure to cold and dampness. — 
Spots size of lentil on chest. — Hard, tender swelling midway between nipple 
and sternum, but nearer latter ; restless nights ; (in baby a few months old),'*^ 

ig. Heart. — In night awoke with lameness near cardiac region, with 
much nervous restlessness, < motion, esp. < expiration ; kept him awake 
long time. — Constrictive feeling in prnecordia with pressure in temples. — 
Great pain in praecordia, much < walking.— Occasional shocks of pain in 
heart region, as soon as this ceases similar pain appears in r. arm. — ({part- 
beats distinctly felt. — Fatty degeneration ; lassitude and indisposition to move, 
— Pulse : small, irregular, with great excitement in chest, esp. in cardiac 
region ; full but soft ; intermittent ; weak. e 

20. Neck and Back. — Hardness of gland in r. side of neck. — Stiff neck, 
< on r. side ; in bed ; after midnight ; on waking. — Back very stiff ^very 
morning. — ^Sensation as if cold iron were pressed on painful scapula, — 



PHYTOLACCA 


8ii 

scapulae ache continually. — Towards evening, while riding, laming pain began 
1. side back below scapula ; 9.30 p.m. it had reached spine and was a prick- 
ing stitching. — Severe pain behind scapulas when walking. — Intense griping 
in small of back. — Pain running dowA spine from nape. — Pain in loins with 
suppression of urine. — Constant, dull, heavy pain in lumbar and sacral regions. 
— Pains shooting from sacrum down both hips to feet. 

21. Limbs.— Intense cramps, muscles gather in large knots, hard and 
fidged ; come and go suddenly.— Rheumatism of all joints 3 p.m. — Sudden 
transference of internal pains to extremities. — Pains in limbs always in outer 
aspects. — Patient is subject to rheumatic pains on change of weather, esp, in 
hips and thighs; rheumatic muscular or chronic rheumatism. — Rheumatic 
pains in arms and hands. — Cold hands and feet. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Enlarged glands in axillae. — Shooting in r. shoulder- 
joint with stiffness and paralysis. — Rheumatism of (1.) shoulder (esp. in syphi- 
litics) ; pains fly like electric shocks from one part to another ; < night and 
damp weather. — Pains at attachment of deltoid. — Weakness and aching in r. 
humerus, < motion and extension. — Dull aching and excessive tenderness, as 
from a bruise, in outer muscle of r. arm. — Hands tremble. — Rheumatic pains 
in hands ; sudden pricking. — Painful, hard, shiny swelling of joints of all 
lingers. — Bony growth in palmar aspect of one finger.— Whitlow. — Ends of 
fingers all throb and ache as if going to suppurate. — Shooting like needles in 
finger-joints ; in top of 1. thumb. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Neuralgic pain in outer side of both thighs (shoot- 
ing from sacrum) ; sciatica. — Sharp, cutting pain in hip, drawing, cannot 
touch floor ; pain runs down outside of thigh, < night, and esp. < after 
sleep. — Rhehmatic pains in lower extremities, < damp weather. — Sensation 
of shortening of tendons back of knee when walking. — Leg drawn up. — Legs 
tremble. — Pain in dorsum of r. foot, 4 a.m. — Syphilitic and mercurial rheu- 
matism ; nightly pains in periosteum of tibia, with nodes and irritable ulcers 
on lower leg.-»-Stitches in various parts, always from without inward and near 
surface. — Ankles swollen. — Feet puffed, soles burn. — Ulcers on inner sides 
of soles. — Aching of heels, dull, wearing ; > raising feet above level of body. 
— Pain in great toe waking him at night. — Corn painful. 

24. Generalities. — Extremities stiff, hands clenched, feet extended, 
toe’s flexed, teeth clenched, lips everted, firm, chin drawn on sternum, 
opisthotonus. — Great desire for cold water, for bathing in it. — Pains are 

pressing, shooting, and sore. — Great exhaustion and prostration. — Sore and 
stiff. — Soreness from head to foot in all muscles.— Pains and numbness 
followed by itching and burning. — Pains came suddenly in full force and so 
continued till they ceased ; followed by drowsiness, stupor, or sleep. — Bones 
and glands inflamed and swollen. 

IJ5. Skin. — Skin cool, shrivelled, dry, lead-coloured. — Syphilitic eruptions 
and ulcerations — secondary and tertiary. — Squamous eruptions ; tinpa capitis ; 
lupus. — Shingles. — Itch . — Pityriasis. — Psoriasis. — Warts. — Lipoma. — Erythe- 
matous blotches, slightly raised, pinkish, slowly desquamating, ending in 
purple ^pot, as old ones died away others came. — Suppuration of painless 
tumours. — Drawing in cicatrices.— Itching began on hands and feet and 
spread over whole body; rash followed four hours later; itching < by 
scratching ; < heat of bed. — Itching and lichen-like eruption on 1 . leg, < 



8ia PHYTOLACCA— PICRICUM ACIDUM 

fore part of night, preventing sleep till midnight.— Boils ; esp. near ulcers ; 
on back ; behind ears. — Ulcers : punched-out looking ; lardaceous ba^ ; 
pus watery, fetid, ichorous ; shooting, lancinating, jerking pains ; syphilitic ; 
cancerous. — Warts. — Corns. f 

26, Sleep.— Frequent yawning ; drowsiness. — Restlessness at night, pains 
drive him out of bed. — On awaking feels wretched. 

27. Fever. — Great coldness, withered appearance of extremities. — Cold- 
ness, faintness, dyspnoea ; limbs cold, head and face hot. — Internal shivering^ 
during the pains. — Chill : every morning ; sudden, followed by fever after 
confinement ; at night without special fever. — Heati with pain in joints ; 
high fever ; in face ^ter dinner ; with red face ; on 1. side of face. — Sweat : 
cold on forehead ; esp. under toes ; night-sweat, acrid. 


Pichi. 

Fabiana imbricata. N. 0 , Solanaceae. Fluid extract. 

Clinical. — Cystitis. Gall-stones. Gonorrhoea. Liver, affections of. Prostate, 
disease of. 

Charaoteristics. — Pichi is a solanaceous shrub of South America. 
It is unproved, but in i to 20 drop doses of the fluid extract it has 
been used with good effect in cases of chronic cystitis with enlarged 
prostate ; liver affections and gall-stones ; excess of uric acid. 
Hansen gives these indications : Excoriating urine and urinary 
calculi. Inflammation of whole urethral tract, must pass water fre- 
quently ; burning pains and violent vesical tenesmus after urination. 
Acute or chronic cystitis, caused by gravel, painful urination, much 
mucus and pus. Subacute or chronic gonorrhcEa, painfqj urination, 
much mucus and pus. 


Picricum Acidum. 

PicricAcid. CarbazoticAcid. Tri-nitro-carbolicAcid. (C6H2(N0a)30H), 
Trituration. Solution in rectified spirit. 

Olinioal. — Acne. Ancemia. Boils. Brain, base of, pain in. Brain-fag^ 
Burns. Cancerous cachexia. Condylomata. Debility. Diabetes. Ears, boils in. 
Etnisstons, Enuresis. Epistaxis. Erotomania. Erythema, Hcenioglobinuria* 
Hands, perspiration of. Headache, of students. Hemiplegia. Jaundice. Leucocy- 
th(Bmia» Liver, congestion of ; fatty. Locomotor ataxia. Lumbago. Myelitis. 
Neurasthenia. Otitis. Paralysis. Paraplegia, Pernicious anaemia. Priapism, 
Pruritus vulvae. Self-abuse. Spinal exhaustion. Spinal irritation. Spinal sclerosis. 
Styes. Sycosis. Urine, bloody. Writer’s cramp. 

Charaoteristics. — Pic. ac, was discovered by Hausman ifl 1788* 

It is formed by the action of Nitric acid on Carbolic add, Salidn, Silk. 
and many other substances. It crystallises in bright yellow needles 
or scales, of very bitter taste, sparingly soluble in water. The yellow*^ 



PICRICUM ACIDUM 


813 

colour is imparted to the eyes and skins of patients who take it in the 
crude, and it not only produces a semblance of jaundice, but actually 
disorganises the liver if pushed. In some experiments by Parisel 
(C. D. P.) these symptoms were observed : Buzzing and whistling in 
ears ; sparks, whirling round of objects ; heaviness of head alter- 
nately with sense of emptiness. Moderately copious, oily-looking, 
yellowish stool, with > of cerebral symptoms. Pulse slow, small, 
very feeble. Great weakness^ compelling to lie down ; limbs hardly able 
to hit themselves ; no anxiety ^ profound calm. Vivid colouration of 
sclerotics and integuments ; urine coloured blood-red. These were effects 
of 0*5 grm. doses. Slow poisoning set up an intermittent fever of 
quotidian type, and “ anorexia, thirst, often sweat, cancerous tint about 
skiHf tendency to cachexia^ These observations give the chief features 
of the drug^s action : Fatigue, mental and bodily ; symptoms < by 
least exertion ; fatigue going into actual paralysis ; brain fatigue, 
nerve fatigue ; at the same time absence of anxiety — indifference. 
Like so many other yellow substances, Pic. ac. acts powerfully on the 
liver, and produces jaundice, cachexia, and cancerous tints. Tired- 
out, washed-out feeling — must give in,^’ is the chief keynote of Pic. ac. 
and its salts. Nash cured promptly with Pic. ac. 6 trit. an old man 
who had been failing for a year, and complained of heaviness in the 
occiput, inability to exert the mind, talk, or think, and general 
played-out feeling. Nash had feared brain softening. Halbert 
{Clinique, September, 1898) reports a case illustrating the power of 
Pic. ac. over the effects of fatigue in professional neuroses. A steno- 
grapher and typewriter after using her right index finger continuously 
lor six years; noticed weakness of her thumb and index, and inability 
to hold pefi or pencil. Next there was difficulty in striking correctly 
the keys of the typewriter and some wrist-drop. The linger when 
Halbert first saw her was quite rigid and straight, showing extreme 
spasticity. Massage, electricity, &c., had failed to give any relief. 
Pic. ac. 3x six times daily cured the case and made great improve- 
ment in the patient’s general health. Evans has found it curative in 
girls and young women who, under the strain of many studies, show 
signs of breaking down — lose appetite, sleep lightly and lie awake 
{Pic. ac. 30 caused a patient of mine, previously a good sleeper, to lie 
awake a long time at nights. — J. H. C.), exhaustion after the day’s 
studies, fatigue even from a short walk, twitchings of muscles when 
^sleep or awake ; hysterical state, loss of will power ; constant head- 
'“ache, irregular menses. Such patients are usually given iron, which 
does little or no good. Pic. ac. and its compounds are among the 
most powerful explosives known, lyddite being ait example. Pic. ac., 
like Glon.j has occipital headaches and bursting headaches. The 
headache, frontal or occipital, is < on any attempt to use the mind, 
and it may extend down the spine. There is also a headache extend- 
ing from the top of the spine up over the head to the eyes. In a case 
of spinal irritation I relieved with Pic. ac. 30 a pain which shot up 
from thp spine into the head. The pains referable to the spinal cord 
are strongly marked. Any attempt to study ss burning along spine ; 
with great weakness of back and legs ; soreness of muscles and 
d^OinS. To the spinal congestion must be attributed the remarkable 



8i4 PICRICUM ACIDUM 

disturbance in the sexual sphere : Priapism ; penis distended almost 
to bursting. Terrible erections, disturbing sleep. When over-exdte- 
ment of sexual system is associated with spinal or cerebellar affections 
in either sex. Great sexual desire with emissions. Amorous fancies. 
On the sldn Pic, ac. produces jaundice with itching ; small painful 
furuncles, particularly in the auditory meatus ; and erythema and 
pruritus of abdomen and feet. Thery of Paris accidentally discovered 
in Pic, ac, solution a remedy for burns. He twice dropped burning 
matter on his hands whilst working with a Pic, ac, disinfectant, and wa^ ' 
astonished at the absence of pain or injury. From that date Pic, ac, 
became his principal remedy for burns, and though others have com- 
plained that it caused violent pains, Thery has only once in some 
thousands of cases had to abandon its use on that account. A. C. 
Blackwood {Clinique^ October, 1898, H. W., xxxiv. 133) gives the 
details of its use. Burns of the first and second degree only are suit- 
able. A saturated solution (Pic, ac, gr. xc to alcohol Jiii.) diluted with 
one quart of water is used. The clothing is removed and the burnt 
surface cleansed with the solution and absorbent cotton. Blisters are 
opened but the epithelial covering is carefully preserved. If exten- 
sive, the whole surface may be bathed with the solution, and strips of 
sterilised gauze soaked and applied to entirely cover it, a layer of 
absorbent cotton held with a light bandage over all. After tlyee or 
four days the dressing is removed carefully after thorough moistening, 
as it adheres closely. The second dressing is applied as at first, and 
allowed to remain a week. Blackwood finds it painless, anodyne, 
antiseptic, preventing inflammation and suppuration and septic 
poisoning. It coagulates the albuminous exudation, • and healing 
takes place under the coagulum. The staining of the*hands and 
linen caused by the dressing can be removed by Boracic acid, 
Gaucher (Sm. Med,^ May 26, 1897) has removed acute vesicular 
eczema by the same treatment. The skin and kidneys are intimately 
related, and Pic, ac, has a powerful action on the latter. Among 
other affections it has cured diabetes. Halbert {Clinique^ quoted 
H, W.^ xxxiv. 542) reports this case : Mrs, C., 49, had ** nervous pros- 
tration since the shock of the loss of a child three years before. 
Wasting with great appetite. Intense thirst and copious urination, 
especially at night. Great perspiration and some jaundice. Heart « 
flabby, mitral bruit, dyspnoea ; emaciation, aucemia, exhaustion. 
Urine 1040, 7^ per cent, of sugar and some albumen. Pic, ac, 6 x six 
times daily. Rapid and continuous improvement followed. KeiTt 
(jfif. P,, viii. 168) says Pic, ac. cures fig- warts and gonorrhcea ; he was 
led to infer its relation thereto by its power over pernicious anaemia, 
which he has often traced to a gonorrhoeal base. Pic. ac, is suited to 
dark complexioned persons, with dirty appearance about knuckles 
(from bile pigments) ; anaemic and cachectic persons ; worn-out 
persons, overtaxed mentally and bodily. Peculiar sensations axB : As 
if sand, or sticks, in eyes. As if throat would split. As if legs enclosed 
in elastic stockings ; as if chest encircled in a tight band Pricking 
as from needles in legs. As of a lump back of thyroid cartilSge. As 
if stairs or ground coming up to meet him. As of ants crawling over 
surface. Nose-bleed accompanies heat and congestion of 



PICRICUM ACIDUM 


815 


Heaviness of head alternates with emptiness. The right upper part 
of the body is more affected than the left, the left leg more than the 
right. Touch < pimples. The headache is > by binding bead 
tightly ; > by rest ; lying down. < By motion ; walking ; raising 
head ; sitting up ; stooping ; ‘ascending stairs. < By study or 
slightest mental exertion. The throat is > by eating ; < empty 
swallowing. Turning over, and turning the head < headache. 

< Morning ; 5 a.m. nausea. Open air and cold room > headache. 
Work in open air = prostration. Wet weather < pains. > From 
cold air and water. Chilliness predominates. Lamplight, strong 
light, moving eye < pain in eyes. During and after micturition, 
burning. 

Rdatioiis. — Compare : Am. pic., Calc, pic., Fer. pic., Zn. pic. 
Spinal exhaustion, Ox. ac. (Ox. ac. more numbness, blueness, pains in 
small spots ; symptoms < thinking of them. Pic. ac. more heaviness ; 
extreme spinal softening). Tired feeling, exhaustion from sexual 
excess, Phos. ac. Fatty degeneration, sexual excess and priapism, 
brain-fag, congestive vertigo, burning in spine, Phos. (Phos. has more 
irritability and excessive sensitiveness, sexual excitement very strong ; 
Pic. ac. has more intense erections but less marked lasciviousness). 
Brain-fag, inability to study, gastric symptoms, sour eructations, 

< morning, Nux. Brain-fag, occipital headache, sexual neurasthenia, 
Gels. Lascivious thoughts in presence of women. Con. Headache 
and backache, Arg. 11. Spinal pains. Aim, (Aim. pain as if hot iron 
had been thrust into the part). Nervous exhaustion, sensitive spine, 
Sil. (Pic. ac. washed out, must give in ; Sil. wonH give in). Nervous 
exhaustion; Zn. Violent erections, Canth., Graph., Hyo., Phos., Myg., 
Sil. Acilfe, K. bro., Bels., Arct. 1 . Hands sweat, Sil. Burning in 
back, Lyc., Phos. Writer’s cramp, Gels., Plat. 

CauBation. — Fatigue. Study. Mental exertion. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Nervous feeling, which I never have except when fever is 
leaving me, feeling as if about to be crushed by the bed-clothes, arms, face, 
tongue, and forepart of brain seemed to reach the clouds when I was going 
to sleep. — Although enjoying the society of men, idea of marriage unen- 
durable. — Desire to be alone. — Irritable. — Low spirits. — Indifference, lack of 
will power to undertake anything. — Disinclination for mental or physical 
work, aversion to talking or movement, with headache. — Mental prostration 
after reading a little ; after writing a little. — The least.^tudy ss burning along 
spine and other symptoms. 

2. Head. — Vertigo : at noon, < rising from a seat ; at 6 p.m! on least 
motion, with nausea, both repeated at 9 p.m., with pain in forehead and 
vegtex and inability to sit up ; on stooping or bending head or lying down ; 

< evening. — Headache : < rising, > open air ; > pressure ; > bandaging 
head ; morning, probably from over-sleeping ; in forenoon, < afternoon ; in 
afterilbon and evening, with trembling ; in evening.— Headache in evening, 
wjfh thirst and heat, chiefly in temples, and burning in external ears, < 
stqpping, ss vertigo, head feels too small, scalp sore to touch, sore aching in 



8i6 


PICRICUM ACIDUM 


infra-orbital region.— Heat and congestion of head with nose-bleed. — Pre^Ofls 
outward as if head would fly apart, at 8 p.m., < motion and study,— Hca^- 
ness; and dulness; alternating with emptiness. — Head feels as if falling 
forward. — Shooting from outside to centre of forehead in evening, — Inter- 
mittent, sharp, and vibrating pain in r.^supra-orbital region.— Aching in r. 
supra-orbital region ; and in nape. — ^Throbbing over r. eye.— Shooting from 
r. to 1 . temple with headache. — Neuralgic pain alternately in 1. and r. temples. 
— Pressure outward at sides of head at 9 p.m., < turning head, moving eyes^ 
or least motion, with sensation as if frontal bones would split* open. — Con-* 
tractcd, squeezed sensation in 1. hemisphere of brain at 6.30 p.m. on going 
into open air. — Pain in r. lower occiput, with sensation as of a hand passing 
along r. parietal eminence. — Pain in occiput and in nape ; pain in r. lower 
occiput, as if r. side of cerebellum were loose, 6 till 7 p.m., < walking, > 
quiet, with throbbing. — Heavy pain extending down neck and spine. — Heavy 
throbbing and burning pains, extending from nape to supra-orbital foramen 
and thence into eyes, which throb and feel sore to touch. — (Pain shooting up 
from spine into head.)— Confusion in base of brain. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes yellow. — Shooting in centre of eye, extending along 
optic nerve to occiput, with soreness of balls on touch, and photophobia. — 
Sensation of sand in eyes, with smarting pain and acrid tears. — Feeling as if 
sticks were in eyes on waking, with inflammation, afterwards feeling; as if 
sticks were in them in evening.— Styes ; with sore feeling.— Eyes < on 
moving them.— Lachrymation.— Pupils dilated.— Conjunctivitis ; < r. eye, 
> washing with cold water and by cold air, < warm room, with difficulty 
in keeping eyes open, and sticky feeling on reading. — Shooting from r. 
eyeball to 1. side of occiput ; pain < moving eyes, > closing them and 
quiet, with soreness ; heavy, smarting, and burning pains, > pressure ; sore 
pains, < strong light and by turning eyes.— Throbbing pain in 1. eyeball 
much < going upstairs.— Inability to keep eyes open when studying.— Air looks 
smoky.— Vision : dim and confused ; dim, can read clearly at only one point, 
about five inches from eyes ; blurred ; whirling of objects.— Visi«n of sparks. 

4. Ears. — Puffy and burning sensation in ears as if worms were crawl- 
ing in them.— Pain behind r. ear running down side of neck.— Painful boils 
in meatus. — Buzzing and hissing in ears. — (Noises in ears, with vertigo and 
headache at the base of brain.) — (Chronic deafness, apparently caused by 
excessive headache, with noises in the ears when tired, membrane pale.) 

5. Nose. Boil in 1. nostril. — Stinging on r, side of nose. — ^Acnc along 
edges and sides of nose, indurated, elevated papules, rather dark red, painless - 
but sore to touch, very small pustules on tips.— Weight or pressure on bridge. 
—Nose full of mucus, can breathe only through mouth, > open air.— Bleed- 
ing from r. nostril ; with heat and congestion of head. 

6. Face.— Pustular acne on face, burning and stinging when touched ; 

on chin.— Irregular pain in lower jaw, with beating in molars.— Tingling in 
lips. g 

8. Mouth.— White, frothy saliva hangs in strings to the floor.— Taste : 
bitter ; with thirst ; sour, bitter ; sour ; bad ; bad, of gas. 

9. Throat.— Redness of throat, with raw, scraped, stiff, and hot feeling 
as if burnt, and with thick white mucus on tonsils, difficulty in swallowing 
with sensation as if throat would split open. — Rawness in 1. side, extending « 



PICRICUM ACIDUM 817 

forward to submaxillary gland, < swallowing ; rawness with roughness and 
scraping. — Soreness back of and above soft palate, with debility. — Dry and 
husky. — Feeling of a plug on swallowing saliva and afterwards.— Sensation of 
something in lower part of oesophagus. 

10. Appetite. — ^Appetite great in evening ; increased, then lost ; lost ; 
lost for breakfast. — Aversion to food ; at noon. — Thirst : great, with bitter 
taste; unquenchable, for cold water. 

11. Stomach. — Eructations : empty ; sour, of gas and ingesta ; bitter 
hfter breakfast. — Waterbrash. — Nausea : on retiring ; after retiring, with 
headache ; deathlike, in stomach and abdomen on waking at 5 a.m., < rising 
and moving about, returned on waking a second time, repeated next morning 
on waking. — ^Vomiting. — Sharp pain in epigastric region ; when eating break- 
fast. — Oppression of epigastric region. — Weight in pit of stomach, with 
ineffectual desire to eructate. — Faint feeling in epigastrium most of the time. 

12 . Abdomen. — Sticking through hepatic region, < in muscles. — Liver 
full of fat granules (in animals poisoned with Pic. ac .). — Tendency to jaundice. 
— Fulness of abdomen. — Rumbling : in small intestines ; at 7 a.m. on waking, 
with colic ; with crampy pain and flatus. — Emission of flatus ; during the 
day ; in evening. — Crawling stinging. — Pain in abdomen all forenoon, with 
slight headache. — Pain in abdomen on waking, with strong erections, and on 
moving emission of much flatus. — Pain in neck of bladder. — Sticking back- 
ward through 1. umbilical region. — Sharp pain 1. side of umbilicus. — Shooting, 
wandering pain in region of coccyx, bladder, rectum, and umbilicus, caused 
by wind. — Sharp pain in r. iliac region, above ovary at ii p.m., with soreness 
on pressure. — Pain ; in lower part of large intestines ; in 1. groin on walking, 
< ascending stairs. — Occasional sensation of giving way in hypogastrium all 
day. — ^Vacaift and sore feeling in hypogastric region. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Stinging in anus during and after stool, with 
itching. — Shooting around anus at 9 p.m. — Stool like gruel, yellow or yellowish- 
grey, twice before 9 a.m. — Diarrhoea : with burning and smarting at anus ; 
frequent witlit prostration, light-coloured, with cutting and smarting at anus 
during and after stool. — Stool : soft ; light-coloured, with tenesmus, then 
drawing up of anus ; scanty, with burning and smarting at anus ; in plugs, 
easy, shooting away, then much flatus ; yellowish, copious, oily, frequent.— 
Stool quick, as if greased, of sweetish smell, as of boiling sap, at night and 
mofning, then with much wind. — Difficult stool, next day ineffectual desire 
for stool. 

^ 14. Urinary Organs. — Sharp pain in region of bladder ; in evening, < 

r. side. — Frequent micturition in morning. — Dribbling ipicturition. — Urethra : 
jerking drawing in ; pain in after micturition ; burning pain during micturi- 
tion. — Urine : yellow ; of a milky, olive hue ; dark ; indications of sugar ; 
dark yellow, with strong odour ; dark yellow, scanty, afterwards profuse and 
yellow ; red ; dark, in evening. — Urine copious and pale ; and light coloured, 
sp. gf. increased ; and hot when passed, with burning pain in urethra ; after- 
vrards scanty. — Urates abundant. — Urine contained much indican, numerous 
granular cylinders and fatty degenerated epithelium. 

xj. iMfale Sexual Organs. — Erections : in morning on waking; at ii 
a.m., with bruised pain in 1. testicle, extending up cord to external abdominal 
firm ia morning, with pain in abdomen, next morning woke with 
VOL. II. 53 



8i8 


PICRICUM ACIDUM 


emission and firm erectioni which lasted about ten minutes after the emiS" 
sion ; terrible at night, with restless sleep ; violent, all night ; violent, all 
night, then profuse emissions. — Lascivious thoughts in presence of any 
woman.— Desire : at night, with emissiofis ; at night, with hard erections, 
lewd dreams and emission, priapism night and day. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Occasional aching and twinges in 1. 
ovarian region. — Menses delayed ; during the period yellowish-brown leucor- 
rhoea. — During menses, bruised pain in abdomen with sickening sensation. — 
Excessive and voluptuous pruritus at night, after retiring, making her feel 
irritable and exasperated (night before menses ; usually had slight pruritus 
after menses, never before), — (Used locally in diseases of nipples, inflamma- 
tion diminishes, skin becomes tougher.) 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Dry cough, as from dust in throat, then 
nausea. — Can get the breath only half-way down. 

18. Chest. — Twitching : in 1. side over eighth and ninth ribs ; in 1. side 
over tenth and eleventh ribs from 6 till 1 1 p.m., with throbbing in muscles. — 
Pain in r. side, extending across 1. — Pain in 1. lung in evening. — Sharp pain 
under r. clavicle. — A heavy throbbing in 1. chest under tenth and eleventh 
ribs at 1 1 a.m., changing at noon to region of kidneys, extending at 2 p.m. 
into legs, < 1. — Stunning pain at 9.30 a.m., with twitching in throat.— Tight- 
ness of chest, as if encircled by a band. — Numbness in lower part of sternum. 

19. Heart and Pulse. — Pain in apex of heart in evening. — Inter- 
mittent fluttering at base of heart all day, it seemed to move. — Palpitation. — 
Pulse : frequent ; slow, feeble, afterwards rapid ; slow, small, and feeble ; 
irregular. 

20. Neck and Back. — Terrible pains in neck and occiput,* ^jetending to 
supra-orbital notch and thence into eyes. — Muscles on r. side of neck felt as 
if they would give way in afternoon when lying ; at night when lying on r. 
side, with feeling as if neck would be dislocated.— Pain in back and lower 
limbs, with heaviness, tired aching, and weakness. — Burning along spine and 
very great weakness, < by study. — Heat in lower spine ; aching and digging 
in loins, < from motion. — Pain extending from r. scapula to r. loin when 
bending forward. — Sticking : under r. scapula ; in lumbar region or bending 
forward when sitting. — Pain in lumbar region ; and anteriorly in thighs, in 
muscles, < motion, with weakness in the same, < legs ; extending down 
legs, < motion, legs and lumbar region sensitive to pressure ; heavy at 
6 p.m. — Dragging pains in region of kidneys and at nape, extending upward 
and downward till they meet between scapulae, at 2 p.m. — Weakness in 
sacral and lumbar regions. — (Myelitis with tonic and clonic spasms, keeps 
legs wide apart when standing ; looks steadily at objects as if could not make 
them out. — Spinal exhaustion following acute disease.) — Sharp pain in region 
of coccyx. 

21. Limbs. — Rheumatic pains in joints. — Weakness from a short walk, 
with excessive heaviness.— Heaviness, < 1. ; of arms and legs on exertiofi, < 
legs, legs weak and heavy all the time.— Extremities cold. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Lame sensation in shoulders. — Shoulders tijjed and 

sore ; r. — Twitching of lower part of 1. biceps ; in forenoon. — Shooting in 1. 
elbow, extending down arm. — Pain in r. elbow between ulna and radius. — 
Shooting in hands.— L, hand goes to sleep. ^ < 



PICRICUM ACIDUM 


819 


23. Lower Limbs. — ^Weakness of Hmbs « 1.) ; on ascending stairs ; 
and heaviness. — Numbness and crawling in legs with trembling and pricking 
as from needles. — Twitching on back of 1. hip at 9 p.m.— Pain anteriorly in 1. 
thigh, can hardly flex and extend le^.— Hips and legs heavy all day. — Knees 
weak. — ^Twitching of flesh of r. leg. — Sticking in legs and feet. — Pain in legs 
anteriorly, on touch ; in calves all night. — Deep-seated, sore pain in upper 
part of 1. Scarpa's triangle, < night, > sleep, returning on waking. — Numb, 
sleepy sensation, extending to soles, > cold water and in the open air. — 
Calves lame and sore. — Weakness of legs ; < 1., which trembles ; with sore- 
ness ; with heaviness. — Heaviness of legs, < 1. — Numbness of anterior 
muscles. — Crawling pain in 1. sole and under patella.— Feet feel as if frost- 
bitten. — Numbness of 1. foot. — Soreness in ball of 1. big toe in afternoon and 
evening, > continued walking. 

24. Generalities. — Veins sunken and small, < 1. side. — Bright yellow 
colour of sclerotic, skin, and urine. — Cancerous cachexia. — Trembling of all 
muscles. — Rheumatic stitches in different parts, with muscular debility. — 
Darting pains in various parts, extending into bonCvS, every hour of the day. — 
All pains lasted till 8 p.m. — Soreness and lameness, < 1. side, in morning 
when rising, with heavy, throbbing pains and dilated pupils, conjunctivitis, 
and lachrymation. — Tired feeling : in morning on waking, with heaviness ; on 
least e?iertion ; > open air ; with lame sensation over whole body ; with no 
desire to talk or do anything, indifferent to anything around, sleepiness and 
desire to lie down.— Numbness, with pains, as when taking cold. 

25. Skin. — Yellow skin. — Pimples on face and neck that he had for 
years were nov{ increased in number and size. — Reddish, painful boils about 
mouth and face, when opened they exude a thin, clear serum, which dries 
into a transparent scab, then become painful and contain pus like condensed 
milk. — Reddish boils on face, becoming pustular, with burning stinging on 
touch. — Erythema of abdomen and feet. — Tight feeling in skin over epigas- 
trium. — Itching ; at night. — (Burns.) 

26. Sleep. — Frequent gaping in church. — Sleepiness, slept an hour in 
afternoon, then felt better. — Sleepiness in evening, > walking in open air ; at 
9 p.m. — Sleep sound but unrefreshing. — Sleepless all night. — Late falling 
asleep from a crowd of ideas. — Woke earlier than usual and dozed till time to 
rise.-r~Woke at 3 a.m., then difficulty in going to sleep. — Constant dreams ; 
dreamt that she was pregnant. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness, with cold, clammy sweat. — Cold limbs ; feet ; 
hands and feet. — Fever ; and chilliness, then cold, clammy sweat. — Chilliness 
predominates. — Heat in head ; r. side ; in forehead. — Butrning ; along coronal 
suture ; along spine, < trying to study, > motion. — Heat in lower dorsal and 
lumbar regions. — Sweat. — Cold, clammy sweat ; in evening ; on hands ; on 
hands and feet in daytime ; on hands in forenoon ; on feet in evening, next 
day fqpt cold and sweaty all day. 



I 


820 PICROTOXINUM 


Picrotoxinum. 

Picrotoxin. An Alkaloid obtained from the fruit of Cocculus indicus* 
Cx^H leOaHjO. Trituration. 

Clinical. — Dysentery. Dyspepsia. Hernia. Locomotor ataxy. Night-sweats. 
Urine, excess of. 

Charaoteristios. — Coc, ind, is used to stupefy fishes, and when 
Piero, is added to water in which fishes are swimming ** they make 
winding and boring movements of the body, alternating with quiet 
swimming, open their mouths and gill caverns frequently, fall on 
their side and rapidly die of asphyxia’^ (Falk, quoted C. D. P.). J. H. 
Henry proved Piero, on himself. The symptoms were so severe that 
he was alarmed, and took Opium and Camphor to antidote them. 
Nausea with tendency to faint, violent intestinal pain and purging, 
dysenteric diarrhoea and excessive secretion of urine, cramps and 
paralytic sensations were experienced. The symptom which gave 
the most concern was the pain in the bowels and sensation as if the 
bowels would protrude at left inguinal ring. Brunton says the local 
application of Piero, as an ointment to the head for tinea capitis' and 
to destroy pediculi has been followed by convulsions and death. 
Hansen mentions that it has been given at bedtime to relieve the 
night-sweats of phthisis. With Pierotoxicum acidum 3X Dorr cured in 
a few weeks a case of advanced locomotor ataxy with amaurotic 
amblyopia {B. J. H., xxxvii. 378). 

Relations. — Compare : Coccul. In tetaniform convulsions, Nux 
(with Piero, respiration is accelerated more from spasm of glottis than 
of respiration, and there is less susceptibility to slight touch ; more 
choreic symptoms. — F arrington). 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Sad thoughts, desires sleep. 

2 . Head. — Nausea with headache. 

11. Stomach. — Pressure on stomach, with coated tongue and eructa- 
tions. — Pain in pit of stomach. 

12, Abdomen. — Pain extending all over bowels. — Fainting, violent sub- * 
acute irritation of intestinal lining membrane. — Pain in bowels as if bruised. 
— Soreness in 1. inguinal ring as if bowels would protrude. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Flatulence with fetid diarrhoea, followed by 
tenesmus, painful and continued. — Diarrhoea and dysentery. 

14, Urinary Organs. — Large quantity of clear urine passes twelve 

times a day. ® 

17. Respiratory Organs.-— Wants more breath ; respiration impeded. 
—(Asphyxia in fishes.) ^ 

20. Back. — Bruised pain in back ; drawing pain (1.). 

22, Upper Limbs. — Dragging sensation of r. arm. — Pains in 1. forearm 
running up to shoulder. ^ 



PILOCARPINUM 


821 


23* Lower Limbs. — Lower limbs feel bruised and paralysed (1.) ; have 
a tendency to draw back with the back, giving great > to limbs. — Constric- 
tive painless sensation. — Cramp pains. * 


Pilocarpinum. 

PiLOCARPiNUM. Pilocarpia. Pilocarpine. CuHieN^Oa. Solution in 

distilled water. 

P. MURIATICUM. Hydrochlorate of Pilocarpine. C^HigNjOaHCl. 

Solution in distilled water. 

P. NiTRicuM. Nitrate of Pilocarpine, CnHigNaOaHNOj. Solution. 

Trituration. 

Clinical. — Albuminuria. Alopecia. Convulsions, uremic; puerperal. Deaf- 
ness. Meniere’s disease. Mumps. Myopia. Perspiration, excessive. Pregnancy, 
nausea of ; salivation of. Salivation. Vertigo, aural. 

Characteristios. — Pilocarpin, is one of the most characteristic of 
several alkaloids which have been isolated horn faborandi {Pilocarpus 
pinf\atus). It has been used, like yabor, yio produce and cure profuse 
sweating ; and by oculists to produce contraction of the pupil, which it 
does whether it is injected subcutaneously or applied directly to the 
eye. It has also an action on the ear. G. P. Field {BriU Med, Jour,, 
May 17, 1890, &c.) has given it with good effect in labyrinthine" deaf- 
ness, tinnitus, and auditory nerve vertigo. The cases least amenable 
to its influence were those in which the hearing was > in a noise as 
of a train, &c. ; and those in which the hearing is < after a cold. 
Subjects of syphilis, hereditary or acquired, and patients who are 
more deaf when tired, are the most suitable. The method of adminis- 
tration is js follows : A solution of Pilo, nit,, gr. i to 10 minims, is 
used, and the initial dose (injected into the back of the arm) is 
gr. gradually increased to J, and, if well borne, to Salivation 
and sweating speedily occur. After each injection a drachm of sal 
volatile is given in a small tumbler of water. The patient is made to 
lie on a sofa, well covered with rugs, the head being wrapped in a 
shawl. The wraps are removed very gradually as the effects wear 
off. If there is any faintness brandy is given. The treatment is 
continued for a period of six weeks. [According to Cooper the 
improvement is only temporary. Moreover, rthe injections create 
tendency to take cold in some patients.] James C. Wood (Med, Cent,, 
i. 301) relates two instructive cases, (i) A primipara, 22, eight 
months pregnant, was seized with violent convulsions the night after 
a long walk in the month of June, and exposure whilst perspiring. 
Delivery was effected with extreme difficulty, and only under chloro- 
form and after incision of the imperfectly dilated os and craniotomy 
of th| fetus, which was evidently already dead. A sharp haemorrhage 
followed. The week previqus the urine had been examined and 
found normal. It was now scanty and loaded with albumen. Apis 
iwQir was given. This was about noon. At 5 p.m. the convulsions 



822 pilo(!:arpinum 

returned. Two ounces of urine drawn off by the catheter became 
almost solid on boiling. Pilo. gr. \ was administered hypodermically. 
In a few momenta saliva began to pour from the mouth, drops of 
sweat gathered on the head, and sweating soon became general ; 
nausea and some retching ; laryngeal and nasal secretions increased ; 
blood pressure diminished ; face and entire body flushed red. These 
symptoms lasted four hours, when a second injection kept them up. 
The saliva was thick, stringy, exceedingly tenacious. The urine 
rapidly increased in quantity, whilst the albumen disappeared. Con- 
sciousness was restored, and the patient made a perfect recovei^ 
imder Apis^ Arsen.y and Merc, Wood has seen Pt 7 o, relieve uraemic 
convulsions in the same way, the diaphoresis, free elimination by the 
skin and other secretive organs, removing the pressure on the over- 
burdened kidneys until they have time to recover themselves. (2) 
From the bedside of No. i Wood went to see a woman three months 
pregnant. She was a picture of distress and despair. For eight 
weeks she had saturated from six to ten handkerchiefs daily with 
tenacious saliva. Nausea and vomiting were constant, emaciation 
extreme. Nausea < by slightest movement. Alternate redness and 
paleness of face, flushes of heat and perspiration. Urine scanty, high 
coloured, depositing much uric acid. Very chilly ; obstinate consti- 
pation. Ptlo.t a tablet containing gr. J, was dissolved in half a glass 
of water : to take a teaspoonful every two hours. Next day Wood 
found his patient sitting up, cheerful, and free from nausea and sali- 
vation. The improvement, with some fluctuations, continued. Merc,^ 
Ipec,f Nii, ac,j K, bi., Hydrasi,^ Act, r, had all previously failed. 
Lambert {H, W,, xxxii. 460) had under treatment a severe case of 
rheumatic iritis of le/l eye, for which Atropine (gr. iv. to^the ounce) 
was being instilled several times in the day. There developed pro- 
fuse night perspiration of the right half of the body, and during the 
day the right side was much moister than the left. Pilo, mur, 4X 
gr. iv. at bedtime reduced the excessive secretion of sweat Lambert 
queries whether the Atropine instillations into the left eye were account- 
able for the absence of sweat on the left side of the body. — The hair 
as well as the skin is affected by Pilo., which is an ingredient in many 
‘'hair restorers.'^ Schmitz, of Cologne {H, W.^ xiv. 180) treated two 
bald men with injections of Pilo, mur. to produce absorption ^of 
inflammatory residue within the eye. In both a secondary effect 
occurred — the growth of young downy hairs on the bald parts of the 
scalp. One, aet. 60, in four months had his head covered " partly 
with grev and partly with black hairs of considerable growth, so as 
to entirely obliterate his previous baldness. Pilo. has also been known 
to turn white hair black.— A woman who had had Pilo. injections 
complained to Cooper that thereafter she had been constantly taking 
cold and in fear of bronchitis. Her skin, too, became irritable* 
Pilo, mur. 3X is Burnett’s chief remedy in mumps. He regards it 
(and Jaborandt) as an organ remedy of the sweat glands, parotid, and 
pancreas. Frohling {H, R,^ xii. 320) relates a case showing the power 
of Pilo. (he used Pilo. mur., 4th trituration) over debilitating sweats 
left after acute diseases. With Merc, sol. 12 he had cured a case of 
rheumatic fever so far as the articular affection was concerned, 



PILOCARrtNUM 823 

the sweats persisted and strength declined in spite of remedies until 
Pilo. was given, when the sweating stopped after the first dose. 

Relations. — Aniidoled hy : Atrop., Amm. c. (^al volatile) ; brandy. 
Follows well : Merc, (in sweating of rheumatic fever). Compare : 
Jaborandi, Myosot., Eser., Phjs. 


SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — ^Throbbing in temples with acceleration of pulse. — ^Turns 
white hair black. 

3. Eyes. — Profuse lachrymation. — Pupils contracted to pin-head. — 
Sight for distance improved. 

4. Ears.—(Labyrinthine deafness ; < when tired ; in syphilitics. — 
Aural vertigo. — Deafness with tinnitus. — Tinnitus of 1. ear.) — Increases the 
secretion of wax. 

5. Nose. — Nasal secretion increased. 

6. Face. — Forehead and face red, veins stand out. — Perspiration begins 
on face. 

8. Mouth. — Sudden salivation ; maxinuim reached in fifteen minutes, 
continues two hours, one and a half pints of thin saliva being secreted in the 
tin^e. — Saliva thick, stringy, exceedingly tenacious. 

XI. Stomach. — Intense thirst following the sweating. — Nausea ; only 
occurring when salivation is complete ; does not go on to vomiting as that of 
Jaborandi does. — Nausea and retching. 

13. Stool. — Urging to stool. 

x6. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses two days early. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Increased bronchial mucus ; much cough 
and expectoration. — Constantly taking cold and in fear of bronchitis. 

19. Heart. — Weakness of heart. — Pulse accelerated, blood pressure 
diminished. — After the perspiration the pulse sinks to normal. 

24. Generalities. — Dilatation of blood-vessels ; temporal artery be- 
comes a thick, pulsating cord ; veins of forehead stand out blue. — Exhaustion 
(after the perspiration) during w'hich most of the patients fell asleep. — Faint- 
ness. — In a case of lead paralysis it produced profuse salivation and perspira- 
tion, with sensation of great coldness and excessive tremors of limbs. 

25. Skin. — Irritable skin. 

26. Sleep. — Patients fall asleep under its influence. 

27. Fever. — Sensation of coldness and shaking chill without fall of tem- 
perature.— Increase of temperature with feeling of intense cold.— Redness of 
face with sensation of warmth ; perspiration at first over forehead along 
margin of hair, invading successively neck, chest, trunk, arms, and, finally 
lower limbs. — Sweat profuse ; may lose from two to four pounds in the 
sweating. — Sweat begins about five minutes later than salivation, often 
accompanied by feeling of intense cold, chattering of teeth and desire for 
wraps. — ^After sweat ; thirst ; feeling of relief and sense of increased vigour. 



824 PIMHNELLA 


Pimenta. 

Eugenia pimenta. Myrtus pimenta.^, Pimenta officinalis. Allspice. 
Jamaica Pepper. [Pimento, or Allspice, consists of the dried 
berries of the West Indian Eugenia pimenta and E. acris.] 
N, 0 . Myrtaceae. Tincture of the fruit. 

ClinicaL’—Chill. Neuralgia. 

CharaoteristiOB. — Allspice so named because its odour is 
said to resemble a combination of cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves. A 
tincture was proved by Becket and developed one-sided neuralgias 
and disturbed sensations of heat and cold. 

Relations. — Compare : Eucalyp., Eug. j. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Semi-lateral neuralgic lesions. 

II, Stomach. — Very imperious desire to eat. 

24. Generalities. — Semi-lateral neuralgic lesions, esp. of head. 

27. Fever. — Disturbance in calorification and sensibility ; parts of body 
burning hot, others cold. — Peculiar cold sensation as if sponge filled With 
cold water passed here and there over the surface, succeeded by sensation of 
heat, as in the reaction after a cold bath. 


Pimpernel, see Anagallis. 


Pimpinella. 

Pimpinella saxifraga. Burnet saxifrage. Bibernell. N, O, Umbel- 
liferae. Tincture of the fresh root. 

Clinical.— -Chilliness. Corns. Epistaxis, Fever. Headache. Lumbago. Stiff 
neck. Tinnitus. 

Characteristics. — The majority of the symptoms of Pimpinella t 
were obtained by Schelling from chewing the fresh root. The rest 
were contributed by Berridge, who proved the i x on a man. Chilli- 
ness was a marked symptom, chilly in the back even in a warm room, 
and much < if a window was opened. Sensitive to draughts. Sen- 
sation of coldness in occiput as from a cutting wind behind. Cold 
stream from hip and into right leg. The pains and sensations extended 
from one part to another, principally from above downward and from 
before backward (temples to nape ; forehead to eyes ; nape to 
shoulders), from within outward ; or alternated between different 
parts. There was rush of blood to head, followed by nose-bleed ; 
whizzing in head, roaring in ears. Sinking sensation in intestii\g§^ 



PIMPINELLA 


825 


Weariness and falling asleep of parts rested on. Frequent yavming 
and desire to take a long breath, which was difficult. Great drowsi- 
ness. The symptoms were < morning (vertigo ; sweat) ; afternoon 
(heat and rush of blood to he^d) ; by chewing ; reading ; writing ; 
reflecting ; rest (weary pain in limbs) ; standing ; stooping ; after 
stooping ; walking ; by opening window ; in warm room. 

Relations. — Compare : Rush of blood preceding nose-bleed, 
Graph. Occipital pains, Hell, n., Nat. s., Glon. 

. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — ^Vertigo : inclination to one side, morning, on rising ; dizzy 
confusion. — Heat, rush of blood and confusion of head, soon followed by 
nose-bleed ; afternoon. — Rushing in whole head, esp. down back part, with 
pressure. — ^Whizzing in head and sounds as in an empty barrel. — Dulness and 
heaviness in head, with drowsiness when reading. — Head feels tied up and 
compressed. — Sticking in forehead, extending to both sides along eyes. — 
Sticking burning from vertex to both sides and down over temples. — Pressing 
and pushing from temples to occiput and nape. — Sensation of coldness in 
occiput as though a sharp draught constantly blowing from behind ; in a 
closed room. — Tension and press! ve pain from occiput into nape. — Pain in 
occiput, < reading or thinking. — ^Acute stitches in occiput concentrated in 
protuberance. — Itching on vertex. — Shivering of scalp, hair bristles. 

3. Eyes. — Smarting pain in r. eye. — Burning in eyes, esp. upper surface 
of eyeballs ; disagreeable coolness. — Smarting in lids. — Vision dim, misty. 

4. Ears. — Fine stitches extending out through r, ear, with roaring. — 
Roaring in e 2 rs as from a distant sound. 

5. Nose. — Dry, stopped catarrh. 

6. Face. — Pain as from an ulcer in r. cheek. 

8 . Mouth. — Sore, pressive pain in stump of tooth, 1 . lower jaw. — Burn- 
ing aroma o» tongue, palate, and throat. — Saliva increased during and after 
chewing.—Collection of mucus in mouth and fauces, obliging hawking. — 
Taste ; acrid, burning, earthy ; penetrating while chewing, later spreading a 
warmth through whole body j mouldy. 

9. Throat. — Hawking of tenacious whitish mucus from arch of palate, 
and a crumbly, cheesy, offensive concretion from fauces. 

11. Stomach. — Eructations : frequent, of gas ; with vertigo and yawn- 
ing ; tasteless ; acid, after stooping. 

12. Abdomen. — Fine stitches just above navel. — Rumbling and gurg- 
ling. — Sensation as if intestines would sink down from^their own weight. 

13. Stool. — Purging. — Stool dry, harder than usual. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Oppression whilst walking, in open air and 
in house. — Breathing short, difficult; feeling of apprehension in chest. — 
Frequently impelled to take a long breath, which is difficult. 

18. Chest. — ^The portion of the chest against which he leans becomes 
painful as if weary .—Transient, needle-like stitches, back and forth in sides 
of che^, back, small of back, and walls of abdomen. 

19. Heart. — Sensation of heaviness in praecordial region and abdomen 
intestines would sink down of their own weight. 



826 PIMPINELLA—PINUS LAMBERTJANA 

20. Neck and Back.— Stiff neck. — Pressive, tensive pain from nape to 
shoulder. — Constant, pressive, contractive pain alternately in nape, side of 
neck, and r. shoulder. — Constant tension and sticking in nape and occiput. — 
Constrictive, cramp-like pain in small of back, esp. on stooping ; on standing 
upright ; on walking. — Tension and teafing in small of back, extending into 
hips and back. — Burning in loins and small of back. — Pressive stitches in 
loins. — Tensive pain in back, esp. sacral region. 

21. Limbs. — Weary pain in limbs while at rest. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pressive, sticking pains in r. shoulder ; stitches 
shoot deep into r. chest. — The arm that is resting on the table feels weary 
and falls asleep. — Fine sticking, drawing from r. upper arm to hand, with a 
shivering extending through the limb. — Stinging as from nettles on last joint 
of r. ring finger. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pain in hips and pelvis as if broken. — A cold 
stream, extending into r. leg and foot, with fine stitches now and then. — 
Painful burning in corns (quite unusual). 

24. Generalities. — The whole body feels weak and weary. — Weakness 
and general sick feeling. 

25. Skin. — Fine stinging as from nettles deeply piercing the skin on last 
joint of r. ring finger, while writing. 

26. Sleep. — Frequent yawning ; with eructations. — Overpowering sleepi- 
ness (for an hour after chewing the drug). — Sleep dreamy. 

27. Fever. — Unusual chilliness over whole body (in warm room). — 
Chilliness and shivering of scalp, the hair bristles (in warm room). — Chill 
runs up middle of back ; rest of body warm, and icy cold hands. — Great 
sensitiveness to every cool temperature, shivering in back .when window 
is opened. — Violent catarrhal fever. — Sweat every morning. • 


Pinas Lambertiana. . 

Sugar Pine. (North America.) JV. 0 . Coniferae. Trituration* of 
inspissated sap. 

Clinical.— Abortion. Amenorrhoea. Constipation. 

ChaJ^acteristiOB. — ^^Fhe inspissated sap of P. Lamb, makes a sugary 
substance like manna. A small quantity (from a bit the size of a pea 
to a teaspoonful) has a decided but gentle laxative action, and in • 
larger Quantities emphatically so. It has also an action on the men- 
strual tunction, restoring menses when suppressed ; and producing 
abortion in pregnant women. 

Relations. — Compare : Sabina, Junip,, Pin. syl., and other 
coniferae. 

SYMPTOMS. 

13. Stools.-^Gentle cathartic action. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Used by Indian women to procure 
abortion. — In suppressed menses restores the flow and removes painful 
sensations resulting from suppression. 



PINUS SYLVESTRIS 


827 


Pinas Sylvestris. 

Scotch Fir. Red. Norway, Riga, or Baltic Pine. (The typical pine 
of Europe.) N, 0, Coniferae. Tincture of leaves and young 
twigs. 

* Olinioal. — Ankles, weak. Anus, itching of. Bronchitis. Constipation. Diar- 
rhoea. Dysuria. Emaciation of lower limbs. Glands, submaxillary and inguinal, 
swollen. Gout. Haemorrhoids. Heart, palpitation of. Joints, stiff. Kidneys, pains 
in. Liver, enlargement of. Rheumatism. Scrofula. Squint. Tinnitus. Urine, 
increased ; strong. Vertigo. Walking, late. Worms (lumbrici). 

Gharacieristios. — Pinus syL was proved by Demeures in the ^ 
tincture ; and Patzack observed the effects of bathing in an infusion 
of the leaves. Pine baths may also be made by adding Oleum pint 
sylvestfis to an ordinary bath in the proportion of one minim to the 
gallon. These baths have a reputation in the treatment of rheu- 
matism, gout, paralysis, scrofula, and skin diseases. The provings 
show that this reputation is founded on a specific relationship. 
Rheumatic, gouty, and paralytic pains in limbs, bones, and joints ; 
stiffness ; glandular swellings ; enlarged and painful liver and spleen ; 
chilliness and sensitiveness to touch. Scalp sensitive. Chest walls 
sensitive, with a peculiar feeling of thinness^ as if they would give way 
at a touch. The kidneys were stimulated ; burning on micturition ; 
flow increased ; urine strong. Itching of the nose and discharge of 
round wornls was noted. The menstrual function was deranged. 
Bronchial i^ucus was increased. Hansen gives emaciation of lower 
extremities^^ and weak ankles in children'' as indications for it, and 
mentions that the tinctures may be used externally, whilst the 
attenuations are given internally. Chilliness alternating with flushing ; 
the face is alternately red and pale. Itching in general. The symp- 
toma are < by exertion ; walking ; touch ; in morning ; in evening. 
In a patient of Cooper's Pmus syL caused “headache < by any 
movement of the eyes " ; and it cured a case of squint. 

Relations. — Compare: Tereb., Sabi., Junip., Thuj., Aloe, Pix. 
Strong urine, Benz. ac. Red margin of eyes, Sul., Bac. 


SYMPTOMS. 

' , ^ 

I. Mind. — Anxiety. — Despondency. — ^Wants to do many things, under- 
takes all and finishes none. — Mind duU, unable to think ; caused by any 
exertion. 

5 . Head. — ^Vertigo, even to falling down. — Dulness ; fulness ; heaviness 
of head. — Pressive headache.— Tearing in temples. — Scalp sensitive.— Head- 
ache ^ by any movement of eyes. 

3. ^ Eyes.— Eyes inflamed.— Margins of lids red.— Vision dim ; veiled.— 
(Squint) 

Ears. — Sticking in ears.— Roaring in ears. 



828 


PINUS SYLVESTRIS 


$• Nose.—Violent nose-bleed several days in succession.— Mucous 
discharge from nose.— -Sensation of coryza. — Itching of nose. 

6. Face.— Face alternately pale and red. — Tearing in face. 

8. Mouth.— Pain in teeth, with h^t of face and pain in head.— Dry 
mouth with increased thirst. 

g. Throat,— Uneasiness in throat as if something in the way.— Painful 
swelling of submaxillary glands. 

11. Stomach. — ^Appetite at first decreased, afterwards increased. — Pres- 
sure in pit of stomach after eating, with great distension. 

12. Abdomen. — Distension of hypochondrium, with pressive, burning 
pains. — Enlargement of liver. — Pressure and fulness in liver and spleen. — 
Colic with incarcerated flatus. — Pain in inguinal glands with swelling. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Troublesome itching at anus. — Stool : thin, 
pasty, with colic and great excitement ; bilious. — Discharge of round worms ; 
itching and burning on anus; bloody, slimy, haemorrhoidal discharge for 
several days.— Constipation. 

14. Urinary Organs. — ^Violent boring-burning pains in kidneys, ex- 
tending along ureters. — Spasms of bladder. — Burning pains when urinating. 
— Micturition difficult. — ^Very greatly increased secretion of urine. — Urine of 
strong odour. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses, usually scanty, became rmore 
profuse. — Menses : earlier ; delayed. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness. — Increased bronchial mucus. 
— Short, dry cough. — Expectoration greater when coughing. — Breath tight, 
esp. when walking. 

18. Chest. — Oppression. — Anterior portion of chest painful to touch ; it 
seems as if very thin and ready to give way on the slightest pressure ; all 
evening. — Burning in sides of chest. — In middle of sternum sensation as if a 
cupping-glass had been applied inside. 

19. Heart. — Palpitation. 

20. Neck and Back. — Drawing and stiffness in nape extending into 
occiput.— Pressive, tensive drawing pain between shoulders and small of 
back ; motion difficult. 

21. Limbs. — Limbs : stiff ; heavy ; weak, can hardly walk — Gouty pain 
in all joints of hands and feet, esp. finger-joints.— Pressive-tensive pains in 
limbs. — Drawing-paralytic pains in limbs. 

23, Lower Limbs. — Knees stiff with stinging-burning pains, so that 
they give out. — Pain in 1 . tibia when walking, it ss sensation as if he would 
double up on himself (in morning only) ; next day same pain in r. tibia, with 
gripings in whole abdomen. — Cramps in calves when stretching in bed at 
night. — In evening, itching lancinations, crosswise, in fold separating first and 
second phalanges of r. great toe, > by applying hand, 

25. Skin. — Nettle-rash. — Itching of whole body, < about joints zi3d on 
abdomen. — Itching of nose. 

26. Sleep. — Great sleepiness, esp. forenoon, with restless sleep in 
evening. — Sleepless. — Dreams which seem when remembered lij:e real 
occurrences. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness, esp. towards evening, alternating with flushes of 

heat.— Perspiration ; general ; easy. ^ . 



PIPER METHYSTICUM 


829 


Piper Methysticum. 

Macropiper methysticum. Ava. Kava-kava. Kawa. N. 0 . 

Piperaceae. Tincture of fresh root. 

Glinioal. — ^Albuminuria. Anus, prolapse of. Brachialgia. Brain-fag. Cata- 
lepsy. Cystitis. Dysuria. Eczema. Gonorrhoea. Headache. Head, enlarged 
feeling. Ichthyosis. Leprosy. Neuralgia. Neurasthenia. Orchitis. Paraplegia. 
Prostatorrhoea. Rheumatism. Toothache. Urethritis. Uric acid, excess of. 

Charaoteristios.— methysticum (it is called Macropiper 
methysticum in most recent botanical works, but 1 retain the older 
name by which it is best known in homoeopathy) furnishes the root 
called Kava in Polynesia. The natives use it as a stimulant, either 
chewing the root or drinking a beverage made of it before under- 
taking any important business or religious rites. Excessive indul- 
gence in it produces a skin disease like leprosy, called at Tahiti 
Arevareva. Lutz (quoted H, xxviii. 175) describes the disease as 
observed amongst natives of the Sandwich Islands ; The skin, par- 
ticularly that of the extremities, assumes the appearance of well- 
marked ichthyosis, associated with a certain degree of atrophy, such 
as is* observed in senile skin. There is an absence of inflammatory 
symptoms.^^ The mental symptoms of the Intoxicating Pepper 
(fjLidvffiCj drunkenness) are the most interesting feature of the drug^s 
action. W. N. Griswold proved the third and second dilutions, and 
developed a. large number of nervous, mental, and brain symptoms, 
among which are some which have proved to be keynotes. The 
drug causes a feeling of buoyancy, as if every nerve was strung up to 
the highest pitch ; feels he can work without fatigue, quickly followed 
by a feeling of tired brain, and over-sensitiveness to all external 
impressions. Mental tension ; feeling as though the head were en- 
larged even to bursting. The mental symptoms, excitement or 
deptession, and the headache, were > by diversion of mind. This is 
one of the keynotes, and it has served to indicate Piper m. in connec- 
tion with other symptoms. Griswold cured a case having burning in 
chest, > by diverting mind (Org,f i. 229) ; and three cases having : 
** Agonising pain, with tossing, twisting, and writhing; p 3 .tient driven 
irresistibly to change position^ which generally gives little or no This 
italicised passage is the second keynote of Piper m. These cures were 
with the I X or 0 tinctures. Skinner gave fractional doses of p tincture 
in water to a highly excitable young girl who Sad severe toothache 
and earache, and had worn out her family by the incessant day and 
night attendance she required. The pains were dragging, heavy, < 
at night in bed, and after or when eating, “ forgets all about her pains 
if amused with anything, but directly she is tired of it she exclaims, 
* Oh, my tooth or ear ! ^ In addition she had Agonising pain with 
tossing, twisting, and writhing ; irresistibly driven to change posi- 
tion,^ The patient slept well that night the first time for a fortnight, 
and had no more pain. The remaining swelling was removed by 
200, Skinner also reports this case ; Miss R., 20, has toothache 



830 . PIPER METHYSTICUM 

in a decayed molar, > if attention is diverted by anything sufficiently 
exciting. When pain is at all violent she has no rest in any position, 
must keep continually changing it Piper m. 500 (F, C.) was given, 
and there was relief very soon after the first dose. A few doses com- 
pletely removed the pain (Org., i. 299 ). — Piper m. has much dizziness 
and vertigo ; > on closing eyes. The forehead was full, ** solid with 
pain ; this shifted to occiput and cervical spine, where it became a 
compression, extending as a constricting sensation to stomach and chest. 
The sensation of enlargement of head was marked and persistent.* 
Farrington says convulsions simulating catalepsy are produced, 
Cerna (quoted H, W,, xxvi. 556) as a result of his investigations 
found Piper m, a general and local ansesthetic. It diminishes reflex 
action by its action on the cord, and kills by paralysing respiration, 
Cerna illustrated its relationship to Cubeha by citing cases of gonor- 
rhoea, acute and chronic cystitis, gleet, prostatorrhoea, vaginitis, cured 
with it. The provings give the indications. The symptoms were < 
before meals (sour eructations) ; reading and thinking ; urinating 
(burning in urethra) ; walking. Going down stairs s= symptoms to 
rush up. > Moving ; diverting mind ; open air ; closing eyes (vertigo). 

Relations. — Aniidoted by : Puls, and Rhus (partially). Compare : 
Cubeba, Piper nig., Matico (botan.). In > by diverting mind, Ox. 
ac. > By motion, Rhus, Feeling of buoyancy, Coff. (but with Ooff. 
the reverse condition of brain-fag does not quickly follow). Neuras- 
thenia, Pic. ac., Arg. n., Avena. Unbearable pains, Coff., Aco., Cham. 


SYMPTOMS. 

« 

1. Mind.— 'Hilarious from 10 a.m. till i p.m.— Lively after an emission. 
— Lively and inclined to work, can dance with more ease than usual. — 
Agreeable excitement and support against great fatigue.— From increased 
doses intoxication of a sorrowful, silent, and sleepy character, different from 
that produced by alcohol. — Faculties sharpened. — (Capable of working more 
without fatigue or brain-fag.) — Lazy and drowsy. — Deep torpor and irritation 
from least noise (intoxication from root grown in damp soils). — Want of 
vigour, timid, apprehensive. 

2. Head. — From 5 to 9 p.m. very dizzy; swimming sensation and 
faintness. — Intoxication, with fantastic ideas and desire to skip about, 
although he cannot for a moment hold himself on his legs. — ^Vertigo in 
morning in bed, with frontal pressure. — Brain tired ; in morning on waking, 
> getting on feet.— 'Tired feeling in brain at night. — Fulness, sometimes in 
one part, ^metimes in another, < in forehead. — Heaviness of head. — Head- 
ache with pressure in upper part of orbits ; with sleepiness. — Shooting : inter- 
mittent after 3 p.m., in 1. supra-orbital nerve ; in 1. temple. — Headache : 
in 1. supra-orbital nerve ; back of eyes ; 1. brain from front to back ; ol^er 
eyes and deep-seated ; at 9 a.m., < 3 p.m. ; in afternoon and evening, 
with drowsy and stupid feeling ; above eyes at 5 p.m. ; at 7 p.m. ; in 1. side 
and deep in upper part of orbits, with pain on moving eyes ; intermittent in 
r. front^ eminence, ^ open air and motion ; above r. eye radiating over 
eyes, at 10 a,m. ; heavy in forehead and temples, < thinking and 



PIPER METHYSTICUM 831’ 

Frontal brain solid with pain " ; this ache during day generally moved to 
base of brain and along medulla, > by slight motion, < by large, continued 
and active motion ; slight mental effort, passing from topic to topic, for an 
instant > ; sustained effort <.— Compressive pain and soreness back of head 
and cervical cord ; disappear later leaving cerebellum sensitive ; parts feel 
treble their normal size. — Dulness in forehead, with fulness and pressure, and 
on raising head or moving it to either side vertigo, after the noon meal the 
pressure shifted to lateral and occipital regions, < lying down, but not 
amounting to real pain, pressure ; < remaining in one position, > moving, 
apprehension of pain by rapid movement, but temporary relief from it. 

3. Eyes. — Conjunctivae red. — Pain along r. optic nerve when reading 
at 3 p.m. — Pain deep in 1. eye as if ball would be pressed out, in the street at 
5.30 p.m. — Dizzy blindness when dressing, vertigo, > closing eyes, directing 
attention to head and exerting the will, at the same time vertigo, then rush of 
blood and fulness in forehead, then similar sensation in occipital and basilar 
regions. 

4. Ears. — Singular pressure in lobules of pinna of 1. ear. 

6. Face. — Pressure outward in face at 7 p.m. 

7. Teeth. — Teeth deep yellow. — Teeth sensitive to cold water, cold air, 
brushing, &c. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue feels as if covered with velvet or fur at night. — 
Burning on tongue. — Burning in whole mouth followed by numbness. — Dry- 
ness of mouth on waking from afternoon nap, with sweat (in a hot day). — 
Salivation. — ^Taste : nauseous ; sweet, then piquant and sharp ; pappy ; every- 
thing tasteless ; lost to food, but ravenous haste in eating. — Taste and relish 
to food not as tlsual, at noon, but appetite unusually good. 

10. Appdlite. — Appetite : formidable at 8 p.m. ; slight ; hungry at noon, 
but not able to eat much ; able to eat but little supper. 

11. Stomach. — Sour eructations, < an hour before meals and at night, 
^at times rolling up and rumbling from stomach to mouth, but generally 
breaking at tl«*oat-pit, and in throat-pit sensation of something that cannot be 
swallowed, the latter temporarily > by eructations. — Bloating at ii p.m. — 
Constriction extending from base of brain. — Crampy pain, > pressure against 
edge of table. — ^Warmth in stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Pain : every day about 9 a.m. ; in forenoon after first 
stooll, with distressing full sensation ; > motion. — Pain in abdomen, above 
umbilicus ; in r. groin when walking, then a large stool, the latter part soft. 

► 13. Stool and Rectum. — Diarrhoea threatened. — Stool : loose in morn- 

ing, more difficult in evening ; soft, difficult. — Constipation : stool hard ; 
large ; light-coloured. — Stool large ; soft. — Urging : alf day ; every evening. 
— Continuous desire, next day forced a large stool, which caused prolapsus 
ani. — Burning in rectum. 

Urinary Organs. — Micturition at 4.45 a.m. — Burning in urethra 
during micturition. — Urine nearly neutral at 10 a.m., hot and over-acid at 
night. — Urine : increased ; scanty in morning. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Shooting in penis.— -Erection : in after- 
noon ; at night ; at 4 a.m. after an emission. — Pain in r. testicle. — Emission 
early in morning, without dreams. — Amorousness, ’ 

Cheat* — Heaviness behind upper part of sternum, as from wind that 



'832 PIPER METHYSTICUM 

cannot be eructated.— -Constriction of chest and stomach, extending from 
base of brain. 

19. Pulse. — Pulse steadied. 

20. Back. — Pain in back only felt pressure, — Soreness about second 

dorsal vertebra. 

21. Limbs.— Pain : in r. foot and wrist and 1. toe at 10 p.m. ; r. elbow 

and 1. knee, with stiffness ; r. foot and back of 1. hand at 11.30 p.m., with heat 
of them. — Pain in r. arm as if marrow would be affected, changing its loca- 
tion, with paroxysmal paralysed feeling in hands, in toe at 9 p.m. * 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pain : in 1. shoulder ; in 1. arm in the street, with 
flushing heat in 1. hand. — Excoriating pain in r. arm, as if the marrow would 
be affected ; paralysed feeling in hands. — Pain in r. arm, running in all 
directions, with heaviness, soreness, and tired sensation. — Dragging in 1. arm 
at 8 p.m., > 10 p.m. — Tingling as from an electric current from 1. elbow to 
fingers. — Numbness of r. elbow. — Pain in r. wrist, < writing. — Weakness of 
1. hand. — Pain in joint of 1. thumb, < pressure. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Drunk in his walk, but intellect unclouded, aware 
of his inability to control the movements of his legs. — Numbness of lower 
limbs. — Weakness ; all day ; in afternoon ,* in thighs as if unable to stand. — 
Sticking in 1, knee at 4 p.m, when walking. — Heaviness of legs when walking. 
— Pain : in feet ; 1. foot and toe ; r. sole ; at outer and under border of 1. foot 
and in r. great toe, with coldness of 1. foot. — Sticking : in end of 1. toe on 
waking at 4.45 a.m., in great toe when moving and walking. 

24. Generalities. — Emaciation and decrepitude.— Trembling.— Pains 
(esp, of head) temporarily > by turning mind to another topic. — Feeling as if 
drug descended and impressed lower part of system, causing trembling of 
abdomen and lower limbs and blood-vessels connected therewith, but on 
descending stairs the drug seemed to come upward through the circulation, 
reaching the brain, causing exhilarating dizziness and disposition to swing 
and stagger, as if under the influence of liquor, felt talkative and happy, after 
the dizziness felt a “ toned-up ” condition of brain and nervous aystem, dizzi- 
ness returned on beginning to move.— Nervous system strung up to its highest 
tension. — Stimulating and sedative effects, then sweat. — ^Vigour ; all day, with 
exhilaration, next day feelings varying and generally depressed. — Uneasiness 
and weakness during day, with timidity and apprehension. — Weakness in 
morning, > ri.sing and moving around. — ^Want of tone and life in all functions 
towards night. — < In open air and on motion. 

25. Skin. — Covered as in leprosy with large scales, which fall off and 
leave white spots, and these often become ulcers. — Dryness, esp. where it is 
thick, as on hands and feet, with scales, cracks, and ulcers. — Painful hard 
swelling in lower corner of 1. ear ; red, painful lump, threatening to become 
an abscess, on forehead above r. inner canthus and on back. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepiness ; at 10 p.m., soon afterwards liveliness and wake- 
fulness ; irresistible. — Hard sleep several times a day. — Stupid sleep. — tftevy 
sleep with disturbing but unremembered dreams. — Sleepless ; from 12 till 
2.30 a.m. ; at 4 a.m., after an emission, then sound sleep, next night wakeful 
after an emission till I got up for breakfast ; latter part of night, mind wt)rking 
on business problems, next morning tired feeling before and after rising.— 
Difficult falling asleep. — Restless sleep last pari of night. — Fragmentary sl^^ 



PIPER •METHYSTICUM— PIPER NIGRUM 833 


last part of night, — Fragmentary sleep from 12.30 till 4.20 a.m., with varied 
and exciting dreams, then sleeplessness so that I had to get up at 4.30 a.m., 
did excitedly all kinds of unusual office work. — Dreams : curious, nonsensical, 
Wild ; amorous ; of travelling by rail ; active, vivid, last part of night, alter- 
nating with half -conscious waking ; in afternoon, of fighting unknown men, 
left them to follow an unknown woman, and when she left me found that she 
had conducted me to a prayer-meeting, which must have changed to a 
restaurant, for I ordered a Hamburg beefsteak, but woke before it was served ; 
of a fire, heard the engines and firemen. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness for the last few hours, at 8 p.m. — Heat : at 9 a.m. ; 
flush of general heat ; in face and hands, < 1. hand ; flushing, in cheeks ; heat 
in 1. ear-flap and 1. hand ; over upper part of body in evening. — Hands sought 
cool places, otherwise no perceptible increase of heat. — Heavy perspiration, 
with great dryness of mouth on waking from afternoon nap. 


Piper Nigrum. 

Pepper. N, 0 , Piperaceae. Trituration or tincture of dried fruits 

• (peppercorns). 

Olinioal. — Anus, fissure of. Blenorrhagia. Breasts, swelling of ; eruption on. 
Constipation. Cough. Dysuria. Haemorrhoids. Headache. Menses, irregular ; 
scanty. Milk, excessive flow of. Neuralgia. Priapism. Speech, difficult. Teeth, 
caries of. Tongue, eruption on ; heavy. Toothache. Uterus, cramps in. 

Charaot6ristioB. — The Peppers are tropical climbing shrubs. 
Piper nig. yiSlds the pepper of commerce. The fruit when ripe is 
red. It is gathered before it is fully ripe and spread on mats in the 
sun, when it loses its red colour and becomes black and shrivelled. 
This is Black pepper. White pepper is the same fruit freed from its 
* outer skin by maceration in water and subsequent rubbing (Treas. of 
Bot.),, The symptoms of the proving are Houat’s. The only addi- 
tional symptom is one recorded by Berridge as having occurred in a 
lady on two occasions from taking a large quantity of pepper : “ Feel- 
ing as if temples and malar bones were pressed in, < on left side.” 
This confirms one of Houat^s symptoms. The full, heavy headache 
of Houat’s provings I can confirm by personal experience : I get the 
^headache whenever I take food highly peppered ; and I know others 
^who do the same. Sensations of burning occur almost everywhere. 
Pressure is almost as common : Pressure in nasal bones, in temples 
and facial bones. Contraction of uterus and sensation as if something 
about to enter it. Sensation of a foreign round body rising to stomach. 
The symptoms are < by change of temperature ; in damp weather ; 
in e^ning ; by motion. 

*&elaiionli. — Compare ; Piper m., Cubeba (botanical ; also mental, 
genito-urinary, skin, and general symptoms). 

SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Hot-headed, irascible, and often gay.— Amorousness with 
hyfM>chondriasi$. — Fear of being poisoned, 

. VOL. n. 54 



PIPER NIGRUM 


834 


2. Head.— Heaviness and congestion of the cerebellum, with pale face. 
— Rushing and congestion of blood to head with throbbing. — Brain ; empty 
feeling ; numbness causing swooning ; fluctuation and oscillation in morning. 
— Pressure on head ; as if bones of cranium and face rested on lower jaw. — 
Neuralgic pain through whole head at every change of temperature.— Violent 
headache ; feels as if it would burst at vertex. — Pressing pains at temples as 
if they would be broken in. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes inflamed and burning, with sensation of cold in lids. — 
Lids ulcerated and bleared. — Lachrymation and photophobia, — Dim sight and 
vertigo, with headache, nausea, and vomiting. 

4. Ears. — Crusty ulcers in concha of ears. 

5. Nose. — Frequent sneezing, epistaxis. — Dry and fluent coryza. — Dry- 
ness and burning in nostrils ; nostrils stopped up. — Pressure on nasal bones 
as if being crushed. 

6. Face. — Feeling as if temples and malar bones were pressed in, < 1 . 
side. — Red, burning face. — Drawing faceache ; as if muscles and bones were 
ranging themselves on one another. — Convulsive closure of jaws. — Eczema 
on lips. 

8. Mouth. — Tooth decays. — Violent toothache, < in warmth and even- 
ing. — Eruption of little vesicles on margin of tongue. — Painful, heavy tongue ; 
impeded speech. — Whitish coating on middle of tongue. — Burning dryness of 
mouth and throat. — Heat and dryness of palate and tongue, as if burned. 

9. Throat. — Constant accumulation of mucus in throat and expectora- 
tion, — Burning in throat with sensation of stiffness as if it were an iron tube. 
— Burning pains in tonsils, with sensation as if they were being pierced. — 
Paralysis of muscles of throat ; can cry but not articulate intelligibly. 

11. Stomach. — Constant, unquenchable thirst. — ^Vomiting with great 
exertion ; it seemed as if stomach itself would be vomited. — Sensation of heat 
and dryness in stomach. — Cramps and drawing in stomach, with desire for 
coarse and extravagant food.— Gastric discomfort. 

12. Abdomen. — Burning and lancinating pains in liver, aX if a tumour 
there. — Disposition of abdomen to obesity. — ^Abdomen swollen, hard,* burn- 
ing. — ^Tympanites with sensation as if everything in it were in ebullition. — 
Borborygmi. — Inflammation of intestines with great thirst. — Heaviness, flatu- 
lence. — Colic and cramps ; sensation as if intestines would burst. — Painful 
restlessness and anxiety in intestines. — Sensation of round foreign body rising 
to stomach, with heavy pain in intestincs.—ElectricaMike discharges in intes- 
tines when he moves. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Inflammation of rectum, anus swollen and 
burning ; fear to go to stool on account of the difficulty and pain. — Fissures 
at anus.— Large flowing hasmorrhoids.— Long-lasting constipation, then in- 
voluntary, thin stools. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Full, swollen bladder, frequent inclination to 
urinate without success.— Burning pains in bladder as from live coals.— 
Burning in glans and urethra.~Blennorrhoea, greenish, offensive.— Difficult 
micturition.— Urine : turbid, brownish ; diabetic ; bloody ; containing sand. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Excessive priapism. — Inflammation and 
swelling of penis, with priapism and burning pains.— Burning, pricking, 
excoriating pains in glans — Strong ejaculation, or almost none, and 
difficult. 



PIPERAZINUM 


835 


l6« Female Sexual Organs. — Ovaries and uterus congested, with 
pricking and lancinating pains. — Contraction of uterus with sensation as if 
something strove to penetrate into it. — Burning and distending pains in 
uterus. — Menses : difficult, retarded ; capricious, irregular, with colic and 
black blood. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Ulceration and false membranes thick, 
deep in larynx. — ^Vojice : low, deep, rough, unintelligible. — Hoarseness with 
coughing and constant snuffing. — Severe coughing, esp. evening and when 
going to sleep. — Cough : violent, occasionally spitting of blood ; croupy ; 
hollow. — Dyspnoea and attacks of suffocation. 

18. Chest. — Disposition to obesity of chest. — Painful spots on chest, < 
coughing, breathing, motion. — At each coughing spell it seemed as if chest 
would be torn and he would spit blood. — Burning, lancinating pains ; sensa- 
tion of heat and dryness of chest. — Burning and swollen heat. — Great flow of 
milk. — Dartrous eruption on 1, breast. 

19. Heart. — Sensation as if heart were surrounded with water. — Fre- 
quent palpitation. 

20. Back. — Burning in loins and kidneys, with contractive movements. 

21. Limbs. — Inflammation and swelling of joints. 

24. Generalities. — Bones brittle. — Motion of carriage deafens and sas 
spasms. — Spasms with tetanic stiffness of limbs. — < From motion ; in evening ; 
in damp weather. 

25. Skin. — Crusty ulcers in ears. — Large pustules on face, leaving scars. 
— Eczema on lips. — ^Very tender skin. — Itching, < by scratching, heat, and 
motion. 

26. Sleep,. — Irresistible drowsiness. — Lethargic sleep. — Wakens at night 
without being* able to sleep again. — Nightmare. 

27. Fever. — Dryness and coldness of skin, heat with biting dryness. — 
Heat in forehead with heaviness of head and vertigo. — Cold sweat with great 

^ heat through whole body.— -Sweat which seems to corrode the skin. 


Piperazinum. 

Piperazine. Piperazidine. Ethylenimine. Diethylene-diamine. 

C4HioNa. Trituration. Solution. 

OUnioal* — Glaucoma. Gout. Lead paralysis. Renal colic. 

f 

Characteristics. — Piperaz, is a synthetic product which was 
intended to replace Spermin (CaH^N), and was named Dispermine. 
It was found, however, to be a different body both in chemical and 
phy^logical properties. It occurs in well-defined, colourless, 
acicular crystals (Helbing), or in lustrous tables (J. Gordon) ; is 
deliquescent and mostly soluble in water. It readily unites with 
uric agid, forming a very soluble compound (urate of piperazine). 
When taken by the mouth it is not entirely oxydised, as part is dis- 
coverable unchanged in the urine. John Gordon experimented with 
Piperaz. and found that a i-per cent, solution in normal urine at body 



836 PIPERAZINUM—PISCIDIA ^ 

temperature dissolved to a large extent a fragment of uric acid cal'- 
cuius, and converted undissolved portions to a granular and pulpy 
condition. The amount of urea is increased in the urine of those 
taking it ; and Helbing {Modem Mal^a Medica) says it has been used 
with success in mental diseases, and in a case of lead paralysis with 
<‘very remarkable results/* J. R. Hamilton, of Hawick (JLancet, 
December 30, 1893), reports success in treating renal colic with 
Piperaz, ; and Walter, of Odessa (quoted H. W., xxv. 10), cleared up^ 
two cases of glaucoma, giving one grain daily in carbonated water, all' 
the symptoms disappearing within three weeks. [After a teaspoonful 
dose of an effervescing preparation of Piperaz>,2i patient complained that 
he was seized with a bad attack of acute gout, that was quite 
unexpected (Cooper).] 

Relations. — Compare: Phloriz., Hydrang., Urt. u. 


Piscidia. 

Piscidia erythrina. Jamaica Dog-wood. N. 0 . Leguminosae. Tinc- 
ture of root bark obtained when the plant is in flower, bfefore 
leaf. 

Clinical.— Fever. Sleep, sudden. Swreat, profuse. 

Gharaoteristics. — The pounded leaves and young ^branches of 
Piscidia etyih, and some allied species are used, like flocculus, for 
poisoning fish — hence the name Piscidia {Piscis-ccedcre), The experi- 
ment recorded in Allen is by W. Hamilton, who took a drachm of the 
tincture in water for toothache, and went off to sleep with such 
suddenness that when he awoke, twelve hours later, he was still 
holding the glass and vial from which he had taken thd dose. 

SYMPTOMS. 

8. Mouth,— When chewed, unpleasant acrimony in mouth, like that of 
Mezer. 

26. Sleep. — A sleep the most profound I ever experienced, arrested me 
so suddenly that I remained motionless the whole night with the uncorked , 
vial in one hand, and the glass out of which I had taken the dose in the 
other, until the sun was high above the horizon, a space of twelve hours, when 

I first returned to consciousness, free from every pain or ache, and without 
any of the unpleasant sensations which invariably succeed an overdose of 
Opium" 

27. Fever. — ** Violent sensation of heat generally, increasing in inteHsity ; 

the sensation of burning gradually extended to the surface, and while I was 
considering what antidote I ought to employ, a profuse diaphoresis burst out 
from every pore.'" • 



PIX LIQUIDA 


837 


Pix Liquida. 

Liquid Tar. (A product of dry distillation of various coniferous 
woods.) Tincture. 

Clinieal*— Acne. Ardor urinae. Bronchitis. Desquamation. Diarrhcea. 
Eofema. Enuresis. Eruptions. Hands, eruptions on. Phthisis. Psoriasis. 
'Vomiting, black. 

Charaoteristios. — In old-school practice Tar is known as a 
“ stimulant expectorant ” in chronic bronchitis and phthisis, a stimu- 
lant to the skin in psoriasis and scaly eczema. Buckley (quoted by 
Allen) has recorded severe constitutional effects following the local 
application of preparations of tar in skin affections. Among these 
are : High fever ; black vomit ; black stools ; dark-coloured urine ; 
acute eczema ; acne. Homoeopaths (led by Jeanes) have brought out 
the special indications for the remedy ; and chief among them is a pain 
at the third left costal cartilage, where it joins the rib. This is really 
a pain of the left bronchus (Hering). and when associated with offen- 
sive muco-purulent expectoration the indications for Pix are complete. 
CasQS of phthisis and chronic bronchitis with these characteristics 
have been cured by it. A case of chronic bronchitis in a merchant, 
55, is recorded in Horn. News (xxix. 414). The cough was < nights, 
breath short, copious expectoration, some fever and night-sweats. Ill 
three years and growing worse. Raynaud’s prescription of Wood 
Tar, a teaspoonful four times a day, after meals and at bedtime, 
cleared up ihost of the symptoms. — Pix often cures the enuresis somni 
of children (R. T. C.). 

Relations. — Compare : Tereb., Pinus syl., Kre., Eupn., Petrol. 
In chest pains, Illic. (Illic. has pain at third right costal cartilage ; 
occasionally also left), Myrica, Therid, Desquamation, Chi. sul. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2* Head. — Fulness and pain in head. 

.XI. Stomach.— Pain in stomach.— Vomiting : constant; of blackish 
fluid (from application to skin). 

12. Abdomen. — Excessive pain in bowels and loins. 

15. Stool and Anus. — Dark-coloured stools (from application). 

14. Urinary Organs.— Ardor urinae. — Dark-coloured urine (from appli- 
cation). 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Expectoration of purulent matter, offensive 
in odour and taste, and accompanied by pain referred to third 1. costal carti- 
lag€^*(really in 1. bronchus); pain may or may not go through to back. — 
(Third stage of phthisis.)— Pain at third 1. cost^ cartilage where it joins the 
rib ; rales ; muco-purulent expectoratio*n,— Suppuration of 1. lung with pain 
at thifd rib.-*-Cough chronic, < night ; expectoration purulent ; fever at 
night. 

24. Generalities.— Great exhaustion. 

25. Skin.<-«Acute eczema.— Acne.— Eruptions, esp. on backs of hands, 



838 PIX LIQUIDA— PLANTAGO ' 

itching intolerably at night and bleeding when scratched.— Skin cracked, 
bleeding when scratched, with sleeplessness. — ^Violent itching. — ^Desqua- 
mation. 

27. Fever. — Occasionally high fevet^ (from application). 


Plantago. 

Plantago major. Plantain. Ribwort. N. O. Plantaginaceae. Tinc- 
ture of whole fresh plant. Tincture of the root. 

Clinical. — Ague. Breast, inflammation of. Burns. Ciliary neuralgia. Diabetes. 
Diarrhoea. Dysentery. Earache. Ear^ inflammatton of. Emissions. Enuresis. 
Erysipelas. Erythema. Haemorrhoids. Impotence. Neuralgias; of herpes. 
Polyuria. Rhus poisoning. Snake-bites. Spleen, pains in. Tobacco habit. 
Toothache. Urination, delayed. Worms. Wounds. 

Characteristics. — Hale sums up the ancient and modern history 
of Plantago maj. the weed which furnishes food for our cage-birds. 
{Plant, m. must not to be confounded with Mwsa, sometimes called 
“ Plantain, which belongs to a different class, viz., the Endogehs.) 
Plantago has had a reputation in medicine from remote antiquity, a 
reputation which homoeopathy has revived. It was used in inter- 
mittent fever in remotest times. In a.d. 1558 the Herbal of Dodoens 
commends the juice of leaves or roots for “ toothache and bleeding of 
gums.’’ John Parkinson in his Theatre of Plants (a.d. 1640) says 
“ the root taken fresh out of the ground, washed and ge^ntly scraped 
with a knife, then put into the earj cures the toothache like a charm.” 
In Switzerland the leaf fibres are frayed out and put into the ear for 
the same purpose, and if they relieve the pain they “ turn black ” (says 
Reutlinger) and have to be removed, if there is no relief they remain 
green. In domestic practice, says Hale, it is constantly resorted to as 
an application in all affections of the skin with irritation, pain, and 
heat, the bruised leaves being applied to the part. Hale enumerates 
the following as having been relieved by it : Erysipelas, R/tws-poison- 
ing, erythema, burns, scalds, inflammation of the glands (notably the 
breasts), bruises, incised wounds, bites of animals, chilblains, frost- 
bite. A case is related (H. R., xi. 241) of a man who allowed himself 
to be bitten by rattlesnakes and cured himself by drinking the juice 
of the plant and applying bruised leaves to the bites, changing them 
frequently. The tincture has been extensively proved by F. Hum- 
phreys (who wrote a monograph upon it). Heath, and others, and the 
homoeopathicity of its cures was clearly brought out. The neuralgic 
pains of teeth, ears, and face were especially pronounced. Some«iew 
symptoms were brought to light. The very copious discharge of urine 
along with the thirst suggest diabetes ; and the laxity of sphincters has 
led to the cure of a number of cases of enuresis. Foul breath, sinking 
and weight in stomach, flatulence, diarrhoea, dysentery, and haemor- 
rhoids, all appeared in the proving. Plant, is one of the most useful 
of local remedies in homoeopathy, and one of its local uses is as an 



PLANTAGO 


839 


application to inflamed and painful piles. In all neuralgic conditions 
where the suffering part can be reached Plant. ^ may be painted on 
without any fear of injury, and often with the most signal relief of 
suffering. In common with oihers, I have used it with success in 
numberless cases of toothache and earache ; but I have also mven 
relief in the painful neuralgia of shingles and in pleurodynia. F. P. 
Stiles {Minn. H. Mag.^ v. 225) relates three brilliant cases : (i) Mrs. S., 
39, for ten days had terrible neuralgic pain in right side of face, 
•shooting into temporal, superior, maxillary, and orbital regions. 
Plant. 0 applied locally to gums, temple, and cheek, removed the 
pain in a few minutes. Some days later a slight return was promptly 
relieved in the same way. (2) Mr. R. had neuralgia in left superior 
maxillai*;^ and lower orbital region of long standing. Promptly 
relieved in the same way. (3) Mrs. N., neuralgia of right upper jaw, 
pain unbearable, radiating to ear, temple, and cheek. A tooth had 
been extracted without relief. Plant. ^ removed all the pain. 

Toothache with earache,*’ toothache with salivation,” are leading 
indications. Plant, has a relation to tobacco. It produces disgust for 
it in chewers ; and it cures neuralgia resulting from tobacco. The 
pains are tearing, boring, bruised. There is great surface sensitive- 
ness. Pains come suddenly and are apt to be erratic. Unendurable 
paitfs. There is darting up and down the urethra. Breath and 
flatulence are offensive. Some characteristics are : Loud noises going 
through one. Sudden discharge of yellowish (or saffron-coloured) 
water from nose. The left side was most affected. The symptoms 
are < at night. > By eating (colic). < By contact ; mental exer- 
tion ; by i^otion ; heat and cold ; cold air ; sharp wind ; heat of 
room. 

Relations. — Antidote to : Apis, Rhus, Tabac. Antidoted by : Merc, 
(toothache). Compare: In neuralgias, Cham., Merc., Spig., Kalm., 
Coloc. Unendurable pains, Aco., Cham., Hep. Wounds and bruises, 
fetid breatb and flatus, Arn. Wounds, Calend. Punctured wounds. 
Led*., Hyper. Haemorrhoids, external and internal use. Ham. 
Enuresis, Bell,, Caust. (Bell, has irregular action of sphincter ; Plant, 
and Caust. relaxation). Earache with toothache ; intolerance of warm 
room. Puls. 

Causation. — Bruises. Burns. Cuts, Punctured wounds. Snake- 
bites. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Mind inactive, with dull, muddled deling in head. — Despon- 
dency, confusion of thought. — Irritable, morose ; impatient, restless mood, 
with dull, stupid feeling in brain. — Great mental prostration, < by mental 
exg:tion, which ss rapid breathing and anxiety. 

3. Head. — ^Twinges of pain in different parts of head, now through r. 
temple, extending backward ; then through occiput from ear to ear ; then in 
othei^parts of head more or less severe. — Severe, lightning-like stitches over 
I. eye, extending to r. 12.30 to 5.45 p.m., disappearing suddenly, involving 
whole forehead, and accompanied at the height with nausea at pit of stomach ; 
> hard pressure with cold hand, < warmth. — Severe pain in 1 . side of head, 



PLANTAGO 


840 

from forehead extending deep into brain, coming on in paroxysms. — Inter- 
mittent pulsative pain in vertex and in small spot beneath scalp.— Headache 
with toothache. — Dull headache. — Oppression deep in head, and sense of 
something lying in the head, through fro^ one ear to the other. — Itching of 
scalp. 

3. Eyes.— Ciliary neuralgia from decayed teeth ; dull, heavy ache in 1. 
eye, with exquisite tenderness of ball ; 1. upper incisor decayed. — Eyes red ; 
dim ; inflamed ; sore. — Aching deep in orbit. — Lids sore, swollen. 

4. Ears. — Pain in r. ear with pains in teeth and face; pains sharp,* 
twinging, running.— Earache : neuralgic ; with toothache ; darting, twinging, 
stabbing pains in lower maxillary branch of trifacial. — Pains often centre in 
ear (1.). — Hearing : more acute ; least noise goes through one ; ringing in 
cars. 

5. Nose. — Frequent sneezing, with sudden attacks of profuse, watery, 
bland coryza. — Sudden discharge of yellowish (or saffron-coloured) water 
from (r.) nostril. — Red papules round nose. — Sensation at bridge as if nasal 
bones being pressed together. 

6. Face. — Neuralgia 1. side of face, pains shooting and tearing, extend- 
ing from jaw to ear. — ^Violent bruised, aching pain, r. face. — Drawing in r. 
malar bone. — Eruption on forehead. — Small, red, rough, scaly erythema- 
tous patches size of pea on (esp. 1.) face. — L. cheek swollen. — Lips Jivid, 
dark, sickly, rough. — Water bladder on upper lip. — Dry, scaly eruption on 
lower lip. 

7. Teeth. — Teeth (1.) feel elongated, sore ; pain unbearably severe, 
boring digging in sound teeth ; < from contact and extremes of heat and 
cold. — ^Aching in decayed teeth, or shooting up 1. side of face*; face red. — 
Rapid decay. — Sharp stabbing along upper maxillary nerve, < "by contact. — 
Violent pain in 1. upper molars ; sound teeth ; excessive boring, digging pain, 
profuse flow of saliva ; < by walking in cold air and by contact, by much 
heat ; partial > lying down in a moderately cool room ; pain unendurable 
(> by Merc. 30), — ^Teeth sensitive, sore. — Grinds teeth at night.—^Gums bleed 
easily. — Gumboil. 

8. * Mouth. — Tongue coated white, with dirty, putrid, clammy taste. — 
Food tasteless. — Breath putrid. — Aphthae in children. 

9. Throat. — Dry, parched throat. — Scraping in throat. — Profuse secre- 
tion of (very tenacious) mucus ; with much hawking. — Soreness and swelling 
of submaxiUary glands on both sides. 

10. Appetite. — ^Appetite poor. — Thirst. — Causes disgust for tobacco in 
chewers. 

11. Stomach. — Eructations ; frequent, empty ; tasting like sulphur or 
carbonic acid gas. — Nausea with drowsiness or faint, tremulous feeling. — 
Sinking sensation. — Heaviness of stomach as from a stone ; even after a 
light meal. — Heat in praecordia with fulness in abdomen while walking in 
fresh air, — Coolish, painful sensation, as from over-distension after hSrty 
meal. 

12. Abdomen. — Gone sensation. — Severe pains in 1. (and r.) hypochon- 
drium.— Distension with passage of fetid flatus.— Violent griping, esp. upper 
abdomen.— Colic : > by eating ; flatulent.— Pain in abdominal muscles ; in 
1. and r. ilia. 



PLANTAGO 


841 


13. Stool and Anus.— Stool: brown, fermented, frothy; watery, 
brown ; watery ; papescent ; excoriating. — Diarrhoea : loose, frequent stools 
with flatulence ; < 8 to 10 a.m. — Before stool : colic, frequent discharge of 
oflensive flatus, — During stool ; griping, tenesmus, partial prolapse, weakness, 
faintness, — (Chronic diarrhoea. — Cholera infantum. — Dysentery.) — Painful 
blood piles (locally). — Angry, inflamed piles. — Worms. 

14. ■ Urinary Organs.—Tenderness over region of kidneys on pressure. 
— Frequent passage of large quantities of pale urine ; < night ; stools grey ; 
frritable ; puffy under eyes ; eats heartily ; sleeps soundly. — Copious noc- 
turnal enuresis from laxity of sphincter. — Irritable bladder with frequent 
micturition. — Delayed, dribbling urine. — Urethra : tingling with unpleasant 
itching in meatus ; sudden darting stinging running up ; sharp cutting in 
from within out. — Urine : large quantities, clear, frequent ; very dark red, of 
strong odour ; deep orange colour ; white sediment. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Sexual debility. — Unconscious emission in 
sleep. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Erysipelas of breasts. — Mastitis. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness. — Cough in cold air. — Panting 
breathing ; inclined to sigh. 

18. Chest. — Orgasm.— Oppression ; < reading or talking. — Sharp 

stitches. — Muscular drawing. 

19. Heart. — Heat in praecordia when walking in open air. — Violent 
palpitation ; on ascending stairs. — Pulse strong, full, intermittent. 

20. Neck and Back. — Neck stiff and sore. — Stiffness of sterno-cleido 
mastoid « r.), < moving head to side affected, > moving it to opposite side. 
— Pulsative pdin between scapulae. — Pain in sacrum. 

22 . UppSr Limbs. — Stinging, dull pains here and there. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Hard, white, flattened, isolated papules on inside 
of thighs, some having red points in centre. — Great pain and stiffness in 1. leg 

^ and knee, < stooping. 

25. Skin. — Violent itching, < night. — Pricking, stinging pains. — Tensive 
sensaiion. — Burning after rubbing where scratched. — Redness, swelling, and 
vesicles on hands and face, — Papules which exude yellowish humour and form 
a crust. — Erythema. — Burns. — Rhus poisoning (local use). — Inflammatory 
affections of skin and involvement of cellular tissue. 

'26. Sleep. — Excessive and continued yawning. — Insomnia from ab- 
dominal trouble. — Grinding teeth during sleep. — Sleep restless ; disturbed by 
« dreams. 

27, Fever. — Chilliness with sensation of heat in chest, with erratic pains 
in limbs, chest, head ; from i to 3 p.m. with dispos^on to stretch and chilli- 
ness on moving about ; cold hands in a warm room. — Chill : without thirst ; 
with gooseflesh, 2 p.m., running over body, < moving about ; fingers cold, 
coldness of body with shivering ; head feels irritable ; feet and hands cold 
even in warm room.— Heat, with thirst ; great excitability, mental agony, 
restlessness ; room seems hot and close ; oppression of chest, rapid respira- 
tion ; jpreathing difficult as if there was no air in room ; burning heat of head, 
face, hands, feet ; head hot, painful, dull, stupid ; hands hot, clammy. — 
Sweat : cold over lumbar and sacral region ; heat of room unbearable, pro- 
ducing perspiration. 



842 


PLATINUM 


Platanus. 

f 

Platanus acerifolia the tree commonly grown in and about London 
as P, occidentalis.*^ — Treas, of BoL). N. 0. Platanaceae (of the 
Urtical alliance). Tincture of young shoots. 

Clinical. — Cataract. Ichthyosis. ^ 

Charaoteristios. — Burnett has recorded (Dw. of Skin) a case of 
ichthyosis in an aged lady, in which Platanus caused considerable 
improvement in the condition of the skin. Another case {Delicate 
Children) was that of a girl, 5 ^^, ‘‘of the coal-black variety of the 
strumous, her forehead low and projecting,’^ who was blind from 
double cataract due to the shock of a fall in the first instance, the 
lenses having gradually silted up. In this case Platanus 0 was given 
(five drops night and morning) for a number of months, with very 
evident improvement in the nutrition of the child’s lenses.” [Burnett 
names the remedy Plat occ, ; but his tincture was made from the 
London tree, which is Plat, acer. It sheds its bark annually, which 
was the signature of its skin action.] 


Platinum. 

Platinum. ' An Element. (Also called Platina.) Pt. (A.W. I 94 ‘ 3 -) 

Trituration. 

Clinical. — AmenorrhcEa. Chlorosis. Constipation. Convulsions. Delusiotts, 
Dentition. Depression of spirits. Dysmenia. Erotomama. Fear. Gout. Haemor- 
rhage. Haemorrhoids, Hysteria, Lead poisoning. Masturbation.^, Melancholia. 
Menorrhagia. Menses, suppressed. Mind^ affections of. Neuralgia. Neurasthenia. 
Numbness. Nymphomania. Ovanes^ affections of Pruritus vulvas. Rheumatism. 
Sexual perversion. Spasms. Tapeworm. Uterus, induration of. Vaginismus. 
Yawning, spasmodic. 

Characteristics. — The original name of Platinum was “ Platina,” 
being a Spanish word meaning “ like silver ” {Plata being Spanish for 
silver). The metal was introduced into Europe from South America 
in the middle of the eighteenth century. It is always found in asso- * 
ciation with other metals, chiefly Rhodium, Osmium, Iridium, Palla- 
dium. Hahnemann was the first to think of it as a medicine, and his 
proving in the Chronic Diseases is the basis of our knowledge of its 
action. One characteristic symptom, either when found alone or in 
association with other conditions, has led to many cures with PlaL — 
lost sense of proportion in both ocular and mental vision. Objects 
look small or the patient thinks them small. This becomes pride aild 
hauteur in the mental sphere ; the patient (generally a woman! looks 
down on everything and everybody. This is a keynote of PlaU 
Another is the occurrence of cramps, cramping pains and spasms, 
developing into convulsions. The cramping pains ss: numbness and 



PLATINUM 


843 


tin^Ung in the parts affected. Pains as if nipped, squeezed in a vice, 
and these pains increase gradually to an acme and then as gradually 
decline. In the rectum this becomes tenesmus ; in vagina, vaginismus. 
Another general keynote is the' alternation of mental and physical 
symptoms : as physical symptoms disappear mental symptoms appear, 
and vice versd, Wash cured a case of insanity of some duration with 
PlaUj being led to the remedy by an alternation of the mental symp- 
toms with a pain the whole length of the spine. This alternating 
feature is also seen between one mental state and another : Changing 
moods ; sad and gay alternately ; laughs and cries by turns. There 
is also a perverse state : Laughs immoderately, but in the wrong 
place ; laughs at serious things. The mental disorder at times takes 
a homicidal form. Jahr cured with Plat, a woman who had an 
inspiration to kill her child, and Jules Gaudy recorded (Jour, Beige 
(TH.f quoted Amer. H., xxii. 314) the case of a woman who was tor- 
mented with an almost irresistible impulse to kill her husband, whom 
she loved passionately, and with whom she was perfectly happy. 
The sight of a knife had an irresistible fascination for her, and she 
was often obliged to leave the table to free herself from the impulse. 
A few months before, she had lost a child a short time after confine- 
ment, which had been followed by profuse and desperately persistent 
haemorrhage. Recovering from this she became restless, irritable, 
and her whole existence was ruled by this terrible impulse. Plat, 6x 
and 30X relieved and finally cured her. Kent (Med. Adv.y xxv. 184) 
records the case of a middle-aged lady, mother of several grown-up 
daughters, who complained of a peculiar mental symptom : A fear, in 
the absence»of her husband, that he would never return, that he 
would die, or be run over. She wept all the time he was away. 
Kent discovered that she had been treated for uterine displacement, 
and was then wearing a pessary. This was removed. Menstrual 
flow was copious, black, clotted. The external genitals were so 
sensitive th^t the usual napkin was intolerable. Plat, cured the whole 
case,* including the displacement. Almost every symptom in this* case 
was a characteristic. The sensitiveness of the external genitals is 
often so great as to make coition impossible. Digital examining of 
such a patient causes great pain. The action of Plat, to a large extent 
centres in and radiates from the sexual organs, male and female. It 
corresponds to masturbation before puberty, and also to the effects of 
masturbation. It was one of Gallavardin^s remedies for the impulse 
to pederasty and sodomy. Tendency to uncover completely in sleep 
is a leading note of it. Excessive desire, ^specially in virgins. 
Premature and excessive development of sexual instinct and organs. 
Nymphomania < in puerperal state. During menses uterine 
spasms, convulsions. Convulsions of puerperal state. Catalepsy 
during menstruation. Spasms alternate between convulsive actions 
and opisthotonos ; full consciousness. Spasms alternate with 
dyspnoea. Excessive itching in uterus ; pruritus vulvas. Plat, has 
some* characteristic symptoms in relation to the bowels. Its 
aramping tendency makes it an antidote to lead poisoning ; and 
it has constipation scarcely less marked than that of P6., though 
differing from it. The stools of Plat, are tenacious and stic^, 



PLATINUM 


844 

adhere to the rectum and anus like putty ; or they may be hard 
as if burnt ; the constipation comes on whilst travelling ; in emi- 
grants ; during pregnancy. Peculiar Sensations and Symptoms are : 
As if her senses would vanish. As if parts of malar bones were 
between screws. As if everything about her were very small. As if 
she were constantly growing longer and longer. As if she did not 
belong to her own family. Vertigo as if torn and pulled with threads. 
Forehead as if constricted ; screwed on ; as if a board pressed against 
it. As if temples too tightly bound. Scalp as if contracted ; as if a 
heavy weight on it. As if head were enlarged. As if throat con- 
stricted ; palate elongated ; tongue scalded. As if abdomen, chest, 
nape, limbs, thigh, great toe, tightly wrapped or constricted. Back 
and small of back as if broken. Crawling, tingling, numb sensations. 
Spasmodic yawning. Pains go from right to left. The right side is 
somewhat more pronouncedly affected than the left. Severe stitches 
in right ovary. The symptoms are periodic and paroxysmal, as well 
as alternating. Plat, is suited to women with dark hair ; thin, san- 
guine, bilious ; with too frequent and too profuse menses ; sexual 
organs exceedingly sensitive. Hysterical and haemorrhoidal patients. 
The symptoms are : < By touch and pressure. < Fasting. < During 
menses. < Rest ; sitting ; standing ; bending backward. > By 
motion. Walking and going upstairs < pressure in genitals ; > 
hysteric rheumatism. Walking against wind =s sudden arrest of 
breathing. < Evening and night. Headache commences on 
waking. < In warm room ; > in open air (but open air ss: fluent 
coryza and shaking chill on going from room ; heat > cramp 
pain in legs and irritability and chilliness. Obliged to stretch, 
which >. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Puls., Nit. sp. d. (Teste, who classes 
Plat, with Thuj., Brom., and Castor, says Colch. is the best antidote 
to all four). Antidote to : Lead. Complementary : Pallad. (both affect 
right ovary, but Pallad. has > from pressure). Compatible ; Bell., 
Ign., Lyc., Puls., Rhus, Sep., Ver. Compare: Pride, Pall. (Plat, 
egotistical, despises others ; Pall, easily wounded, attaches importance 
to others), Lyc. (imperious). Spasms and emaciation from ante- 
puberty masturbation, Staph. Uterine affections, nymphomania, 
Aur., Sep. (the nymphomania of Plat, is more intense ; Plat, is 
intermediate between Aur. and Sep. in weariness of life ; the 
uterine cramps of Plat, are followed by numbness ; those of Sep. 
are a clutching as if suddenly seized then suddenly relaxed). Hys- 
teria, indurated ulcers, Tarent. Sees ghosts and demons, Hyo., K. bro. 
Shamelessness, uncovers, Pho., Hyo. (Hyo. sees things larger ; Plat, 
smsdler). Thinks death near and fears it, Aco., Ars. Dark, stringy 
haemorrhage, Cham., Croc. (Croc, has sensation of something dive). 
Pains come and go gradually, Stan., Arg. n. (Bell, and Lyc., sudde&ly). 
Sensitive to coitus, Sep., Bell, (dry vagina). Fer., Nat. m., Apis (with 
stinging in ovary), Thuj., Kre. (followed by bloody flow), MureXi^Orig. 
Constipation when travelling (Lyc. when from home ; Bry. when 
at sea). Weak and exhausted feeling for two hours after stool, Sep. 
Sticky stools like soft clay. Aim. Hysteria, pressure at root of nose, 
Ign. Excessive sexual aevelopment, especially in virgins, K. pbo. 



PLATINUM 


845 


Masturbation in girls, Orig., Gratid. Dark-haired women, Sep. 

Laughs immoderately at serious things, Anac., Nat. m., Lyc., Pho. 

Caasatlon. — Fright. Vexation. Bereavement. Fit of passion. 
Sexual excess. Masturbation. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.— Sadness, esp. in evening, with strong inclination to weep 
dften (every second day) alternating with excessive gaiety and buffoonery.— 
Involuntary inclination to whistle and sing. — Involuntary weeping. — Loud 
cries for help. — Thinks she stands alone in the world. — Anxietas praecordium 
to an excessive degree, with great fear of death, which is believed to be very 
near, accompanied by trembling, palpitation of heart, and obstructed respira- 
tion. — Sensation of dread and horror. — Fear, with trembling of hands and 
feet and confusion of ideas, as if all persons approaching were demons. — 
Hysterical humour, with great mental depression, nervous weakness, and 
over-excitement of vascular system. — Mental symptoms in general : amative- 
ness ; state of madness. — Timorous disposition. — Great irritability, with pro- 
longed ill-humour, after a fit of passion. — ^Apathetic indifference and absence 
of mind.— Pride and self-conceit, with contempt for others, even for those 
who aje usually most beloved and respected ; < indoors, > in open air and 
sunshine. — Impulse to kill her own child ; her husband ; (on seeing a knife). 
—Distraction and forgetfulness.- Loss of consciousness.— Incoherency of 
speech. — Delusion of the senses ; feeling as of being too large, and, on the 
contrary, all other things and persons seem to be too small and too low. — 
Delirium, with* fear of men, often changing, with over-estimation of oneself. 
— Mania ; witlfgreat pride ; with fault-finding ; with unchaste talk ; trembling 
and clonic spasms, caused by fright or from anger. 

2. Head. — Tensive confusion in forehead, as if head were compressed 
in a vice. — Pressing headache from without to within the forehead and 
temples, gradually increasing and decreasing, < in evening from stooping, 
while, at rest, in the room ; > from exercise and in open air. — Transient 
attacks of vertigo in evening with loss of consciousness, — ^Vertigo on sitting 
down or ascending stairs. — Headache which increases gradually, or by fits, 
until it becomes very violent, and which diminishes progressively in same 
manner. — Attack of headache, with nausea and vomiting. — Sensation of 
numbness in head, and externally at vertex, preceded by a sensation of con- 

• traction of brain and of scalp ; < in evening and while sitting, > from 
motion and in open air. — Pain in sides of head, as if caused by a plug. — Con- 
strictive headache, as if a tape were tightly drawn awund it, with sensation 
of numbness in brain, flushes of heat and ill-humour, < from stooping and 
exercise. — Formication in one temple, extending to lower jaw, with sensation 
of coldness on that spot ; < in evening and when at rest, > from rubbing.— 
Pressive, cramp-like, compressive pains in the forehead and temples, esp, in 
root of nose, greatly < by movement and by stooping, sometimes with heat 
and redness of face, inquietude, and weeping.— Tingling in temples, as if 
caasea by insects.— Buzzing and noise in head, like that of a mill. 

3. Eyes. — Pain in eyes after fatiguing the sight by looking attentively 
at an object* — Tension in sockets, with gnawing pain, as from excoriation in 



PLATINUM 


846 

margins. — Cramp-like pain in edges of orbits. — Compressive tension in eye* 
balls.— Aching in eyes with sleep.— Creeping tingling in canthi.— Sensation of 
heat or of coldness and smarting in eyes. — Trembling or spasmodic quivering 
of eyelids. — Eyes convulsed. — Objects appear smaller than they really are.— 
Confused sight, as if directed through a veil, often with painless twitchings 
round the eye. — Quivering and sparkling before sight. 

4. Ears. — Otalgia with cramp-like pain. — Shocks in ears. — (Sticking 
jerking in r. outer ear with) sensation of numbness and of coldness in ear^ 
extending to cheeks and lips. — Gnawing tingling in ears. — Roaring, whizzing, 
and ringing in ears. — Dull thundering and rumbling in ears. 

5. Nose. — Cramp-like pain, with sensation of numbness in nose and at 
root of nose. — Ineffectual want to sneeze and tingling in nose. — Dry coryza, 
often semi-lateral. — ^Corrosive sensation on nose, as of something acrid. 

6. Face. — Face pale, wan, and sunken. — Burning heat and glowing red- 
ness in face, with ardent thirst and dryness of mouth, esp. in evening. — Distor- 
tion of muscles of face. — Sensation of coldness, with tingling and sensation of 
numbness throughout (r.) side of face. — Cramp and tensive pressure in 
zygomatic processes. — Benumbing, dull pressure in malar bone. — Pulsative 
digging in jaws, esp. in evening and during repose, with involuntary weeping. 
— Lockjaw. — Gnawing, with pain as from excoriation in lips and chin, which 
compel scratching. — Smarting and lancinating vesicles on lips,— Lips dry and 
cracked. — Plexus venarum, of a reddish blue colour, on chin. — Sensation of 
torpor or coldness round mouth and chin. — Cramp in jaw. 

7. Teeth. — Odontalgia with pulsative and digging pain. — Cramp-like 
drawing, which recurs by fits, in teeth. — Numb pain in 1 . lower teeth. — 
Fissures in gums. 

8. Mouth. — Sensation of coldness, esp. in mouth. — Crawling sensation 
on tongue. — Burning pain under tongue. — Sensation in tongue as if it had 
been burnt or scalded. 

9. Throat. — Sensation as if throat were raw during (empty) deglutition 
and at other times. — Cramp-like drawing in throat, like a constfiction. — Sen- 
sation as if palate or uvula were elongated, — Scraping and accumulation of 
phlegm in throat. — Hawking up of phlegm. 

10. Appetite. — Mucous, clammy taste. — Sweetish taste on tip of tongue. 
— ^Adipsia. — Loss of appetite after the first mouthful. — Complete loss of appe- 
tite. — Repugnance to food, arising from sadness, — Dislike to food. — Bulimy. 
— Voracious rapidity in eating, with a disposition to find fault with every- 
thing (to detest everything around himself). — After a meal, risings, pressure 
on stomach ; and colic. 

XI. Stomach. — Ineffectual effort to eructate. — Empty, noisy eructations. 
—Serum of a disagreeable sweetish bitterness ascends throat, and puts 
patient in danger of choking. — Continued nausea, with lassitude, trembling, 
and anxiety.— Aching (pressure) in stomach, esp. after a meal.— Sensatipp of 
constriction in pit of stomach, extending into abdomen. — Fermentations in 
epigastric region. — Flatulent soreness towards hypogastrium. — Contractive 
pain in scrobiculus, as if it were squeezed too tightly. — Pressure or shocks, or 
else throbbing, shootings, and pinchings in scrobiculus. — Burning sensation 
in scrobiculus, sometimes extending from throat into abdomen. 

12. Abdomen* — Pains in abdomen, with dull and jerking pressure,— 



PLATINUM 


847 


Inflation of abdomen, with difficult and interrupted expulsion of flatus. — 
Pressing and bearing down in abdomen extending into pelvis. — L ead colic. 
— Constriction in abdomen. — Pinchings in umbilical region. — Shootings in the 
side of abdomen and in umbilical region. — Gnawing in abdomen. — Drawing 
in groins, commencing from sacrum. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation : after lead poisoning or while 
travelling ; sometimes very obstinate. — ^The stool is discharged with difficulty, 
seeming to stick to anus and rectum like putty. — Frequent want, with scanty 
evacuation, which is voided in pieces, and with great efforts. — Evacuations of 
consistence of pap. — Stool hard, as if burnt. — Tenia and ascarides are dis- 
charged from rectum during evacuation and at other limes. — After evacuation 
general shuddering or sensation of weakness in abdomen. — Frequent itching, 
tingling, and tenesmus in anus, esp. in the evening (before sleep). — ^Violent 
and dull lancinations in rectum. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Red urine with a white cloud, or else which 
becomes turbid, and deposits a red sediment. — Slow but frequent emission of 
urine. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Burning pain and gnawing in scrotum. — 
Unnatural increase of sexual desire, with frequent erections, esp. at night 
(with amorous dreams). — ^Voluptuous crawling in genital organs and abdomen, 
with anxious oppression and palpitation, then painless pressure downwards in 
genitals with sticking in sinciput and exhaustion. — Flow of prostatic fluid. — 
Coition of too short duration, with but little enjoyment. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Sensation of bearing down towards 
genital organs, with aching in abdomen. — Unnatural increase of sexual 
desire, with painful sensibility and voluptuous tingling from' genitals up 
into abdomen.— Nymphomania, which may occur even during the lying-in 
period. — Induration of uterus. — Sanguineous congestion in uterus. — Miscar- 
riage. — Metrorrhagia (with great excitability of the sexual system) of thick, 

, deep-cdloured blood, with drawings in groins. — Catamenia too early and too 
profuse (blodti dark and coagulated), sometimes with headache, restlessness, 
and tears. — Menstruation, when the discharge is very abundant, thick and 
black like tar, and is very exhausting ; spasms and screaming at every men- 
strual period. — Catamenia too long continued. — Before catamenia, cuttings 
and pains like those of labour in hypogastrium. — Cramps at commencement 
of catamenia. — Painful sensitiveness and constant pressure in mons veneris 
and genital organs, with internal chill and external coldness, except face.- 
* Severe stitches in r. ovarian region. — During catamenia, pressure as of a 
general bearing down towards genital organs, which are very sensitive. — 
Leucorrhoea, like white of eggs, flowing chiefly afteiy urinating, and on rising 
from a seat. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Aphonia. — Short, nervous, dry cough, with 
palpitation and dyspnoea. — Short, difficult, and anxious respiration. 

ifl. Chest. — Shortness of breath, with constrictive oppression of chest. — 
Inclination to draw a long breath, prevented by a sensation of weakness in 
chest.«i-Anxious oppression of chest, with sensation of heat, which ascends 
from epigastrium. — Pain in chest, as if a weight were pressing upon it, with 
want to take a full inspiration, which is hindered by a sensation of weakness. 
—Tension, pressure, and shootings in sides of chest, which do not permit 



PLATINUM 


848 

lying down on either side.— Aching and dull blows in chest,— Spasmodic 
pressure in one side of chest — Spasmodic pain in chest, commencing 
slightly, increasing to a certain intensity, and gradually diminishing in same 
way, — Dull lancinations in sides of chest, during^an inspiration, 

19. Heart.— Burning and sticking low down by heart,— A dull pressure 
in region of apex of heart.— Anxious palpitation of heart, 

20. Neck and Back. — Rigidity of nape of neck. — Weakness and sensa- 
tion of tensive numbness in nape of neck (the head sinks forward), — ^Contusive 
pain in loins and in back, esp. when pressing upon them, or else when bend- 
ing backwards. — Pains in back and small of back as if broken, after a walk < 
bending backwards. — Spasmodic pain in loins. — Sensation of numbness in 
cocc)^, as after a blow. 

21. Limbs.— Cramp-likc jerking and drawing pains in limbs and joints. 
— ^Tension in limbs (esp. thighs) as if bound too tightly with ligatures. — 
Attack of spasmodic rigidity in limbs, without loss of consciousness, but with 
clenching of jaws, loss of speech, eyes convulsed, and involuntary movements 
of the commissures of lips and eyelids. — ^Tingling restlessness, sensation of 
weakness and trembling in limbs, esp. during repose and in open air, 

22. Upper Limbs. — Heaviness and lassitude of arms, with paralytic 
pulling. — Paralysed sensation in 1. arm; in both arms. — Aching and spas- 
modic pain in forearms, hands, and fingers, esp. w^hen grasping an3dhing 
firmly. — Itching, gnawing, pricking, and burning sensation in arms, hands, 
and fingers, — Sensation of stiffness in forearms. — Painful throbbing in fingers, 
— Distortion of fingers. — Numbness of fingers. — Trembling of r. thumb, with 
numbness. — Numbness of little finger. — Ulcers on fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Spasmodic pain and tension in thighs, feet, and 
toes. — ^Weakness of thighs and knees, as if they were broken.— Pain as from 
a blow in 1. knee. — Shocks and blows in legs. — Lassitude of legs. — Restless- 
ness and trembling in legs, with a sensation of numbness and rigidity. — 
Lassitude and numbness in feet when seated. — Coldness of feet. — Gnawing, 
excoriation, and smarting in ankle-bones, greatly < by least todch, — Painful 
throbbing in toes. — Swelling on ball of toe, with tearing and nocturnal 
pulsations. — Ulcers on toes. — Pain in great toe as if too tightly envelpped. 

24.. Generalities. — Dark-haired females. — Face changing colour fre- 
quently. — Rising in throat. — Tapeworm, other symptoms agreeing. — Contrac- 
tion of inner parts.— Catalepsy ; epilepsy with rigor ; tonic spasms. — ^Very great 
paleness of skin. — Spasmodic yawning. — Pains like labour pains, — Sensation 
as of a hoop around parts, — Violent shocks as if from pain.— Sensation of 
prickling in the outer parts, — Sensation of coldness in outer parts. — Compres- 
sive, cramp-like, constrictive, or pressivc pains, as if caused by a plug, or by 
dull blows. — Cramp-like, jerking, and drawing pains in limbs and joints. — 
Tension in limbs, as if bound too tightly with ligatures. — Pains, as from a 
contusion, a blow, or a bruise, esp. when pressing on part affected. — P^ins, 
slight at commencement, increase gradually, often at regular intervals, and 
diminish in same manner. — Sensation of torpor and paralytic rigidity in 
various parts, often with trembling and palpitation of heart. — ^Attack ofc spas- 
modic rigidity in limbs, without loss of consciousness, but with clenching oi 
jaws, loss of speech, eyes convulsed, and involuntary movements of commis- 
sures of lips and eyelids. — The spasmodic attacks manifest themselves chii^y 



PLA'rtNUM— PLATINUM MURIATICUM 849 

at daybreak.- Affections caused by fright, by vexation, or by a fit of passion. 
—Moral and physical affections, appearing alternately. — Excessive weakness 
(paralytic weakness in limbs). — Dull, pushing, or inward pressing pains, as 
from dull blows. — Tingling restlessness, sensation of weakness and trembling 
in limbs, esp. during repose and in open air. — Majority of symptoms < by 
repose, in the evening ; from anger ; more in females than males ; after lying 
down and rising again ; when sitting ; after rising ; and > by movement. — 
The affections which are > in open air are generally < towards evening and 
In a room. 

25. Skin. — ^'fingling gnawing, with pain as of excoriation, and itching or 
burning, pricking, and shooting pain on various parts of skin, which provokes 
scratching. — Ulcers (on fingers and toes). 

26. Sleep. — Convulsive and spasmodic yawning, esp. in afternoon. — 
Great disposition to sleep in evening. — Prolonged sleep in morning. — 
Anxious dreams of wars and bloodshed. — Lascivious dreams. — ^Waking at 
night, esp. after midnight (with frightful dreams, want of consciousness), or 
with anxious, sad, and distressing thoughts. — Bewilderment at night on 
waking. — At night patient lies on back, with arms above head, legs drawn up, 
with strong inclination to uncover them. 

27. Fever. — Pulse small, feeble, frequently tremulous. — Constant shivering 
and shuddering over whole body, esp. in open air. — Shaking chill when going 
from the room into the open, even warm air. — Chilliness predominates, with 
low spirits, which ceases during heat. — Heat with sensation of burning in face, 
without any visible change in colour of face (she thought she was very red, 
but colour the same as usual). — Flushes of heat, interrupted by chilliness. — 
Gradually ineSreasing, and in the same manner gradually decreasing heat. — 
Perspiration only during sleep, ceasing as soon as one wakens. 


. Platinum Muriaticum. 

• Chloride of Platinum. PtCl^. Solution. 

Clinioal* — Caries. Chancre. Condyloma. Laryngismus. Mercury, abuse of, 
CEsophagus, stricture of. Stomach, cancer of. 

Charaoteristios. — Plat, nmr, was experimented with by Hofer, of 
Pau, who applied locally a saturated solution and administered solu- 
• tions internally. Fever, headache, constricting sensations and fibrillary 
twitchings were induced by internal doses ; the local application pro- 
duced acute irritation of the skin and glans penip, with an eruption on 
the latter like commencing chancre. Plat, mur, has been used in 
cases of caries (especially of nasal bones and bones of tarsus) ; of 
syphilitic caries ; syphilitic rheumatism ; chronic gonorrhoea ; con- 
«>dylchffata ; gastric carcinoma ; acne. 

SYMPTOMS. 

• 

V Mind. — ^Thinks he has been poisoned. 

2. Head. — Some headache, with slight acidity of stomach. — Severe 
headache, esp. in occiput, with fever. 

VOL. II. 55 



850 PLATINUM MUR— PLECTRANT^^US 

8. Mouth. — Metallic taste. 

II. Stomach.— Acidity of stomach with headache.— Warmth and heavi- 
ness in epigastrium. — Nausea and inclination to vomit. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — [From application of saturated solution to 
the parts.]— Violent itching on glans and prepuce, with sensation of warmth 
and very troublesome sticking ; symptoms of acute inflammation of urethra, 
pain on urinating, slight dysuria ; after some hours an eruption about glans 
penis, somewhat livid, slightly raised, size of pin head, looks like commencing 
syphilitic sore, but disappears in twelve hours. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — ^Violent constriction of larynx, so that 
speech and swallowing were decidedly impeded. 

24. Generalities. — Involuntary movement of fibres of muscles of nape, 
back, and extremities for several hours. 

25. Skin. — Skin discoloured yellow, becoming covered with rosy red 
eruption that disappears after a few minutes (from local application). 

27. Fever, — Slight shuddering, pulse accelerated, warmth in epigastrium. 


Platinum Muriaticum Natronatum; 

o 

Chloroplatinate of Sodium. PtCl42NaCl. Solution. 

Clinical* — Flatulence. Polyuria. Salivation. 

Charactepistics. — Hofer experimented with PlaL w. n. on the 
same man who took Plat, mur. The chief additional symptom was 
decided by increased secretion of urine and saliva. * 

SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Slight headache. 

8 . Mouth. — Decided increase in saliva. 

11. Stomach. — Feeling of warmth and heaviness in stomach. — Eructa- 
tion of gas. — Nausea and inclination to vomit. 

12. Abdomen. — Rumbling in abdomen. — Transient colic. 

13. Stool. — Emission of flatus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Decidedly increased secretion of urine. 


Plectranthus. 

Plectranthus fruticosus. N. 0 . Labiatae. Tincture of fresh plant. 

ClinioaJI* — Abdomen, coldness of. Cholera. Cramps. Dentition. Dianhcea* 
Dysphagia. Fever. Intermittent fever. Lumbrici. Neuralgia. Rheumatism. 
Shoulder (r.), pains in. Spastic paralysis. Stiff-neck. Sweat, local. Throat, sore. 
Toothache. Wrists, pains in. 

* o 

CharacteristioB* — Plectranthus was extensively proved by the 
Austrian Provers^ Association. Severe symptoms were induced in 
head, throat, intestines, and rectum, limbs and joints. Toothache 



PLECTRANTHUS 


851 


with swelling of face and difficulty of opening mouth. Pain near 
right jaw-joint as if a tooth were coming through ** suggests a use 
for the remedy in difficult cutting of wisdom teeth. Burning sensation 
extended throughout the digestive tract ; and there was also coldness 
of abdomen, > in open air. Many pains about the navel. Paralytic 
pains in joints. Pains of many kinds in right shoulder. Exhaustion, 
bruised sensation, general discomfort were experienced. Cramps and 
paralytic pains in joints, Hansen mentions spastic paralysis as having 
oeen remedied by it. Among the peculiar symptoms are ; As if a 
morsel stuck in throat after swallowing. As though air were piercing 
the marrow of the bones. Cool sensation followed by burning at root 
of tongue and palate. Pressure as from a heavy weight in stomach. 
Discharge of white mucus from anus causing scratching. Pressure 
on rectum and bladder. Whites of eyes yellow, < left. Sweat of 
right foot, left foot dry ; of right foot and both hands and no other 
part ; of scalp. The right side was more affected than the left. The 
symptoms are < after eating (pressure in stomach ; pain in umbilical 
region). < By all food and drink (burning in mouth). Chewing ass 
pain in temples. < By motion ; moving head ; turning body ; by 
swallowing ; whilst urinating, > after. < By warmth of stove. > 
By application of ice ; by eructations. Many of the pains and symp- 
toms were sudden^ and came and went suddenly. 

Relations. — Compare: Urinary symptoms, Ocim. Black stools, 
Lept. Stitches in chest, K. ca. Pains come and go suddenly, Lyc., 
Bell. Crumb in throat, Hep., Nit. ac., Arg. n. 

* SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Fretful. — Ill-humoured. — Peevish. — Distracted in mind; 
cannot keep his attention on an interesting subject. 

• 2. Head. — Head confused, heavy, dull. — Pressure (and stitches) in r. 

frontal emine^ice.— (Violent headache in anterior part of skull as far as vertex, 
becoming intolerable. — Swashing and throbbing with every motion ; not > 
by cold applications ; thirst and difficulty of swallowing.) — Pressive pain in 
occiput ; < lying on back ; < out of doors ; tension in cervical muscles. — 
Profuse perspiration on scalp. 

3. Eyes. — White of eyes yellow « 1 .). — Vision seemed remarkably 
clear (on a dull day). — Flickering before eyes. 

4* Ears. — Sticking and stitches in both ears. — Roaring in ears. 

5, Nose. — Exces.sive catarrh, frequent inclination to sneeze ; great 
stoppage with at times discharge of tenacious yellow mucus. — Dryness, 
mornings. 

6. Face. — Painful drawing in r. cheek, infra-orbital region ; extending 
to la^ jipper molars ; continued through the night with fever ; next day r. 
cheek swollen and very sensitive. — Lips very dry ; burning. 

S. Mouth. — ^Violent drawing in upper and lower incisors with swelled 
cheek.-w-Periodic drawing in r. teeth extending to temple and ear, < chewing, 
> going out. — Pressive pain in r. lower sound teeth. — Upper incisors sensi- 
tive. — Tongue coated. — Sensation on root of tongue and on soft palate, at 
first cool, then burning. — Dry mouth. — Burning through mouth and fauces, < 



852 


PLECTRANTHUS 


by all food and drink.— Opening the mouth became very difficult ; ulcers on 
r. side of palate ; digging in r. upper teeth with increased secretion of saliva ; 
sticking and burrowing extending to r. articulation of jaw as though a tooth 
erupting. 

Q. Throat.— Scraping in throat ; stitches.— Dryness with thirst, not > 
by glass of water. — Burning as from pepper, from root of tongue to stomach 
(6 a.m. to 4 p.m.). — Sensation as if a morsel of food stuck in throat on swallow- 
ing. — Tension in pharynx when drinking, with disagreeable tickling in both 
ears, that obliges frequent hawking. — Acute pressure in pharynx, on swallow- 
ing became a burning, not affected by external pressure, increased to 9 a.m., 
when it became a sensation of swelling. — Dysphagia. 

11. Stomach. — Appetite great ; eats hastily, though without satiety ; on 
rising from a meal pressure as from a weight in stomach with desire to drink 
a great deal ; after taking a few sips a pulling in stomach causing tension in 
oesophagus. — Loss of appetite. — Great thirst. — Eructations ; frequent ; empty ; 
and hiccough. — Nausea ; vomiting. — Sudden gushing vomiting twice at night 
without any other symptoms. — Weight on stomach < after eating. — Cutting 
in epigastrium followed by two thin, frothy stools. 

12. Abdomen. — ^Contractive pain in umbilical region always < after 
cating.-;~Violent griping at umbilicus with desire for stool. — Rumbling and 
movement. — Crawling about umbilicus disappearing along rectus muscle 
tovrards symphysis pubis, — Cutting low in abdomen with desire for stool. — 
Coldness through (upper) abdomen in warm room, morning. — Drawing stick- 
ing in 1. inguinal region. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Painful pressure in rectum, with constant 
griping followed by profuse, dark, frothy stool, succeeded by burning and 
tenesmus in anus ; later sudden desire and painful pressure ; only a little 
mucus and gas evacuated with burning in anus. — Discharge of white mucus 
provoking scratching of anus and followed by burning. — Stool : almost black ; 
pJisty, yellowish brown ; watery, mixed with mucus ; first pasty, then liquid ; 
omitted for five days, then bluish nodular evacuated with great effort. — 
During stool : griping and rumbling in abdomen ; painful dragging in 
rectum. — After stool : weakness of lower limbs ; coldness of abdomen ; cold 
sweat on forehead. — Evacuation of round worms. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Pressure in bladder, immediately followed by , 
deshe to urinate, sudden cutting pain from root of penis to base of bladder, 
compelling to sit still. — Burning in navicular fossa during and after micturi- 
'tion, which was scanty and unsatisfactory. — Frequent, sudden desire, had 
hardly time to reach the closet, but only a few drops passed, followed by a 
sensation as though bladder full, afternoon ; in evening copious micturition 
with great >. — Increased urination. — Urine dark with reddish -yellow sedi- 
ment. 

*15. Male Sexual Organs. — Transient drawing sticking along r* ^de of 
penis and urethra. — Violent erection. 

18. Chest. — Burning at sterno-clavicular joint. — Stitches : in pectoralis 
major, arresting breath ; between r. fourth and fifth ribs ; in r. side.-dPain in 
r. chest extends up to r. scapula and nape of neck, so violent at night was 
compelled to jump out of bed and cry out ; as though a number of needles 
sticking into head till head was turned towards the side ; with profuse sweat, 



PLUMBAGO 853 

painful inspiration, great heat of head ; < by application of mustard paste, > 
gradually by application of ice. — ^Tension in chest. 

ig. Pulse. — Pulse hard, full with the fever. 

80. Neck and Back. — Stiffness and pressive tension in nape, < by 
every motion of the head. — Drawing in nape. — Coarse stitches from without 
inward between scapulae, while walking ; during expiration. 

21 . Limbs. — Sticking and paralytic drawing in all the joints and limbs. 
T-Sensation of paralysis in joints of fingers and toes. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Paralysed sensation : in upper limbs ; r. shoulder ; 
r, shoulder and wrist, suddenly appearing and disappearing ; in both 
shoulders. — Lameness ; sprained feeling ; weariness ; shaking ,* drawing 
tearing in r. shoulder. — Sensation in 1. shoulder as if one were beating on it 
with a knuckle. — Drawing tearing in joints of upper-arms, fore-arms, and 
fingers, < r. — Sudden pain in outer condyle of 1. wrist. — Stitches in r. wrist. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Weariness in lower limbs. — Painful cramps in 
calves waking him up, not > by stretching. — Stitches in 1. hip- joint ; burning 
in r. — ^Cramp in adductors ; tension in hamstring. — Drawing in fascia of r. 
thigh. — Tearing beneath r. patella; stitches in 1. — Pains in both knees. — 
Wakened at night by sudden start from a violent sticking in malleoli of ankles- 
— Burning in periosteum of r. tibia. — Numbness in leg. — Toes painful as if 
burnt.* 

24. Generalities. — Weariness. — Stitches. — Sensation as though air were 
piercing the marrow of the bones. 

25. Skin. — Prickling in 1. palm. — Crawling in 1. little finger ; in ball of 1. 
thumb. 

26. Sleep r—Drowsiness. — Waked often. — Troubled by confused, un- 
remembered dreams before midnight. 

27. Fever. — Sudden, violent, shaking chill with chattering of teeth, 
waking him from sleep, followed by dry heat. — Chilliness through whole 

• abdomen witji warm face and hands ; < by heat of stove ; > moving about 
in opdn air. — Coldness over back and heat of hands ; could not get warm in 
heated room. — Sudden heat on scalp lasting a few minutes, followed by pro- 
fuse sweat ; after sweat dried up, forehead cold to touch. — Sour sweat at 
night. — Sweat on r. foot and both hands ; no other part. — Profuse sweat r. 
foot, 1. foot dry. 


Plumbago. 

Plumbago littoralis (Mure. — Allen says P. scandens corresponds to 
Mure^s figure, and grows in Brazil. Mure says P. lit. is “ a 
creeper inhabiting the shores in the bay of Rio Janeiro 
• ‘JNT. 0 . Plumbaginaceae. Tincture of leaves. 

Olinloal. — Costiveness. Eyes, inflammation in. Fever. Kidneys, pain in. 
Saliva, pilky. 

Characteristics. — Mure proved this plant. The most peculiar 
symptoms were : Saliva profuse, milky. Ulceration of commissures of 
Ups* Costiveness with red urine. Vertigo after eating. Pain in 



PLUMBAGO 


854 

humerus on lifting anything. Hot arms with cold hands. Many of 
the plants of this genus are acrid and caustic in the highest degree. 
The root of P. scandens, the Herbe du Diable of San Domingo, is a 
most energetic blistering agent when fresh ; so also is that of P. rosea. 
The beggars employ P. ewropta to raise ulcers on their body to excite 
pity ; and used internally it is said to be as effectual an emetic as 
Ipecacuanha^* {Treas, of BoL), In Mure’s proving Aversion to every- 
thing is noted ; also ulceration of commissures of lips,'^ which is 
an evidence of its acridity. 

Relations. — Compare : Costiveness with red urine, Lyc. The 
Plumbaginaceae are allied to the Primulaceae and the Plantaginaceae 
(the root of Plumb, europ. is used dried as a remedy for toothache). 

SYMPTOMS. 


I. Mind. — ^Taciturn. 

tf. Head. — ^Vertigo; after eating.— Excessive heat about head. — Dart- 
ings in head. — Pain in temples. — Frontal headache. 

3. £yes. — Heat in eyes. — Inflammation and running of 1. eye. 

4. Ears. — ^Acute pain 1. ear. 

5. Nose. — Sensitive smell all day. 

8. Mouth. — Saliva ; profuse ; milky. — Ulceration of commissures of 
lips. — Bitter mouth. 

9. Throat. — Painful constriction of throat. — Sore throat. 

11. Stomach. — Aversion to everything. — Heaviness at stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Pain in iliac region. — Pain behind false ribs when 

inspiring. v 

13. Stool. — Costiveness with red urine. 

15, 16. Sexual Organs. — Violent sexual desire. 

18. Chest,— Pain ; at r, ribs ; sides of chest, — Prickings in chest. 

19. Heart. — Pain at heart. — Painful stitch in heart region., — Palpitation.^ 
— Pulse hard and small. 

20. Neck and Back. — Pain in kidneys as if pinched. — Pain in back. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pain in r. shoulder ; burning and pricking. — Pain 
in humerus when lifting anything. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Weakness of joints of lower limbs, 

24. Generalities. — Prostration. — Darting pains here and there. — Pain 
in joints. — Acute pains all over for three hours. 

26. Sleep.— Drowsy. — Dreams of dead bodies. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness when moving. — Hot arms with cold hands. — 
Internal heat coming and going. — Very hot internally at night. — Heat in 
limbs. 



PLUMBUM 


855 


Plumbum. 

Plumbum metallicum. The Element. Pb (A.W.2o6-39). Xrituration. 
Plumbum aceticum. Acetate of Lead. Sugar of Lead. Pb 
(CaH30,)a3H,0. Trituration. 

Plumbum carbonicum. Carbonate of Lead. Pure White Lead. 
• Plumbic CaBj3onate. Pb COj. Trituration. 

Olinioal. — Ailtaurosis. Ancemia. Anaesthesia. Aneurism. Ajiidrosis. Appen- 
dicitis. Asthma. Atrophy. Bone, exostoses on. Brain, softening of ; tumour of. 
Bright's disease. Colic. Constipation, Cystitis. Dcpiession of spirits. Diplopia. 
Dropsy. Dysmenorrhoea, Dysuria. Emaciation. Epilepsy, Epulis. Eyes, in- 
flammation of. Ganglion. Gout. Haemoptysis. Haemorrhoids. Headache. 
Hernia, strangulated. Hyperaesthesia. Hypopion. Ichthyosis. Intermittent fever. 
Intestines, obstruction of. Intussusception. Jaundice, ^aw, tnvwnr of. Kidneys, 
affections of; granular. Liver, affections of. Lockjaw. Locomotor ataxy. Melan- 
cholia. Metrorrhagia, Myelitis. Nephritis. Numbness. QSsophagus, stricture of. 
Pflrfl/ysis ; diphtheritic ; agitans. Perichondritis. Proctalgia. Progressive muscular 
atrophy. Prolapsus ani. Sciatica. Spine, diseases of ; sclerosis of ; tumour *of. 
Spleen, affections of. Stricture. Tabes mesentcrica. Tobacco habit. Tongue ; 
paralysis) of.“ Typhlitis. Umbilicus, abscess of; hernia of. Uric-acidaemia. 
Vagina, spasm of. Vaginismus. Veins, varicose. 

bharaoteristlos. — Plumbtun, the Saturn of the Alchemists, has 
been proved by Hartlaub, Trinks, Hering, and Nenning. To their 
symptoms have been added those of numberless cases of poisoning 
among workers with lead and painters, symptoms from drinking lead- 
contaminated waters, from the use of lead in cosmetics, and from cases 
of suicide. In the old school metallic lead was seldom used, being con- 
sidered inert ; but Bcerhaave gave it internally reduced to an impalpable 
powder for leucorrhoea, dysentery, syphilis, and gout (Teste). In the 
form of plaisters and “ Goulard water the salts of lead have been largely 
used as external applications in skin diseases, vaginal and urethral 
injections, and much injury has not infrequently resulted, especially 
from* repelled eruptions. The effect of the three preparations of lead 
enumerated above have all been included in the Schema, as no 
attempt has ever been made to keep them separate ; nor has any 
specific difference been noted. Among painters and lead manufac- 
turers the best-known symptoms are the colic and drop-wrist. In 
addition there are set up conditions of kidney irritation with albumi- 
nuria, ending in granular degeneration with attendant heart hyper- 
trophy, optic neuritis, and blindness. There is an excess of uric acid 
in the l3lood of persons under the influence of lead, and actual gouty 
deposits and gouty attacks have been observed. In one case of lead 
poisoning I saw there was chronic enlargement of the knees and con- 
tra(5jtipn of the lower limbs, completely crippling the patient. In 
another case there were small aneurisms almost all over the body. 
In those who have drunk lead-contaminated water the effects vary in 
intensity according to the amount of contamination and duration of 
exposure. When the poisoning has been going on insidiously for 
years a state of anaemia is set up, with dry, inactive, scaly skin, and 
inveterate constipation. Tunzelmann (B, y. //., xxxii. 17 — quoted 



PLUMBUM 


Ss6 

C.D.P.f where a full collection of cases may be found) reports a number 
of cases of acute poisoning from drinking water containing lead : (i) 
A cook, ill three weeks. Unable to retain any food on stomach ; con- 
stant nausea, and even when no food was taken frequent vomiting of 
greenish watery fluid, < night. Skin yellowish ; conjunctivae 
decidedly yellow. Tongue furred, coat at back very yellow ; horrible 
taste, foetor of breath ; bowels confined. Extreme debility. HydrasL 
3 gave great relief, but three months later the hands became para- 
lysed, which led to the testing of the drinking-water and the discovery’ 
of lead. (2) Youth, aet. 12, had bronchial catarrh with loose cough 
and consolidation of left apex. As soon as the poisoned water was 
stopped he rapidly got quite well. (3) An elder brother had haemop- 
tysis, coughing up half a pint of blood. Nothing was found wrong 
with the lungs beyond slight feebleness of respiration at apices. 
Three months later, after a day^s rowing, the haematemesis returned 
with epistaxis. Now distinct dulness was found at right apex. Rapid 
recovery followed stopping the water. Caspar (C. D, P,) relates the 
case of a pregnant young woman who swallowed three ounces of 
white lead on October 8th. The first symptoms set in some hours 
later with vomiting. Next morning she was found suffering from 
inflammatory pain and jaundice. The evening of the loth she gave 
birth to a seven-months^ child, and died the following morning. The 
autopsy revealed : Features relaxed ; skin dirty yellow. Bloody, 
frothy ichor escaped from nostrils in large quantities, and from 
genitals, saturating the bed ; the mouth also, from which the tongue 
point protruded, was full of it. Abdomen distended J^nd of stony 
hardness, genitals swollen and discoloured ; brain ma’^kedly blood- 
less ; pleura contained 8 ozs. of bloody fluid, lungs distended, filled 
with frothy, decomposed blood ; heart empty, very soft, dirty brown ; 
trachea dark cherry-colour. Pectoral muscles very soft, brown, the 
blood exuding from them being greasy. Liver dirty brown, very soft ; 
spleen filled with black, tar-like blood ; both kidneys very soft* and 
full of blood. Blood in vena cava black, tar-like. Women who work 
with lead frequently abort ; women who do not work with lead but 
whose husbands do, abort in even greater proportion. Children born 
under these conditions are frequently idiotic or epileptic. According 
to Teste, Plumb, is particularly adapted to adults, males rather than 
females ; particularly to persons of a dry, bilious constitution, with 
somewhat jaundiced complexion, irascible, hypochondriac, or dis- 
posed to religious monomania. (But children are by no means 
excluded. I have seen apparently hopeless cases of marasmus in 
infants with large, hard abdomens and extreme constipation cured 
with Plumb. f usually in 3rd trituration of the metal or the acetate.) 
Teste mentions the following cases as having been successfully treated 
by him with Plumb, (i) Chronic cystitis. (2) Stricture after gohor- 
rhoea. (3) Tenacious salivation (mercurial), < in damp weather, 
saturating pillow in sleep. (4) Excessively painful retraction of testes 
and penis, which seemed to re-enter hypogastrium (consequence of 
sexual excesses and repelled tetters). (5) Nightly bone pains (after 
failure of Mere, &c.). (6) Pulling and pressive chronic headache in 
forehead, < by mental labour ; intolerable in company. (7) Mental 



PLUMBUM 


857 


derangement from syphilis with obscure paralysis of right arm, 
paroxysms of religious monomania, erotism without erection, periodic 
fever without sweat, cramp-like retraction of abdomen from time to 
time. (8) Nervous disease characterised chiefly by wandering pains 
in limbs, spasms of facial muscles, paroxysms of screaming, fright 
without cause, sudden fainting in passing from one room to another 
or entering a room full of company. (9) Marsh intermittent with 
quotidian or double tertian type, especially when splenic region is 
painful to touch. In such cases, says Teste, neither Ars, nor Chi. can 
be compared tg Plumb. These cases bring out some of the keynotes 
of Plumb.j and chief among them is : Retraction and sense of retraction. 

Violent colic, sensation as if abdominal wall were drawn back by a 
string to the spine.” Actual drawing in of abdomen is frequently 
present and is characteristic. The cheeks are retracted, sunken. 
Excessive and rapid emaciation. In the same category with colic 
are : Cramps, spasms, convulsions, paralyses, tremors. Frohling 
{A. H. Z., cxxxii. 68 — Amer. Horn., xxii. 422) relates the case of N., 
farmer, 46, who was taken ill in November, 1893, with attacks of colic 
with vomiting and extreme constipation ; action only obtained by 
large enemata. Had been constipated in former years but without 
illness. Opium had given only temporary relief. After December, 
1893,* vomiting was rarer, but colic increased in intensity up to 
February, 1894, when Frohling saw him first, and found him wasted 
to a skeleton^ abdomen drawn in ; appetite bad, felt ill, mind somewhat 
affected, unable to give sensible answers to questions. Constant 
urgent call to^stool^ only swallj hardy black balls passed. Liver dulness 
only heard frqm upper border of sixth to upper border of seventh rib. 
Lead poisoning was suspected, but as no evidence of it could be found 
Plumb. 6 three times a day was prescribed. In six days colic attacks 
were less frequent, and less severe ; two stools passed without enema ; 

, mind clearer. Improvement continued in all respects, and in fourteen 
days.N. wa^ able to leave his bed, to which he had been confined 
since- November. By the middle of March he made an hour^s journey 
to see Frohling, and was hardly recognisable, he had gained so much 
flesh, and his liver was found of normal size. Wingfield (M. H. R.y 
quoted Amer. Hom.y xxi. 426) reported two characteristic cases : (i) 
Mrs. D., 50, no children, sparely built, very nervous, constipated fifteen 
years, takes a teaspoonful of Cascara extract every other night. Tongue 
• coated with yellowish white fur. Has constant headaches, and after 
each motion is thoroughly exhausted, and has to lie down the rest of 
the day. Plumb. 6x gr. iii. twice a day. In two days bowels com- 
menced acting naturally. In three weeks headaches gone, tongue 
clean, much less nervous. (2) Miss M., 25, florid ; has boils appear 
on face and arms, and chronic constipation. The constipation had 
beeh k trouble since she was twelve years old. Slight spinal curva- 
ture. Tongue furred, occasionally has headaches. Suffers much at 
menstrual periods. Plumb. 6x twice daily at once relieved the con- 
stipation, and soon the boils disappeared. Patient soon felt quite 
well. Arriaga {La Homoeopatiay No. 9, 1893 ; H. ilf., xxix. 190), of 
Mexico city, reports the case of a woman, 73, seized with symptoms 
of intestinal occlusion, violent colic, nausea, obstinate constipation. 



PLUMBUM 


858 

meteorism, complete anorexia, and no fever. iViwr relieved the colic, 
and then P/um6, 12, and later 13, gradually brought about recovery in 
four days. NAsh cured a severe case of post-diphtheritic paralysis in 
a middle-aged man. The leading symptom was excessive hypercesthcsia 
—could not bear to be touched anywhere, it hurt so. Plumb, 40m 
(Fincke), a single dose, cured. Nash tells of a man, 70, attacked with 
severe pain in abdomen, and finally a large, hard swelling developed 
in ileo-caecal region, very sensitive to contact or least motion. It began 
to assume a bluish tint, and on account of his age and weakness the man^S 
life was despaired of. But his daughter, the wife of a medical man, 
found the symptoms in Roue under Phimh,y in the chapter on Typh 
litis, and Plumb. 200 cured. Anaesthesia is as strongly marked as the 
hyperaesthesia of Plumb. The excessive emaciation of Plumb, and 
the action on the spine make it a remedy of the first importance in 
progressive muscular atrophy. Among the spasms are : Vaginismus ; 
spasm of uterus and expulsion of its contents ; sensation as if there 
was not room enough for foetus ; spasm of bladder ; of oesophagus ; 
strangulated hernia. Clonic or tonic convulsive movements of limbs 
from cerebral sclerosis or tumour. Epilepsy preceded by vertigo, 
sometimes sighing, followed by stupid feeling. (In a case cured by 
Skinner, after a fit the head turned to the right. There was < 8 to 
9 a.m.) Paralysed parts lose flesh. Progressive locomotor ataxia. 
Restlessness ; lassitude ; faintness. Sensation in abdomen at night 
which causes patient to stretch violently for hours ; must stretch in 
every direction. Assumes strangest attitudes in bed at night. Peculiar 
sensations are : As if something were working at top of head, with a 
sense of screwing from behind forward. Eyelids as if paralysed. As 
of a ball rising from throat into brain. As if a wheat-hull in throat. 
Cornea as if breathed upon. Eyes as if too large. As of a plug ip 
throat. As if everything were weighted down. As if abdomen and 
back were too close together ; abdomen drawn to spine with a string. 
Bowels as if twisted ; constricted ; distended with gas. As if abscess 
forming near umbilicus. Sphincter ani as if drawn in. As if a bag 
not quite filled with fluid lay in bowels. As if fluid rolled from one 
side to other of abdomen. As if thighs pierced with needles. As if 
feet made of wood, — Pains are wandering or radiating, vague, 
paroxysmal. Ailments develop slowly and intermit for a time. After- 
nations are common ; Delirium with colic ; diarrhoea and constipa- 
tion ; jerks of flexors and extensors ; paralysis and colic. Right side * 
is most affected, symptoms go from left to right (throat). In ladies 
poisoned by cosmetics the vaginismus which resulted increased pari 
passu with paralytic symptoms. With Plumb. 6 Theuerkauf cured in 
six weeks a case of hypopion with great pain (B. J. H.j xxxvii. 303). 
W. H. Woodyatt {Ibid.y 205) reports a case of “ vaso-motor neurosis ” 
affecting left eye. Mrs. D., 29, had been ill two weeks, and sup*p6sed 
she had caught cold in the eye. The symptoms were : Drooping 
upper lid, intense photophobia, very profuse lachrymation of hot 
tears, pericorneal injection, deep bluish redness of sclerotica f most 
marked at corneal margin. Cornea very faintly hazy. Pupil con^ 
traded. Sight misty. Ars, 6 x and Plant, ox failed to relieve. Plumb, 
6 x was then given with immediate improvement, which went on to 



PLUMBUM 


859 


core in seven days. The italicised symptoms were the leading indi- 
cations for Plumb, In a case of right-sided sciatica which bad been 
greatly benefited by Gnaph, i, but which had returned, the symptoms 
being : Stiffness ; soreness from great trochanter and point of exit of 
nerve to knee ; weakness in thigh ; < by stooping ; walking =: sen- 
sation as if pushing a knife in thigh, Plumb, 6 was given four times a 
day. Up to the twelfth day there was no change ; on that day the 
pain suddenly went. The case had lasted nine months. The symp- 
toms are < by touch. > By hard pressure and by rubbing, > At 
rest. < By motion. Mental exertion <. > Lying down. < 

Lying right side (swelling in abdomen ; cough). Lying on left side 
< violent palpitation. Bending back > pressure in stomach ; pain 
in epigastrium ; pain in back. Bending forward s=r pressure in 
stomach ; > pain in back. Bending double > colic. Back sensitive 
when leaning on it. > Stretching limbs. < At night. < In rough, 
foggy weather. Open air, coldness in ; sensitive to ; > vertigo. 
Damp weather = profuse salivation. < In room full of company. 

Relations. — Antidotal by : Sulphuric acid, diluted, taken as a 
lemonade, is one of the best antidotes to the chronic effects of 
lead ; Alcohol is a preventive ; Alumen, Alumina, Ars., Ant. c.. Bell., 
Coccul., Hep., Kreos., Nux, Op., PetroL, Plat., Piperaz., Zn. (Teste, 
who classes Plumb, with Merc, and Ars., says .<®thus cyn. is the best 
antidote in his experience ; he names also Hyo., Plect., Strm., and 
Electric.) It antidotes : Bad effects of long abuse of vinegar. Com- 
patible : Ars., Bell., Lyc., Merc., Phos., Pul., Sil., Sul. Compare : Con- 
stipation, inertia, hard black balls. Op. (Plumb, has also some 
spasmodic constriction at anus). Delirium, bites and strikes. Bell. 
(Plumb, has tremors of head and hands ; yellow mucus about teeth ; 
colic alternating with delirium). Head and abdominal symptoms alter- 
nating, Pod. Brain softening, Zn. (Plumb, has pain in atrophied limbs 
• alternating ^ith colic), Vanad. Constipation from inertia, vaginismus. 
Plat. ’(Plat. > these conditions of Plumb.). Irritable piles with drawn- 
up sensation at anus, Lach. Peritonitis with retracted abdomen, 
Euphb. Head turns to right, Stram. (to left, Lyc. ; to either, Bufo, 
Camph.). Globus, Ign., Lach., Lyc. Diseases originating in spine, 
Pho., Pic. ac., Zn. Weak memory, unable to find right word, Anac., 
Lac c. Face greasy, shiny, Nat. m., Sanic. Desire to stretch. Amyl. n. 
Illusion of smell, Anac. 

Gaasation,— Repelled eruptions. Sexual excess. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I, Mind. — Silent melancholy and dejection. — Great anguish and un- 
easiness, with sighs. — Anxiety, with restlessness and yawning.—Weariness 
and dislike to conversation and labour. — Discouragement. — Weariness of life. 
— ^Weakness or loss of memory, — Slow of perception ; increasing apathy, — 
Unable to find proper word while talking. — Coma. — Imbecility.— Dementia. — 
Mania. — Delirium; alternating. with colic. — Fury. — Frantic delirium (bites, 
strikes), sometimes with demented aspect. — Dread of assassination, poisoning; 
thinks every one about him a murderer. 



86o 


PLUMBUM 


ft. Head*— Head confused and heavy, as from apathy and melancholy, 
—Dizziness to the extent of falling senseless.— Intoxication.— Vertigo, esp. on 
stooping, or looking up into the air. — Headache, as if caused by a ball rising 
from throat into brain.— Heaviness of head, esp. in (cerebellum) occiput and 
forehead.— Tearing in forehead and temples. — Lancinating headache.— Con- 
gestion of blood to head, with pulsation and heat.— Violent pains in integu- 
ments of skull from occiput to forehead. — Great dryness of hair. — Hair 
becomes very greasy. — Falling off of hair of scalp, also of eyebrows and 
whiskers (moustaches). 

3. Eyes. — Pressive and very acute pain, as if eyeballs ^ere too large.— 
Heaviness of eyes when moving them. — Paralysis of upper eyelids. — Contrac- 
tion in eyes and eyelids. — Tearing in eyelids, with sleep. — Sanguineous con- 
gestion in eyes. — Inflammation of eyes and of iris,— Nocturnal agglutination 
of eyes.— Swelling of eyes.— Yellowish colour of sclerotica. — Spasmodic 
closing of eyelids.— Eyes convulsed. — Pupils contracted. — Sight confused, as 
if directed through a mist, which forces the patient to rub eyes. — Hypopion, 
— Myopia. — Diplopia. — Blindness, as from amaurosis. — Optic neuritis. 

4. Ears. — Tearing in ears. — Boring and shooting in ears. — Sensibility 
to noise.— Occasional sudden diminution of hearing. — Deafness ; sudden. — 
Buzzing in ears. — Hears music, with frightful delirium. 

5. Nose,— Coldness of nose.— Erysipelatous inflammation of nose. — 
Red, purulent vesicles in nasal angles. — Fetid smell in nose. — Loss of smell. 
— Obstruction of nose. — Accumulation of tenacious mucus in nostrils, which 
can only be expelled by way of the nasal fossse.— Fluent coryza, with discharge 
of serous mucus. 

6. Face. — Face pale, yellow, hippocratic. — Bewildered, air j distorted 
countenance. — Bloatedness of face, — Semilateral swelling of face. — Paralysis 
of lower two branches of r, facial nerve. — Skin shining and greasy to sight 
and touch.— Tearing in maxillary bones, which is removed by friction, or 
made to appear in another place. — Boring in lower jaw. — Exfoliation (pain- » 
less) of lips. — Cramps in jaw, — Lockjaw.— Swelling of submaxillary glands. 

7. Teeth.— Tearing, jerking pains in teeth, < by cold things.— Teeth 
coated with yellow slime.— The teeth become black.— Fetid, hollow, carious 
teeth, which break off in notches. — Looseness and falling out of teeth, — 
Grinding of teeth. — Gums pale and swollen ; purple-coloured thin border„on 
gums nearest teeth, — Painful and hard nodosities on gums. 

8. Mouth. — Dryness of mouth. — Copious accumulation of sweetish 
saliva in mouth, with dryness of gullet. — Salivation ; tenacious ; mercurial ; < 
during sleep. — Froth in mouth. — ^Viscid mucus in mouth on waking in morn- 
ing. — Haemoptysis. — Aphthae and fetid ulcers in mouth, and purple blotches in 
mouth and on tip of tongue.— Breath fetid. — Inflammation, swelling, and 
heaviness of tongue.— Tongue brown and dry, with rhagades.— Tongue green, 
slate-coloured, or coated yellow. — Paralysis of tongue, preventing speech ; 
cannot put tongue out. 

9. Throat, — Sore throat, as if caused by a swelling (plug) or foreign 
body in gullet.— Sensation as if a ball were rising in throat (globus hystericus). 
—Sensation of constriction in throat (as soon as the least effort is made to 
swallow, with great urging to do so).— Paralysis of gullet, with inability to 
swallow.— Drawing in throat when eating, as if oesophagus were being tom 



PLUMBUM 


86i 


out.— Sensation as if an insect were crawling in oesophagus.— Inflammation 
and induration of tonsils ; granular sore throat, going from 1 . to r. — Formation 
of consecutive, small, exceedingly painful abscessesr in tonsils. 

10 . Appetite. — Sweetish, bitter, metallic, or horribly offensive taste. — 
Sulphurous, acid taste in bottom of throat.— Violent thirst, csp. for cold water. 
— ^Anorexia. — Violent hunger, even shortly after a meal. — Great desire for 
bread and fried things, cakes, rye bread, tobacco. 

IX. Stomach. — Risings, with a taste of food.— Empty risings, sometimes 
very violent and painful. — Sweetish risings.— Hiccough. — Regurgitation of 
sweetish or souf water. — Disgust and frequent nausea, with disposition to 
vomit, sometimes with retching. — Continued and violent vomiting of food, or 
of greenish and blackish matter, or yellowish, with violent pains in stomach 
and abdomen. — ^Vomiting of bile or of blood. — Vomiting of faecal matter, 
with colic and constipation. — Very violent pains in stomach. — Sensation of 
heaviness and aching in stomach, sometimes after a meal. — Dull and anxious 
pressure in scrobiculus. — Constrictive cramps in stomach. — Shootings from 
pit of stomach into back. — Cuttings and burning pain in stomach. — Inflamma- 
tion of stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — [Drawing pain from before backward, as though 
abdomen were drawn in and through towards backbone, sometimes making 
abdomen concave ; sensation as though a siring were inside abdomen draw- 
ing it in ; generally there is great despondency with this pain. — Painters* 
colic with this sensation, as though abdomen were drawn in and touching the 
spine ; pulse may be down very low, 50, or even 40. — Gastralgia with sensa- 
tion as though abdomen and backbone met. — Great liver remedy ; inner belly 
in general ; inner region of navel ; sometimes umbilical hernia, and is an 
excellent remedy for this ; 1 . side of abdomen generally (H. N. G.).] — Pain in 
liver, with lancinating pressure. — Hepatic region sensitive to pressure. — Heat 
and burning in liver and spine. — Sticking and darting in liver, first anteriorly, 

^ then posteriorly. — Jaundice. — Cirrhosis ; first enlarged, then contracted. — 
Affections df spleen. — Very violent pains in abdomen, with retraction of 
navel.*— Inflation and induration of abdomen. — Violent colics, with constric- 
tive pain, esp. in umbilical region, with violent contraction of abdomen (navel 
and anus are violently drawn in), sometimes forming elevations and depres- 
sions, < by slightest touch, and sometimes increased at night to the highest 
degree. — Large, hard swelling in ileo-caecal region, very sensitive to contact 
or least motion ; sneezing or coughing. — Colic and paralysis of lower extremi- 

* ties.— Pinchings and cuttings in abdomen. — Shootings round navel.— Sensation 
in upper part and in sides of abdomen as if something detached itself and fell 
down. — Pulsation in abdomen. — Burning sensation <|lr coldness in abdomen. 
— Inflammation, ulceration and gangrene of intestines. — Hard nodosities in 
abdomen, as if caused by internal induration. — Soreness of abdominal muscles, 
< by movement and by touch. — Continued production and incarceration of 
flatus, with grumbling and borborygmi in abdomen.— Abundant expulsion of 
very offensive and hot, burning flatus, — In rectum very urgent effort to expel 
flatus without any result. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Most obstinate constipation ; stools blackish. — 
Continued and ineffectual want to evacuate. — Faeces difficult to evacuate, hard, 
sometimes in round pieces, like sheep dung, and tenacious.— Balls in con- 



862 


PLUMBUM 


glommte masses, discharged with di£hculty.*-Loose evacttations.-~-Long« 
continued diarrhoea, generally of yellow excrement, or else painful, and often 
very offensive. — Sanguineous diarrhoea. — ^Watery diarrhoea, with vomiting 
and violent colic, esp. pain in umbilicus. — Painful retraction and constriction 
of anus.— Intolerable pain from spasms of rectum, with every evacuation 
lasting an hour or two ; horrible constriction, much < if stool solid.— (Con- 
stipation from anal spasm in children. — R. T. C.)— Prolapsus ani, with 
paralysis.— Fissures of anus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Retention of urine. — Difficult emission of urine, 
only drop by drop, dark coloured, scanty, albuminous. — Tenesmus of bladder. 
— More frequent and more copious emission of urine. — Watery, or reddish, 
fiery, turbid, and sometimes thick- urine ; sediment consisting of red blood- 
corpuscles and cylinders ; all the symptoms of acute nephritis ; with amaurosis 
and cerebral symptoms. — Discharge of blood from urethra. — Diabetes. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Swelling and inflammation of genital 
organs (of penis and scrotum). — Contraction and constriction in testes, with 
jerking in spermatic cord. — Retraction of testes.— Excoriation of scrotum. — 
Sexual desire excessively increased, with frequent erections and pollutions. — 
Loss of sexual desire. — Insufficient emission of semen during coition. — (Im- 
potence.) 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Retarded menstruation. — Amenoerhoea, 
chloro-anaemia. — Nymphomania. — Wants to stretch limbs during ovarian 
pains. — Spasmodic dysmenorrheea. — Cessation of menses on invasion of 
colic ; may reappear after paroxysm, or not again until next period. — Metror- 
rhagia with sensation of strong pulling from abdomen to back; during 
climacteric, dark clots alternating with fluid blood or bloody ^erum. — Stran- 
gulation of prolapsed portion of vagina, intense pain. — Mucous discharge 
per vaginam. — Feels a lack of room for feetus in uterus ; inability of uterus to 
expand ; threatened abortion. — During pregnancy cannot pass urine, from 
lack of sensation ; or from paralysis. — Puerperal eclampsia ; albuminuria. — 
Pulling, tearing, contractive pains in breasts, uterus, and vagina, with or 
without colic ; the breasts become momentarily harder, or with the colic 
they become smaller. — Induration and inflammation of breasts. — Lcucorrhoea. 
— Miscarriage. — Vaginismus. — Hyperaesthesia of genitals. — Obstructed bowels 
during pregnancy. — Milk scanty and watery. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness and roughness in throat. — 
Aphonia. — Constriction of the larynx. — Copious expectoration of mucus from 
larynx, which is viscid, transparent, or yellowish green, and in lumps. — Dry, " 
convulsive cough. — Expectoration of pus with the cough. — Cough, with 
expectoration of blood, haemorrhages from lungs. 

18. Chest. — Difficult, anxious, oppressed, and panting respiration. — 

Shortness of breath. — Spasmodic asthma. — Oppression of chest, appearing 
periodically. — Fits of suffocation. — Pressure on chest, esp. when breaking 
deeply or laughing. — Shootings in chest and rides, sometimes with obstructed 
respiration.— Apices of lungs affected. — Small red papules on chest, which 
desquamate. ^ ^ 

19. Heart. — Ebullition in chest, with anxietas praecordium, and percep- 
tible palpitation. — Change in muscular structure without coincident disease of 
valves, with or without atheromatous degeneration of vessels, usually hyper- 



PLUMBUM 


863 


trophy and dilatation of 1. ventricle, sometimes with parenchymatous nephritis. 
— Bruit de souffle. — Palpitation, < on ascending stairs or running. — Pulse 
rapid, jerky, weak. — Tachycardia. 

20* Neck and Back. — Tension in nape of neck, extending into ear* on 
moving head.— Tcarings and shootings in loins, in back, and between 
shoulder-blades. — Distortion of spine.— Itching on coccyx above anus, going 
off when scratched. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Convulsive movements of arms and hands, with 
jfains in joints. — Drawing and tearing in arms and fingers. — ^Wrist-drop. — 
Weakness and painful paralysis of arms and hands. — Dilatation of veins on 
back of hands, arms, and calves. — Ganglion on back of hands. — ^Wens on 
hands. — Difficulty in moving fingers. — Red and swollen spots pn fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Drawing in hip-joints when lying down. — Painful 
sensation of paralysis in hip-joints, and in those of hands and feet, esp. on 
going up stairs. — Violent pains in limbs, esp. in muscular parts of thighs ; < 
evening and night. — Sciatica ; walking causes great exhaustion ; with con- 
secutive atrophy. — Cramp in calves, < at night. — Paralysis of thighs and feet. 
— Numbness outer side r. thigh from hip to knee. — Numbness of legs and 
feet. — Tearings and shootings in thighs and knees. — Sensation of numbness in 
feet, with difficulty in putting them to the ground. — Cramps in soles of feet. 
— Swelling of feet. — Fetid sweat on feet. — Distortion of toes. — Pain in great 
toe at night. — Ingrowing toenails. 

24. Generalities. — [Jaundice, where the sclerotica is yellow, face yellow, 
urine yellow ; vomiting in bed after retiring for the night, restless, sleepless, 
&c. — Loss of smell ; reddish-yellow face. — Affections in lower teeth ; tongue ; 
sweetish taste, as in expectoration of cough with sweetish taste. — Obstructed 
flatus with terrible colic. — Retraction of soft parts in general ; pinching pain 
with sensation of tearing; sphacelus ; grey ulcers. — H. N.G.] — Drawing and 
tearings in limbs, < at night, sometimes shifting their position on the parts 
being scratched. — Burning sensation in various parts of body. — Violent ting- 
*ling pains in4-)ones, coming on fitfully. — Cramps and constrictive pains in in- 
ternal organs. — Numbness, stiffness, pain as from fatigue, and contraction of 
some of the limbs. — Paralysis ; of the limbs of those who work in lead. — Con- 
vulsive trembling and jerking of limbs, convulsions and cramps, sometimes 
followed by paralysis. — Epileptic fits (without consciousness). — Swooning, esp. 
in a large company. — Heaviness and torpor of limbs. — Great weakness, with 
trembling of limbs. — Depression, with want to lie down, and throbbing of 
wteries in whole body after slight exercise. — Muscles flaccid. — General 
emaciation, esp. in paralysed parts, followed by swelling of those parts. — 
Excess of uric acid in the blood, — Anaemia, — Anaesthesia.— Hyperaesthesia.— 
Arthralgic and neuralgic pains in trunk and limbs. — Dropsical swellings, 
sometimes of whole body, — Sensitiveness in open air. — The symptoms 
develop themselves slowly, and sometimes disappear for a time and reappear 
subsequently. — < In the night ; from rubbing. 

25. Skin.— Sensitiveness of skin to open air. — Lead coloured, dry, rough, 
bluish, ^r yellow skin. — Dark brown spots over whole body. — Tendency to 
inflammation and suppuration of slight wounds.— Burning pain in ulcers. — 
ExccMriations. — Decubitus. —Sphacelus. 

26. Sleep. — Great drowsiness during day ; tendency to fall asleep, even 



864 PLUMBUM— PLUMBUM CHROMICUM 

wBile speaking.— Coma and lethargy, sometimes with dizziness.— Retarded 
sleep.— Nocturnal sleeplessness, with abdominal spasms.— Jerks during sleep. 
— Must stretch in every direction. — Assumes strangest attitudes in bed at 
night.— Many dreams, sometimes lascivious, with erections.— Talking during 
sleep. 

27, Fever.— Pulse very variable, generally contracted, small and slow ; 
at times hard and slow, occasionally small and quick. — Predominance of 
shiverings and coldness, esp. in the limbs and in open air. — Cfiill predomi- 
nates, increasing towards evening, with violent thirst and redness of face.— 
Coldness in open air and when exercising. — Cold or clammy sweat. — Tran- 
sient, anxious heat (with thirst, redness of face, and sleepiness). — Internal heat 
in evening antj at night, with yellowness of buccal cavity. — Entire lack of 
perspiration. 


Plumbum Ghromicum. 

Chromate of Lead. Chrome Yellow. PbCr 04 . Trituration. 

Olinioal. — Colic. Convulsions. Cramps. Diarrhoea. Dysphagia. Erythema. 
Screaming. Tenesmus. 

Charaoteristios. — Several cases of poisoning by Chrome Yellow 
have been observed. The symptoms present the cardinal features of 
lead poisoning — cramps, convulsions, retracted abdomen. Charac- 
teristic features were a violent diarrhoea of yellow colour. Yellow 
stools with constipation. Convulsions with terrible pains. Erythe- 
matous redness of chest and abdomen. Pupils enormously dilated. 
The face was red and hot, and there was heat of the body gener^ly. 
The symptoms were < towards evening. > By drinking warm milL^ 

ft 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Apathetic, but when questioned knew what was going on 
around.— Apathetic, almost soporous. 

2. Head.— Headache with ringing in ears, pains in chest, loss of 
appetite, inclination to vomit. 

3. Eyes. — Pupils enormously dilated. — Eyeballs fixed, staring. ‘ 

4. Ears. — Ringing in ears with headache. 

6. Face. — Face pale, — Face red and hot. — Face livid during convul- 
sions. — Expression of most profound prostration. — Lips violet. — Lips dry.— 
Jaws firmly closed. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue coated yellow. — Point of tongue red. — Bad pdour 
from mouth. 

9. Throat. — Swallowed with difficulty ; shortly before death. 

11. Stomach. — Appetite lost. — Great thirst. — Nausea and vonjiting. — 
Softening of coats of stomach,— Pain in epigastric region. 

12. Abdomen. — Abdomen hard and forcibly retracted. — Pain in um- 
bilical region, — ^Violent cramps in abdomen with constipation. 



PODOPHYLLUM 865 

13, Stool and Anus. — ^Violent diarrhoBa.-r-yellow diarrhoea. — Consti- 
pation with yellow faeces. — Constipation. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Respiration short ; laboured. 

18. Chest. — Pain in chest. — Redness of chest and abdomen. 

ZQ. Heart. — Pulse tumultuous. — Pulse irregular and intermittent. 

20 . Back. — Pain in spine. 

24. Generalities. — Frequent convulsions, during which face becomes 
livid. — Frequent screaming. — Convulsions with terrible pains. — Prostration — 
Restlessness. 

25. Skin. — Skin of chest and abdomen remarkably erythematous. 

26. Sleep. — Sleeplessness. 

27. Fever. — Whole body hot. 


Plumbum lodatum. 

Iodide of Lead. Plumbic Iodide. PbL. Trituration. 

Clinioal. — Arterio-sclerosis. Atrophiae. Crusta lactea. Glands, enlarged. 
Paralysis. Pellagra. Scrofula. Spleen, enlargement of. Tonsils enlarged. Ulcers. 

dkaracteristics. — Plumb, iod. is used in old-school practice as an 
external application in cases of enlarged glands, chronic ulcers, and 
porrigo capitis. It has also been given internally for enlarged glands 
and chronic enlargement of the spleen. Hansen mentions “ arterio- 
sclerosis ; atrophiae ; pellagra ; paralyses,’’ as conditions relieved by it. 
A combinatioir of Plumb, and lod. indications will be the chief guide. 


Podophyllum. 

Podophyllum peltatum. May Apple. Mandrake (American). N. O. 
Berberidaceae (by some placed in the Ranunculaceae and closely 
related to both). Tincture of root gathered after fruit has 
• ripened ; of whole fresh plant ; of ripe fruit. Solution of 
resinous extract, Podophyllin. 

• Glliiloal* — Acidity. Amenorrheea. Anus^ prolapse of. Asthma, bronchial. 
Bilious attack. Bronchitis. Cataract. Cholera infantum. Cornea, ulcer of. Den- 
tition. Diarrhoea ; camp. Duodenum^ catarrh of. Dysentery. Dysmenia. Dys- 
pepsia ; from calomel. Fevers. Flatulence. Gagging. Gall-stones. Gastric 
catarrh. Goitre. Haemorrhoids. Headache, sick ; bilious. Heart, pains in. 
Hydrocephaloid. Intermittents, Jaundice. Leucoma. Liver^ affccHotts of Oph- 
thalmia. Ovaries, pains in ; numbness in ; tumour of. Palpitation. Pneumonia. 
ProcMist Prostatitis. Pustules. Sciatica. Stomatitis. Strabismus. Taste, lost ; 
perverted ; illusions of. Tenesmus. Tongue, burning in. Urticaria. Uterus, pro- 
lapse of. Whooping-cough. Worms. 

Ckaraoteristioft. — Pod. grows throughout the United States in 
damp, shady places in woods^ has leaves five to nine-lobed, large 
white nodding flowers, yellowish fruits, egg-shaped, not unlike a 
small lemon, hence the plant is sometimes called Wild Lemon. It 
VOL. n. 56 



866 


PODOPHYLLUM 


flowers in May and June, and the fruit ripens in October. Indian 
tribes use the root to expel worms, and drop the juice of the root 
into the ear to cure deafness. “ All the tribes are fond of the fruit,” 
says Rafinesque, quoted by Hale, who gives a full account of the 
medicine. The botanic ana eclectic practitioners adopted the remedy 
and used it as the “vegetable mercury.” The first homoeopathic 
proving was made by Williamson. An unintentional proving recorded 
by E. V. Rose {H. IV.y xxv. 2^) brings out the chief characteristics of 
Pod.f and shows that its reputation as a vegetable mercury” is not 
undeserved : Mr. 26, took at ii a.m. gr. x of Pod, rt x to “stir up 
his liver.” At 6 p.m. was taken with an indescribable sick feeling all 
over, and a persistent dry, rough feeling in pharynx and oesophagus, 
extending along right Eustachian tube, with dull, aching pain in right 
ear ; feeling as though a ball or lump in upper oesophagus. At 8 p.m. 
dull and stupefying headache, chiefly frontal, < lying down. Fulness 
in stomach, belching of gas, sour eructations ; marked salivation and 
offensive odour from mouth. Sleep disturbed, full of confused 
dreams ; rolled and tossed about, bed felt too hard ; and a feeling as 
though head and shoulders were lying too low. At 3 a.m. call to 
stool, which was profuse, watery, dark green. Calls frequent. Before 
stool : peculiar weak, dull, griping pain below umbilicus ; fulness in 
rectum. During stool ; weak feeling in stomach. After stool : tenes- 
mus and faint feeling. These symptoms passed off in two or three 
days, the diarrhoea being followed by constipation, which was quickly 
removed by Nux. These symptoms are nearly all proved charac- 
teristics of Pod, : The early morning < ,* the profuse stools, faint, gone 
sensation ; fulness and tenesmus in rectum. Pod,^ is an irritant 
wherever applied. Externally on the skin it produces a rawness like 
intertrigo. The dust of the powdered root getting into the eyes sets 
up intense inflammation, ulceration, and leucoma. These effects have 
proved leading indications for its internal use in eye affections. The , 
fulness and tenderness of the rectum noted in Rosses case went on to 
actual prolapse in the provings. I have many times cured withPorf.6 
prolapsus ani in children. With Pod, ix Mr. Knox Shaw relieved 
“ continual urging and straining” in a case of rectal cancer too far gone 
for operation. The genital organs were involved with the rectum in 
the tendency to prolapse. “ Symptoms of prolapsus uteri with pain 
in sacrum; with muco-gelatinous stools”; “sensation at stool as if 
the genital organs would fall out ” are keynotes of the provings which 
have led to many cures. Pains in the ovaries, especially the right, 
extending down the anterior and inner side of thighs. In the preg- 
nant and puerperal state Pod, is frequently indicated : in the vomiting 
of pregnancy ; swelling of labia ; severe after-pains with strong 
bearing-down sensation ; haemorrhoids and prolapsus recti ^ter con- 
finement. A peculiar symptom of pregnancy indicating Pbd, is : 

“ Can lie comfortably only on stomach (early months).” The iMta- 
tion of Pod. is shown in the brain, but it is then generally reflected 
even from the abdominal viscera (cholera infantum) or the teeth (den- 
tition). There is moaning and whining during sleep ; the head is 
thrown back and rolls from side to side ; the child grates its teeth. 

“ Great desire to press gums or teeth together ” is a keynote. The 



PODOPHYLLUM 


867 


salivation, foul breath, and moist, tooth-indented tongue of Merc, are 
reproduced in the Pod. provings, and so also is the congested, sensi- 
tive liver, with excess or absence of bile. These, combined with the 
feverishness and proneness to sweat, make Pod. one of the important 
antidotes to Merc. Fevers of many kinds are met by Pod. — ^remittent, 
chiefly.^ bilious remittent, intermittent. Delirium is not rare, and is 
apt to be loquacious. Moaning and whining during sleep. Much 
^drowsiness and desire to stretch. Alternating conditions are noted : 
Diarrhoea alternating with constipation ; headache alternating with 
diarrhoea ; he^ache in winter, diarrhoea in summer ; inflammation of 
scrotum or of the eyes ; not of both. Some Concomitants are impor- 
tant : Pains in sacrum, in lumbar region with rectal and uterine symp- 
toms ; cramps in calves with stools. The stools may be painless, or 
may be preceded, accompanied, and followed by colic, tenesmus and 
other symptoms. The concomitance of diarrhoea with other affections 
points to Pod. Loquacity during chill and heat is a keynote in fevers. 
Nash cured an obstinate case of intermittent through this symptom : 
Chills violent, followed by intense fever with great loquacity ; when 
the fever was past patient fell asleep, and on waking remembered 
nothing of his loquacious delirium. ‘^Burning tongue is another 
leadipg symptom. A case is related by W. A. Burr {Critique^ quoted 
Horn, Newsj xxviii. 87) of a young man who had for some weeks a burn- 
ing sensation along left edge of tongue, occasionally shooting to tip, or 
through to opposite edge. He had been in poor health, “ bilious,” for 
years. With catarrh of stomach, duodenum, and bile ducts extreme 
discomfort followed even the blandest foods. Pod. 3X improved in two 
days, and the^tongue was well in a week. L. M. Barnes {Horn. News, 
XXIX. 45) reports these cases : (i) A lady for four months after mis- 
carriage had much ovarian pain, < at night. She was sleepless, 
nervous, restless. Much bearing down in abdomen and back. She 

• was a larger stout woman, with a pendulous abdomen. Pod. cured after 
Ptt/s.* and Act. r. had only partidly relieved. (2) A stout woman, 60, 
complained of burning, aching, cutting pain in rectum. Was obliged 
to be on her feet all day. Nervous, cross, irritable. Pod. cured. 
Pod. is suited to bilious temperaments, especially after mercurialisation. 

* Peculiar sensations are : As if strabismus would occur. Pain in head 
as from ice on occipital protuberance. As if tongue, throat, apd 
^palate had been burned. As if a thousand live things moving about 
*in abdomen, or of fish turning over. As if everything would drop 
through pelvis. As if heart ascending to throat. Ball in upper 
oesophagus. Notable symptoms are ; Thirst for large quantities of 
cold water. Intense desire to press the gums together. Viscid 
mucus in mouth, coating teeth. Diarrhoea whilst being bathed or 
wasbecJ ; of dirty water soaking through napkin ; with gagging. 
Patient is constantly shaking and rubbing region of liver with his 
hands. Great loquacity during chill and heat. Pod. is predominantly 
right jided — right throat ; hypochondrium ; ovary. Guernsey men- 
,tions that it is often called tor in complaints of pregnant and par- 
turient women, with sensation as if intestines were falling down. He 
mentions also ** whooping-cough with costiveness and loss of appetite.” 
The symptoms are < by touch (spot on right hypochondrium) ; > 



868 


PODOPHYLLUM 


by pressure. > Rubbing (inclination to rub liver region with hand). 
> Lying down ; lying on abdomen ; stretching in bed. Pain in left 
leg < by straightening out the limb. < Motion ; walking ; ascend* 
ing stairs ; exertion. < Morning, especially early morning, 2 to 4 
a.m. Some symptoms < night. < Open air; while washing. 
External heat > pain in bowels. Heat of stove does not > chilliness, 
but wrapping warmly in bed does >. Hot weather, summer, < diar- 
rhoea. < After eating and drinking ; after acid fruit and milk. < 
By swallowing. < Before, during, and after stool. 

Relations. — Antidoted by: Lact. ac., Nux, Coloci, Lept. Anti- 
dote to : Merc. Compatible : After Ipec. and Nux in vomiting ; after 
Calc, and Sul. in liver diseases. Incompatible : Salt, which increases 
its action. Compare : Morning diarrhoea, Sul., Dros., Bry., Nat. s., 
Rx. c. Hot, yellowish, green, offensive diarrhoea, Cham. (Cham. < 
evening ; Pod. < morning, in one gush). Cholera morbus, profuse 
stools, Ver. (Ver. has much pain ; Pod. may have absence of pain). 
Diarrhoea < after eating ; headaches alternating with uterine and 
bowel affections, Alo. (Plumb, delirium alternating with colic). Pro- 
lapsus ani before stool with weakness in abdomen (Alo. after stool). 
Prolapsus uteri < during stool, Stan, (with Pod. the stool is diarrhoeic 
and comes with a rush). Prolapsus recti et uteri, Nux, Sep. Bearing 
down in hypogastric and anal regions, > lying down, Sep. Prolapsus 
of rectum. Bell., .^sc. h.. Nit. ac.. Rut. (especially in children, Chi., 
Chi. s., Pod,). Duodenal catarrh, Berb., Chi., Hydras., Lyc., Merc., 
Ric. c. Diarrhoea immediately after eating, Alo., Ars., Chi., Lyc., 
Staph,, Trbd. (whilst eating. Per.). < After eating or drinking, Dig., 
Trbd'. Headache from over-excitement, Epipheg. Blu’^ before head- 
ache, K. bi., Ir. V. Wants to bite gums together, Phyt. Tongue as if 
burnt, Sang, Blue tongue, Gymno. As if something alive in abdomen. 
Croc. Regurgitation of food, Sul. Pain under right scapula, Chel. 
Diarrhoea, ovarian pain, ovarian tumour, dysmenia, Coloc. 

Causation. — Over-lifting or over-straining (prolapsus uteri). 
Summer (diarrhoea). 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.— Conscious during chill, but cannot talk, forgets words, — 
Delirium, loquacious during heat ; forgetful after of what has passed. — 
Depression : imagines he is going to die or be very ill ; in gastric affections. 
— Disgust for life ; headache ; biliary disorders. — Over-fatigue of mind from * 
business ; when in bed he rolled his head on waking and while awake. 

2. Head. — ^Vertigo : while standing ; in open air ; with tendency to 
fall forward ; with sensation of fulness over eyes ; from gastric or bilious 
disorders. — Momentary darts of pain in forehead, obliging one to shut eyes. — 
Stunning headache through temples, > by pressure. — Sudden pain in fore- 
head, with soreness of throat, evening.— -Pressing in temples, forenoon, with 
drawing in eyes as if strabismus would follow. — Throbbing in temples, aching 
eyes, hot tears, in morning.— After stool, 10 a.m. ; Frontal headache with 
feverishness ; sensation of great dryness in forehead and eyes, > for short 
time by bathing with cold water. — Sick headache accompanied by constipa- 
tion.— Headache alternating with diarrhoea.— Bilious headache, burning at 



PODOPHYLLUM 


869 


vertex and over forehead, pain lasts twenty-four hours, ends in vomiting ; 
pale urine during attack ; passes much bile next day ; < from over-excite- 
ment or walking. — Morning headache with flushed face and heat in vertex. — 
Dull headache with pain behind eyes ; liver torpid.— Pain in vertex on rising 
in morning. — Sick headache most in occiput, preceded by blur before vision, 
coming suddenly. — Head hot, rolling head from side to side ; dentition. — 
Reflex irritation of brain from disorders of bowels ; grinding teeth at night ; 
morning in sleep ; eyes half-closed ; head sweaty. 

3. Eyes. — Inflammation of eyes with excruciating, heavy pain, great 
turgescence of wessels. — Superficial ulceration of each cornea with general 
congestion of conjunctivae ; ulceration central and extensive, in r. eye its 
base was densely white, as if lead had been used (after ten days, from the 
dust whilst grinding the root). — Eyes inflamed in morning. — L. eye sore. — 
(Arcus senilis lessens and a dribbling of saliva ceases in an old man. — R. T. C.) 
— Eyes glazed and motionless (from ripe fruit). — Eyes sunken. — Heaviness of 
eyes with occasional pains at vertex. — Smarting ; inflammation of lids. — Pain 
in eyeballs and temples, with heat and throbbing of temporal arteries. — 
Drawing in eyes as if squint would follow. — Scrofulous ophthalmia < in 
morning. — (Cataract has been known to clear after Pod, given internally. 
-R. T. C.) 

4. Ears. — Aching pain in r. ear, with rough feeling extending from 
there along r. Eustachian tube. 

5. Nose. — Nose pinched. — Soreness and little pimples on nose. 

6. Face. — Corpse-like pallor. — Complexion sallow, dingy. — Hot, flushed 
cheeks. — Under jaw fallen. 

7. Teeth. — Great desire to press gums together ; jaws clenched ; 
grinds teeth af*ifight ; difficult dentition. — During dentition ; catarrhal cough ; 
catarrh of chest ; cholera infantum ; hydrocephaloid. — Teeth covered with 
dried mucus in morning. 

8. Mouth. — Total loss of taste, could not tell sweet from sour ; sleep- 
less, /estlcsf. — Everything tastes sour or putrid ; sweet. — Taste of fried liver 
in mouth at night. — Bad taste after other symptoms had disappeared. — Feel- 
ing as if tongue, and sometimes palate and throat, had been burned. — Tongue : 
furred white with foul taste ; white, moist, shows imprints of teeth ; dry, 
yellow ; full and broad with pasty coat in centre ; red, not bright red ; rough 
wfth uniformly erect papillae ; dull bluish colour ; red, dry, cracked, some- 
what swollen and often bleeding. — Offensive breath ; at night ; perceptible to 

’ patient. — Copious salivation. — (Dribbling of saliva in an old epileptic case 
ceases. — R. T. C.) — Much viscid mucus in mouth (morning). — Mouth and 
tongue dry on awaking. — Nursing sore mouth ; canker. 

g. Throat. — Dryness of throat— Burning in throat (from the ripe fruit). 
—Soreness of throat extending to ears ; r. to 1 . ; 1 . side sore, < swallowing 
liquids^ morning. — Rattling of mucus in throat. — Goitre. — Dry, rough feeling 
in pharynx and oesophagus, extending along r. Eustachian tube with aching 
pain in r. ear. 

10^ Appetite.— Indifference to food ; loss of appetite ; smell of food ss 
loathing. — Satiety from small quantity of food, followed by nausea and vomit- 
ing. — Appetite variable, at times voracious.— Great thirst for (cold water in) 
large quantities ; moderate thirst during fever. — Increased thirst after eating. 



PODOPHYLLUM 


I 

<870 

—Desire for something sour.— Thirst towards evening.— After eating : regurg- 
itation of food, sour ; hot, sour belching ; diarrhoea ; vomits food an hour 
after, craving appetite afterwards; depression of spirits. — ^After eating and 
drinking : diarrhoea. — After acid fruit and milk : diarrhoea. 

11. Stomach.— Heartburn, waterbrash, heat in stomach.— Eructations ; 
smelling like rotten eggs ; hot ; sour. — Nausea : distressing and extreme ; 
with attempts to vomit; motion of gagging is made with mouth but not 
accompanied with retching ; stomach contracts so hard and rapidly that the 
wrenching pain =s patient to utter sharp screams ; gagging or empty retch-' 
ing. — Gagging in infantile diarrhoea. — Nausea and vomitings with fulness in 
head. — Vomiting : of milk in infants, with protrusion of anus ; of food with 
putrid taste and odour ; of thick bile and blood ; of hot, frothy mucus ; with 
congestion of pelvic viscera during pregnancy.— Acidity in afternoon with un- 
pleasant, sickly sensation in stomach. — Tender over stomach and bowels, < 
least touch or motion. — Hollow, empty, weak, sinking feeling at epigastrium ; 
without hunger. — Stitches in epigastrium from coughing.— Dyspepsia from 
calomel, aching behind eyes, clayey stools. — Gastric catarrh. — Awakened by 
violent pains in stomach and bowels. — ^Aftcr breakfast and dinner burning in 
stomach as if caused by hot steam. — Heat in stomach. — Cold water < ; it as 
oppression and uneasiness ; small quantities of it were ejected, tasting bitter 
and causing much burning in oesophagus. 

12. Abdomen.— Acute burning in region of pyloric orifice, with violent 
retching and vomiting of bile and belching of wind ; constipation ; after 
attacks, prostration ; slight jaundice and persistent tenderness to touch in one 
spot corresponding to entrance of common bile duct into duodenum. — Fulness 
in r. hypochondrium, with flatulence, pain, and soreness. — Twisting in r. 
hypochondrium with burning. — Stitches in hypochondria, < while eating. — 
Pain in region of liver with inclination to rub the part with the hand. — Exces- 
sive secretion of bile, great irritability of liver. — Hepatitis with costiveness ; 
tenderness and pain in region of liver. — Gall-stones and jaundice. — Bilious- 
ness; nausea and giddiness; bitter taste and risings; tendency to bilious 
vomiting and purging; dark urine. — Abdomen swelled almost to bursting 
(fruit). — Flatulence. — Abdominal plethora : bloated feeling ; soreness, uneasi- 
ness ; > after stool ; causing uterine troubles. — Rumbling. — Colic. — Awakened 
by violent pains in stomach and bowels, griping, stitching, > for short time 
by pressure ; 3 a.m. (first night). — Pain in transverse colon, 3 a.m., followed 
by diarrhcjea. — Pain in limbs at daylight, > by external warmth and bending 
forward whilst lying on side, < lying on back. — Heat in bowels with inclina- 
tion to stool. — Woke 2 a.m. with stitches in bowels and desire to go to stool ; 
> flexing thighs or abdomen. — Symptoms generally, and esp. abdominal 
symptoms, < morning, > evening. — Tenderness over h3rpogastrium.— Pain 
extended into lower bowels and r. ovary, 

13. Stool and Anus, — Emission of fetid flatus. — Morning diarrhoea, 
then no more stools during day. — Diarrhoea early in morning, continuing 
through forenoon, followed by natural stool in evening.- Diarrhoea imme- 
diately srfter eating and drinking. — Stools in morning, with strong urgipgs in 
bowels and heat and pain in anus.— Small, frequent, bilious stools with 
tenesmus.— Diarrhoea, yellow stools, one every hour for live hours.— Stools of 
pure blood (produced.— R. T. C.). — Infantile dysentery (cured. — R. T, 



PODOPHYLLUM 


871 


Dysenteric diarrhoea. — Stools ; thin, watery, green ; green ; muco-gelatinous 
with pain in sacrum ; 4 a.m., yellow, undigested faeces, mixed with mucus, 
offensive ; with violent tenesmus ; burning, acrid, causing much bearing down 
during and after stool ; with gagging and excessive thirst in children ; gush- 
ing, watery, profuse, green, with sudden urging, often painless ; offensive, < 
in hot weather ; pasty ; yellow, watery, with meal-like sediment ; smelling 
like carrion ; mucous and blood-streaked ; black, only in morning ; tar-like ; 
changing colour. — Stool with much pain and deadly nausea. — Diarrhoea and 
tonstipation alternating every day or two, for several days after the most 
prominent symptoms had disappeared. — Diarrhoea with great sinking at 
epigastrium, sensation as if everything would drop through pelvis, prolapsus 
ani, — Small stools, yellow, watery, coming after meals with sick feeling, in 
pregnancy. — Diarrhoea from indigestion after eating canned fruit. — Before 
stool : intense nausea ; sudden urging ; loud gurgling as of water ; rumbling in 
1, side ; violent colic or absence of pain ; prolapsus ani . — During stool ; urging 
in bowels ; heat and pain in anus ; sensation as if genital organs would fall 
out ; in women bearing down as from inactivity of rectum ; nausea ; gagging, 
tormina, and pain in lumbar region ; colic or absence of pain ; prolapsus ani ; 
pains in sacrum ; tenesmus. — After stool : extreme weakness and cutting pain 
in intestines ; exhaustion, even after natural stool ; flashes of heat running up 
back, ^cutting in bowels, severe and painful tenesmus ; colic continues ; faint- 
ness and pain in lumbar region ; prolapsus ani ; sore anus ; sensation of 
emptiness in abdomen and rectum. — Aggravation of internal piles ; rectum 
protrudes more than an inch after every stool, or sudden motion as sneezing, 
even during mental excitement ; prolapse sometimes persists for days from 
swelling and 'congestion. — Prolapsus ani : in infants, stool bloody, or too 
large ; with uteJfhie displacement. — Secretion of mucus from anus. — External 
piles, bleeding or not— (Cancer of rectum.) 

14. Urinary Organs. — Micturition painful; scanty with frequent 
voidings. — Urine : yellow, containing sediment ; very red. — Diabetes mellitus 

* and insipid»s ; chalky stool, urination immediately after drinking, frequent, 
profu§e. — Urinary tenesmus, — Enuresis ; (markedly < on lying down, hence 
at night.— R. T. C.). 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Sticking pain above pubes and in course of 
spermatic cords. — Diseases of prostate gland associated with rectal troubles. 
— Inflammation either of scrotum or of eyes ; seldom of both. — Inflammation 
of scrotum is attended with a pustular eruption which suppurates freely. 

• i6. Female Sexual Organs.— Symptoms of prolapsus uteri, with pain 
in sacrum, muco-gelatinous stools. — Sensation as if genital organs would tall 
out at stool. — After-pains with strong bearing down.-«^Pain in r. ovary and 
uterus.— Numb aching in 1. ovary ; heat down thigh ; third month of preg- 
nancy. — Pain in ovaries, esp. r. ; extending down limbs. — Pain from r. ovary 
down anterior crural nerve, pain < as it descends ; < straightening limb. — 
Shooting pain in r. ovary, before and during menses. — Ovarian tumour : with 
pains extending up to shoulder. — Prolapsus uteri : with diarrhoea ; from 
washing ; after over-lifting or straining ; after parturition.— Induration of os 
uteri.— (Extreme tenderness of uterus, backache, sick feeling and enuresis on 
ll^ng down. — R. T. C.) — Menorrhagia from straining. — Menses, retarded ; 
with ovarian, hypogastric, and sacral pains, < from motion, > lying* down. — 



PODOPHYLLUM 


872 

fiftsring down in abdomen and back during menses ; ovarian pains niimmg 
into thighs.— During pregnancy : swelling of labia ; can lie comfortably only 
on stomach, early months ; excessive vomiting. — Haemorrhoids and prc&psns 
ani aft^r confinement. — Pendulous abdomen. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Chronic bronchitis.— Inclination to breathe 
deep ; sighing. — Sensation of suffocation on first lying down at night.— Bron- 
chi^ asthma ; < after catching cold. — Cough : loose, hacking ; with remittent 
fever ; dry ; loose ; rattling in chest, during dentition ; from disease of liver, — 
Whooping-cough, with constipation and loss of appetite. 

18. Chest. — Catarrh of chest during dentition. — Pneumonia. — Snapping 
in r. lung like breaking a thread, when taking a deep inspiration. — Pains in 
chest < by deep inspiration. — Oppression in chest with constant desire to 
breathe deep, which is prevented by feeling of constriction in chest. 

19. Heart. — Sensation in chest as if heart ascending to throat. — Sticking 
(or stinging) in region of heart. — Palpitation : with a clucking sensation 
rising up to throat, obstructing respiration ; from exertion or mental emotion ; 
with heavy sleep and feeling of fatigue on waking ; nervous, in consequence 
of excessive hepatic action. — Pulse : quick and small ; slow, scarcely percep- 
tible ; pulseless. 

20. Neck and Back. — Nape of neck stiff, muscles sore. — Pain under r, 
scapula. — Pain between shoulders, morning ; with soreness, < night and 
morning, < by motion. — Pain in small of back, when walking or standing, 
with sensation of back bending inward. — Pain in lumbar region with sensation 
of coldness, < at night and from motion. — Pain in lumbar and sacral 
regions < during stool, and still < after. — Pain in loins < walking on uneven 
ground or from mis-step. — Sacral pain. 

21. Limbs. — Aching in limbs < night. — Weakness of Jthnts, esp. knees. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pain in course of ulnar nerve of both arms. — 
Rheumatism in I. forearm and fingers. — Pains from head into neck and 
shoulders ; fingers numb. — Weakness of wrists, sore to touch. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pain and weakness in 1 . hip, like rhetrmatisni from 
cold ; < by going up stairs. — Sharply defined ache in sacro-ischiadic foiamen, 
with tenderness on pressure. — Slight paralytic weakness of 1 . side. — Heaviness 
and stiffness of knees as after a long walk. — Cracking in knee from motion. — 
Cramps in calves, thighs, and feet, with painless, watery stools. — Sharp pains 
in outer and upper portion of 1. foot. 

24. Generalities. — Faintness and emptiness after stool. — Prostration 
with the pain. — Stiffness on beginning to move. — Sudden shocks of jerking ' 
pains. 

25. Skin. — Sallow skin ; jaundice ; also in children. — Skin moist with ‘ 
preternatural warmth. — Scabs on arms and legs. — Pustules slow in healing. — 
Rawness and itching of genitals ; also pustules. — Cold, clammy skin. — 
Erysipelas. — Rubefaciant and vesicatory. — Intolerable itching of body and 
arms. — Urticaria. — Skin has peculiar odour in patients taking Pod. (Ussher). 

26. Sleep. — Sleepiness : in daytime, esp. forenoon ; with rumbling in 
bowels in morning. — Heavy sleep ; fatigue on wakjng.— Drowsy, half-closed 
eyes, moaning, whining, esp. children. — ^Great restlessness, tossing ai^at in 
bed, yawning and stretching, which > completely. — Rising up in sleep with- 
out waking. — Drowsiness or restless sleep, with grinding of teeth or rolling of 



POLYGONUM 


873 


hea<l**-:Worrying and sleepless early part of night, apparently from nervous 
iriitabiUty. — Sleep disturbed, full of confused dreams. — Rolled and tossed 
about, bed felt too hard ; feeling as though head and shoulders lying too 
low. 

aj. Fever. — Chilliness while moving about during fever, and in act of 
lying down, with sweat immediately after. — Chilly at first on lying down in 
evening, followed by fever and sleep with talking and imperfect waking. — 
Chill 7 a.m. — Backache before chill. — During chill great loquacity. — Shaking 
abd sensation of coldness continue some time after heat commences. — Heat 
begins during chill or whilst he is yet chilly. — Chilly with stool. — Pain in 
bowels first attended with coldness, which is followed by heat and warm 
sweat. — Feverish during afternoon, with occasional chilliness, not > by heat 
of stove, but > by covering up warmly in bed.— Heat with violent pains in 
head; thirst; loquacity. — Flashes of heat running up back during stool. — 
Ravenous hunger with thirst during fever. — Bilious fever ; bilious intermit- 
tent ; remittent ; infantile remittent ; intermittent, quotidian, tertian, quartan. 
— Sweat : profuse, dropped off proverbs fingers ; of feet in evening ; bathed in 
cold ; warm on hekd and legs. — Sleep during sweat. 


Polygonum. 

Polygonum acre. P. punctatum. Ell. P. hydropiperoides, Pursh. 

, Smart Weed. (North America.) And 
Polygonum rxpropiper. Persicaria urens. Water-pepper. (Britain.) 

Tincture of whole fresh plant. N. 0, Polygonaceae. 

Glinloal. — Amenorrheea. Antrum, pain in. Blepharitis. Colic, flatulent. 
Cough. Diarrhoea. Dysentery. Dysmenia. Dysuria. Eczema. Epilepsy. 
•Gonorrhoea. Gravel. Haemorrhoids. Heart, affections of. Hysteria. Laryngitis. 
Nephritis, mjuralgia. Orchitis. Prostatitis. Sciatica. Spermatic cord, pain in. 
Spleen, affections of. Strangury. Ulcers. 

Characteristics. — Polyg. was proved by W. E. Payne and others. 
Additions by Ed. Bayard, included by Hering, appear in the Schema, 
• ** Smart Weed,” says Hale, “ is a popular domestic remedy throughout 
U.S.A, Applied externally it has the effect of a mustard plaister, and 
the leaves saturated with hot water are applied to relieve cramps and 
colic, and as an emollient in inflammation and sprains. The provers 
were all men, but clinical experience has shown a definite action in 
the female generative sphere, amenorrheea, aversion to coitus, and 
congestion of the ovaries having been cured by it. Leading symptoms 
are ; Aching pains in hips and loins, with weight and tension in 
pelvis, ^nd Tearing in groin, < right.” The pains are ; Lancinating, 
cutting, pulsating, shooting, wandering, and flashing. One prover 
described them as like aurora borealis, and a case of sciatica with 
pains pf this description was cured with Polyg, The left temple was 
markedly affected ; left side generally more so than right. Sensations 
of cold were numerous, and alternated or coincided with heat in the 
same or other parts. Coldness of right side of face when pain in left 



POLYGONUM 


874 

side was most severe. Burning in chest with cold feeling at pit of 
stomach. Feet burning, then suddenly cold. Diarrhoea, as with its 
relations, Rheum and Rumex^ is marked, and also dysuria. There is 
excessive weakness, trembling, and sensitiveness to cold. Epilepsy 
and hysteria have been cured with it. The Polygonums are named 
by Gerarde Arse-smarts.’^ Burnett (who prescribed Polyg, hydropiper 
under its name Persicaria urens) regarded it as a splenic, and as useful 
in old cases of syphilis. As a splenic he found it often required in 
cases of gout ; and in gouty eczema with much irritation he used it 
with much benefit in the 6th, 12th, and 30th. Peculiar Sensations are : 
As of sudden rising of scalp. As if whole intestinal contents were fluid. 
As if hips drawn together. As of galvanic shock through lower extremi- 
ties. The symptoms are < by cold ; damp ; change of temperature : 
this is the most characteristic condition. Warmth >. Pressure of 
clothing ss distress. Lying down == pressure in occiput ; dizziness 
and wavering of sight. Rising =s sudden pain in occiput. Bending 
head down ss, and bending head back >, pain in ears. 

Relations. — Compare : Botan., Fago., Rheum, JRumex. Cough, 
diarrhoea, Rumex. Burning in mouth and throat, Caps. < Pressure 
of clothes, Lach. Headache waking him from sleep, Lach. Wan- 
dering pains, Puls., K. bi. < From cold and damp, Dulc., Merc., 
Rhus. > Bending head back, Seneg. Averse to coitus, Nat. m. 
Plumb. Also Asar., Caulo., Senec., Xanth. 

Causation. — Cold. Damp. Sprains. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Great depression followed by excessive irrRability. — Gloomy 
vieWvS of life, dislike of change and excessive dread of death. 

2 . Head. — Dizziness. — Pulsative, acute pain in 1. temple. — Under pres- 
sure of great weariness or excitement a dull, depressing pain through whole 
head, causing a sensation of torpor and strong desire to sleep, but inability to' 
do so. — Pressure in back of head on lying down. — Pressure and soreness in 
head during menses. — Pain on sudden rising in back of head with pain over 
eyes. — Headache < in damp weather, > in moderately warm temperature. — 
Sensation of sudden rising of scalp, with extreme irritation and increased dry 
exfoliation. 

3. Eyes. — Burning in eyeballs ; dry sensation in lids. — Convulsive 
twitching in lids when closed and when lying down, dizziness and wavering 
of sight. — Inflammation of edges of lids. 

4. Ears. — Dull hearing. — Ringing in ears. — Sudden sounds on tym- 
panum, producing momentary cessation of hearing. — Acute pain in ear when 
bending head down; > bending head back. — Ear symptoms < in damp 
atmosphere. — Secretion of ears increased. 

5 . Nose. — Inflammation, smarting, raw feeling of Schneiderian mem- 
brane. — ^Tickling in nose. — Frequent sneezing as from cold. — Red, inflamed 
appearance of nostrils, with swollen sensation,—* Feeling of congestion through 
eyes and nose, — Coldness in external nose. 

6. Face.— Acute pain in 1 . face extending to temples, sometimes darting 
through whole 1. side of head. — Excruciating pain and heat in 1. side of face* 



POLYGONUM 875 

< by cold or damp.— Coldness in r. face when pain most severe in L— Pain 
in r. antrum as if proceeding up from a tooth (sound). 

8. Mouth. — Gums tender.— Cold or cooling temperature in mouth, pro- 
ducing acute toothache. — ^Tongue : coated yellow ; feels swollen. — Heat and 
burning : from root of^ tongue to pit of stomach ; from tip of tongue to mouth 
and throat (r. upper). — Heat in roof of mouth with excitation of salivary 
glands. — Increased flow of hot saliva, gives no > to parched condition. — 
Saliva abundant and thin (before thin and scanty). — Taste ; bitter ; pungent, 
like pepper. 

9. Throat .—jThroat dry, hot, burning, with sense of excoriation. — Glands 
feel swollen ; < from cold or moist air. — Contracted feeling in throat after 
swallowing, followed by thirst. 

11. Stomach. — ^Appetite: voracious; lost. — Food tasteless. — Great 
thirst for cold water, yet drinking ss nausea. — Nausea : as if proceeding 
from small intestines ; with coldness in abdomen. — Acidity. — Weight in 
stomach. — Burning in stomach. — Cold feeling in stomach : with headache ; 
with burning in chest. — Pressure of clothes = distress. — Pain on pressure 
followed by throbbing and distress. — Uneasiness in stomach and abdomen. 

12. Abdomen. — Burning heat in stomach and bowels. — Tympanites and 
flatulent colic. — Cutting, lancinating, griping pains, with great rumbling as if 
whole intestinal contents were in a fluid state and in violent commotion, the 
movement proceeding from below up, producing nausea and disposition to 
vomit, with liquid faeces discharged with great force, with pain in loins. — 
Pain in hypogastric region, rectum, and anus, — Throbbing in I. inguinal 
glands. 

13* Stool and Anus. — Copious stool followed by smarting in anus. — 
Straining at stort with mucous, jelly-like discharges. — Stools : yellowish 
green ; hard, lumpy ; dark, followed by burning in rectum. — Urging with 
discharge of much fetid flatus. — Tenesmus ; with nausea ; with pulsative 
pains in hips and loins, — Constipation alternating with diarrhoea. — Interior of 
3 nus studded •with itching eminences, as from corrugation without contrac- 
tion, a^ kind of haemorrhoidal tumour. — Haemorrhoids with itching and 
burning.— Pruritus ani (used as a wash). 

14. Urinary Organs. — Inflammation of kidneys from cold. — Cutting 

pains along ureters to bladder.— Painful cutting and feeling of strangulation 
at deck of bladder while urinating, lasting long after. — Strangury.— During 
an attack of gonorrhoea extremely violent pains on urinating, causing him to 
tremble and cry.— Pulsating pain ; pain ; and burning in prostate on 
urinating.— Pains in bladder. — Deposit in urine of mucus and phosphates. — 
Frequent and profuse discharge of clear, light, or straiov-coloured urine. — 
Albumen. * 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Pain in testicles, spermatic cords, and 
neck of bladder when urinating.— Itching at orifice of urethra and around 
glans with desire to urinate. — Itching and stinging of prepuce. — Pain and 
soreness in 1. testis, extending along 1. spermatic cord ; occasionally darting 
at same time in r. cord and testis. — Loss of power and semen, sometimes 
followed by inflammation of glans. — Extremely convulsive action in the func- 
tional uses. 

Female Sexual Organs. — Intense dislike to coition, followed by 



876 


POLYGONUM 


perturbation and irritation if approached ; inaction of flow of secretions.*^ 
Aching pain in hips and loins, and sensation of weight and tension in pelvis. 
— Menses : absent ; delayed, with distress and pain ; too copious ; tardy ; 
fetid.—During menses : pressure and soreness in head ; grinding pain through 
abdomen.— Congestive weakness and loss of power.— Congestion of ovaries ; 
tearing sensation in groin, < r.— Burning in vagina.— Acrid, excoriating 
leucorrhcea. — Shooting pains through breasts, with great soreness, distension, 
and tenderness. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Stifling sensation in larynx; irritability of 
whole system ; weakness of sexual function.— Constriction cf larynx.— Crowd- 
ing and pressure about larynx with irritation of bronchi. — Roughness as of 
adhesion of mucus to larynx, producing spasmodic hacking and hoarseness. — 
Hacking cough, < by change of temperature.— Dry cough, in night, excited 
by tickling, prickling-tingling in upper anterior part of chest, behind sternum ; 
dry sensation in larynx when coughing. 

18. Chest. — Sharp pain under r. scapula, extending into chest and pit of 
stomach, with heavy beating of heart and throbbing of carotids. — Pulsativc 
pressive pains about xiphoid cartilage. — Cutting in 1 . chest. — Burning in chest 
with cold feeling in pit of stomach and shooting pains. 

19. Heart. — Sharp, cutting, shooting pains in region of heart, extending 

to 1. scapula.— Increased action of heart with loss of rhythm. * 

20. Neck and Back. — Awoke at midnight with lameness 1 . side neck to 
shoulder, making movement painful ; with pulsative, wandering pains. — Pul- 
sative pains in 1 , loin. — Aching in loins with pain around 1 . hip-joint. — Pain in 
back and at lower extremity, acute or drawing, lateral in its action, as if hips 
being drawn together (kidney affection). — ^Tearing and draWing in loins on 
exposure to cold, followed by lameness and soreness. ** 

21. Limbs. — Trembling ; bruised feeling ; weakness in limbs. — Shooting 
pains in arms and back of legs. — Distension of blood-vessels in hands and 
feet. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pains in arms and inability or sense of weakness on 
lifting slightest weight. — Pains pulsating, intermittent, shooting, wandering, 
generally shooting down to finger-tips, sometimes shooting up. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Sciatica ; pain flashing like aurora borealis. — Pul- 
sative pains in hips and loins with ineffectual urging and tenesmus. — Swelling, 
of legs and feet. — Superficial ulcers and sores. 

24. Generalities. — Pulsating, wandering, flashing pains, like aurora 
borealis. 

25. Skin.— Skin dry.— Scarlet eruption round waist ; itching, burning 
spasm. — Eczema.— Chronic erysipelatous inflammation. — Old and indolent 
ulcers. 

26. Sleep,— Sleep, restless, uneasy, full of dreams.— Dreams : unremcm- 
bered ; laborious and fatiguing ; of headache and wakes with headache. 

27. Fever*— Alternation of heats and chills and chills and heals. — Feet 

alternately hot and cold ; burning for an hour, then suddenly cold.— Profuse 
sweat and trembling of whole body from moderate exercise. o 



POLYPORUS PINICOLA 


877 


Polyporus Officinalis, see Boletus 
Laricis. 

Polyporus Pinicola. 

Polyporus pini<jola. Pine agaric. N. 0. Fungi. Tincture of fresh 

plant. 

Clinical. — Anus, prolapse of. Constipation. Hcemorrhoids. Intermittent fever. 
Liver, affections of. Malar bone, pain in. Prolapsus ani. Kheiimatism. Spleen, 
affections of. Tonsils, enlarged. 

Characteristics. — The Pine agaric, Po/./)iw., like the Larch agaric, 
Polyporus officinalis (described in this work as Boletus lancis^ its older 
and less correct name), was proved by Dr. Burt. The symptoms of 
the two have a very close resemblance, and many are common to 
both. Despondency ; aching distress in many parts ; stiffness of 
back ; of fingers ; enlarged tonsils with dysphagia and constant 
inclin^ion to swallow ; neuralgic pains in head, face, and temples ; 
pain in liver and spleen with diarrhoea or constipation and piles — 
these are the chief features of the proving. Hale says it is a remedy 
for ague in the Middle and Southern States, taken during the inter- 
mission macerated in whisky. Quotidian fevers, he says, are most suited 
to it. The symptoms are < by motion ; by walking ; > by rest. < 
In damp air. < After stool. 

Relations. — Compare : Bol. lar., Bol. lur., Agar. 

SYMPTOMS. 

• ' 

1. • Mind. — Despondency with the pain. — Gloomy ; spells of depression. 
— Wants to get away out of sight and lie down. 

2. Head. — Congestion to head and face ; vertigo when walking ; light- 
ness ; fulness. — Severe headache, < reading or walking ; with soreness over 
•eyejL — Sharp, neuralgic, cutting pains in temples, 

3. Eyes. — Smarting in eyes, — Dull pains in eyeballs. — ^Agglutination of 

lids. 

5. Nose. — Nostrils constantly filled with thick yellow mucus. 

6. Face. — Face congested. — Severe aching distress in r. malar bone, 
with neuralgic pains in temples. 

8. Mouth. — ^Tongue : coated white ; yellow. — Taste : sweet, flat ; flat, 
rough ; slimy, coppery. 

9. Throat. — ^Throat dry, sore, frequent inclination to swallow. — Tonsils 
much congested, enlarged ; frequent efforts to swallow, quite painful. 

11. Stomach. — Sour eructations. — Nausea. — Burning in stomach and 
dragging in r. hypochondrium. — Constant very severe distress in lower 
epigastrium, causing faintness ; < by pressure and by walking. — Severe pain 
in epigastrium all morning. 

12 . Abdomen.—Dull, dragging, drawing, aching, burning in both hypo- 



878 POLYPORUS PIN,— POPULUS CAN. 

chondria.— Pain and distress in liver ; and all dorsal region ; < walking.— 
Distress and colicky pains in umbilical and hypogastric regions. — Runibling. 
— Hard, distressing, sickening pain in hypogastrium, causing faintness; 
followed by stool. — Drawing in r. groin. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Stool : ran from bowels in deep yellow stream ; 
loose ; hard, dry, lumpy, then mushy ; lumpy with mucus and bile ; costivei 
hard, dry lumps, brdught on piles and slight prolapsus ani. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine scanty and high coloured. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Preying sensation in larynx with dryness 
of fauces. 

19. Heart. — Burning distress in praecordial region ; sharp pains on full 
inspiration. — Pulse soft, feeble. 

20. Back. — Back stiff. — ^Aching in back ; and hips. — Felt ill with aching 
and sore sensations along spinal column. 

21. Limbs. — Constant rheumatic, drawing pains in fingers, wrists, knees, 
ankles, feet. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Drawing in elbows and flexor muscjes of both arms. 
— Fingers ache ; feel quite stiff. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Hips ache. — Drawing inside r. thigh. — Sharp pain 
in r. tibia. — Hard, drawing pains in knees and ankles, causing restlessness. — 
Aching distress, weakness of ankles and feet, walking very difficult. — Soles of 
feet and heels feel as if pounded ; < when boots on. 

24. Generalities. — Rheumatic pains in every part of the body < in 
damp weather. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepy, yawning, and stretching. — ^Wakeful after 3 a.m. 

27. Fever. — Paroxysms of chilliness, cold shivering spnsations followed 
by feverishness. — Chills and a shivering sensation. — Face hot, flushed. — Hands 
and palms hot and dry. — Slight perspiration. 


Populus Gandicans. 

A variety of P. balsamifera. Balm of Gilead. [This name applies 
especially to the variety P. candicans ; but also to all P. ** 
balsamiferae. In England the name ** Balm of Gilead tree ** is 
given to the Black Italian Poplar, which abounds in Italy, but 
the origin of which is not known.] N, 0 , Salicaceae. Tincture 
of the resinous buds. 

Clinioal.— Aphonia. Asthma. Brain, base of, congested. Bullae. Catarrhal 
fever. Constipation. Coryza. Dysmenia. Dyspepsia. Dysphagia. Ecthyma. 
Heart, affections of. Hyclroa. Liver, enlargement of. Phosphaturia. Sunstroke. 
Throat, burning in ; paralysis of. Vagina, burning in. 

Characteristics. — C. F. Nichols (if. P., viii. 234) gives an account 
of Pop, cand„ the effects of which he observed, ** The resinous gum 
exuding from buds and stalks, deliciously aromatic in perfdme, is 
widely used to heal wounds, open sores, and eruptions, and often 
suppresses these latter to the harm of the patient."' As an applica- 
tion, Nichols says, it is like Arn,^ dangerous, though most people arc 



POPULUS CANDICANS 


879 


not*susceptible to its poisonous effect. He has never seen blisters of 
the size of those of Pop, c. produced by any other drug : blisters hang 
..down like bags of water the size of walnuts. Burning was a common 
symptom — eyes, nose, throat, bowels, vagina. W. C. Stilson {H, P., 
xi. 88) relates a case of poisoning ki a man who one evening drank 
rum in which Balm of Gilead buds had been placed for making a 
liniment. A few hours later his wife heard him breathing heavily, 
and on waking him found he could not speak. Stilson found him only 
able to speak in hoarse whispers, and he would forget in the middle 
of a sentence wljat he was going to say. Face ashy pale ; wild look. 
Tongue and mouth dry. Throat dry, burning, constricted, felt as if 
spiders had spun webs on it. It was some days before he recovered. 
Since this occasion Stilson has cured several cases of catarrhal 
hoarseness and aphonia with Pop, c., and one case of nervous aphonia : 
Mrs. S. had nervous prostration, and during the attack aphonia. The 
aphonia remained after the patient got well otherwise. Pop, c, 0 
cured. Among the peculiar symptoms observed by Nichols is surface 
anaesthesia with or without numbness. The finger-ends are actually 
thickened, horny, insensible to pinching and pricking. There is 
numbness in back radiating from spine. The skin is harsh, genemlly 
dry and cold, with a stinging burning behind the surface as if an 
eruption would appear ; or as if sweat would break out. Other 
peculiar sensations are : Whole body feels swollen, bruised, lame, sore, 
and painful, exhausted as in dry, sultry weather. Eye feels twisted 
with the headache. Constipation, bowels feel hot and dry. The 
menses were at first scanty, later abundant and early, with dysmenor- 
rhoeal pain > ‘by application of hot cloths. The symptoms were < 
on moving. <”before menses. < After food and drink. < Lifting 
arms. < By contact of clothes. > Hot applications. < After 
sleep (mind). 

Relations. — Antidoted by: Rhus. Compare: Salix, Pop. trem., 
Salicylates. •< Contact of clothes, Lach. 


SYMPTOMS. 

*x. Mind.— Hopeless foreboding < after sleep.— Fear and anguish.—- 
Expectation of death. — Feels as if the will were paralysed. — Loquacity. — 
Vanishing of thought. — Forgets to finish a sentence. — ^Voices sound distant 
and words just spoken seem as if uttered long ago ; objects seem multiplied. 

2 . Head. — ^Vertigo from lifting head. — ^Vertigo and heat of head as if 
scorched by sun. — Confusion in head, with expansive fulness, all parts feel 
lame, swollen, inflamed, thickened, painful, burning, throbbing in head and 
brain, < cerebellum and cerebro-spinal axis, dulness of the senses as from 
congestidn. — Boring through 1. temple. — ^Weight on vertex. 

3 . Eyes. — Sensation as if 1. eye were twisted during the headache. — 
Burnin^rritation in eyes, nose, mouth, throat, and air passages. 

6 . Face.— Face yellow. — Burning prickling on face. 

8. Mouth. — ^Tongue : white, dry ; feels thick and numb. — Tongue and 
mouth feel burnt and dry, but are moist, wants drink, but can take only a 



88o PQPULUS CANDICANS 

Uttie, < after food and drink.— Speech thick.— Taste : bitter; 
morning. 

g. Throat, — Distressing burning in throat, as from swallowing hot fat* 
— ^Throat red, dry, burning ; felt as if spiders had spun webs in it. — Deficient 
power of deglutition ; food stops in oesophagus or is passed with difficulty. 

10. Appetite. — Appetite lost, loathes meat. —Nothing relished.— Hungry 
but dares not eat for fear of choking. 

IX, Stomach. — Belching of gas feeling like hot steam. — Nausea with 
sinking in epigastrium. — Vomits bile, 

12. Abdomen. — Wears her clothes loose.— Flatulent colic doubling the 
body forward. — Pain in r. h3^pochondrium with enlargement. 

13. Stool. — Stools watery, green, alternating with constipation.— Consti- 
pation, bowels feel hot and dry. — Stools small, round, preceded by cramps in 
abdomen ; lack of expulsive power. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine : strong, high coloured, hot, scanty j 
increased, variously coloured, red, dark, light, phosphates abundant. — Urine 
dark, straw colour ; smoky. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses scanty, usually delaying, after- 
wards absent, then abundant, early, with dysmenorrhoea, > hot cloths. — 
Vagina burns as if scalded. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— 'Hoarseness.— Aphonia.— Dry cough when 
tired. — Cough caused by “ cobwebs in his throat. — Suffocation. — Breathing 
dry, asthmatic, with dyspnoea, sits bent forward, < lifting arms. 

18. Chest. — Pulmonic, cardiac, and capillary circulation oppressed, feels 
as if death must result, as if there must be fatal organic lesions. 

19. Heart and Pulse. — Pain in heart, stitches. — Heart's ^ound irregular, 
usually muffled, with a systolic murmur, < before menses.-^Palpitation when 
rising or lying on 1 . side, with vertigo. — Pulse rarely exceeded 60. 

20. Back. — Numbness in back radiating from spine. — Burning weaiiness 
in small of back. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Finger-ends thickened, horny, insensfible to .pinch- 
ing and pricking. — Nails blue as in ague (not thickened). 

24. Generalities. — Emaciation. — Rheumatic and gouty pains to ends of 
fingers and toes, — Whole body feels swollen, bruised, lame, sore, and painful, 
exhausted as in dry, sultry weather, movements heavy, laboured, clumsy,, 
stinging, restless irritation as if an eruptive fever would come to the surface, 
feeling as if sweat would break out. — Burning irritation of eyes, nose, skin, 
mucous membrane of mouth, throat, and air passages, and oppression of 
respiration and circulation. — Catarrhal feverish state of raucous surfaces — 
Weakness. — Stiffness of muscles, tendons, ligaments, with lameness and with 
dry feeling in cartilages, as if lame.— Insensibility of surface, < back and 
abdomen, so that rubbing and pounding were borne without pain and insisted 
upon for the sake of warmth.— < Morning ; < before menses. 

25. Skin. — Skin harsh, generally dry and cold, with burning-stinging 
below the surface, as if eruption would appear, rarely blotches and fine 
papules.— Burning prickling on face, chest, and hands, the parts beca^ne darji 
red and swollen, and there were blisters as large as walnuts, hanging dowW 
like bags of water, with watery, acrid, sticky oozing, external heat like coals 
of fire on skin, at times internal heat, with cool skin, > hot applications, the 



POPULUS TREMULOIDES 88i 

eruption returned each year with fear and expectation of death, loquacity, 
discussing repeatedly her symptoms, vertigo from lifting head. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepless after midnight, with restlessness, < from early 
morning till noon.—Dreams : frightful, vivid ; fearful after fitful sleep. 

27. Fever. — Sudden coldness of extremities, with numbness of them and 
heat of head, — Fever and unrest. — Fever with congestion of brain, fulness, 
heaviness, dulness, soreness, with expansive pressure, as if swollen, deadening 
heat in head as if scorched by the sun, vertigo, oppression of vital forces and 
chrculation as if over-heated, fatigue, faintness, and burning, throbbing 
oppression. — Dryjbeat. — Heat of cerebellum and neck, with feeling as if the 
capillary circulation were congested and oppressed, — Sweat on head and 
neck. 


Populus Tremuloides. 

Aspen Poplar. (The American Aspen ; the British Aspen is P. 
tremula.) N. O. Salicaceae. Tincture of inner bark. Solution 
of Populin. 

Clinical • — Ardor urinae. Bladder, catarrh of. Gleet, chronic. Prostatic 
affections. 

Gharaoterifitios. — The few symptoms of the Schema were pro- 
vided by Paine (eclectic), whom Hale quotes. Paine used Pop^ L in 
affections of the bladder, urethra, and prostate. Hale confirms its 
action in vesical tenesmus and inliammation of the neck of the 
bladder. He gives this case : A lady had metritis, vaginismus, and 
cystitis, and was apparently cured. A ride on the cars brought back : 
Weight, pressure, and aching in pelvis and vesical tenesmus with 
frequent desire to urinate. Pop. p. 3X removed all these symptoms in 
tiiree days. ,In the cases cured by Hale he says there was little pain 
t/Mnng’uriiiation, but as soon as the last drops were voided, or a little 
before,’ a severe cramp-like pain just behind pubes lasting ten to 
fifteen minutes. 

Relations. — Follows well: Cannab., Canth. (succeeded after 
they had only partially helped). Compare : Pop. can., Sal. nig., 
Gaulth., Salicin, and Salicylates. 

• SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — General nervous excitement. ^ 

IX. Stomach. — Nausea and vomiting. — Warm pungent sensation ; (or 
from larger doses) fierce burning sensation in stomach. 

13. Stool. — Slight purging of bilious matter. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Very copious discharge of urine ; irritation of 
bladder and urethra. 

27. Fever. — Warmth in stomach followed by glow of heat on entire 
surface. • 

Pothos Foetidus, see lotodes. 

VOL. U. 57 



882 PRIMULA 6bc6nCA 


Primula Obconca. 

P. obconca. N. 0 . Primulaceae. Tincture of whole fresh plant 

Clinioal. — Chapped hands. Eczema. Eyes, inflammation of. Itching. Liver, 
pain in. Skin, affections of. Spleen, pains in. 

Charaoteristics. — Prim, ob, is an ornamented variety of Primrose. 
Gardeners, amateur and professional, have discovered after much 
suffering that it has with some persons a most powerful action on the 
skin, its action taking place chiefly by contact but partly by effluvia. 
The Rev. F, H. Brett xxv. 496), who was one of the first to 

notice its poisonous properties, undertook to prove it. He had 
handled the plants freely up to that time without experiencing any ill 
effect. He cut up some young plants and added some vigorous fresh 
leaves of an old one and made a tincture. This he allowed to stand 
for a week, and then took three or four drops, three times a day for 
four days. Two days after ceasing to take it symptoms began to 
develop in the right little finger, and two days afterwards in the right 
thumb. These became very intense, and ran a chronic course ; and 
now he could not go near a plant of Pnm, ob. without setting up 
an <. When plants were in the room there was < at night. < By 
rubbing or scratching. At the same time Brett noted that pains in the 
liver and spleen to which he had been subject now troubled him no 
more. The right hand was much more affected than the left. His 
symptoms are marked (B) ” in the Schema. With Prim, ob, 3 I 
cured a chronic psoric dry eruption on the leg of a^woman. Cooper 
relieved a case of severe eczema on the leg with bleeding. 

Relations. — Compare : Anag., Prim, ver., Prim. vulg. 

SYMPTOMS. 

3. Eyes. — Burning irritation of eyeballs and eyelids, nostrils, and 
mouth. — Lids greatly swollen, covered with large bullae ; half closed ; stiff 
and unmovable. 

6. Face. — Face, neck, and greater part of body, burning irritation 
and discoloration of skin. — Urticarial eruption on face — Papular eruption 
on chin. 

12. Abdomen. — Pain in region of liver, and a less severe pain in spleen 
always occasioned by bending from side to side (cured by the proving. — B). 

22. Upper Limbs. — Elevated mass of points in outer side first joint r. 
little finger (B). — Heat, itching, and bright-red, tense, solid elevation on outer 
surface r. thumb ; these coalesced, forming a solid mass over back of thumb 
like corrugated leather (B). — At intervals for weeks bright red patches 
appeared on backs, inner sides of, or spaces between the fingers, itching 
intensely at first and leaving low elevations, flat and smooth like polished 
leather, stiffness in bending fingers as if skin rigid (B).— Eruptions made their 
way down thumb to wrist, inner side of which became covered with red 
patches, as if grains of sand under skin (B). — At outer edge of hand a row of 
hard lumps under skin (B). — At times whole back of hand would assume a 



primula VERIS 883 

dark red colour, when excited, bright red ; rubbing or scratching < the itching 
tenfold (B). — Blisters on back of r. thumb and between thumb and index, 
discharging clear fluid when punctured (B). — Desquamation occurred in 
about eight weeks (B). — Moist eczema, papular and excoriated, cracked over 
joints ; symptoms < at night when itching is unbearable. — Purple blotches 
on backs of hands and fingers ; deep blisters formed at tip of each finger and 
above and below each phalangeal flexure ; fingers stiff. — Dryness and heat in 
palms. — L. hand much less affected than r. (B). 

• 25. Skin. — Eruptions : eczema ; moist eczema ; erythema ; papules ; 
vesicles ; like ^ales. — Eruption preceded by pricking sensation which 
gradually changes to a smarting. — Skin diffusely infiltrated and swollen ; 
small bullae form. — Deep infiltration stiffening parts. — Cracks as from frost 
over joints. — Desquamation ; sometimes furfuraceous ; sometimes lamellar ; 
exposing papillary layer. — Intense itching < at night. 

27. Fever. — At night feverish, hands and face would burn, then intoler- 
able itching. 


Primula Yeris. 

Cowslip. N. O. Primulaceae. Tincture of entire fresh plant. 

ClinicaL— Apoplexy, threatened. Eczema. Fevers. Migraine. Neuralgia. 
Vertigo. Voice, affections of. 

Characteristics* — The flowers of Prim, verts are said to be 
narcotic (Trea%of BoL), ^‘Cowslip wine^’ is a favourite remedy in 
the country for many small disorders. Cooper cured with P, ver, 0 a 
case of eczema of the hands after P. obc. had failed. He also cured 
with it eczema palmaris of years’ duration in a man ast. 70. Schier, of 
•Mentz (Un^v, Horn, Ann.y p. 99), proved a tincture of fresh plant 
including root. The duration of action is only a few days in healthy 
persons. The conditions in which Schier commends it, and which 
are borne out by the symptoms, are : Threatened apoplexy, arising 
apart from psychic depression ; as an external application when 
• there is no skin lesion, as this remedy has a certain relation with 
the skin. Prudence is necessary here, especially for persons with 
sensitive and easily vulnerable skin.” The symptoms are < by 
tent position ; stooping ; movement ; in room ; in closed carriage ; 
travelling by rail. < In open air. 

Relations. — Compare : P. obc., P. vulg., Cyf:!., Anag. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. *Mind. — Happy disposition. — Stubbornness. — Heat with anxiety. 

2. Head. — Vertigo ; whirling ; sensation of falling backward ; as if 
brain moved, wanted to get out of skull ; as of heavy weight on head. — Fear 
of falling on standing up. — Fulness and heaviness of head. — Head hot with 
rush of blood to head ; red spots on cheeks. — Hammer-like, boring, beating, 
sometimes dull headache, in both temples, occiput, and above foreh^d, < r. 



884 PRIMULA VEFUS 

temple in morning ; > by pressure ; < stooping, movement, travelling by 
rail ; > in open air ; < indoors. — Sensation as if band across forehead and 
occiput ; cannot keep hat on. — Tension of skin of forehead. — Burning itching 
of scalp, in r. temporal region and occiput. 

3. Eyes.— Flies flying before eyes, violent vertigo as if everything 
revolving. — Burning and pricking pains in orbital cavities, — Sensitive to 
light; > in darkness. 

4. Ears.— Buzzing and ringing in 1. ear. 

5. Nose.— Pressure at root of nose < r. side. 

6. Face.— Face hot ; pale. 

8. Mouth. — ^Tongue clear but imprinted with teeth ; papillae of edges 
very red. — Salivation. — Dull sensation in r. half of tongue and digestive tract. 

9. Throat. — Burning pains r. side of throat. — Pricking when breathing 
in r. side of thyroid body. 

11. Stomach. — Tendency to vomiting. — Sensation of emptiness and 
burning at orifice of stomach and in duodenum. 

12. Abdomen. — Rumbling in bowels. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Painless liquid stools ; with malaise < by pres- 
sure on head. — During stool : fever, goose-flesh. — After stool : tenesmus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Turbid earth-coloured urine smelling of violets 
or of strong urine. — Tenesmus, painful irritation of ureter. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Dull sensation r. side of larynx, pharynx, 
tongue, and digestive tract.—Cough with burning and pricking in respiratory 
tracts. — Voice remarkably fine, clear, and strong, the high notes easily given 
out. — Sensation as if r. half of larynx stopped up. 

19. Heart.— Palpitation with feeling of weakness. 

20. Neck and Back. — Stiffness r. side of neck. — Short, intense pain 
beside insertion of r. sterno-mastoid muscle. 

21. Limbs. — Weight and lassitude of limbs, esp. shoulders. — Twitching 
ill throat going to forearm, and in great toe going to calf. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Burning in r. axillary joint preventing movement 
of r. arm > in* bed, lying on painful part.— Pricking in fourth aqd fifth 
finger of both hands,— Itching in palms. — Burning in hollow of r. hand, in 
arm, esp. in 1 side. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Tearing in 1. leg and thigh.— Sensation as if 1. leg 
was swollen with tearing and drawing. — Itching in 1. little toe. 

24. Generalities. — Beating, tearing, burning, and drawing sensations. — 
Trembling of hands and feet.— Malaise of head > in open air. < In bent 
position ; by movement ; in a room ; riding in closed carriage. — Weight and 
lassitude of limbs. 

25. Skin. — Sensitive, easily vulnerable skin. — Itching. 

26. Sleep. — Sleeps well with pleasant dreams. 

27. Fever. — Febrile excitement.— Intense heat with anxiety as if fearing 
a stroke of apoplexy. — Wants to get cool. — Sweat on forehead, feet ahd hands 
cold.— Head hot with red spots on cheeks.— Feet and hands sweat, rest of 
body cold. 



PRINOS VERTICILLATUS 


885 


Primula Vulgaris. 


Primrose. N,0. Primulaceae. Tincture of fresh plant. 
Clinical. — Dropsy ; wandering. Heart, pressure at. 


, Gharftotcpistics. — Cooper cured with P. vulg. ^ a case of wander- 
ing dropsy. In a cancer case, one dose caused the disappearance of 
dropsy from the*leg and led to oppression at the heart. ‘‘Pressure at 
heart” Cooper thinks a characteristic aggravation. 


Prinos Yerticillatus. 

Black Alder. N. O. Aquifoliaceae. Tincture of the berries. Tincture 

of fresh bark. 


GUnioal* — Diarrhoea. Fever. 

• 

Characteristics. — The genus Prinos is very closely allied to 
the hollies. “ The bark of P. I'ertic, is bitter, and has been used in 
the treatment of fever, and in the form of a lotion as an application 
in cases of gangrene. The berries are tonic and emetic ” (T reas. of 
Bot,), The only recorded experiment with Pri, v.y the effects of 
swallowing twedty berries, bears out the last statement : the effect 
was to cause vomiting (and also an extremely profuse greenish 
diarrhoea) ; increased appetite and tense feeling of well-being in 
spite of great loss of weight. 

• • 

SYMPTOMS. 

9 . Throat. — Acrimony in fauces. 

. .XI, Stomach. — Appetite and digestion better than usual after the liquid 
stools. — Sensation of commotion in stomach, not exciting nausea, ate heartily 
in spite of it ; walking precipitated vomiting of a little bile. 

• 12. Abdomen.— Inclination to stool ; had natural stool which > all 
sensations. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Natural stool ; half an hoiir later, most profuse 
stool consisting of natural faeces diluted with an immense quantity of greenish 
liquid ; without pain or uneasiness ; in another hour and a half similar stool 
but less in quantity. 

24. Generalities. — Felt remarkably well after the diarrhoeic stool 
though had lost ten pounds in weight. 


Propylaminum, see Trimethylaminum. 



886 


PRUNUS PAD US 


Prunus Padus. 

Cerasus padus. Padus racemosa. P. vulgaris. Bird cherry. N, 0. 
Rosaceae. Tincture of leaves and bark of small twigs collected 
when in blossom. 

Glinioal* — Headache. Heart, affections of. Rectum, pains in. 

CharaotePistics. — Prunus padus was proved by Lembke. The 
plant is now classed with the Cherries, but I retain ft under its old 
name. In Scotland it is known as the Hayberry. The fruit is 
small, black, and nauseous to the taste. In the North of Europe 
it enters into the formation of a palatable liqueur ; the juice is also 
expressed and drunk with milk, while the residue of the fruit is 
kneaded up into cakes’* {Treas. of Dot.), Lembke’s proving brought 
out marked symptoms in head, rectum, chest, and heart. Pains were 
pressive in head, sticking in rectum, pressive beneath sternum. 
Heart-beats were tumultuous. The symptoms were < by pressure ; 
sitting ; standing ; stooping, and walking. 

Relations. — Compare: Heart, Crataeg., Pru. sp., Pru. v., Lauroc. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I. Head. — Dulness, with dull pi*essure in forehead. — Momentary sensa- 
tion as if head would sink to r. side. — Head heavy, confused. — Pressure at base 
of brain. — Pressure ; on forehead with external heat ; in 1. temple. — Heaviness 
of occiput with dull pain extending transversely through occiput. 

3. Eyes. — Pupils much dilated. 

5. Nose. — Pulsating feeling under skin at root of nose, with visible 
trembling movement < by stooping. 

9. Throat. — Sore throat with frequent swallowing of saliva. 

II. Stomach. — Great nausea. ^ 

12. Abdomen. — Drawing pain in hypochondrium and umbilical region, 
< by pressure. — Abdpmen greatly distended by gas. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Sticking in rectum while sitting and walking; 
repeated and lasting all day. — Stitches in rectum. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Profuse bright-yellow urine. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Some dull stitches in larynx compelling 
to swallow. 

18. Chest. — Pressure behind sternum with difficult respiration. — Pressure 
behind lower sternum, as if heavy weight lying on it, no > by deep 
inspiration ; < walking.—Some sudden violent stitches beneath r. ribs. 

19. Heart. — Oppression of heart while standing. — Every beat felt in 
chest while sitting.— Beats tumultuous, felt in neck and actually shake head. 
— ^Violent, irregular beats. — Pulse very slow ; and small. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Weakness in elbow joints. 

24. Generalities. — Sensation of general weakness ; of weakness extcn 4 - 
ing from side of neck into r. arm, soon followed by similar sensation 1. side. 

27. Fever.— Frequent sensation of coldness in back.— Heat deep in 
small of back. 



PRUNUS SPINOSA 


887 


Prunus Spinosa. 

Blackthorn. Sloe. N, 0 . Rosaceae. Tincture of buds just before 

flowering. 

Clinical* — Appetite, lost. Ascites. Breast, pain in. Choroiditis, Ciliary 
neuralgia. Cystitis. Dropsy. Dysuria ; flatulent. Earache. Eyes ; choroiditis. 
Glaucoma. Heart, affections of. Hernia. Herpes zoster. Leucorrhoea. Menor- 
rhagia. Metrorrhagia. Neuralgia. Sprains. Strangury. Stricture. Toothache. 
Vitreous, opacities of. 

Charaoteristios. — Pmn. spi. was proved by Wahle. The symptoms 
resemble those of Pm. pd. in general, but some very strongly cha- 
racterised ones were produced. The pains were pressive and out- 
pressive, and out-shooting. These pains are felt in skull, eye, root of 
nose, and ears ; the teeth feel raised out of their sockets. Shooting 
from within out, from before backward. These pains occurring in 
and around the eye have led to its successful use in glaucoma, ciliary 
neuralgia, choroido-retinitis, irido-choroiditis, irido-cyclitis. Sprain- 
ing pains and pains wdiich take away the breath. A remarkable 
symptom is : Breath always seems to remain sticking in pit of 
stomach.’^ This symptom, with ‘‘ pain as if sprained in left ankle, led 
Lippe* to make a remarkable cure in this case : A young lady, 16, 
jumped from a carriage whilst the horse was running away and 
sprained her ankle. Left ankle and foot much swollen. As swelling 
abated, breathing became rapid ; great oppression with constantly 
recurring desire to take a long breath ; felt as if atr inhaled did not 
reach pit of stomachy and till she could force air so far down had to 
yawn and try to take a deep inspiration. — The tightness, stitches, and 
sticking pains in chest have marked Prun. spi. as a remedy in many 
cases of neuralgic pains with or following herpes zoster. The urinary 
symptoms are perhaps the most peculiar of all. Pressure of abdominal 
flatulence dli the bladder is not an uncommon symptom, and is met 
by Pmn. spi. : Flatulence presses on bladder and =b cramps in 
bladder so that he is obliged to double up.’^ Strangury of the most 
painful description was produced, and this symptom, which is quite 
.characteristic : Hurriedly impelled to pass urine, which, however, 
seems to pass for'Ward into glans penis and then return and cause most 
violent pain in urethra. Menses are too early ; too profuse ; last too 
long, and are thin and watery. There is leucorrhoea, which weakens 
and stains yellow. The right side is much more affected than the 
left Peculiar sensations are : As if a sharp corneif pressing against top 
of head. Headache as if from sun. As if skull would be pressed 
outward by a sharp plug. As if inner portion of eye would be torn 
out. Eyeball as if crushed, or pressed asunder. As if tooth would be 
torn out. As if tongue had been burned. As if hernia would pro- 
trude. Burning as from a wound in rectum ; as from salt in a wound 
in anus. Sighing as if climbing a steep mountain. As if small of 
back had been injured. As if right thumb sprained ; as if left ankle 
sprained ; as if first joint of big toe pulled out. C. M. Boger gives 
this confirmation of Pmn. spi. {Med. Couns.j xvi. 264) : Man, 60, with 



888 


PRUNUS SPINOSA 


enlarged prostate, had frequent urging to urinate, day and night. 
Shooting pains in neck of bladder unless desire to urinate is at once 
gratified. Urination delayed if any great amount has accumulated. 
Spasmodic tenesmus of bladder and rectum at close of urination, with 
pains in glans. Pulsation in glans from jar of walking, Prun, spi, 

I m. (Fincke) removed the symptoms. The symptoms are ; < By 
touch and pressure. Biting teeth together > toothache. > From 
rest ; from doubling up. < Motion ; from jarring ; must walk care- 
fully. < Night. < From warm food (toothache). 

Relations. — Compare : Heart, Crataeg., Lauro., Pru. p. Eyes, 
Bell. Burning tongue, Sang., Polyg. Stool like dog's, Pho. 
Leucorrhoea staining yellow, Agn. c., Carb. a., CheL, Kre., Nux, Sep., 
Thu., Nit. ac. 

Causation. — Sun. Sprains. Over-lifting. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Sadness, indifference, moroseness, and ill-humour. — Rest- 
lessness, which does not allow one to remain in one place, walks about 
constantly, with dyspneea and short breathing. 

2. Head. — Reeled and staggered back and forth. — Heaviness in head, 
and vertigo. — Pressure in head, principally in forehead, occiput, and temples. 
— Pressive pain beneath skull, as if skull would be pressed through with a 
plug. — Pressing asunder headache so violent that he almost lost his reason. — 
Sharp pains beginning in r. forehead shooting like lightning through brain and 
coming out at occiput. — Painful jerks in forehead shooting ‘back. — Violent 
nervous pains in head, with loss of ideas and of consciousness. — Pressure in 
head mostly manifests itself from without inwards. — Pressive pain from within 
out beneath upper part of r. temporal bone ; from thence to frontal bone < 
by external pressure. — Twinging pain : in r. temporal bone to ear, causing ear- 
ache ; extending outward. — Pressive pain r. vertex as if sharp co-* ner pressing^ 
against it.-— Jerking sticking back part 1 . frontal bone. — Painful jerking through 
r. hemisphere of brain, on motion. — Nervous out-pressing pain in occiput and 
occipital bone (1.). — Headache, as from heat of sun. — Stitches in scalp. 

3. Eyes.— Pains in the eyes, as if the balls were torn out — Glaucora.^,^ 
— Ciliary neuralgia ; pain in eyeball as if crushed or pressed asunder ; sharp 
shooting pain extending through eye back into brain, or above eye extending 
into, around it, or over corresponding side of head ; pain commences behind 
ear and shoots forward to eye, < motion, > rest ; pains occasionally periodic, 
may be < at night. — Pain in r. eye as if it were torn asunder ; as if inner 
portion would be torn out. — Itching in corners of eyes and in edges of lids. 

4. Ears.— Binding sensations in ears. — Pressing-asunder pain in r. ear, 
like earache. 

5. Nose. — Frequent sneezing. — Pressing-asunder pains about nasal 
bones. 

6. Face. — Itching sticking in upper part of malar bone. 

7. Teeth.— Violent nervous or wrenching pains in teeth, or else a sensa- 
tion as if teeth were raised up, and pulled out. — Pricking pains in teeth. — 
Toothache > biting teeth together. 



PRUNUS SPINOSA 889 

8 . Mouth. — Shootings, and burning pain, in tongue. — ^Tongue loaded 
with whitish mucus, — Itching crawling in tip of tongue and front teeth. — 
Mucous, clammy, or bitter taste in mouth. 

9. Throat.— Rawness, scraping, crawling in throat, causing hacking 
cough. 

11. Stomach. — When eating at times seized with hunger, but a very 
small quantity of food satisfies the appetite. — Constant nausea, with dislike to 
all food, and diarrhoea. — Fulness, distension, and oppression in pit of stomach, 
^ith shortness of breath (as after a full meal, or from over-lifting). 

12. Abdomen. — Aching pains in hepatic region. — ^Violent spasmodic, 
colic, which hinders lying on back or sides, also walking, except very slowly ; 
> on bending thorax forwards. — Pressive colic in epigastrium, or in r. side of 
abdomen, even at night. — Colic as from eating much fruit and drinking much 
water after. — Shootings in abdomen, which interrupt respiration. — Dropsical 
swelling of abdomen, with loss of appetite, scanty urine, hard and knotty 
faeces. — Ascites, with loss of appetite, scanty urine, hard, knotty stool, which 
is difficult to pass, — Incarcerated flatulency pressing on bladder, causing 
cramps in it, and compelling one to walk stooped. — Incarceration of flatus, 
with spasmodic colic, and cramps in bladder. — Shootings in r. inguinal region, 
and pressure, as if a hernia were about to protrude. — Swashing like a bladder 
full of liquid in fold in r. lower abdomen. — Very painful stitches r. groin, > 
by pressure with hands. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Difficult, hard, and knotty faeces. — ^Diarrhoea ; 
with colic, and copious evacuation of faecal matter ; faeces consisting of mucus, 
with burning in rectum as from a wound. — Much offensive water involuntarily 
discharged from rectum at night by one suffering from ascites ; whereupon 
the swelling in r.^abdomen steadily decreased, and disappeared in eight days. 
— Hard stool, intermitting, looking like excrement of dogs, in small lumps, 
with stitches in rectum extorting cries. — Cramp-like bubbling in rectum while 
sitting. — Pressive pain as if an angular body were pressed inward on r. side of 
fectum an inch above anus. — Cramp-like pains in rectum. — Discharge of 
blood ’f;‘om anus after evacuation. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Cramps in bladder, also at night disturbing the 
sleep. — Tenesmus of bladder, every half-hour for eight hours. — Burning in 
sphincter vesicae. — Pain as from suppuration or ulceration ; < taking hold of 
^urethra. — Scanty and brown urine. — Stream of urine like a thread, with 
pressure to stool. — Stream forked. — Hot, corrosive urine. — Bright yellow 
urine, with whitish, and sometimes a sky-blue coloured sediment. — Strangury. 
— Continuous urging to urinate, with burning-biting in bladder and urethra ; 
when the effort is made to urinate, burning in urethra, 4 o that one must bend 
double without being able to urinate. — Urgent desire to urinate ; the urine 
only reaches glans penis and causes there violent pains and spasms, also with 
tenesmus in rectum ; the pain in bladder is momentarily > as soon as the 
urine descends in the urethra. — Urine reaches glans penis and then returns. — 
Spasmodic retention of urine. — Tenesmus of bladder.— Violent burning pains 
in urethra when endeavouring to urinate. —Pain in urethra, as from excoria- 
tion, esp. when it is touched. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Flaccidity of penis, and retraction of 
prepuce.— Agreeable itching in the scrotum immediately > by scratching. 



890 PRUNUS SPINOSA 

z6. Female Sexual Organs.-^Discharge of a watery and pale blood 
from uterus.— Tickling, itching in region of ovaries, not > by scratching and 
rubbing. — Metrorrhagia daily for eight to ten weeks, becoming more and 
more watery the longer it lasted. — Menses watery and thin. — Catamenia too 
early, and too copious, with sacral pains. — Corrosive leucorrhoea, staining 
yellow. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Scraping and roughness in throat, with 
inclination to cough. — Cough excited by a tickling as with a feather, or 
crawling in larynx and upper part of trachea ; cough renewed by holding the 
.breath. — ^Wheezing cough. — Breathing difficult, caused by a sensation of 
heaviness in lower part of thorax. — Oppressed, short, difficult, anxious, and 
panting respiration. — Respiration is continually arrested at pit of stomach. 

18. Chest. — Pain in chest, when speaking, with weak voice. — Sensation 
of heaviness and oppression in chest. — Pains under sternum, and oppression, 
with fulness in scrobiculus, and distension of abdomen. — Stitching pains in 
fleshy parts of 1. breast on deep inspiration, extends to every side and even 
above 1, shoulder ; while walking and sitting. 

ig. Heart. — Furious beating, even when at rest, and great danger of 
suffocation from slightest motion ; visible pulsation of carotids ; face bloated 
and purple ; lips purple ; menses suppressed. — Knocking at heart with 
laboured breathing. — Even very moderate motion < beats of heart fear- 
fully. — Far advanced oedema of feet in girl, 14, with hypertrophy of heart. 

20. Neck and Back. — Pressivc pain in nape which involves whole 
occiput on stooping. — All parts of back and small of back seem stiff as if he 
had been injured. — Stitches between shoulder-blades on drawing a long 
breath. — Pain in small of back when sitting. — (Pain in small of back as if 
all strength had gone. — R. T, C.) — Stitch on r. loin to n2*vel, taking away 
breath ; < lying on back. — Pain, as from ulceration in loins. — Stiffness in 
back and loins, as if caused by a strain. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pressure on r. shoulder, extending to deltoid 
muscle, preventing one from raising arm. — Soreness of axillary glands. — 
Tension, wrenching pains, and paralytic sensation in various parts of arms 
and hands. — Paralytic pains in 1. elbow-joint extending to wrist. — R. wrist : 
wrenching pain during rest ; pain as if bruise would form. — Sensation as if 
sprained in r. thumb, hindering one from writing ; cannot hold the pen. — 
Itching in fingers, as from chilblains. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pains in hips at night, before midnight. — Pain in 
hip, < forenoon, and free from it after midnight. — Restlessness in legs, has to 
change the position continually. — Wrenching pains in knees and feet. — Burn- 
ing sensation in legs. — Pain as from sprain 1 . ankle.— Pain in first joint of big 
toe, as if it were pulled out. 

24. Generalities. — Shootings in muscles. — ^Trembling in whole body. — 
Uneasiness in body, with shortness of breath and oppression of chest. 

26. Sleep. — Sleep after a meal. — Retarded sleep and sleeplessness at 

night — Waking too early. — Lassitude in morning, as after unrefreshing sleep. 
— Sleep full of dreams and phantasies. — Dreams of furunculi; or of salt 
things. ' 

27. Fever. — Shivering, esp. in evening. — Dry heat over the whole body, 
csp. in genital organs.— Sweat on face only, during sleep. 



■PSORINUM 


891 


Prunus Yirginiana. 

Cerasus virginiana. Choke-cherry. N. 0 . Rosaceae. Cold infusion 
or tincture of inner bark. Solution of concentrated resinous 
extract, Prunin. 

Cllnioal.— Acidity. Anorexia. Dyspepsia. Heart, weakness of ; hypertrophy 
of ; irritable. Pyrosis. 

Charaoteristics. — Hale says the cold infusion of Prun. virg. has 
been used from time immemorial for irregular, intermittent action of 
the heart with deficient impulse. Hale adds cough, sympathetic with 
heart troubles ; dyspepsia with tendency to acidity ; slow digestion ; 
loss of appetite and pyrosis. Excessive doses have caused ^‘dull, 
heavy feeling in head^^ like that of the other Pruneae. Seymour 
Tayler {H, xxx. 80) says it is especially useful in dilatation of 
right heart, whether as a result of chronic bronchitis or of mitral 
stenosis. Laidlaw {N,Y. Med, Times, xxiv. 290) gives as a particular 
indication : Persistent coughs acquired in winter, < at night on lying 
down. Also : Spasmodic and asthmatic coughs, attacks of wheezing 
and whistling in trachea and large bronchi ; and cough left behind 
after an attack of influenza. Laidlaw’s first case was this : A delicate 
girl, 20, took cold, which began with coryza and in a few days passed 
into a cough with scanty expectoration and soreness under sternum. 
Cough was persistent and annoying at all times, but < at night. After 
many other remedies had failed Pnimn (the preparation Laidlaw 
uses), one grain»every two hours, relieved in two days and cured in a 
week. A recurrence some months later was rapidly cured by the 
same remedy. Burnett used it for weak digestion especially of 
elderly people. He regarded it as a mild form of Hey, ac. The ^ 
tincture, in.5- or lo-drop doses, has been most commonly used. 


Psorinum. 

fsoricum. The nosode of Psora. [The sero-purulent matter of a 
scabies vesicle was used by Hahnemann. The product of 
“Psora sicca (epidermoid efflorescence of Pityriasis) by 
Gross. The salt from a product of Psora ^y Hering.] Tritu- 
rations, 

Clinical. — Acne. Adenoids* Anus, itching in. Asthma. Backache. Boils. 
Cancer. •Cholera infantum. Cough. Constipation. Cornea, ulcers of. Crusta 
lactea. Crusta serpiginosa. Dcbihty, Diarrhoea. Diphtheria, after-effects of. 
Dyspepsia. Eczema ; rubrum. Enuresis. Eruptions ; moist ; itching. Gleet. 
Gonorrhoea. Gout. Haemorrhages. Haemorrhoids. Hair, dry ; tangling. Hay 
fever, headache. Head, congestion of. Hernia. Hydrocele. Impotence. In- 
fluenza, . Injuries. Itch, Itching. Leucorrhoea. Lienteria. Liver, affections of ; 
chronic inflammation of. Melancholia, religious. Nose, redness of. Odour of body, 
fetid. Ophthalmia, scrofulous, Otorrhoea; fetid. Ozeena, Pediculosis. Pmto- 



892 


PSORINUM 


niHs, tubercular. Plica polonica. Polypus. Quinsy. Sciatica. Scurvy. Skin, affcc- 
tions of. Spina bifida. Spleen, affections of ; induration of. Sprains, Syphilis. 
Throat, mucus tn. Tinea capitis et faciei. Tonsils, concretions in. Ulcers. 

Charaoteristics.— As Sulphur has been the chief remedial agent 
in both schools in the treatment of itch and itch-like eruptions, it is 
natural to find in the nosode of Psora, or constitutional itch, a close 
analogue of Sulph, Psorinum has been proved entirely in the poten- 
cies, and I know of no more trustworthy proving in the materia 
medica. I have frequently seen Pso, develop some of its own symptoms 
in patients whom it has benefited in other ways. A 'man who com- 
plained of ** cloudiness of mind and difficult thinking,’’ and who had 
among other symptoms, Left foot colder than right,” received Pso. 
30. It removed these symptoms ; but whilst under its influence these 
new symptoms appeared : Heavy headache across the eyebrows ; 
greasiness of face and forehead. A woman to whom I gave Pso. 30 
complained that after each dose she had a feeling “ as if something in 
the head were being screwed up and drawn ” ; one of Hahnemann’s 
symptoms is ** Spasmodically contracting headache.” A patient who 
took Pso. 500 complained that it had a “ filthy taste.” From Pso. 20m 
(F. C.) I have seen produced an eruption of boil-like indurations in 
both axillae, first (and worst) in left then in right. The general 
symptoms were very greatly relieved at the same time. One great 
mark of distinction between SuL and Pso. is that the Pso. patient is 
exceedingly chilly, likes to have a fur cap on in summer ; whilst the 
Sul. patient is predominatingly hot. H. C. Allen gives another : Pso, 
is indicated in chronic cases when well-selected remedies fail to relieve 
or to permanently improve (in acute diseases SuL) ; *also when Sul. 
seems indicated but fails to relieve. Pso. is specially suited to : (1) 
Scrofulous, nervous, restless persons who are easily startled. (2) 
Psoric constitutions ; lack of reaction after severe diseases. (3) Com- 
plaints of psoric origin ; patients emit a disagreeable odoiiv. (4) Pale,* 
sickly, delicate children. (5) Peevish, unhealthy-looking children, 
who have a disagreeable odour about them. (6) Dirty people in whom 
the body has a filthy smell which no amount of washing can remove. 
(7) Those subject to diseases of the glands and skin ; and who have 
had eruptions suppressed. The chief of the keynotes of Pso. is : Lac'lT* 
of vital reaction ; prostration after acute disease, depressed, hopeless, 
night-sweats. Hopelessness, despair of perfect recovery is part o^ 
the lack of reaction ; emaciation and foul body odour may accompany 
it. Foulness ” may be considered the second keynote of Pso. 
Eruptions have offensive discharges ; the otorrhoea is horribly offen- 
sive. The diarrhoea (especially of cholera infantum) is profuse, 
watery, dark brown, and even black, and is putrid — smelling like 
carrion. The Med. Visitor (xi. 378) collected a number of casf.s illus- 
trating the action of Pso. (I italicise some of the characteristics) : (i) 
W. A. Hawley reports a case of cholera infantum which seemed to 
defy every remedy. Stools very thin and watery ^ dirty greenisti^ smelt 
like carrion. Child very fretful, had no sleep for two days and nights. 
Pso. 42m (Fincke), one dose in water. In two hours the child went 
to sleep ; in four days it was well without repetition of the dose. (2) 



•PSORINUM 


893 


Another case of Hawley’s : Miss N., 20, had an eruption in bends of 
elbows and knees, dry, scaly, with little pointed vesicles round the 
reddened edges ; disappeared entirely in summer and reappeared when 
cold weather set in ; violent itching, < by warmth of bed or by scratch- 
ing. Pso. 4201, two doses at six weeks^ interval, cured. No return 
the following winter. Pso. also cured — (3) Headache preceded by 
dimness of sight or spots before dyes (Haynel). (4) Headache and 
eruptions, < during changeable weather (W. P. Wesselhoeft). (5) 
Always very hungry during headaches (W. P. W.). (6) Miss C., con- 

valescing from typhoid fever, reported : Stationary, no appetite.'^ 
Pso. 400 produfced immediate change and ravenous appetite (J. B. 
Bell). (7) Mr. P., 50, complained of nothing but weakness ; no appe- 
tite ; least exertion puts him into a perspiration. Pso. 40 cured rapidly 
(J. B. Bell). Mr. X.. 21, was obliged one day to run till nearly 
exhausted. Though strong and well before he now became weak, 
perspiring easily, severe pains right side, < by coughing, laughing, and 
motion. Pso. 40 cured rapidly (J. B. Bell). [I have frequently verified 
the action of Pso. in liver affections with pains as in the last case.] 
(8) Extreme dulness ; fears inflammation of brain ; > by nose-bleed. 
Headache following darkness before eyes. Black spots before eyes. 
Pso. cured (Haynel). (9) Horribly offensive, nearly painless, almost 
involuiitary, dark and watery stool ; only in night and most towards morn- 
ing (H. N. Martin). (10) Mr. C., 43, spare, dark. Hypochondriacal. 

Nervous’^ nine months. Had to give up business. Took much 
Quinine and other drugs. Complains of very disagreeable feeling 
about the head and manifests mental depression ; Hunks he will never 
recover ; has lost all hope. Cannot apply his mind to business. Seems 
confused ; cannt)t reckon. Numbness of legs and arms, < left side ; < 
going to bed, formication and crawling with prickling and smarting on 
scalp, and same on extremities. Tongue coated white. After three 
months treatment was stationary. It was then ascertained that he 
Seated very easily on least exertion, and somewhat at night, and had loss 
of raetoory. Pso. 400 soon caused improvement, and enabled the 
patient* to return to business (J. B. Bell). G. A. Whippy {Am. 
Horn., xxiii. 391) cured the following case with Pso. 200, a dose every 
third night : Carpenter, 40, long-standing discharge of reddish 
dSt^imen from left ear, < at night. Sensation of valve opening and 
shutting in left ear, < afternoon. Buzzing in ear, which stopped 
sjiddenly and was followed by violent itching. Dull, heavy pain in 
base of brain in afternoon, with sensation as though skin of abdomen 
was greatly relaxed and drawn down. Face sallow and greasy; 
several pustules on chin and neck which itch intensely and bleed 
when scratched. — Other leading indications of Pso. are : Sick babies 
will not sleep day or night, but worry, fret, cry ; or good and play all 
day, restless, troublesome, screaming all night. Weakness from loss 
of fluids ; after acute disease ; with or without organic lesion. Whole 
body painful, easily sprained and injured. Great sensitiveness to cold 
air, chaiLge, storms ; to sun ; restless for days before a thunderstorm. 
A symptom not seldom met with in practice and useful to remember 
is Feels unusually well day before attack.^’ Headache > by 
eating ; from suppressed menses ; > by nose-bleed. Dry, lustreless 



894 


PSORINUM 


hair ; plica polonica. Acne < during menses ; from fats, sa|[ar, 
coffee, meat. Quinsy, throat burns, feels scalded, cutting, tearing, 
intense pain on swallowing, profuse, offensive saliva ; tough mucus in 
throat ; must hawk continually ; tendency to quinsy. Profuse sweat 
after acute diseases, with > of all suffering. Skin has dirty look as if 
never washed. Pso, has cured more cases of hay fever in my practice 
than any other single remedy. Many cases have a psoric basis, and 
when the basic taint is corrected the irritating agents have no effect. 
Nasal polypus I have also cured with Pso. when the general symptoms 
indicate the remedy. Peculiar Sensations are : As if frightened. As if 
he would lose his senses. As if stupid in left half of head. As if 
brain had not room enough in forehead. Eyes as if pressed outward. 
As from heavy blow on forehead. As if brain would protrude. Back 
of head as if sprained. Right side of occiput as if dislocated. As if 
piece of wood lying across back of head. As if head separated from 
body. As if sand in eyes. As if he heard with ears not his own. 
Cheek-bones as if ulcerated. Condyle of jaw as if lame. Tongue as 
if burnt. Teeth as if glued together. Plug in throat. Throat as if 
narrowing. As if intestines hanging down. Everything in chest as 
if raw, scratched ; torn loose. Arms as if paralysed. Hip-joint as if 
ulcerated. Joints as if encased in armour ; as if would not hold 
together. Hands and feet as if broken. The pains of Pso. may be 
erratic and alternate (headache and toothache). The symptoms are 

< by touch ; pressure (of truss) ; rubbing ; scratching ; riding ; band- 
age ; blow ; fall. Slight emotions sss severe ailments. (Pso. cannot 
bear to have the limbs touch each other at night ; or weight of arms 
on chest.) > When eating ; < immediately after (rush of blood to 
head). < After cold drinks (pain in chest). Drinkihg s= cough. > 
Lying down (most ailments, especially of chest ; but < cough, and ss= 
gurgling at heart). < Lying r. side (liver). < Riding in carriage or 
exercising in open air ; (riding > short breath). > By rest and in 
room. Overlifting = thoughts to vanish. < Walking ; moving. ^ 
Evening and before midnight ; night ; morning on waking. Open air 

< (> taste ; cough ; itching) ; nose sensitive inhaling. < Before 
thunderstorm (restless for days before). Winter cough. Summer 
ss diarrhoea ; itching eruptions. < During full moon (enuresis). 

< Periodically. 

Relations. — Antidoied by : Coffee. Compatible : Carb. v., Chi., 
Sul. (if Sul. is indicated but fails to act give Pso.). Followed well by : 
Aim., Borax, Hep. Complementary : Sul., Bac. (Bac. is the acute of 
Pso.), after Lact. ac. (vomiting of pregnancy) ; after Arn. (blow on 
ovary) ; Sul. after Pso. in mammary cancer. Inimical : Lach. Com- 
pare : Sick babies fret day and night (Jalap) ; good all day, screams 
all night (Lyc. opp.). Effect of thunderstorm, Pho. Headache pre- 
ceded by dim vision. Lac d., K. bi. Headache with hunger ; > 
while eating, Anac., K. ph. ; > nose-bleed, Melilot. Plica polonica, 
Lyc., Bar. c., Sars., Bac. Offensive, cheesy concretions from throat, 
K. mur. > By sweat, Calad., Nat. m. > Lying down and ^keeping 
arms stretched far apart (Ars, opp.). < Mornings on waking and 
evenings lying down, Pho., Bac. Eruptions easily suppurate, Hep. 
Drinking as cough (> Caust.). Drinking <, Dig. Teeth stick 



■PSORINUM 


895 


together (Tub. teeth feel jammed together). Pediculosis, Ped., Bac., 

Nat. m. Earthy, greasy face, Nat. m., Bry. Erratic pains ; < from fats, 

< evening. Puls. Tongue as if burnt, Sang. As if parts separated, 
, Ars. (body at waist), Bap. (limbs). Convalescence, profuse sweat, 

K. ca. (K. ca. has not the hopelessness of Pso.). Despair of recovery, 
Chi., Lauro. (chest), Caps., Op., Val., Amb. Lack of reaction, Op. 
(patient not sensitive), Lauro. (over-excitable and nervous), Carb. v. 
(emaciated, weak pulse ; Pso. psoric diathesis). Hay fever. Gels, 
(morning sneezing), K. iod. Hunger at night, Chi. s., Pho., Sul., Ign., 
Lyc. Axillary affections. Jug. c.. Jug. r., Elaps. Crusta lactea, MeUta- 
grinum. Explosion in ear, Alo. 

Causation. — Emotions. Over-lifting. Mental labour. Repelled 
eruptions. Stormy weather. Thunderstorm. Injuries. Blows. 
Sprains. Dislocations. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Good-humour in morning ; works with pleasure ; enjoys 
everything. — Excitable before sleep. — Excitable, vexed with everything. — 
Fear. — Anxiety : when riding in a carriage ; with trembling of hands and 
restlessness. — Melancholy : religious ; she could commit suicide, then is full 
of phantasms, peevishness, and lachrymation ; alternating suddenly with live- 
liness.—Despair : fear of failing in business ; wishes to die in spite of the best 
hopes. — Driven to despair by excessive itching. — Ill-humour : in morning ; 
and constant thoughts of dying; could weep about everything. — Quarrel- 
some. — Every moral emotion s= trembling. — Disinclination to work ; to ride 
in a carriage, then desire to ride all the time, even in bad weather. — Senti- 
mental.— Inability to rid himself of ideas which first appeared to him in a 
dream. — Thinking that he understood what he had read he tried to explain it, 
and found that he did not understand it. — Memory lost ; so that she does not 
recognise the room after looking out of the window. — Thoughts vanish after 
*over-lifting.« 

2., Head. — Vertigo ; mornings ; everything turns around with him ; 
with headache, confusion, roaring in cars. — Sticking in head, with weakness, 
had to lie down towards 7 p.m., and soon fell asleep, copious sweat at night, 
^hich >. — Thrusts in head. — Tearing in head (which he formerly had) this 
time with fever and general arthritic pains. — Headache ; in evening ; with 
eructations ; with thirst, coldness, and dryness of mouth and lips ; inter- 
mittent ; spasmodically contracting ; as if a hammer were beating in head, 
esp. unilateral (in a herpetic patient); as if everything would protrude 
through forehead towards evening. — Fulness during mental laboui. — Conges- 
tion of brain, > nose-bleed.— Cloudy feeling in night on waking, as if he had 
been intoxicated in evening, with stupor and tumbling about. — Heaviness in 
morning,— Weakness of head. — Pulsation of blood during mental labour.— 
Sticking in 1. side of forehead ; in r. side extending into eye. — R, side of head 
and r. eye swollen and painful as if it would burst. — Drawing in forehead 
extenc^ng to nose. — Pinching in upper forehead beginning morning in bed, 

< morning and evening, with heaviness, sometimes whole sinciput aches and 
then temples feel pressed in, afterwards it alternates suddenly with pain in 
molars, < walking in fresh air. — Pain in centre of forehead ; with weakness 



896 


PSORINUM 


of it.— Pain in sinciput, < temples, < steady mental exertion, > motion, esp. 
in open air, < morning and evening, with heaviness in sinciput, often it sud- 
denly passes off and attacks 1. molars. — Pain as if brain had not space enough 
in morning on rising, > washing and breakfast ; contracting pain. — Drawing 
in sinuses as in coryza. — Stupefied feeling in 1. forehead in morning, — Shoot- 
ing from 1. temple into head. — Boring in 1. temple.— Pain in temples : after 
mental exertion ; hammering ; crampy, in skin of r. at 7.30 p.m.— Fulness in 
vertex as if brain would burst, with formication in head followed by heavy 
sleep.— Intermittent pain in a spot in vertex. — Strained pain in r. side 6f 
occiput at noon. — Pain in occiput as if a piece of wood lay across from r. to 1. 
— Feeling as of a cord around skin, < about occiput, which feels as if pressed 
outward. — Always hungry during headache. — Congestion of blood to head 
immediately after dinner. — Headache < by change of weather ; if it changes 
in night the headache wakens him. — Hair : dry, lustreless ; tangles easily ; 
glues together. — Spot of white skin with white Jock of hair becomes natural 
colour under Pso , — Sensation as if head separated from body. — Averse to 
having head uncovered ; wears a fur cap in hot weather. — Viscid sweat about 
head, — Humid eruptions. — Tinea capitis et faciei. — Crusta serpiginosa. — Raw- 
ness and soreness behind ears. — Humid, scabby eruption, full of lice, 

3. Eyes. — Eyes : gummy ; surrounded by blue rings ; glassy, with pain 
in them ; agglutination in morning. — Swelling of lids and of face. — Inflamma- 
tion of r. eye. — Pain in r. eye as if it would burst. — R. eye feels melting away. 
— Ophthalmia, with pain as from sand in eyes, and lachrymation at night. — 
Sticking : in 1. eye ; pain in r. eye, < touch. — Pain in eyes with burning, in 
evening when looking sharply at something, and by candle-light. — Pain as 
from sand, or foreign body (in r. evening when closed). — Biting in eyes. — 
Tired in evening as from much reading by candle-light. — Lachrymation : 
towards evening ; on looking long at one object. — Pimples : like hordeola on 
upper lid ; red, like fresh hordeola on margin of upper lids, and sensation as 
if something were moving before the eyes, as if one were playing with his 
fingers before them. — Itching : of r. lid ; 1. lower lid, from one side to other* 
of canthi ; inner canthi, with heat. — ^Vision of sparks. — All objects iji room 
appear to tremble. — Dazzling in evening when walking in street. — ^Vision 
blurred suddenly. 

4. Ears. — Discharge of fetid pus (1.). — Otorrhoea, with headache. — Dj§; 
charge of reddish cerumen from 1. ear. — Sticking ; towards noon ; in 1. lobe 
in evening ; in 1. after the buzzing ; in meatus internus, transiently > boring 
in with finger, frequently returning, < evening during rest. — Intermittent 
tearing through external meatus, as from temporal muscle to styloid process. 
— Pain : in r. ear, in morning ; ulcerative, in L, and at the same time on r. ear 
a pimple appearing like healthy skin, but split into four parts by a cross like 
a wart, in the centre a deep indentation.— L. concha inwardly inflamed, with 
suppurating pimples. — Sensation as if something burst suddenly when eating 
or swallowing saliva. — Sensation in 1. ear as if breath came from it instead of 
from respiratory organs. — Feeling as if stuffed with cotton, forenoons. — Biting 
in 1. car.— Itching in r. ear.— Coldness in r. ear, then sticking.— RingiM : in 1. 
car, evening ; in r. or 1., with buzzing in head so that she hears hardly any- 
thing, and behind ears in region of sterno-cleido-mastoideus, a sore pain, 
sometimes heat extending to vertex, < towards evening, wheh she feels as if 



PSORINUM 897 

pulled by the hair. — Roaring so that he feels stupefied. — Buzzing in ears. — 
Feeling in r. ear as if he heard with the ears of another person, evening. 

5* Nose. — Inflammation of septum, with white pustules. — Sticking in 1. 
^ nostril when boring in with finger.— Boring in r. nostril, then sneezing.— 
Drawing extending up to frontal sinuses, with pain in eyes as if coryza would 
set in, then discharge of fluid from nose. — Dry coryza ; nostrils nearly dry, 
and sensitive when breathing through them. — Scratching crawling towards 
root of nose as if coryza would set in. — Stoppage of nose. — Sneezing ; without 
ccflryza. — Coryza : with cough and expectoration of yellowish green mucus ; 
dry ; dry with obstruction of nose ; fluent ; fluent, from 1. nostril. — ^Tough 
mucus, he can hardly do a minute without his handkerchief, without coryza, 
with feeling of a plug high up in nose, which nauseates him, > stooping, — 
Clear, watery fluid pours out, < 1. nostril, < stooping. — Nose red. 

6. Face. — Face pale ; sickly looking ; yellow. — Congestion to head, 
cheeks and nose red and hot. — Pain in zygoma on touch as if bone were 
suppurating, in evening. — Sticking in lower jaw. — Pain as if lame in condyle 
of jaw. — Crusta lactea. — Coppery eruption on face. — Roughness of skin of 
face ; eruption on forehead between eyes ; offensive stools. — Swelling of 
upper lip. — Dryness of lips ; and brown and black colour. — Burning of lips ; 
painful and seem swollen. — Pimple on upper lip. — Vesicles around corner of 
mouth, and outwardly above them larger sore spots, exuding a fluid which 
seemed to originate from Scratching the vesicles, and cause continual scratch- 
ing. — Corners of mouth sore, often ulcerated ; sycotic condylomata. — ^Yellow 
vesicles on red edge of lower lip sore on touch. — Clear vesicles on inner 
surface of lower lip. — Painful itching on r. half of upper lip as if swollen. 

7. Teeth. — Looseness of teeth, < incisors, so that he fears they will 
fall out, the pain ^ by touch, > open air, with much mucus of an offensive 
odour in mouth. — Blood suddenly escapes from a hollow molar. — Sticking 
from one side to the other, extending to head, then burning pain in r. cheek, 
which is swollen. — Stitching in teeth on touching them in order to remove 
something lodged between them. — Sticking in a carious r. upper tooth as if it 
would be pulled, at dinner, then grumbling and hammering pain in all r. teeth, 
only in daytime, > fresh air. — ^Tearing ; jerking in 1. molars, sometimes only 
slight pain alternating with headache.— Teeth seem on edge in afternoon 
wji^en smoking. 

*8. Mouth. — Ulceration of r. gum after toothache. — Inflammation of 
gum of a posterior r. hollow lower molar, with swelling and crawling pain, < 
touch. — Tongue : coated ; white ; yellowish white. — Ulceration of tongue and 
gums, with sore throat. — Tongue : dry ; at tip, as if burnt, painful ; burnt 
feeling from tip to middle, so that he has hardly any^^taste. — Thick, tough 
mucus from choanae ; of nauseous taste ; teeth stick together. — Adhesion of 
tough mucus to posterior wall of soft palate, tasting like old cheese, coming 
from choanae. —Scratching in back part of mouth, and when leaning back- 
ward asthmatic feeling. — Swollen sensation in palate. — Dryness of mouth. — 
Taste : bitter mornings before eating, > eating ; when not eating ; > eating 
and drinking ; bad, finally coppery ; like cat’s urine to bread and butter in 
morning ; oily to the dinner ; flat, insipid ; foul, she drinks to get rid of it ; 
filthy. — Increase of the nauseous taste after eating and smoking tobacco. — 
Sticky taste. 

VOL. n. 


58 



ggg PSORINUM 


g, Throat.—Submaxillary glands swollen and painful to touch, also a 
painful pustule below 1. lower jaw.— Angina, on r. side an ulcer, with sore pain 
deep in throat and burning in palate. — Painful pimple on fauces. — Stitches,: 
in 1. tonsil ; in 1. sinews on turning head. — Pain in 1. tonsil, with swollen ^ 
feeling, — Quinsy, intense pain to ears on swallowing, profuse, offensive saliva ; 
tough mucus in throat, must hawk continually ; tendency to quinsy. — Hawks 
up cheesy balls, size of pea, of disgusting taste and carrion-like odour. — Pain 
on swallowing saliva. — Intermittent pain and difficult swallowing. — Soreness 
with difficulty in swallowing ; can take without difficulty only cold food®. — 
Scraping in throat as if she would become hoarse (in a herpetic patient) ; with 
suffocation, causing dry cough. — Burning in throat ; extending farther down- 
ward. — Dryness of throat : in morning, with scraping ; of fauces, with 
moisture in mouth. — Swollen feeling in fauces. — Sensation of plug in throat, 
impeding hawking. — ^Tickling in throat : mornings ; causing cough ; then 
empty eructations. 

10. Appetite. — Hunger great ; in afternoon, with thirst for beer ; in 
evening after a walk ; in evening; for breakfast. — Hunger without appetite. 
— Appetite diminished. — Easily satiated though he has a good app^etite. — Loss 
of appetite, but constant thirst. — Disgust for pork. — Desire to smoke in even- 
ing, but when not smoking the desire for it ceased. — Desire for acids. — 
Aversion to smoking after breakfast, hut when he begins smoking is relished. 
— Thirst : during dinner ; after the chill, then heat in mouth ; with dryness 
and burning in mouth ; for beer. — Eating (dinner) ss congestion to head. — 
Drinking ss cough. 

11. Stomach. — Eructations : tasting like rotten eggs ; sour ; rancid in 
evening. — Pyrosis ; after drinking water ; when lying down, colic > eating. 
— Hiccough : after eating ; when smoking a pipe after eating. — Waterbrash 
on lying down, > getting up. — Nausea : during the day, a kind of vomiting 
of sweet mucus every day at lo a.m. and in evening ; in morning ; in pit of 
stomach in morning ; after all food ; after supper, > eating something 
roasted. — ^Vomiting: sour; of sour mucus, so that teeth arc on ddge,®in 
morning before eating ; of food, then of a sour, slimy fluid. — Bloating. — 
Sticking in pit of stomach. — Cramp in epigastric region ; cutting* — Oppres- 
sion. — Contracting pain in epigastric region. — Weakness and pressure. 

12 . Abdomen. — Deep-seated, stitching, pressing pains in region of liver, 
< external pressure and lying on r. side ; pain hinders sneezing, laughmg, 
yawning, coughing, deep inspiration and walking. — Sticking : in sides of 
abdomen ; r. side ; region of spleen ; under last 1. rib ; in hepatic region ; 
region of spleen, > standing still, renewed by walking, later felt even during 
rest. — Swollen sensation horizontally across below short ribs when sitting. — 
Abdomen bloated : after eating ; after eating frozen things. — Constant feeling 
of emptiness and looseness of abdomen ; sensation as if intestines were hang- 
ing down. — Rumbling in morning ; gurgling and roaring. — Foul-smelling 
flatus.— Cutting in abdomen ; in evening, > passage of offensive flatus ; as 
from a purge. — Cramps in abdomen in morning in bed. — Griping; when 
driving ; in women, < pubic region. — Pinching in abdomen in morning so 
that he has to run for the closet, > stool.— Pain in abdomen ; towirds even- 
ing, > eating ; after eating, > emission of flatus, with nausea ; and in lumbar 
vertebrae, with flatulent troubles, pain in spermatic cords and testicles as if 



PSORINUM 


899 


filled with blood, a soft, difficult stool.— Pain as from canine hunger, < 
epigastric region, an hour after supper, with accumulation of flatus. — Frequent 
sticking to 1. of umbilicus during rest. — Cutting in umbilical region. — Gurgling 
in small intestines.— Twitching in r. groin after driving. — Sticking in inguinal 
glands. — Pain in r. inguinal ring. — Bearing down towards pubes, with 
tenesmus and painful burning micturition. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Stool : fluid, dark brown, foul-smelling ; thin, 
watery, dirty greenish, like carrion ; horribly offensive, nearly painless, almost 
iifvoluntary, dark and watery; only in night, < towards morning.— Diar- 
rhoea preceded bji colic ; green, bilious, mixed with mucus ; four times a day^ 
without pain. — Involuntary stools during sleep. — Lienteria. — Soft, difficult 
stool ; and copious. — Obstinate constipation, with severe pains. — Stools ; 
either costive or mushy : of normal consistency, in small balls, almost 
involuntary, at night, with violent emission of flatus ; two in forenoon ; four 
or five a day, preceded by colic ; sometimes shooting away as from a syringe, 
at another time it is mushy, sometimes of normal consistency. — Stool wanting. 
— Spasmodic pain in rectum. — Burning high up in rectum. — Sensitive haemor- 
rhoidal pain in rectum. — Chafed sensation in rectum and anus during a drive. 
— Ineffectual urging. — Burning haemorrhoids in anus. — Itching in anus. 

14. Urinary Organs.— Discharge of prostatic fluid before micturi- 
tion. — Tenesmus uriiiac and discharge of a few drops when he thinks he has 
done.— Frequent micturition at night. — Sticking inwardly from orifice of 
urethra. — Burning during micturition with cutting. — Urine has a red sedi- 
ment and a pellicle of fat. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Relaxation of genitals ; with indifference 
to sexual affairs. — ^Aversion to coitus. — Impotency. — No discharge of semen 
during coition. — Gttaiis inflamed, with an ulcer on it, testes swollen and heavy, 
— Burning pain at tip of penis on beginning to urinate. — Chronic painless 
discharge from urethra, staining linen yellow. — Chronic gleet. — Frequent 
tightness of penis, with drawing. — Absence of erections ; even with lascivious 
thoughts, afterwards morning erections and pollutions, with satyriasis. — 
Drawing in testicles, but more steady in small of back. — Painful suppurating 
vesicle on scrotum. — Hydrocele : from repeated inflammation caused by 
pressure of truss (Puls, cured the inflammation). 

^ 16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses too late ; and scanty. — ^Amenor- 
rhoea; in psoric subjects; with phthisis. — Dysmenorrhoea ; near climaxis, — 
Leucorrhoea ; large lumps ; unbearable in odour ; violent pains in sacrum 
and r. loin ; great debility. — Intolerable itching from anus to vagina, with 
knotty stools, < at night. — Ulcers on labia. — L. ovary indurated from a 
blow. — Sensitive knotty lump above r. groin. — Cutting in 1. groin. — During 
pregnancy : congestion ; foetus moves too violently ; tympanites ; nausea, 
vomiting ; obstinate cases. — Breasts swollen ; nipples red ; burning and 
itching pimples about nipples. — Mammary cancer. 

17. Ifespiratory Organs. — Hoarseness; when talking phlegm sticks 
in larynx, — Talking is very fatiguing. — Suffocating, crawling sensation in 
larynx, producing a paroxysmal, dry, hacking cough.— Tickling in trachea, 
with cough. — Inclination to cough, with sensation of coldness.— Cough in 
evening, > keeping quiet, with pain in chest and throat, talking as cough, — 
Cough with weakness of chest ; so that he could not remain in bed at night/ 



goo 


PSORINUM 


with weakness and vertigo.-— Dry cough : all day, with nausea and retching 
and tickling in throat ; from tickling in trachea, as if narrowing ; with sore* 
ness under sternum ; with heaviness on chest. — Cough, < morning on 
waking, and in evening on lying down, with expectoration of gr^en mucus, ^ 
nearly like matter, with nausea, chest is affected and expectoration is difficult ; 
with copious -expectoration ; sometimes of mucus streaked with blood; with 
salivation and vomiting of acid mucus. — Suffocation in larynx when sitting 
bent backward, with crawling, causing paroxysmal, dry, hacking cough, and 
at same time contraction and heaviness in chest and pain in upper part “of 
sternum. — Dyspnoea in evening. — Short breath ; in fresh^air, > riding and 
lying down. — Want of breath on walking in fresh air ; < sitting, > lying, 
with pain in chest. — Whistling respiration on waking, with constriction, again 
in evening whistling in chest. — Breathes easily when doing some light work, 
as trimming trees. 

i8. Chest. — Twitching through 1. chest, anterior side. — Sticking : in 1. 
chest ; 1. mamma ; under 1. false ribs ; in r. side on coughing or breathing ; 
even when not breathing ; in sternum on deep breathing, and on touch a 
pressing and bruised pain. — Feeling as if everything in it were torn when 
lifting. — Pain as if a lung had been torn loose and something were pressing 
it down. — Cutting as with knives ; in evening, with burnt feeling in throat, 
eructations, then emission of flatus. — Boring in r. chest, with oppressed 
breathing. — Pain under sternum when coughing as if something would be 
torn away, extending to throat. — Pain on spots ; ulcerative pain under 
sternum ; pain as from a load, < bending head forward, with want of breath. 
—Oppression ; pressure ; contracted feeling in chest. — Dull feeling in chest, 
with pain in back. — When in bed has to remove the arms as far as possible 
from chest, otherwise they increase the pain. — Hot sefisation in chest. — 
Suppuration of lungs. — Chronic blennorrhoea of lungs. — Hydrothorax. 

ig. Heart. — Stitches in cardiac region, low gurgling extending to heart, 
for a moment breathing is impossible. — Pain in heart > lying down ; thinks 
the stitches will kill him if they continue. — Gurgling in hea«t region es^. 
noticeable when lying down. — Pericarditis. — Palpitation ; with anxious op- 
pression. — Pulse : weak ; irritable, indicating a return of abscesses on neck. 

20. Neck and Back. — Glands of neck swollen, and on touch bruised 
pain extending to head. — Sticking in neck, with pustules. — Herpetic eruptioii 
on side of neck extending from cheek. — Nape excoriated by discharge from 
eczema capitis. — Tearing in nape. — Boring in nape, with stiffness. — Pain in 
nape in afternoon, only in the house, when supporting head with hands -it 
feels as if it had no body, as if he could pass through it with the hands. — Pain 
in muscles of r. neck, in their upper sinewy part, as from sudden tension, on 
turning head to r. backward or sideways, > pressure. — Tensive pain in nape 
after waking, as if he had lain in an uncomfortable position. — Drawing pain 
extending to shoulder, after waking.— Sticking in back ; extending towards 
chest on coughing. — Boring in vertebrae in morning, with colic, as from 
rheumatism. — Aching in back ; bruised feeling in evening, cannot straighten 
it. — Scapulae : sticking between in morning ; tearing ; rheumatic sticking 
tearing in and between, down sides. — Boring in dorsal vertebrie; pain 
between second and third in afternoon. — Sticking : in loins extending to knee 
in morning ; in os pubis during bodily exertion. — Cutting in loins so that she 



PSORINUM 


901 


could not walk alone. — Pain in loins ; and itching ; like moliinina hasmor- 
rhoidalia, < motion, so that he could not walk straight comfortably ; as if 
third vertebra from below were wanting or broken. — Drawing in loins, and 
• sometimes in testicles. — ^Tightness in ischii when walking, extending to 
knees. — ^Weakness of loins. — Backache : with constipation ; after suppressed 
eruption. — Spina bifida. 

21. Limbs. — Trembling of hands and feet. — Stretching. — Tearing : in 1. 

knee and shoulder ; intermittent, in joints, in humerus, knee, and toes, > 
motion. — Wandering pains, < tibiae and soles, also in finger-joints, at times 
in r. patella, > tnotion. — ^Weakness of joints as if they would not hokb 
together. * 

22 . Upper Limbs. — Tearing in 1. shoulder in afternoon and evening 
when resting. — ^Tearing in arm ; intermittent sticking in 1. arm. — Arm and 
shoulder swell up from an old eczema-patch on left wrist, and immediate 
relief follows dose of Pso, (R. T. C.) — Spasmodic pain in bones of 1. arm in 
evening at rest. — Sensation in 1. arm, in morning in bed, as if asleep with 
crawling in fingers ; with numbness of three first fingers and half of hand. 
— Tearing in elbow ; r. in evening. — Sticking in 1. index. — ^^Fetter on arm, 
with small, millet-like eruption, exuding a yellow fluid ; itches intensely 
in heat. — Eruption in bends of elbows and around wrists. — Itch-like 
eruptions on wrists, with rheumatism in limbs. — Trembling of hands. — 
Swelling and tension of backs of hands and of fingers. — Pustules on hands, 
near finger-ends, suppurating. — Copper-coloured eruption or red blisters 
on backs of hands. — Itching between fingers ; vesicles. — Herpes on palms. 
— Sweat on palms, esp. at night. — Warts, size of pin's head, on 1. hand 
and fingers. — Nails^brittle, 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pain in hip-joints as if dislocated, < when w'alk- 
ing, with weak arms. — Sciatica : tension down to knee while walking. — 
Paralysis of legs from suppression of eruption on arms. — Legs, < tibiae and 
soles, pain as from too much walking, mornings in bed, > rising, with rest- 
lessness of legs. — Leg on which he lies in bed too weak to endure the 
pressure* of the other, he has to change his position continually. — Sensation in 
r, leg as if it would go to sleep. — Tibia? and soles feel bruised, as after a 
tiring walk, mornings in bed. — Sticking in r. ankle in morning on every 
step.with strained sensation. — Feet, trembling ; inclination to turn 1. inward 
when walking, with sensation as if he really had turned it the wrong way. — 
Pain in feet < during rest, with itching. — Gouty pain in 1. foot. — Cramp or 
spasm in toes, < 1. great toe, when stretching them or taking off boots. 

24. Generalities. — Looks pale, exhausted, thin, his clothing is too large 
for him. — Hot trembling over whole body in morning during rush of busi- 
ness. — R. side of body full of burning pains. — Soreness. — Gouty pains in 1. 
toe, both knees, and back. — Stormy weather affects him, s= restlessness in his 
blood a few days beforehand ; makes him sick and ss haemorrhoidal troubles. 
‘—Weakness : towards evening, > going to bed ; after riding in a waggon ; 
from a little labour. — Sensation when in the sun as if it pushed her down, she 
had to rest in the shade in order to walk on. — Heaviness of whole body as 
before intermittent fever. — > Morning ; in fresh air ; when lying. 

25. Skin. — Rash ; above 1. brow and on 1. cheek ; red. on external throaty 
be^ning ^with sticking. — Nodules on face, neck, and legs. — Pimples : on 



902 


PSORINUM' 


forehead ; on neck and mammae ; with black points in centre, painful when 
scratched ; on external throat. — Burning like heat-rash below eyes ; causing 
itching, smarting pain, burning after scratching, and feeling sore (in a 
herpetic patient) ; and ulcers, from which watery fluid oozed for hours after * 
being opened, < hands, wrists, and palms.— It < herpes and causes smarting 
and itching. — A scab on nose which commonly fell off when coughing is now 
adherent and hard. — Pustules on nape, with sticking. — Boils on chest and 
loins ; on buttocks, with burning itching, soon disappearing, leaving crusts.— 
Itch-like eruption on face, hand, back, and leg, and agglutination of eyes, — 
Vesicles : on face ; quickly filling with yellow lymph, sorelo touch on fore- 
head, face, and behind r. ear ; filled with lymph, p'ainful to touch on various 
parts, some forming itching papules. — An old rhagade near r. styloid process 
suppurated, itched, and was surrounded by blisters filled with clear water, 
these soon changed to pustules, which healed under a crust. — Crawling on all 
limbs, with falling asleep of them. — Itching : on forehead ; tip of nose ; 1. 
arm ; biceps of 1. arm ; r. elbow ; soles in evening after a glass of Muscat 
wine, with tickling and heat ; of face, neck, and hands on touch ; over whole 
body after rubbing papules and vesicles ; between fingers, and vesicles filled 
with lymph ; on r. carpus, with red spots ; voluptuous, where a flea had 
bitten, with white, hard blisters on a red base. — < Of the itching, which he 
had had for years on knees, < 1., and the herpetic eruption begins to become 
pustular. 

26 . Sleep. — Yawning : at noon ; and shivering pale blue rings, with 
tearing and spasmodic pains in umbilical region in evening ; in evening, with 
early sleepiness. — Sleepy all the time ; in daytime ; early. — Sleeps when she 
sits down. — Sleep unusually sound. — Cannot fall asleep in ^evening. — Cannot 
sleep on the habitual r. side, but sleeps on 1. — Gnashing of teeth at night, so 
that he wakes. — Restless sleep ; and unrefreshing. — Sleep restless but refresh- 
ing. — Restless sleep on account of disquiet dreams. — Dreams : anxious in 
morning, of robbers, travels, and dangers ; uneasy, earnest ; that he is qp 
the closet, and thus nearly soils his bed ; of his business and of his plans. 

27. Fever. — Coldness < evening, with hot flashes, debility, and sleepi- 
ness. — Coldness with heat, thirst, and sweat. — Internal coldness towards noon, 
with shivering and horripilation.— Creeping coldness in afternoon, with 
internal shivering. — Horripilations. — Feet cold all night. — Heat : in afternoon*; 
in evening when riding in a carriage, with sweat ; of whole body suddenly, at 
meals and in evening, with trickling sweat all over face, frequent thirst, dry- 
ness, and burning in mouth. — Heat in evening, as if she would lose her 
senses, at night delirium, thirst, and sweat, then she feels well.— Burning ; in 
head ; in forehead ; in nose, transiently > by discharge of mucus, — Burning 
in nose, then fluent coryza.— Burning in face, then vesicles.— Burning in r. 
ear with itching.— Sweat ; on waking ; in morning when out of doors ; with 
consequent debility, and taking cold easily ; sweat on palms ; on face ; on palms 
at night ; perinaeum on moving about.— Want of sweat, dry skin. 



PTELEA 


903 


PtsldSl* 

Ptelea trifoliata. Shrubby Trefoil. Hop Tree. Wafer Ash. N. 0 . 

Xanthoxylaceae of the Rutaceae. Tincture of bark of root. 

Clinical* — Asthma. Constipation. Dysentery. Dyspepsia. Erysipelas. Gall- 
stones. Gastralgia. Headache, gastric ; bilious. Intermittents. Jaundice. Liver, 
congestion of. Nightmare. Phosphaturia. Rheumatism. Spleen, affections of. 
Worms. • 

Characteristics. — Ptelea is the Greek name for the Elm, and was 
applied by Linnaeus to a genus of shrubs and small trees, natives of 
North America and Asia, and included in Xanthoxylacece. In Canada 
the young green shoots of Pie. in. are used as an anthelmintic in the 
form of an infusion. The fronds are bitter and aromatic, and have 
been used as a substitute for hops {Trcas. of BoL). One of the provers 
of Pte, confirmed its anthelmintic powers by a very copious expul- 
sion of ascaridcs.^^ The proving was very thorough and extensive, 
and T. Nichol, Burt, and Cowperthwaite were among the provers. A 
very marked action was produced on the liver, and Nichol, one of the 
provers, values it highly (says Hale) in “ hepatic difficulties, and in 
those erysipelatous and urticarious eruptions that are so often con- 
comitant with affections of the liver.^^ Hale says it has not the violent 
action of Pod. or h\ v.^ but a slow, pervading action, and causes 
chronic ailments. He has found it useful in bilious headache, dys- 
pepsia, gastralgia, congestion of the liver, chronic hepatitis, and 
chronic erysipdas.’^ Others have used it in chronic rheumatism, 
dysentery, and constipation. Hale says the oily constituent of Pte. 
resembles Turpentine ; and one of the most marked symptoms of the 
proving is : Pressure as from a stone in pit of stomach,^' recalling 
Abies n. ami the conifers. In the proving the liver was swollen and 
tendeV, but there was > lying on right side, and < lying on left. 
[H. K. Leonard (H. /?., xiii. 468) cured a seemingly hopeless case 
with Pte, I X on this symptom : Weight, aching distress, dull pain in 
hepatic region, > lying on right side ; turning on left s=s a dragging 
as* if liver pulling on its ligaments.] The “ dull, muddled head is 
another liver symptom. J. Preston {B. fF. H., xlii. 71) cured with Pte. 
a case of jaundice following gall-stones, with great emaciation. — 
Aching distress ; general aching and soreness ; malaise. A number 
of alternating symptoms were noted. Nervous pains alternating from 
left arm to left eye and temple. Liveliness alternates with sadness. 
As gastric symptoms improved difficulty of breathing came on. There 
is the ravenous hunger of the antipsorics ; empty sensations in oeso- 
phagus,* in stomach. Sensitive to light, sound, to open air. Enlarged 
feelings were noted : head feels large ; fingers feel numb, and large 
and clumsy. Headache with hunger, especially on awaking, may 
prove? a keynote. Right (liver) side most affected. The symptoms 
are < in hot room ; > in cold air. < After sleep; on awaking. 
After eating, feeling of liveliness. After breakfast : distress in 
stomach, headache and hunger >'; one hour after, <. > After 



904 


PTELEA 


eating acid things. < From cheese ; butter ; pudding. General < 
after eating. > Morning and evening ; < afternoon. < Lying 
down ; lying 1 . side ; > lying r. side. < Walking ; speaking ; ment^ 
exertion ; moving eyes ; raising eyebrows, before, during, and after 
stool. Headache > after stool. Straining at stool < vertigo. Cough- 
ing = feeling as if head would burst. 

Relations. — Compare: Xanthox. Headache at base of brain, 
Ipec. Congestion of brain with feeling of weight in right hypochon- 
drium and liver enlarged, Mag. m. (Pte. > lying right side). Weak 
mind, peevish, irritable, sensitive, tenesmus, must lie dpwn, Nux, Bry. 
(Bry. has large stool, Pte. small, hard balls ; both have > lying right 
side ; Bry. < least attempt to breathe, Pte. on deep inspiration only ; 
Nux has < lying on painful (r.) side and large stool). Eructations 
like rotten eggs, aversion to meat, longing for acids, Arn. (with Am. 
eating ss: fulness; with Pte. it =s epigastric pain and goneness). 
Periodic < of gastric symptoms 3 to 4 a.m., Nux (Nux desires fat, 
Pte. loathes it ; Pte. predominating bitter taste, Nux sour; Pte. feels 
effect of food at once, Nux two hours after ; Pte. dysenteric tenesmus 
before and after stool, Nux tenesmus ceases after stool). Head symp- 
toms < straining at stool, Indm. Headache with cough. Caps., Bry., 
Nat. m. Noise almost = spasms, Asar. Impressions of sounds 
remain long in ears (images of objects seen remain long. Lac c., 
Nic.). Pain like a stone at epigastrium, Ab. n., Bry. Sensation as 
if abdomen retracted, Pb. (Pb. abdomen hard^ Pte. soft). < After 
sleep, Lach. Dreams of fighting, Nat. s. Scalded tongue, Sang., 
Pod. Clumsy fingers. Bo vis t. Liver, &c., Hydrast. ; Berb. 

Gaasation. — Repelled eruption (asthma). 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Liveliness after eating, followed by depression an hour later. 
— Depression, anxiety, and tendency to worry. — Irritable; nervbus, sudden’ 
noise startles and =; headache. — Unusual energy with disposition to hurry. — 
Thoughts chase each other through the mind, impossible to fix attention. — 
Dull, stupid, dazed, confused, muddled feeling in head.— Malaise of mind and 
body ; indisposed to physical or mental exertion.— Sudden shrinking from 
mental work, with sickness and faintness. — Memory weak : for things ; and 
names. 

2 , Head. — Head confused, giddy, weak, — Vertigo : with rumbling and 
swelling in umbilical region ; < straining at stool ; > slow motion, < sudden 
motion ; < turning head ; < walking ; on rising ; with piercing pain through 
brain. — Fits of vertigo, > bending head down and closing eyes. — Head light ; 
or heavy and full.— Severe dull headache, < motion ; < warm room,— Pres- 
sive feeling at base of brain.— Stunning, splitting, bursting, throbbing head- 
ache ; < by mental exertion; by coughing.— Headache with hunger on 
waking, > after breakfast. — Dull, heavy, frontal headache, < moving eyes* — 
Head feels enlarged. — Darting pain through 1. superciliary ridge, extending 
deep into brain. — Pressive and piercing pain through temples ; < by chew- 
ing.— Hot flushes and pain in vertex.— Pains alternate between r. temple and 
between front and back of head. 



PTELEA 


905 


3. Eyes. — Pressure over eyes, < lifting eyebrows. — Eyes heavy. — Pains 
over eyes. — Sensitiveness to light. 

4. Ears. — Swelling of gland tmdcr r. ear ; sliarp pain behind ear. — 
. Shooting pains from 1. ear down spine. — Intolerance of loud talking ; a plea- 
sant voice sounds coarse ; thought it would produce spasms if obliged to 
listen ; impression produced by the sound lasts long. — Roaring and singing in 
ears. 

5. Nose. — Sneezing. — Influenza. — Nose stopped, sore ; breath burns 
and irritates nostrils. 

6. Face. — Face pale, esp. round eyes ; sickly, yellow. — Burning in face. 
— Pain in r. zygoma. — Nervous twitching of upper lip, extending to 1. eye. — 
Lips cracked ; and sore ; dry. 

8. Mouth. — Teeth (esp. r. molars) all ache ; feel sore and elongated. — 
Tongue ; swollen ; coated yellow ; papillae red and prominent, rough at back ; 
dry j feels scalded. — Soft palate and uvula inflamed, breath hot. — Mouth dry. 
— Profuse salivation, drivelling whilst lying on face ; tastes salt. — ^Taste : in 
morning everything tastes and smells sour ; bitter ; of medicine returning in 
gusts ; nothing tastes natural.— Unable to speak for some time on waking. 

9. Throat, — Throat sore ; ulcerated ; < r. side ; < afternoon. — Burn- 
ing and pricking pains before rising, esp. in tonsils. — Dryness ; roughness ; 
heat ; constriction in throat. — Heat, dryness, and distressing feeling of 
emptiness in oesophagus. 

11. Stomach. — Appetite : voracious ; at supper followed by pain in 
epigastrium ; awoke with hunger and headache. — Tired before finishing 
eating. — Desire for acid food. — Aversion to meat, butter, and rich food. — 
Thirsty ; drank much water. — Absence of thirst ; with bitter taste, — Eructa- 
tions : tasting bitter ; of bad eggs ; sour. — Hiccough, 3 p.m. — Severe, per- 
sistent nausea ; with fever ; with headache ; < lying down ; < speaking or 
singing. — Efforts to vomit. — Vomiting without >. — Stomach : sour ; burning 
distress at ; faint feeling, — Weight at stomach with bloating ; wakening him 
I a.m.— ;Pressure as of a stone at pit of stomach, < by light meal. — Cuttii^, 
griping, .squeezing, throbbing aching in epigastric region, < by cheese. — 
Feeling as of sand in stomach. — Aching and sticking in diaphragm < by 
speaking. — All gastric symptoms < towards morning ; ss awakening. 

12 . Abdomen. — Weight and dragging in hypochondria on walking; 
standing ; sitting erect ; > stooping forward. — Liver swollen ; tender to light 
touch ; clothes feel too tight ; < lying 1. side, ss dragging pain ; > lying r. 
side. — Pains shoot fromr. hypochondrium downwards. — Throbbing ; stitches ; 
distress in r. hypochondrium. — Cutting, soreness, distress in spleen ; with 
pressure in forehead. — Pulsation and tenderness in untoilical region. — Bor- 
borygmi and colic. — Involuntary discharge of flatus. — Flushes of heat in 
abdomen. — Abdomen feels hollowed ; empty ; caved in ; soft as if front walls 
drawn in t9 spine. — Distress and griping in hypogastrium and groins. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Pressure in rectum ; urging to stool. — Smart- 
ing in anus ; after hard stool ; with diarrhoeic stool. — Stool followed by 
tenesmus and succeeded by itching and smarting at anus. — Diarrhoea, stools 
dark, sulphurous odour. — Cadaverous smelling stools. — Stools with shivering. 

’ — Fssces coated with slime. — Copious expulsion of ascarides. — Black, lumpy 
stool. — ^Constipation ; with continued urging. — Hard, difficult stool, with 
straining and smarting. 



9o6 


PTELEA— PULMO VULPIS 


14* Urinary Organs.~-Strange uneasiness in bladder and prostate,— 
Heat in prostate. — Tickling, smarting, burning, and sensitiveness of urethra. 
—Urine increased ; copious white sediment ; phosphatic ; high coloured ; 
yellowish red ; scalding slightly ; muddy sediment. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Throbbing in glans and pubic region on 
lying down at night. — Sexual desire greatly increased at first ; later abolished, 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness ; inability to speak aloud. — 
Sensation of foreign body in larynx, morning before rising. — When cough- 
ing head feels as if it would burst. 

18. Chest. — Uneasiness and difficulty of breathing calne on as gastric 
and hepatic symptoms declined.—Stitching pains in lungs.— Tenderness of 
sternum. — Pain in back of 1. breast near axilla. — Darting under r. breast. 

19. Heart. — ^Awoke from afternoon nap with slight pain near heart, and 
afterwards shooting from under r. breast. — Severe, cramp-like pains in region 
of heart. — Pulse quick, full, hard, tense. 

20. Neck and Back. — Pain in neck ; feels swollen ; cords lame. — Nape 
stiff, moving = painful tension. — Awoke with headache. — Lameness of small 
of back. — Cramp-like pains in sacrum when walking. 

21 . Limbs. — Aching distress ; weary feeling ; rheumatic pain in all 
limbs. — Stitches in shoulder and hip. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Rheumatic pain in shoulders and arms. — Nervous 
pain alternating from 1. arm to 1. eye. — < Nervous trembling of hands. — 
Prickling numbness of hands, feet cold, enlarged, clumsy, stiff. — Fine pains 
in fingers and region of spleen. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Weakness of lower limbs. — Pain in r. hip. — Dart- 
ing pains in r. thigh. — Throbbing in gluteal region. — Sticking in 1, knee. — 
Drawing pains in 1. heel. 

24. Generalities. — Weak, languid, sick, tired. — Gone feeling all over, 

25. Skin. — Skin : reddish ; dry ; parched. — Intense itching all over body 
— Eruptions : vesicles ; red spots ; boil on r. forehead ; desquamation. 

26. Sleep. — Constant yawning ; drowsy. — Sound sleep but haunted by 
frightful dreams. — Dreams ; vivid, of armies ; of dead animals ; of fighting ; 
of food and awoke hungry. 

27. Fever. — Shivering : by warm stove ; with hot head ; from hips 
down ; with chattering teeth ; with sensitiveness to cold air. — A cold streak 
runs up and down spine.-— -Feverish heat ; with pains in all limbs and nausea. 
— Dry heat over whole body, esp. palms. — Burning cheeks and hot flushes, — 
Sweat : all night ; profuse on waking ; on forehead. 


Pulmo Yulpis. 

Fox^s Lung. A Sarcode. Trituration. 

Clliiloal*— Asthma. Bronchitis. Catarrh. Lungs, oedema of ; catarrh of, 

CharaoteriBtiOEf — Recent discoveries in the uses of tissues and 
organs as remedies have thrown light on many curiosities of ancient 



PULSATILLA 


907 


medicine. As the fox is probably the longest-winded of all animals, 
the doctrine of signatures pointed to his lungs as a likely remedy for 
short breath. Grauvogl has put on record this case (quoted Horn, 
News^ XXV. 490) : Woman, 65, much reduced in flesh by a persistent 
condition of humid asthma. It commenced with chronic catarrh and 
symptoms of oedema of the lungs. Strong, sonorous bubbling, now 
rattling, now whistling sounds over whole chest, and at some distance 
away ; perceptible also to hand laid on chest. Accelerated short 
tJreath amounting to suffocation, even without corresponding heaving 
of the chest, frequently with cough and inability to expectorate. 
[Sometimes, in light cases, there is no catarrh present, and only per- 
sistent shortness of breath, becoming a paroxysm of asthma on the 
least bodily exertion.] The patient could only live sitting up, bent 
forward ; constant lividity of face, lips, and extremities, and dropsy 
of legs. Hearths pulsations irregular, and death seemed imminent. 
Pulmo vuipis I X gr. i. was given, and repeated in an hour. Visible 
improvement set in but without increased expectoration. After a 
third powder the patient was able to lie down, and fell into a refresh- 
ing sleep lasting several hours. In eight days she engaged in her 
domestic duties. 


Pulsatilla. 

Pulsatilla nigricans. Anemone pratensis. Pulsatilla pratensis. Pasque 
Flower. • (Sunny, sandy pastures in Central and Northern 
Europe and parts of South of England.) N. O. Ranunculaceae. 
Tincture of entire fi-esh plant when in flower (it flowers in 
spring and again in autumn). 

Olinioal t^Acne. Amaurosis. Amenorrhoea. AncEWta, Appetite, depraved. 
Bladder, catarrh of. Blepharospasm, Breasts, pain behind. Bronchitis. Cataract. 
Catarrh. Chaps. Chest, pains in. Chilblains. Claims. Cold. Cough. Diarrhoea; 
of phthisis. Distension. Dysmenia. Dyspepsia. Earache. Epilepsy. Epistaxis. 
Eyes, lachrymal sac, inflammaUon of; granular ophthalmia. Fear. Feet, soles 
painful. Foetus, mal-position of. Freckles. Gonorrhoea. Gout. Haemorrhoids. 
Hands, pains in. Heart, palpitation of. Heartburn. Hydrocele ; congenital. Hys- 
teria. Intermittent fever. Joints, synovitis of. Labour, spurious pains of . Lactation, 
disorders of. Lcucorrhcea. Measles. Menstruation, abnormal ; vicarious. Moles. 
Mumps. Neuralgia. Nymphomania. Ovaries, pain in; inflammation of. Phleg- 
masis alba dolens. Pregnancy ; bladder trouble of; sickness of; heartburn of; 
diarrhoea of. Priapism. Prostate, inflammation of. Prpstatorrhoea. Puerperal 
convulsions. Puerperal fever. Puerperal mania. Retained placenta. Rheumatism; 
gonorrhoeal. Side, pain in. Smell, illusions of. Spine, curvature of. Stye. Syno- 
vitis. Tape-worm. Taste; depraved; lost. Tongue, coated. Toothache. Urine, 
incontinence of. Uterus ; inflammation of ; prolapse of. Veins, inflammation of; 
v'aricose. * Whitlow. 

CharaotepiertioB. — As some confusion has arisen as to the Pulsa- 
tilla of homoeopathic use, I will give Jahr’s description of the plant : 
‘‘ Stems simple, erect, rounded, 3 to $ inches high ; leaves radical 
bipennatifid, oblong; flowers solitary, terminal, having folioles of 
calyx campanulate, bent at the point, the odour of the herb but 



9o8 


PULSATILLA 


slightly evident, taste acrid and pungent. The fresh plant cousins 
an acrid and ;csicatiiig principle, and furnishes a corrosive oil, as 
Avell as a kind of tannin, w-hich colours iron green ; in the dry state it 
is entirely deprived of this acrid quality. Grows in sandy pasture 
grounds, on hills and declivities exposed to the sun.'' He further 
distinguishes this Black Pulsatilla from the Common Pulsatilla {Pulsa- 
tilla vulgaris j Anemone Pulsatilla) which grows only on dry and 
sterile hills and flowers in spring only, whilst the black-coloured 
Pulsatilla flowers a second time in August and September." P. vulg. 
is much less downy than P. nig. : “ Its flowers clear violet or pale red, 
straight and not hanging ; seeds surmounted by a long silky tail." It 
is called Pasque Flower because it is in bloom at Easter, and its 
flowers are used for colouring Easter eggs. The Anemone is a 
medicine of ancient date, and its affinity for the eyes seems to have 
been noted from the first. Perhaps its tearful propensities gave rise 
to the legend that it sprang from the tears of Venus. Dioscorides 
mentions it as a remedy for headache and ophthalmia. Stcerck was 
the forerunner of Hahnemann in the modern use of Pulsatilla^ which 
he employed especially in chronic affections of the eyes (catarrh, 
amaurosis, spots on cornea). A young girl who had had amaurosis of 
both eyes since infancy he cured in two months, administering an 
extract internally, and insufflating a dry powder. The latter ‘^caused 
at first an acute pain and profuse flow of tears ; after which the pains, 
which had existed previous to the lachrymation, diminished as soon as it 
commenced, and finally disappeared with it" (Teste). Other cures by 
Stcerck are : (i) Foul ulcers on foot with serpiginous tetters on neck 
and shoulder. (2) Paralysis of right arm of five years' standing. (3) 
Paralysis of thighs. (4) White swelling of knees. (5) Melancholia. 
Hahnemann quotes Stoerck's experiences in the proving of Puls, in 
M. M. P. “ Of the numerous provings left us by Hahnemann," says 
Teste, “ that of Puls, seems to be the one to which he has contributed^ 
himself more than any other ; it is one of the most interesting and 
most characteristic provings of his materia medica." Teste himself has 
given a very luminous account of the remedy. He puts it at the head 
of a group with Stlic., Calc., Hep. as its chief members {Graph., Phos. 
in less degree, with Per., Cham., and Gadus as analogues). These 
drugs act principally, says Teste, on the vascular apparatus. All the 
symptoms which they have in common depend upon a small number 
of primordial symptoms {e.g., impeded respiration, engorgement of air 
passages, irregular beating of heart), indicating vascular disturbance. 
Hence arise — (i) Throbbings here and there synchronous with the 
pulse. (2) Blackness and diminished fluidity of the blood. (3) 
Swelling of veins, capillary engorgement, a sort of ill-conditioned 
plethora. (4) Diminished vital heat and action. (5) Congestion of 
blood to head and engorgement of the sinuses. (6) Sensation of 
heaviness and fulness of brain ; and (7) the same kind of pain some- 
times with apoplectic shocks, in centre or (more usually) on right side of 
brain. (8) Vertigo and cloudiness as in complete apoplexy, especially 
when atmospheric pressure is low, as at the approach of storms, and on 
heights. [Others follow from which I make a selection. — H. C.] 
Soft stools, and a passive diarrhoea without colic, which seems to ease 



PULSATILLA 


909 


the patient rather than weaken him, and continues for an indefinite 
period, in phthisical patients. Sort of numbness, torpor of the 
genital organs, with absence of erections and pleasurable sensation 
(especially among women) during an embrace ; or else permanent 
sexual excitement, “ probably from compression of the cerebellum by 
the blood which flows to it in excessive quantity and remains there, 
as is the case in certain forms of asphyxia ; this is the cause of the 
sexual excitement with which phthisicy persons are so often 
troubled.’^ Delay of menses in spite of evident symptoms of a flow 
of blood towards the uterus ; the menstrual blood is black, coagu- 
lated, impoverished if menses either too early or too late. One is 
obliged to lie with the head much higher than the rest of the body. 
Pains which manifest themselves principally in the parts on which one 
is not lying, but on changing position aggravated breaking out of those 
pains on the parts on which one has just been lying. — ^This idea of 
vascular engorgement usefully strings together many of the leading 
characteristics of Puls.^ which will serve to indicate its use in a great 
variety of disorders. The leaves of the recent herb have an acrid, 
burning, and nauseous taste. Its juice draws blisters to the extent, 
it is said, of causing gangrene, if allowed to remain in contact with 
the part for a sufficient length of time ; but these properties are, in a 
great diieasure, lost by dessication ; and ruminating animals, such as 
sheep and goats, eat the dry Pulsatilla, if mixed with other herbs, 
without aversion or inconvenience.^^ An active principle, Anemonin, 
has been isolated ; it is inflammable and crystallises in colourless, 
odourless neutral needles. Hahnemann says of Ptils, : “ This power- 
ful plant produces many symptoms on the healthy human body which 
often corresponcl to the marked symptoms commonly met with ; 
hence, also, they admit of frequent homoeopathic employment, and 
often do good. We can therefore unquestionably reckon it as a 
remedy of many uses (poly direst). It is useful in acute as well as in 
chronic di^ases, as its action, even in small doses, lasts from ten to 
twelve, days. . . . The homoeopathic employment of this, as of all 
other medicines, is most suitable when not only the corporeal affec- 
tions of the medicine correspond in similarity to the corporeal symp- 
toms of the disease, but also when the mental and emotional 
alterations peculiar to the drug encounter similar states in the disease 
to be cured, or at least in the temperament of the subject of treat- 
ment.” Hahnemann now gives m masterly fashion the picture of 
the Puls, disposition and temperament : A timid, lachrymose disposi- 
tion, with a tendency to inward grief and silent peevishness, or at all 
events a mild and yielding disposition, especially when the patient in 
his normal health was good-tempered and mild (or even frivolous and 
good-humouredly waggish). It is therefore especially adapted for 
slow, phlegmatic temperaments ; on the other hand, it is but little 
suitable for persons who form their resolutions with rapidity and are 
quick in their movements, even though they may appear to be good- 
tempered. It acts best where there is a disposition to chilliness and 
adipsia. It is particularly suitable for females when their menses 
come on some days after the proper time ; and especially when the 
patient must lie long in bed at night before he can get to sleep, and 



910 


PULSATILLA 


when the patient is worse in the evening. It is useful for the ill 
effects caused by eating pork.’^ Hering gives these additional touches 
to the Ptils. type : Sandy hair, blue eyes, pale face, easily moved to 
laughter or tears ; affectionate, mild, timid, gentle, yielding disposi- 
tion ; women and children ; women inclined to be fleshy ; the 
pregnant state. The behaviour of the Wind Flower, the sport of 
every gust, has been said to typify the action of the remedy. Change- 
ableness is one of its most important keynotes : Erratic temperatures 
in fevers. Wandering pains shift rapidly from one part to another, 
also with swelling and redness of the joints. Haemorrhages ap- 
parently stop and in a few hours return. Stools constantly changing 
colour; no two stools alike. Alternate pallor and redness of face. 
When one set of symptoms comes on another vanishes. A patient of 
mine, after a mental strain and fright, had severe occipital pain. I 
gave Pm/s. 30. Each dose caused the pain to fly from the occiput to 
the left leg ; the mental balance was soon restored. Metastasis of 
mumps to testes or mammae. Nash says Puls, will often clear up 
those cases which have no “ head or tail ” to them ; in which the 
symptoms are always changing and contradicting, pains run here and 
there. The Puls, patient is chilly, but at the same time there is 
extreme aversion to heat. The chief of all the keynotes of Puls, is 
< by warmth ; in warm, close room ; by warm coverings ; warm 
applications ; and > in open air ; cold air or cool room ; eating or 
drinking cold things ; cold applications. Another keynote of Puls, is 
thirstlessness, and Teste gives a useful clue to that in suggesting that 
it depends on the congestive action of the remedy. The loss of thirst 
and even aversion to liquid food is as if one had an instinctive dread 
of increasing the excessive fulness of the vessels.^’ • The wandering 
pains of Puls, are generally dislensivey again suggesting congested 
vessels ; and the headaches are congestive ; < on stooping forward ; 
> by tightly bandaging ; as if the brain would burst and the eyes 
would fall out of the head. The three characters, chilly ; < by 
warmth ; thirstless,” serve to define the fever of Puls, in whatever 
form it may be met — measles, mumps, typhoid, bilious, catarrhal, 
intermittent, rheumatic, &c. The chilliness may be one-sided, and 
associated with numbness ; it may be flitting^ in spots now here, now 
there. With the heat there are distended veins and burning hands 
that seek cool places, and still there is no thirst. In the rheumatic the 
pains shift from joint to joint. The sweat is profuse, may be one- 
sided, sour, sweetish sour, or musty in odour. The last completes 
the similarity of Puls, to the ** mousey ” odour of measles ; the cough, 
catarrhal symptoms, and rash giving other strong points of correspon- 
dence. The ear trouble which is a common sequela and complication 
of measles or other fever is frequently met by Pm/s., which also meets 
the consequences of suppressed exanthemata and metastases, as of 
mumps to testes or mamma. As a prophylactic against measles Puls, 
has a reputation almost equal to that ot Bell, against scarlatina ; I 
generally give Puls. 3 three times a day. The generative organs ot 
both sexes are strongly acted on by Pm/s., which may almost be 
regarded as an organ-remedy in relation to them. Gonorrhoea, with 
thick, purulent secretion ; and the effects of suppressed gonorrhoea, 



PULSATILLA 


911 

orchitis, and cystitis ; prostatitis ; sarcocele, varicocele, hydrocele- 
all come within the sphere of Puls. In the female Puls, ranges over 
the whole sexual period, from puberty to the climacteric, including 
disorders of menstruation, pregnancy, the puerperium and lactation — 
all of which present many points ot correspondence with the symp- 
toms of Puls. Epilepsy with absence or irregularity of menses has 
been cured with Puls. Bojanus (J5. y. H., xxxix. 218) relates two 
cases: (i) Girl, 18, of good constitution, with no hereditary predispo- 
sition, had amenorrhoea for six months, and a fit occurred at the time 
each period was due. Aura : sad, pale as death ; chewing move- 
ments. Puls. 6 one dose a day. Next month menses returned and 
there were no more fits. (2) Robust girl, 14, with no hereditary pre- 
disposition. Fits twelve months. Exciting'^cause : non-appearance 
of menses. One great fit per month, small fits daily. Aura : self- 
willed, angry, stands on one spot, stares into vacancy, stamps her 
foot. In fit : cries, deathly paleness, biting tongue, flow of urine, 
continuing the occupation she was engaged with at commencement 
of fit. Puls. 30 one dose a day. Some weeks after a slight fit. 
Month later menses came on for first time, no great fits, small ones 
rare. Puls. 30 one dose a week. Month later a great fit. Puls, once 
a day. No more great fits, only a few small ones. Cure permanent. 
A patient to whom I was giving Puls. 3 for some heart affection com- 
plained that she could not take it because it caused her to wake up in 
the night with a dry cough, and she was compelled to sit up in bed to 
get relief. That is a characteristic cough of Puls.^ and I have fre- 
quently cured it in other patients. Puls, has a cough with copious 
expectoration, and this is the more usual ; but they may be alter- 
nating conditiolis. The congesting action of Puls, is well shown in the 
respiratory symptoms. Remarking on this symptom, Pressure upon 
the chest and soreness,’^ Hahnemann says that in the catarrhal condi- 
tion they refer to, “ the glands of the air passages appear to be 
^swollen and inflamed, and unable to secrete the mucus necessary to 
mois'ten them ; hence the sensation of dryness^ rawness, painfulness, and 
the illusory sensation as if the air passages were internally constricted by 
an excessive amount of tenacious and Jirm mucus which could not be 
loosened.^^ Commenting on another symptom of Puls. (“ dyspnoea or 
vertigo, with weakness of the head on lying outstretched upon the 
back, wholly disappearing on sitting upright Hahnemann eluci- 
dates some of its Conditions : “ The symptoms of Puls, caused by 
lying down, sitting up, rising from sitting, by walking and by standing, 
consist of varying alternate conditions, all of which belong to the 
primary action of the drug, but which vary in their character. Usually 
the symptoms of Puls, which occur while lying still upon the back are 
> by sitting upright, seldom the reverse ; frequently the symptoms 
that appear while sitting still are > or removed by gradual motion 
and by walking, seldom the reverse. Yet the act of rising, before one 
begins to walk, s= symptoms more numerous and more severe the 
longer the sitting has continued ; so also longer continued and more 
violent motion ss* aggravation no less long than sitting still, which, 
however, are only really felt and noticed after one has sat down and 
become quiet.” Other leading indications of Puls, are : First serious 



912 


PULSATILLA 


impairment of health is referred to age of puberty, never been well 
since — ^anaemia, bronchitis, phthisis. Secretions (of eye, ear, nose, 
vagina, &c.) are generally thick, bland, and yellowish green. The 
pains appear suddenly and leave gradually ; or'tension much increases 
till very acute, then “ lets up with a snap.’’ Great dryness of mouth 
without thirst. All-gone sensation in stomach, especially in tea- 
drinkers. < At twilight ; in evening (the wide-awakeness on first 
going to bed comes within this modality). Suffering parts emaciate. 
Peculiar Sensations are : As if beside himself. As if in a hot atmo- 
sphere. As if death were near. As if looking through a sieve. 
Limbs as if bruised ; as if asleep. As if one had turned in a circle a 
long time ; as if he would fall ; as if he were dancing. As if brain 
would burst and eyes fall out of head. As if skull of forehead too 
thin. As if skull were lifted up. As if one had eaten too much. As 
if a nail driven into occiput. As if head between screws. As if 
gimlet piercing skull. As if eyes tightly bound by cloth. As if foreign 
body pressing in eye ; sand in eye ; thick body forcibly driven into 
ear ; something crawling out of ear ; worm creeping into throat. As 
if nose would be forced asunder. As if face being drawn tighter and 
tighter, then suddenly let loose as if a string cut. As if a nerve in 
tooth put on stretch and then lei loose. As if he had to swallow over 
a lump. As of stone in stomach. As if bladder too full ; as if it 
would fall to side on which he is lying ; as of a stone in bladder or in 
abdomen or chest. As if joints would be easily dislocated. Small of 
back as if sprained. As if a hand passed through back and everything 
were constricted. Chill as if drenched with cold water. As if head 
would burst on coughing. Tongue as if burnt. Pain as from sub- 
cutaneous ulceration. As of a hot coal above ulcer. ' The symptoms 
are < by touch ; > by hard rubbing and pressure (but stomach, 
bladder, uterus, very sensitive to pressure). > Uncovering. Aver- 
sion to and < from meat, butter, fat food, pork, bread, milk, buck- 
wheat, ice cream, smoking. Desire for : sour, refreshing things^ 
herring ; lemonade. > From cold, < from warm foods. Rest < 
(> pain in testes ; labour-like pains ; weakness in joints). Cannot 
rest though motion <. The longer he lies in the morning the longer 
he wishes to lie. > Lying with head high. < Lying on 1. side ; on 
sound side. Pains which come on when lying on back are > by 
turning to either side (also vice versa) ; must sit up and turn. When 
rising up the red face turns deathly pale. Great inclination to stretch 
feet. Gentle motion >, slow walking >. Violent motion <. Mis- 
step < stitching pains in stomach. Intellectual labour, or watching 
will as headache ; meditation will sometimes > . Most symptoms < 
evening and night. < Twilight : As evening comes on begins 
to fear ghosts ” ; all symptoms < alternate evenings. < Before 
thunderstorm. Sun <. < Hot food ; is vomited immediately; < 
toothache. < Changes of weather. < Getting wet. Wind <. 
Draught of air > toothache. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Cham. (Cham, and Puls, antidote each 
other and follow each other well. If either one has over-acted the 
other will probably neutralise the ill effect and car^ on the good), 
Coff., Ign., Nux (Teste adds Sul., and says when the improper use of 



PULSATILLA 


913 


Puls, has affected the air passages Calc. ph. has proved his best anti- 
dote). Antidote to : Chi., Chi. suL, Fer. (in chlorotic girls who have 
been damaged by Iron, Puls, has excellent effect), Mag. c., Sul., Sul. 
ac., vapours of Mercury and Copper, Bell, Cham., Coff., Colch., Lyc., 
Plat., Gels., Strm., Saba., Ant. t.. Whisky, Toad-stool poisoning. Com 
paiible : Ars., Bry., Bell, Ign., K. bi., Lyc., Nux, Pho., Rhus, Sep., 
Sul. Complementary : Lyc., Sul. ac., Arg. n. (if Arg. n. flags, give Puls. ; 
Arg. n. follows Puls, in ophthalmia) ; Stn. (Stn. has menses too early 
a-nd too profuse). Compare : Tearfulness, Sep. (Puls, cries when telling 
her symptoms, ^Sep. weeps when questioned about her symptoms ; 
Sep. irritability and anger, indifference to household affairs), Nat. m. 
(Nat. m. is < by consolation), Ign. (Ign. hides her grief). Varicose 
veins, varicocele, orchitis, phlegmasia alba dolens, Ham. (Ham. has 
soreness of affected part). Ophthalmia, Arg. n. Cold, Cycl. (Cycl 
has spasmodic sneezing), Cep. (both have < in room, > open air, but 
Cep. discharge is thin and excoriating, Puls, thick and bland), Pen. 
sed. (Pen. sed. has rawness in nose and throat ; and constant wet 
feeling without coryza,^^ later thick and purulent like Puls.). Stinging 
pains in throat < swallowing saliva and after eating, Apis. Feeling 
as if food lying in (esophagus, Chi., Abies n. Effect of fat food, Ip., 
Thuj., Carb. v. Effect of ice-cream, Ars., Carb. v.. Ip., Bels. Mixed 
diet, Nux, Ip,, Chi. Desire for lemonade, Cyc., Sabi., Bell Gastric 
ailments from pork. Ant. c. (tongue as if whitewashed, vomiting pre- 
dominates ; Puls, stool greenish and slimy). Ip. (tongue clean, nausea 
predominates). Spasmodic, irregular pains = faintness, Nux. Re- 
tained placenta, Canth. After-pains, Cham., Xan., Cup. (in women 
who have borne many children). Non-appearance of milk, Urt. u., 
Ric. com., Agn. b. Uterine affections. Caul, Helon., Senec., Alet. f., 
Cycl, Hydras., Lil. Measles, Morbillin, K. bi. Backache < sitting, 
Zn., Cobalt., Sep., Can. i. Earache, Borax. Knee-joint affections, 
.^nac. (Anac. chronic). < From wine, Zn. (Puls, from sulphurated 
wines,) Rllb., Glo., Nux, Sel, Lach., FI ac.. Ant. c., Bov., Sil. Thick, 
yellowish, green nasal discharge, Merc. (Puls, bland ; Merc, has moist 
mouth and intense thirst, and Puls, and Nux m. dry mouth without 
thirst). Sudden vanishing of sight with scanty menses, Sep., Cycl. 
Diarrhcea from fright. Gels. (Puls, stools greenish, yellow, or slimy, 
or very changeable). Hypertrophy of heart ; > from slow motion, 
Rhus. Menstrual colic, Coccul (Coccul. as if sharp stones rubbed 
together with every movement). Vicarious menstruation, Bry., Pho. 
Ozaena with thick greenish discharge, gleet, gonorrhoeal rheumatism, 
effects of tea, Thuj. (the gleet of Puls, is thicker ^han that of Thuj.). 
Scanty menses. Graph. > Open air, Sul (Lyc. desires open air, but 
is < in cold, damp air). Climacteric state, Lach. > Uncovering, 
Lyc., Camph., Aco., Sec. < From heat. Apis, lod. Nausea in upper 
chest arrd in hypogastrium. Puls, (nausea in hypogastrium, generally 
with uterine bearing down, Rhus). Nausea when fasting. Calc., Lyc., 
Silic. ; when beginning to eat, Nux, Sul. Nausea in chest. Ant. t. 
Acid stomach, Chi., Calc., Sul, Sil, Robin. Menstrual pain begins 
with the flow (opp. Lach., pain subsides as flow begins). Acquisitive- 
ness, Ars., Lyc. Dread of disease. Calc., Lach., Nux. < Lying on 
left side ; > cold food and drink, Pho. Ribbon-like stools (Pho. like 
VOL. II. 59 



914 


PULSATILLA 


dog^s). Feais darkness, Am. m., Ars., Bar. c., Berb., Calc., Carb. a., 
Carb. V., Caus., Lyc., Pho., Rhus, Stro., Val., Stram. Fear of ghosts, 
Aco., Ars., Bro., Lyc., Ran. b., Sep., Sul., Zn, Piles during menses. 
Am. c., Ars., Carb. v., Coccul., Collins., Graph., Ign., Lach., Mur. ac., 
Pho., Sul. Faintness connected with stools, Ap., Nux m., Spi., Ver. 
(with scanty stools, Crot. t., Dulc., Ox. ac.. Pet. Sars., Sul.) Stoppage 
of menses from wet feet, Rhus., Lob. i. Chilblains, Agar. Vertigo 
on looking up (Calc, on turning head ; Sul. on looking down). < In 
bed at night, Sul., Merc., Cham. Taste bitter with biliousness of a 
morning, the taste felt chiefly in upper chest, Sul. One hand cold the 
other hot, Chi., Dig., Ip., Mosch. Metastasis of mumps to testes, 
Bell., K. ca., Rhus (to brain. Bell., Hyo.). Effect of taking cold, fever, 
Aco. (Aco. has great thirst and anguish). Inter- menstrual haemor- 
rhage, Bov., Ham. < Hair-cutting, Bell. > Lying on painful side, 
Bry. Erratic temperatures (Zn. nervous high temperatures). Puls, 
is a close analogue of Cycl. in many respects, but Cycl. has profuse 
menses, the flow being < sitting and > walking (Puls. < during day ; 
Kre. < lying down) ; and Cycl. has < in open air. Puls, and Nux 
are in most respects antipodal, though they follow each other well ; 
Puls, has > lying on back, < turning to either side ; Nux has < 
lying on back, > turning t(5 either side. Silica is the chronic of Puls. ; 
and Sul. also in many respects. 

Causation. — Chill. Wetting feet. Eating : Pork ; Fats ; Pastry ; 
Ice-cream ; Mixed diet. Thunderstorm. Tea, 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.-~[This remedy is particularly applicable for complaints which 
are found to occur in patients of a mild, yielding, or good-natured disposition ; 
also in those who by their sickness, or naturally, are very easily excited to 
tears — they are very apt to burst into tears whenever spoken to, or when they 
attempt to speak, as in giving their symptoms, &c. — Affections the mind 
in general; covetous; mistrustful; absent-minded; low-spirited (H. N. G.)] 
Melancholy with sadness, tears, great uneasiness respecting one’s affairs or 
about the health ; fear of death (tremulous anguish, as if death were near), care 
andgrief.— Involuntary laughter and weeping. — Great anguish and inquietude, 
mostly in precordial region, sometimes with inclination to commit suicide, 
palpitation of heart, heat, and necessity to loosen the dress, trembling of 
hands, and inclination to vomit, — Fits of anxiety, with fear of death, or of an 
apoplectic attack, with buzzing in ears, shiverings, and convulsive movements 
of fingers. — Apprehension, anthropophobia, fear of ghosts at night or in 
evening, with an impulse to hide or to run away, mistrust and suspicion. — 
Covetousness. — ^Taciturn madness ; with sullen, cold, and wandering air, 
sighs, often seated with the hands joined, but without uttering any cpmplaint. 
— Despair of eternal happiness, with continual praying. — Discouragement, 
indecision, dread of occupation, and obstructed respiration. — Disposition 
envious, discontented, and covetous, exhibiting itself in a wish to appropriate 
everything. — Caprice, with desire at one time for one thing, at another time 
for something else, either being rejected as soon as obtained. — Hysterical 
laughter after meals.— H5rpochondriacal humour and moroseness, < evening, 



PULSATILLA 


915 


often with repugnance to conversation, great sensitiveness, choleric disposi- 
tion, cries, and weeping. — Ill-humour, sometimes with a dread of labour, and 
disgust or contempt for everything. — Inadvertence, precipitation, and absence 
of mind. — Difficulty in expressing thoughts correctly when speaking, and 
tendency to omit letters when writing. — Giddiness ; patient neither knows 
where he is nor what he does. — Great flow of very changeful ideas. — Noc- 
turnal raving ; violent delirium and loss of consciousness. — Frightful visions. 
-^Weakness of memory. — Fixed ideas. — Stupidity. 

2. Head. — Fatigue of head from intellectual labour. — Sensation of 
emptiness and cdhfusion in head, as after long watching or after a debauch, 
and sometimes with great indifference. — Stupefaction in evening, in warm 
room, with chilliness. — Stupefying headache, with humming in head, < when 
lying or sitting quiet, or in the cold. — Vertigo as during intoxication, or 
vertigo to such an extent as to fall, and staggering, < evening, or morning 
when rising up, when getting up after lying down, when sitting, when stoop- 
ing, when walking in open air, or after a meal, as well as on raising eyes, and 
often with great heaviness and heat in head, paleness of face, inclination to 
vomit, sleep, cloudiness of eyes, and buzzing in ears. — Meditation and conver- 
sation < the vertigo. — Fits of dizziness and loss of consciousness, with bluish 
redness and bloatedncss of face, loss of motive power, violent palpitation of 
heart, pulse almost extinct, and respiration rattling. — Pain as from a bruise in 
brain (as if brain were lacerated, on or soon after waking), as in typhus fever 
or after intoxication with brandy. — Headache as from indigestion, caused by 
eating fat food (or from the abuse of Mercury). — Pain in head as if forehead 
would split, or as if brain were tight, compressed, or contracted. — Headache 
on moving eyes d^ep in orbits Jis if forehead would fall out ; and frontal bones 
were too thin, with dulness of head, evening. — Semilateral headache as if 
brain would burst and eyes fall out of head. — Soreness as from subcutaneous 
ulceration in one or both temples, < in evening, when at rest, and in warm 
r«om; > by walking in open air. — witching-tearing in temple on which 
one lies, and going to the other side when turning on it ; < in evening and 
on raising eyes upwards. — Congestion of blood to head, with stinging pulsa- 
tion in brain, esp. when stooping. — Shootings, or sharp drawing and jerking 
pains, or tingling pulsation, and boring in head. — Headache across eyes 
like a drawing- up and letting go again. — Roaring, buzzing, and crackling 
in head ; or painful sensation, as if a current of air were crossing brain. 
— The. headache is often only semilateral, extending as far as ear and 
teeth, where it affects forehead (generally in one temple) above eyes, pene- 
trating into sockets, or it is experienced in occiput, with painful contraction 
in nape of neck (with vertigo, ringing in ears, and vanishing of sight). — 
Appearance or < of headache in evening, after lying down, or at night, or in 
bed in morning, as well as on stooping, on moving eyes or head, when walk- 
ing in open air, and during intellectual labour ; . compression sometimes >. — 
Headache > by meditation. — Headache with nausea and vomiting, or with 
congestion and heat in head, or else with shuddering and syncope, vertigo, 
cloudiness of eyes, loss of sight, and buzzing in ears, photophobia, and weep- 
mg.-— Pain in scalp on turning up hair (or on brushing hair backwards). — 
Tickling and itching in head. — Purulent pustules and small tumours, with 
pain in scalp as from ulceration (suppurating and affecting the skull, more 



9i6 


PULSATILLA 


painful when lying on the opposite well side).— Tingling, biting-itching on 
scalp, mostly on temples and behind ears, followed by swelling andiCruptions ; 
sore pain ; < in evening when undressing and on getting warm in bed. — 
Fetid, frequently cold perspiration, at times only on one side of head and 
face, with great anxiety and stupor ; < at night and towards morning, > 
after waking and rising. — Disposition to take cold in head, < when it gets 
wet ; sweat of scalp and face. 

3, Eyes. — Affections in general appearing on the cornea ; margins of 
the eyelids ; dim-sightedness, with a sensation as though there were some- 
thing over the eye which the patient wishes to rub away ; amaurosis ; 
cataract. — Pain in eyes as if scratched with a knife. — Burning sensation, 
pressive pain as if caused by sand ; or sharp or shooting pain in eyes, or else 
boring and incisive pain. — Burning itching in eyes, chiefly in evening 
(inducing rubbing and scratching). — Inflammation in eyes and margins of 
lids (and meibomian glands), with redness of the sclerotica and conjunctiva, 
and copious secretion of (thick) mucus (and nightly agglutination). — Swelling 
and redness of eyelids. — Trichiasis in eyelid. — Styes, esp. on upper lid. — 
Crystalline lens clouded and of a greyish colour. — Stye with inflammation of 
sclerotica, and tensive drawing pains on moving the muscles of the face. — 
Dryness of eyes and lids, esp. during sleep. — Profuse lachrymation, prin- 
cipally in the wind, as well as in open air, in the cold, and in clear, bright 
daylight. — ^Acrid and corrosive tears. — ^Abscess near angle of eye, like a 
lachrymal fistula (discharging pus on pressing it). — Nocturnal agglutination 
of lids. — Pupils contracted or dilated. — Amaurosis ; paralysis of optic nerve. — 
Look fixed and stupid. — Dimness of sight, esp. on getting warm from exer- 
cise. — Cloudiness of eyes and loss of sight, sometimes with paleness of face 
and inclination to vomit ; (all objects present a sickly hue).— Loss of sight in 
twilight, with sensation as if eyes were covered with a band. — Sight con- 
fused, as if directed through a mist, or as if caused by something removable 
by rubbing, principally in open air, in evening, in morning, or on waking.— 
Incipient cataract. — Diplopia. — Luminous circles before eyes, and*‘diffu^on of 
light of candles. — Great sensibility of eyes to light, which causes lancinating 
pains (and in sunshine). 

4 . Ears. — Pain in ears, as if something were about to protrude from 
them. — Shootings with itching, or sharp, jerking pain, and contraction in and 
round ears ; the pains sometimes come on by fits, affect whole head, appear 
insupportable, and almost cause loss of reason (may be accompanied by high 
fever, &c.). — Earache with shooting down to teeth of lower jaw, < when 
warm in bed. — Eamche in both cars with violent headache, frontal and 
occipital, < at night. — Inflammatory swelling, heat, and erysipelatous redness 
of ear and auditory duct, as well as of surrounding external parts. — Painful 
swelling of bones behind ears. — The cerumen is hard and black. — Bland, 
nearly inoffensive discharge of mucus and pus from ear.— Discharge of pus, 
of blood, or of a thick yellowish humour from 1. ear. — Discharge from one or 
both ears, which may come on after measles or any other disease, or may 
occur spontaneously. — Otorrhoea with throbbing tinnitus.— Warbling, pulsative 
murmurs, tinkling, roaring, and humming in ears.— Hardness of hearing, as 
from an obstruction (esp. from cold, from having hair cut, or after sup- 
pressed measles). — (Deafness after washing head.— R. T. C.) — Burning, 



PULSATILLA 


917 

gnawing scabs at the tragus (with swelling of glands of neck). — Shootings in 
parotids. 

5. Nose. — Pressure and pain as from an abscess in root of nose (near 
inner canthus, as if a lachrymal fistula would form).-— The nose feels sore 
internally and externally. — Ulceration of nostrils and of the alae nasi (emitting 
a watery humour). — Discharge of fetid and greenish or yellowish pus from 
nose (like old catarrh). — Old catarrh, frequently a profuse discharge every 
morning, in mild and pleasant persons. — Nasal catarrh accompanied by 
special discomfort in the house, cannot breathe well in a warm room, and 
great > by goin^j out into the open air. — Blowing of blood from nose and 
nasal haemorrhage (blood coagulated ; with dry coryza ; with suppressed 
menses), sometimes with obstruction of nose. — Obstruction of nose and dry 
coryza, principally in evening and in the heat of a room. — Coryza with loss of 
taste and smell, or with discharge of thick (yellowish green) and fetid mucus. 
— Tickling in nose and frequent sneezing, principally in morning and evening. 
— Constant shivering during coryza. — Imaginary smells. — Constant smell 
before nose, as from a coryza of long standing, or as of a mixture of coffee 
and tobacco. — Swelling of nose. — Nasal bones pain as if they would be forced 
asunder. 

6. Face. — Face pale (or yellowish, with sunken eyes) and sometimes 
with jin expression of suffering. — Painful sensitiveness of skin in face. — Boring 
in 1. malar bone. — (Neuralgia of r. face, < and then > by warmth, tightness 
across forehead as from a tight siring, keeps her awake at night. — R. T. C.) — 
Pallor of face, alternating with heat and redness of cheeks. — Heat and red- 
ness of r. cheek only. — Sweat on face and scalp ; shuddering or one- (r.-) sided 
sweat of face. — Face (and nose) puffed and of a bluish red colour. — Convulsive 
movements and •muscular palpitations in face. — Tension and sensation of 
swelling in face, or painful sensibility of skin, as if it were excoriated. — 
Erysipelas in face, with shooting pain and desquamation of skin. — Red 
^odosities in region of cheek-bones. — Lower lip swelled and cracked in 
middle. — Celling, tension, and cracks in lips, with desquamation of skin. — 
Gnawing and smarting around mouth. — Sharp and contractive pain in jaws. 
— Swelling of submaxillary and cervical glands. 

7. Teeth. — Sharp, shooting pains in teeth, or drawing, jerking pains, 
as if the nerve were tightened, then suddenly relaxed ; or pulsative, digging, 
and gnawing pains, often with pricking in gums. — Jerking and stinging in 
teeth, extending to ears and eyes. — ^Toothache which affects the sound as 
well as the carious teeth, often only semilateral, and frequently extending to 
face, side of head, ear, and eye, on the side affected, being sometimes 
accompanied by paleness in face, shivering, and dyspnfea.-— Toothache < or 
appears principally in evening or afternoon or at night, as well as in heat of 
bed or of a room ; renewed by eating, as also by partaking of anything hot, 
and by irritation with the toothpick : > by cold water or fresh air. — Tooth- 
ache from cold (in the first warm spring days), with otalgia, paleness of the 
.face, and chilliness. — The toothache is also sometimes < by cold water as 
well as by fresh air or by wind ; but these cases are rare. — Sensation of burn- 
ing or swelling, pain as from excoriation, and pulsation in gums« by the 
heat of the stove). — Looseness of teeth. 

8. Mouth.— Dryness of mouth in morning (without thirst). — Offensive 



gi8 


PULSATILLA 


smell, and even putrid fetor from mouth, principally in morning or at night, 
and in bed in evening. — Flow of sweetish and watery saliva from mouth, 
sometimes with inclination to vomit. — Sensation as if tongue were too large. 
— ^Tongue feels dry, and clammy. — Painful blister on r, side of tip of tongue. 
—Sensation in middle of tongue, even when it is moistened, as if it had been 
burned and were insensible ; at night and in morning. — Edges of tongue feel 
sore as if scalded. — Tongue greatly swollen, dorsum bright red and covered 
with network of dilated and congested veins; varicose swelling on 1. side 
of tongue.—Tongue loaded with a thick coating of a greyish, whitish, or 
yellowish colour (and covered with tough mucus). — ^Accumu^gltion of tenacious 
mucus in mouth and on tongue ; these parts are, as it were, coated with a 
white skin. — Cracks and painful vesicles on tongue.— Sensation as if the palate 
were swollen, or covered with tenacious mucus. — Constant spitting of frothy, 
cotton-like mucus. 

9. Throat. — Pain as from excoriation in throat, as if it were all raw, 
with scraping, burning sensation and smarting. — Redness of throat, tonsils, 
and uvula, with sensation as if those parts were swollen, < swallowing. — 
Difficult deglutition, as from paralysis, or from contraction of throat. — Shoot- 
ings in throat, with pressure and tension during empty deglutition. — Inflam- 
mation of throat, with varicose swelling of veins. — Dryness in throat (in 
morning) or accumulation of tenacious mucus, which covers the part affected 
(esp. night and morning). — The sore throat is generally < in evening or 
afternoon. — Sensation of a worm creeping up into throat. 

10 . Appetite.— Insipid mucus, putrid taste in mouth, cmpyreumatic, 
earthy, or pus-like taste. — Taste : fatty ; lost ; in colds where there is an entire 
loss of taste. — Sweetish, acid, or bitter taste in mouth, and of food, principally 
meat, bread, butter, beer, and milk, substances which also often appear insipid 
or cause disgust. — Bitter or sour taste in mouth immediately after eating, as 
well as in morning and evening. — ^Wine has a bitter (beer a sweet or bitter) 
and meat a putrid taste. — Food appears either too salt or insipid. — Want of 
appetite and dislike to food.— Hunger and desire to eat, without knowiiffe 
what. — Ravenous hunger, with gnawing pain in stomach. — Complete adipsia, 
or excessive thirst, with moisture on tongue, and desire for beer, or spirituous, 
tart, and acid drinks. — Thirstlessness with all complaints. — Sensation of 
derangement in stomach, similar to that caused by fat pork or rich pastry.— 
Repugnance to tobacco smoke. — After eating, nausea and eructations, regur- 
gitation and vomiting, inflation, and aching in pit of stomach, colic and 
flatulence, headache, obstructed respiration, ill-humour and melancholy or 
involuntary laughter and weeping, and many other sufferings.— Bread, esp., 
lies heavy on stomach. 

11. Stomach. — Frequent eructations, sometimes abortive, or with taste 
of food, or acid, or bitter, and principally after a meal ; like bile in evening. — 
Regurgitation of food. — ^Waterbrash. — Frequent hiccough, principally on 
smoking tobacco, after drinking, or at night, and sometimes with fit of sufiEo- 
cation.— (Constant hiccough with jaundiced look and burning pains about 
shoulders.— R. T. C.)— Insupportable nausea and inclination to vomit, some- 
times extending to throat and into mouth, with distressing sensation as of a 
worm crawling up oesophagus.— Morning Sickness (during pregnancy).— 
Attacks of constriction and choking in oesophagus. — Scraping sensation in 



PULSATILLA 


919 


stomach and oesophagus, like a heartburn.— -Vomitings, sometimes violent, of 
greenish mucus, or bilious and bitter, or acid matter (esp. in evening and at 
night). — ^Vomiting of food. — Haematemesis. — ^The nausea and vomiting take 
place principally in evening or at night, or after eating or drinking, as well 
as during a meal, and they often manifest themselves with shivering, paleness 
of face, colic, pains in ears or back, burning sensation in throat, and bor- 
borygmi. — (Persistent indigestion in fits, with great weight on chest and 
sickish feeling, from mental and physical upset. — R. T. C.) — Cold in stomach 
from ice-cream and fruit. — Colic, with nausea, ceasing after vomiting. — Pain- 
ful sensibility of region of stomach to least pressure. — Disordered stomach 
(digestion) from eating fat food (pork). — Pressive, spasmodic, contractive, and 
compressive pains in stomach and praecordial region, principally after a meal 
or in evening or in morning, and often with vomiting or nausea and obstructed 
respiration. — Tingling or pulsations in pit of stomach, or shooting pain on 
making a false step, or on uneven pavement. — Pain in epigastrium, which is 
greatly < when sitting (during pregnancy). 

12. Abdomen. — Inflammation of abdomen, with great sensitiveness of 
integuments to pressure. — Drawing tension in hypochondria, or pulsative 
shootings, as in an abscess. — Hard distension of abdomen, principally in 
epigastrium, with tension, and sensation as if all were full, hard, and impas- 
sable, as if no stool or flatus could be expelled, though a stool does pass 
slowly but not hard, and yet the flatus is passed with difficulty and in small 
amounts, — Chilliness extending from abdomen to lower part of back.— Pres- 
sure in abdomen and small of back as from a stone ; limbs go to sleep while 
sitting ; ineffectual desire to stool. — Spasmodic and compressive pains, some- 
times at bottom of hypogastrium, with pressure on rectum or cuttings, princi- 
pally round navjil (low down in abdomen, penetrating into pelvis), or sharp 
and shooting pains in abdomen. — Colic and labour-like pains in pregnant 
women. — Colic with chilliness, while the menstruation is suppressed. — Sensi- 
tiveness and inflammation of abdominal walls. — The colics are often accom- 
panied byi*romiting or diarrhoea ; they manifest themselves mostly in evening 
or after eating or drinking ; and are sometimes > by squeezing the abdomen 
or byVepose, while movement < them. — Annular swelling round navel, painful 
when walking. — Retraction and soreness of abdomen, with great sensibility of 
integuments of abdomen, which appear swollen, with pain as from a bruise 
on touching them, or on yawning, singing, coughing, and at every movement 
of the abdominal muscles. — Stitches and cutting in abdomen in evening ; < 
on sitting still. — Flatulent colic, principally in evening, after a meal, or after 
midnight, or in morning, with pressive pains, produced by incarcerated flatus, 
tumult, borborygmi, and grumbling in abdomen and efcape of fetid flatus. — 
Painless rumbling of flatulence in upper abdomen. — Constriction as from a 
stone extending to bladder. — Purulent pustules in groins, 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation and difficult evacuations, some- 
times With painful pressure on rectum and pains in back. — Constipation, esp. 
if faeces are hard and large, after intermittent fever suppressed by Chininum 
sulph, — Frequent want to evacuate, even at night.— Involuntary and unper- 
ccived evacuations during sleep. — ^Stools frequent soft, diarrhoeic, consisting 
of yellow mucus or mixed with blood, preceded by cutting in abdomen, or 
with pains in small of back.— Nightly diarrhoea, discharges watery or green 



920 


PULS^VTILLA 


like bile, after previous rumbling in abdomen.— Stools consisting only of 
mucus, or acrid, or bloody, or very offensive, or white. — (Diarrhoea, white, 
cream-coloured stools, involuntary. — R. T. C.). — (White, clayey liverish stools 
resume their normal colour. — R. T. C.) — Dysentery, with pain in back, — Loose 
evacuations, even at night, and sometimes with colic and cuttings, shiver- 
ings and shudderings, and pains in anus. — Diarrhoea, particularly when it 
is very changeable and no two stools are alike ; flatus very fetid, sometimes 
obstructed, causing much pain. — Diarrhoea during menses, particularly if it 
comes on at night.— Frequent evacuations of whitish, yellowish, sanguineotfs 
mucus, or of greenish, minced, bilious, or watery, and sonjetimes corrosive 
matter (may contain tapeworm). — Before and after evacuations, burning, 
smarting, and pains as from excoriation in anus and rectum. — During stool 
congestions of blood to anus.— Discharge of blood from anus even when not 
at stool. — Blind and bleeding hfemorrhoids, with itching, smarting, and pain 
as from excoriation. — Protrusion of haemorrhoids. — Haemorrhoidal tumours 
with great soreness. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine very scanty ; bloody ; with mucus ; 
reddish ; complaints before making water and during ; when going to 
urinate there is a sensation as if it would gush away, and patients can scarcely 
wait. — Retention of urine, with redness and heat in region of bladder, 
anxiety, and troublesome pains in abdomen. — Tenesmus of bladder and 
frequent want to urinate, with painful pressure on bladder and drawing pain 
in abdomen. — Involuntary micturition ; at night in bed, esp. in little girls. — 
Involuntary emission of some drops of urine when coughing, walking, sitting 
down, expelling flatus (or during sleep). — Welting the bed (at night, esp. in 
mild-tempered, tearful people, and in children). — Enuresis of old people 
with distended colon (R. T. C.) — Profuse emission of wi^tery urine, with 
weakness in loins and diarrhoea, or scanty red or brown urine, sometimes 
with a violet-coloured froth. — Urine, with sediment, red, or of the colour 
of brick-dust, or violet, or mucous, or gelatinous. — Sanguineous urine with 
purulent deposit and pains in loins. — Haematuria with burning aft orifice o! 
urethra, and with constriction in region of navel. — Haematuria in cows and 
in human beings (R. T. C.) — Discharge (thick) from urethra as in gonorrhoea. 
— Contraction of urethra with a very small stream of water.— During 
micturition burning in urethra. — Burning during and after emission of urine. 
— Pulling and pressure in urethra, neck of bladder, and also in the bladder. — 
Pressure and constriction in bladder, with soreness (sensitiveness) in that 
region. — Swelling near neck of bladder, with .soreness when touched, inter- 
mittent stream of urine, and spasmodic pain in pelvis and thighs after 
urinating. — Urine watery, colourless ; brown ; bloody. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Itching and tickling in prepuce and 
scrotum, < morning and evening. — Itching-burning on the inner and upper 
side of the prepuce. — Inflammatory swelling of testes and spermatic cords 
(sometimes only on one side), with pressive and drawing pains, extending 
into abdomen and loins, redness and heat of scrotum (from a contusion or 
after suppressed gonorrhoea), nausea and inclination to vomit. — Burning in 
testicles, without swelling. — ^Testicles hang low down. — Dropsical swelling of 
scrotum of a whitish blue colour. — Excessive increase of sexual passion, 
almost like priapismus, with frequent and prolonged erections, ardent desire 



PULSATILLA 




92T 


for coition, and frequent pollutions. — Flow of prostatic fluid. — Inflammation 
of prostate gland. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Affections in general of the female 
genital organs ; of the uterus. — Nymphomania.— Drawing, pressive pain 
extending towards uterus with qualmishness, towards morning. — Contractive 
pain in 1. side of uterus, like labour pains, obliging her to bend double. — 
Spasmodic pains, or drawing tension in uterus, and pains like those of labour, 
— A burning (sticking) pain in vagina and pudenda. — Metrorrhagia (discharge 
now stopping, and then stronger again, of coagulated, clotted blood, or with 
false labour-pains)? — Menstrual blood black, with clots of mucus, or pale and 
serous. — Catamenia irregular, tardy, or premature, of too short or too long 
duration, or entirely suppressed (esp. if produced by getting the feet wet), 
with colic, hysterical spasms in abdomen, hepatic pains, gastralgia, pain in 
loins, nausea and vomiting, shivering and paleness of face, megrim, vertigo, 
moral affections, tenesmus of anus and bladder, stitches in side, and many 
other sufferings before, during, or after period. — Suppression of menses (esp. 
in elderly women in whom they usually occur at full moon). — Delay of first 
menses in mild, gentle girls, low-spirited, &c. ; diarrhoea during menses. — 
Leucorrhoea, thick, like cream (esp. frequent in lochial discharges where the 
flow looks like milk), or corrosive and burning, principally at period of cata- 
menia (J?efore, during or after), and sometimes with cuttings « when lying 
down ; with swollen vulva). — After-pains in females of a mild disposition. — 
False pregnancy. — During pregnancy : nausea, morning sickness ; varicose 
veins, bluish, < towards evening. — Lame pelvis, < warm in bed, must 
change po.sition frequently ; threatened abortion, flow now ceasing, now 
returning. — During labour : intense inertia ; weeps because she is not 
delivered ; malpositions of fetus ; post-partum haemorrhage ; convulsions, 
following sluggish or irregular pains ; lochia scanty, milky, or suppressed ; 
puerperal fever ; phlegmasia dolcns. — Labour-pains too weak, spasmodic, or 
ceding. — Swelling of breasts, with tensive pain as if the milk rushed into 
them ar\d caused pressure, while nursing. — Lumps on breasts of girls before 
puberty > or escape of thin, milk-like fluid. — Scanty supply of milk. — Affec- 
tions of nipples. — Weeps every time child is put to breast ; pain extends into 
chest, neck, or down back, changes from place to place. — Milk suddenly 
suppressed, lochia becomes milky white. — Galactorrhoea esp. in women who 
do not nurse their children. — After weaning, breasts swell. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness, which does not permit one to 
speak a loud word. — Breathing, groaning, or rattling. — Catarrh, with hoarse- 
ness, roughness, dryness, scraping, and pain as from excoriation, in larynx 
and chest. — Attacks of constriction in larynx, principally |it night, when lying 
in a horizontal posture. — Dyspnoea, esp. when lying on back at night, with 
giddiness and weakness in head. — Difficulty of breathing when walking. — 
Short, dry qough as soon as he gets warm. — Dry cough whenever he wakens 
from sleep, disappearing while sitting up in bed, and returning as soon as 
lying down again. — Dry, severe cough, mostly in morning, with retching and 
desire to vomit, and sensation as if stomach were turned inside out. — ^Violent 
spasmodic whooping-cough, in two consecutive coughs, caused by itching, 
‘scraping, with dryness as from vapours of sulphur in larynx and chest. — 
Shaking cough, principally in evening, at night, or in morning, excited by a 



922 


PULSATILLA 


sensation of dryness or a scraping and tickling in throat, < when lying down, 
and often accompanied by an inclination to vomit, with retching and vomit- 
ing, or by a choking, as from the vapour of sulphur, with bleeding of nose 
and rattling respiration. — Cough, with shootings in chest or sides, and palpi- 
tation of heart. — Moist cough, with expectoration of white, green, tenacious 
mucus, or of thick, yellowish matter of a bitter, greasy, salty, or putrid taste 
(loose cough ; with expectoration in morning, without expectoration in 
evening ; with expectoration in day, without expectoration at night). — Expec- 
toration of black and clotted blood during cough (during suppression of 
menstruation). — Shootings in r. shoulder or in back when <c,oughing. 

i8. Chest. — Respiration accelerated, short, and superficial (during the 
fever), or rattling and anxious. — Dyspnoea, as from spasmodic tension in 
lower part of chest, below false ribs. — Tickling on sternum. — Attacks of 
burning in chest. — Respiration impeded, shortness of breath, choking as from 
vapour of sulphur, and fits of dyspnoea and of suffocation, with anxiety, 
spasmodic constriction of chest or larynx, violent hiccough, cough, headache, 
and vertigo ; principally in evening, after a meal, or at night when reclining 
horizontally. — Movement, quick wjilking, the open air, and cold < the 
asthmatic symptoms. — Cramp-like and constrictive tension in chest, princi- 
pally on breathing (on drawing a long breath), and sometimes with internal 
heat and ebullition of blood. — Pain as from (subcutaneous) ulceration, or 
sharp and incisive pain in chest. — Acute suppuration of the lungs. — Shootings 
in chest and in sides, principally at night and when lying down, and some- 
times with difficulty in drawing a full inspiration, inability to remain lying on 
the side affected, short cough, and paroxysm of suffocation. — (Pain in 1. side 
under heart as if a string were pulling there. — R. T. C.) 

ig. Heart. — Congestion of blood to chest and heat^, esp. at night, with 
anxious dreams (e,g., of being immured), with starting up and anxious cries. — 
Catching pain in cardiac region ; > for a time by pressure of hand. — Stitches 
in praecordial region, > while walking, with pressure and anxiety, impeding 
respiration. — Burning in region of heart. — Frequent and violent fits of palpi- 
tation, principally after dinner and after moral emotions, or provoked by 
conversation, and often with anguish, clouded sight (vanishing of sight), and 
impeded respiration, esp. when lying on the 1. side. — (With menstrual irregu- 
larities, chlorosis, &c. ; the beat of the heart is felt in the pit of the stomach.) 
— Anxiety, heaviness, pressure, and burning sensation in heart. 

20. Neck and Back. — Rheumatic, tensive, and drawing pains in nape 
of neck and in neck, sometimes scrailateral, and often with swelling of the 
parts, and pains as from subcutaneous ulceration when they are touched. — 
Cracking in cervical vertebrae and shoulder-blades on moving those parts. — 
Itching pimples on neck. — Swelling of glands of neck. — Pains in sacrum and 
in back, as from having remained some time in a bent posture, or with 
rigidity, as from the pressure of a belt. — Sacral pains like those of labour. — 
Pains in back and chilliness from suppressed menstruation.— Shootings in 
back, in loins, and between shoulder-blades. — Curvature of spine (upper part). 

21. Limbs. — Redness and swelling of joints, with stinging pains .-7 
Anxious, tremulous sensation in limbs. — Drawing, sticking, < in joints, which 
are painful to touch. — ^Weakness in limbs morning after rising, with relaxation 
without feeling weary. — Drawing, tearing pains in limbs, shifting rapidly 



PULSATILLA 


923 


from place to place ; < at night, from warmth ; > from uncovering.— 'Pain 
in limbs in morning in bed, < in joints, forcing him to stretch, with general 
heat.— On waking the parts on which he has lain are asleep, with crawling 
. tij^ghng. — Coldness of hands and feet ; they seem dead. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Sharp, jerking, and drawing pains in shoulder- 
joint, as well as in the arms, hands, and fingers. — Paralytic pains in scapular 
joint when lifting and moving arms. — Burning sensation in arm in evening or 
at night, with sensation of dryness in fingers.-^Burning heat in hands and 
arhis and in trunk with perspiration down spine (agg. — R. T. C.) — Pressive 
heaviness in armsj with sensation of numbness, esp. in hands. — Sensation of 
tension and swelling and wrenching pain in joints of elbows, hands, and 
fingers, with rigidity. — Swelling of elbow after a contusion. — Swelling of veins 
on forearm and hands. — Easy numbness of fingers, principally in morning 
and at night. — ^Vesicles between fingers, with pricking pain. — Pain as if 
caused by panaritium in index. — Itching chilblains on hands. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pain as from a bruise or from ulceration in the 
psoas. —Wrenching pain in coxo-femoral articulation, with painful jerks, as in 
a wound, extending as far as knee, < during repose. — Pulling and tension in 
thighs and legs, < in calves of legs, as if tendons were too short. — Pain as 
from a bruise, with sensation of paralytic weakness in bones and muscles of 
thighs and legs. — Pain as from subcutaneous ulceration in legs and soles of 
feet. Cracking in knees. — Swelling of knees, sometimes chiefly above 
patella, and often with heat, inflammation, sharp drawing and shooting pains. 

Enlargement of knee with local varicosis (relieved. — R. T. C.) — Weakness 
and yielding of knees, with tottering gait. — Pulling and great fatigue in 
legs, esp. knees, with trembling. — Swelling of veins and varices in legs. — 
Numbness in legs 'when remaining long standing. — Pain in tibia as from 
a bruise. — Tension and drawing in calves of legs. — Hot swelling of legs, or 
only of the back or of soles of feet, sometimes with shooting pains when 
the parts are touched, and during movement. — Painful sensation of numbness 
in soles of f&t and in balls of the toes. — Red-hot swelling of feet, extending 
up to calf, with stinging pain. — Swelling of top of foot. — CEdematous swelling 
of feet, < in evening. — Piercing shootings and incisive pains in heels (towards 
evening). — Shootings in soles of feet and extremities of toes. — Chilblains. — 
The complaints are < when one allows the feet to hang down. 

24. Generalities. — [Affections in general, and of any kind, appearing in 
r. abdominal ring ; r. chest; r. upper and lower extremity ; tongue ; increase 
of saliva ; larynx ; trachea ; nape of neck ; heart and region of heart ; palpi- 
tation of heart, also with anguish ; small of back ; shoulder-joints ; fingers ; 
legs ; shin-bones ; calves, particularly when they are svfollen, red, and hot ; 
heel ; sole of foot ; ball or under part of toes ; knee-joint ; bones of lower 
extremities ; inflammation of bones in general. — Strong desire for open air, 
which makes patient feel better in every way, headache, toothache, earache, 
cold in head, &c,, are all > in open air, can breathe better, &c. — Bleeding 
from inner parts ; congestion of blood to single parts ; apparent deficiency of 
blood.-^hlorosis (in persons of mild, quiet, &c., dispositions).— Secretion of 
mucus increased; nervous debility. — Varicose veins, even when inflamed, 
esp. when blue, particularly in pregnant females ; feel more comfortable 
when walking about.— {Phlebitis of single veins.— R. T, C.>— Symptoms < : 



924 


PULSATILLA 


in afternoon ; from mental affections ; on waking ; when blowing nose 
(produces pain in chest, nose, head, or somewhere else, or a cracking in 
ears) ; before falling asleep ; during expiration ; after taking cold ; from 
coughing; from change of position (particularly applicable to the female* 
organism) ; from loss of fluids ; from being frostbitten ; lying on L side ; 
on painless side ; lying with head low ; having measles, after measles ; 
before and during menstruation ; on beginning to move ; from taking 
bread ; butter ; buckwheat ; fat food ; fruits ; ice ; pancakes ; warm food ; 
abuse of Peruvian bark ; can't bear pressure on the well side if it be made 
towards the diseased side : from derangement of stomach ; during stool, 
particularly in dysentery if it gives great pain in small of back; while 
suckling child ; in the sun ; in the twilight ; before, during, or after urinating ; 
women in confinement ; from having a tapeworm ; from surgical injuries in 
general ; from tobacco ; during pregnancy. — Symptoms > : in open air ; 
in a cold place ; from cold air ; by lying on r. side ; with head high ; from 
cold things ; from washing ; on wetting the affected parts ; after discharge of 
flatus. — H. N. G.] — Sharp drawing and jerking pains in muscles, < at night, 
or in bed in evening, as well as by heat of a room, > in the open air, and 
often accompanied by numbness, paralytic weakness, or hard swelling of 
parts affected. — Shootings and sensation of coldness in parts affected on a 
change of weather. — Tension in some of the limbs as if tendons were, too 
short. — Shifting pains which pass rapidly from one part to the other, often 
with swelling and redness in joints. — Sensation of hollowness ; of pulsations, 
knocking, or throbbing in inner parts ; of extension in size, as if one part, or 
every part, were growing too large ; of a band around the parts ; of buzzing 
or humming in any part of the body. — Shocks in tendon^. — Fitful pains with 
shivering, labouring respiration, paleness of face, and trembling of legs. — ^The 
shiverings increase as the pains become <. — Pain as from a bruise or sub- 
cutaneous ulceration on touching parts affected. — Semilateral pains and 
affections. — Symptoms are < and renewed when seated after long-contir\iied 
exercise ; or on rising after having been seated a long time, as well as during 
repose, esp. when lying on side or back. — The symptoms which appear when 
lying on back arc > by turning on side or by rising up, and vice versa . — 
Movement, walking, pressure, external heat, and the open air, equally > many 
of the symptoms, while they < others. — Symptoms generally most violent in 
evening or at night before midnight, sometimes also in morning and after a 
meal. — The symptoms are < every second day in evening. — Agitation and 
uneasiness throughout body, with inability to sleep or to enjoy repose, and 
constant inclination to stretch limbs. — Frequent and troublesome pulsations 
over whole body, < during movement. — Great tendency of limbs to go to 
sleep. — Frequent trembling of limbs with anxiety.— Sluggishness and heavi- 
ness of limbs, with paralytic weakness, painful sensibility of joints, and 
tottering gait. — Weariness in morning, which is < by a recumbent position. 
— Fainting fits with deadly paleness of face. — Epileptic convulsions, with 
violent movements of limbs, followed by weakness, eructations, and inclina- 
tion to vomit (after suppression of catamenia). — Great sensibility and repugi* 
nance to open air. — Great desire to remain lying down or sitting. — Paiii as 
from a bruise in bones of extremities. — Emaciation. 

25. Skin. — Pale skin. — Itching, mostly burning or pricking (as if caused 



PULSATILLA 


925 


stings of ants), principally in evening, and at night in heat of bed, < by 
scratching. — Red spots, like morbilli, or nettle-rash. — Frequent redness, even 
when the parts are cold. — Eruptions from eating pork, itching violently in 
.bed. — Eruptions like measles. — Rhagades.— Suppurating wounds, pus thick 
and too profuse. — Pus copious and yellow. — Moles or freckles in young girls. 
— Eruptions similar to varicella coniformis, with violent itching in bed. — 
Chilblains, particularly when they turn blue. — Exanthema, chapped. — Blue- 
black swellings. — Chilblains with bluish-red swelling, heat, and burning, or 
pulsative pains. — Phlegmonous erysipelas, with hardness, burning heat, and 
shooting pain on ^touching or moving parts affected. — Furunculi. — Shining 
redness, hardness, and itching round ulcers, with ready bleeding, and shoot- 
ing, burning, and gnawing pains. — Deep or fistulous ulcers ; where there is 
much swelling around. — Inflamed or putrid ulcers. — Varices. 

26. Sleep. — Constant sleepiness and comatose sleep, with agitation and 
disquieting fancies, day or night. — Great tendency to sleep during day, prin- 
cipally in evening or afternoon. — Irregular sleep, too early in evening or too 
late in morning, and sometimes with nocturnal sleeplessness. — Sleep retarded, 
sometimes until two hours after midnight, and often followed by early waking. 
— A great flow of ideas hinders sleep in evening and at night. — Agitated sleep, 
with frequent waking ; and general numbness on waking. — Inability to sleep 
except Y^hen seated with head inclined forwards or to one side. — During 
sleep, chattering, talking, delirium, convulsive movements of mouth, eyes, and 
limbs ; tears, cries, and moans, nightmare ; starts from fright ; shocks in 
body and jerking in limbs. — Wakes up frightened and confused, knows not 
where he is, cannot collect himself. — At night great agitation and tossing, 
inquietude and anguish of heart, ebullition of blood, dry heat, itching, 
incoherent talking, *with fixed ideas. — ^When sleeping patient lies on back 
with knees raised and arms placed over head or crossed over abdomen. — 
Fearful, frightful, anxious, confused, vivid, disgusting, voluptuous dreams, of 
quyrels and of business of the day, of spectres, and of the dead. — Frequent 
yawning. * 

27. Fever, — Chilliness of one side only ; chilliness without thirst, often 
followed by fever without thirst (accompanied by vertigo and stupor) ; heat 
on one side ; perspiration on one side only ; want of thirst ; febrile symptoms 
r. side.— Continuous internal chilliness even in warm room. — Thirst before 
chill or heat, seldom during hot stage. — Chilliness (4 p.m.) without thirst, 
accompanied by anxiety and dyspnoea ; this is followed by a drawing pain 
extending from back into head, three hours later heat of whole body without 
any thirst, with sweat on face, drowsiness without any sleep and unconscious- 
ness ; in morning perspiration over whole body. — Coldijicss,. shiverings, and 
shudderings, principally in evening or afternoon, and sometimes with pale- 
ness of face, vertigo, and dizziness, pain and heaviness in head ; anxiety and 
oppression pf chest, vomiting of mucus (when the cold stage comes on), desire 
to lie down, and flushes of heat. — Partial coldness and shivering, principally 
in back, arms, legs, hands, and feet, often with heat in head or face and 
redness of cheeks. — Semilateral coldness with numbness of the side affected, 
—Dry heat (internal), principally at night, in evening in bed or in morning, 
’and often with fits of anguish, headache, face red and bloated, or perspiration 
on face, shivering on being uncovered, burning in hands, with swelling of 



926 PULSATILLA— PULSATILLA NUTT. 

veins, lamentations, sighs, and moans, profound or agitated sleep, anxious and 
quick respiration, fainting fits, with cloudiness of eyes, inclination to vomit, 
and loose evacuations. — Partial heat, principally on face, with redness of 
cheeks, hands, face, &c., often semilateral, with coldness and shivering in the 
opposite parts. — Heat of face or heat of one hand, with coldness of the other. 
— Febrile paroxysms composed of heat, which are preceded by shiverings, 
with adipsia, and mixed with, or followed by, perspiration ; quotidian, tertian, 
or quartan type ; < in evening or afternoon ; remission in morning duripg 
apyrexia, nausea and loss of appetite, headache, painful oppression at chest, 
moist cough, bitterness in mouth, constipation or (mucous) diarrhoea. — Febrile 
symptoms with loss of consciousness, delirium, tears, and despair, or with 
gastrico-mucous or bilious symptoms or with comatose sleep (or consequent 
upon the abuse of Quinine, with bitter taste of food and constipation). — 
Repugnance to external heat. — Pulse weak and small, but accelerated. — Pulse 
quick and small ; or full and slow ; or feeble and almost suppressed. — Per- 
spiration, principally at night or towards morning ; profuse and fetid sweat 
semilateral or partial sweat (on head and face), and sweat with cramps on 
arms and hands, weariness, comatose sleep, dreamy reveries, and redness 
face. — Perspiration during sleep, soon ceasing when waking. — Perspires 
easily during the day. — Night-sweat with stupor. — Smell of perspiration, 
sour, musty, like musk. — Perspiration at times cold. 


Pulsatilla Nuttaliana. 

American Pulsatilla. Pasque Flower (American). Anemone Ludo- 
viciana. A. nuttaliana. N, O. Ranunculaceae. Tincture of 
whole plant. 

Clinical. —Amenorrhoea. Clavus. Cold; liability to. Deafnetfo. Diarrhoea. 
Dyspepsia. Feet, fidgety. Home-sickness. Knees ; rheumatism of. Livfer, pains 
in. Measles ; prophylaxis of. Menses, retarded. Ptosis. Rheumatism ;* wander 
ing. Sciatica. Shoulder, r., pain in. Tinnitus. Uterus, pains in, 

Oharacteristios. — The American Pulsatilla approaches more 
nearly to P. vulgaris than to P. nig, in its botanical characters. It 
flourishes especially in the dry and sandy bluffs which form the bed 
of the Mississippi. The flower is pale purplish. “ The odour of the 
dried plant is rather faint, being slightly camphor aceous^ the taste of 
the dried flowers simply sweetish and herbaceous, that of the leaves 
more astringent with very slight acrimony. The taste and to sonib 
extent the odour of the fresh plant are both acrid and irritating '' 
^ale). A. W. Miller, a pharmaceutist (referred to by Hale), analysed 
P. nuti. The extracted substances had an acrid, almost caustic taste, 
and well-marked camphoraceous odour. When volatilised they pro- 
duced an irritating, pungent vapour, affecting the eyes and causing 
sneezing. The analysis revealed the following constituents : (il 
Organic — Grape-sugar, gum, resin, an alkaloid and anemonic acidl 
(2) Inorganic — Sulphate of potash, carbonate of potash, chlorate of 
potassium, carbonate of lime, magnesia, and ** a proto-salt of iron/^ 



PULSATILLA NUTTALIANA 


927 


Dr. W. H. Miller (brother of A. W. M.), an allopathist, claimed to 
have used P. nutt, with success in many chronic eye affections, par- 
ticularly catarrh, amaurosis, and corneal opacities, cutaneous erup- 
tions, and secondary syphilis. Hale instituted the first homoeopathic 
research, and Burt was the first proven The symptoms have a strong 
resemblance to those of P. nig,,, and cases cured with P. nutt, are 
mostly such as would be amenable to P. nig. A patient of mine was 
incidentally cured of a tendency to catch colds by taking P. nutt, for 
soifae weeks as a prophylactic against measles. Burnett cured with it 
a case of deafness and oedema of left upper eyelid. The proving 
showed a powerful effect on the menstrual function, and Hale reports 
many cures of retentio mensium : (i) A young lady, formerly subject 
to retardation of menses, had : Constant chilliness, cold hands and 
feet, loss of appetite, sour eructations, nausea after meals, hemicrania, 
toothache, melancholy, general malaria. Menses two weeks late ; 
took a chill at the time they were due, when she had precursory 
symptoms ; no symptoms of menses now. P. nutL 1 in water every 
two hours. After the first dose the menses came on and the con- 
stitutional symptoms cleared off. (2) Plethoric, usually healthy young 
woman, had menses delay two weeks. Continual severe headache, a 
heaviness and fulness, < moving or stooping ; sight dim, complete 
blindness on stooping or rising suddenly ; weight in uterine region 
severe aching extending to back, < evening. Hands and feet cold ; 
weakness in lower limbs. Act, r, failed to relieve. P. nutt, i x, 
5 drops every three hours, brought speedy improvement. Next day 
menses came on profusely but without pain, two days before the 
expiration of the ^eighth week. The Puls, flying pains were very 
noticeable in the proving. Hale reports this case : Strong, healthy- 
looking man had wandering rheumatic pains chiefly in dorsum of 
right foot, loins, thighs, chest, arms, head. The head pain was a dull, 
heai^y pressime in vertex, nearly constant, with occasional sharp pains. 
Some fever out no local . inflammation of joints or muscles. Urine 
scanty, depositing lithates. Acidity of stomach. Appetite good. 
Bowels normal. P. nutt, 1 x cured in three days. Some Peculiar 
Symptoms are : Home-sick feeling. Trembling weakness, weariness, 
heaviness. Snapping noise in ears. Fidgety feet. Colic before and 
after stool. Colic after eating a pear. Stiffness of fingers. Hands 
hot and dry (a constant symptom). The symptoms are < coming in 
from open 'air ; after eating ; eating a pear ; at night ; by warmth ; 
by reading ; on urinating ; on walking. > WalMng in open air ; 
rubbing with flesh-brush ; scratching. ^ 

Rdations. — See Puls. Antidoted by : Ant. c. Compare : In 
fidgety feet, Zn., Caust, 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.— Sad, gloomy ; with frequent eructations.— Home-sick, despon- 
dent. — ^Anxiety; at night, — Irritable; quick, nervous motions.— Dull, dis- 
inclined for work. 

2. Head. — Dizziness on entering house from open air; sudden, in 
afternoon with fulness of head. — Dull, heavy headache, mornings ; > by 



928 


PULSATILLA NUTTALIANA 


active exercise before breakfast. — Flying pains in head and feet— Dull, 
oppressive, frontal headache ; on waking. — Hard pains in upper forehead pass 
in a wave to occiput, involving whole brain,— With headache cutting pains 
in epigastrium.— Hard pain over 1. eye ; as if a nail being pressed into fore-, 
head. — Pain over r. eye, afternoon, > walking in open air, < in warm room, 
with sense of heat, fulness in head, and dryness of eyes. — Sharp, shooting 
pains through both temples ; in r. temple. — Dull pain in r. temple ; in vertex, 
— Severe throbbing on vertex. — Full, hot feeling at cerebellum. — Headache 
arising from nape of neck and upwards. 

3. Eyes. — Profuse secretion of mucus from eyes.— «Dull pain deep in 
eyes, with smarting. — Dryness ; smarting ; profuse flow of tears. — Twitching : 
of 1. brow and upper lid for half an hour after going to bed; r. lids < 
reading. — Paralysis of lids. — GEdema of 1. upper lid. — Tarsal edges red, dry, 
irritable. — Lids agglutinated; profuse secretion of soft, yellow, or white 
matter. — Profuse lachrymation with dull pains in eyeball extending to malar 
bone. — Neuralgic pains in eyeballs, while walking, < r. 

4. Ears. — Hard, drawing pains along r. Eustachian tube. — With the 
pains in head and eyes, frequent drawing pains in ears from within out. — 
Sharp pains in r. car and temples. — L. ear feels closed ; later both. — Snapping 
noises in ears; fluttering in r. — Deafness, with oedema of 1. upper eyelid 
(cured). 

5. Nose. — Dryness and heat in nose. 

6. Face. — Face red, hot, flushed. — Complexion at first rough; later 
very clear after disappearance of rash. — After eating, flushed, pressure of 
blood in face. — Painful drawing in 1. cheek-bone and jaw. — Lips dry. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue : coated white, with flat, pappy taste on rising ; 
covered with tough slime, red, rather dry and swollen, teeth inde^nted; 
yellowish coat along centre ; unusually red after eating. — Breath offensive, to 
self and others; after eating. — Mouth and lips dry. — Smarting of velum 
palati. — Mouth filling with saliva. — On awaking, dry, pappy taste in moutjj, as 
if tongue thickly coated (which it was not). — Taste : flat ; flat bitter ; flat 
rough; sweetish; bad. — Awoke after afternoon sleep with vinegar-like 
acidity in mouth and dull, pressing pain in stomach. 

9. Throat. — Frequent inclination to clear throat.— After eating slight 
irritation in throat, with easy expectoration of white, tough mucus. — Throat 
dry, smarts on waking, contains much tough mucus hard to dislodge. — 
Scratchy, husky feeling in throat. — Sensation of plug in lower throat. 

II. Stomach. — Great hunger ; rapidly returned after eating. — Loss of 
appetite. — More thirst than usual ; cold water extremely grateful. — Eructa- 
tions ; tasting of Puls. ; while riding belches up food hot and tasteless ; ,of 
hot, tasteless wind; of sour air. — Thick gulping. — Heartburn. — Nausea; and 
dull headache, then faintness at stomach ; on entering house. — Fulness in 
stomach preventing eating in spite of appetite (cured in the^ proving). — 
Painful emptiness, pressure, then rising towards oesophagus like heartburn. — 
Emptiness : after action of bowels ; after eating. — Gnawing, empty sensation. 
— Weight and pressure in stomach ; after eating ; with faintness. — Distress ; 
with severe cutting pains in epigastrium. — Feeling as if Jieedles being pressed 
through stomach. — Heat in stomach gradually increasing to pain, < in spot^ 
under sternum ; burning ; pricking burning. 



PULSATI LLA NUTTALI ANA 929 

la. Abdomen.— Dull pains in r. hypochondrium ; in 1.— Severe pain in 
umbilicus 6 a.m., virith desire for stool, stool dark, covered with mucus, severe 
pains for half an hour after. — Rumbling ; after dinner of wind in distended 
abdomen moving from epigastrium to hypogastrium.— Aching in one spot < 
by moving. — Colicky pains after eating a ripe pear. — ^Aching in 1. groin ; above 
1. iliac crest on moving or bending. — Dull pains: in whole abdomen; by 
spells in hypogastrium. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Evening and afternoon, feeling as if must go 
to* stool immediately, with constant distress in lower epigastrium and 
umbilicus. — Sudden attack of diarrhoea whilst riding on horseback. — Stools : 
dark, thin, pap-like ; watery, light yellow, painless ; mushy ; dark, slightly 
covered with mucus ; dry, hard, lumpy. — Constipation. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Pain on urinating; at end of urethra. — Fre- 
quent micturition. — Tenesmus, extending up ureters ; uneasiness in kidneys. 
— Urine: pale; albuminous; excess of water ; skunk-like odour. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Distressing erection, soon subsiding. — 
Pain in penis on waking, < on micturating. — Hard, sticking pains in (1.) 
spermatic cord and testes. — Dull pains in testes, < r. — Emission. 

i6. . Female Sexual Organs. — Stinging, darting pains passing through 
uterus from side to side. — Leucorrhcea, bland but so profuse, and with so great 
depression that the prover refused to take more of the drug although it 
removed a pleuritic pain. — Leucorrhcea, painless, 4 p.m. — Feeling as if 
menses coming on. — (Menses became more regular.) — Menses weak, too soon 
(never before ; but discharge, which had been formerly too dark and with 
pain, was this time natural in colour and painless). — Menses, always copious, 
became increased to flooding and lasted three days. — In morning on 
awaking found mefises had returned first time since weaning babe (two 
months). 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Coughed much. — Constant inclination to 
cough. — Small sore spot in upper trachea. 

18. Chei^t. — Sharp, stabbing pain in pectoralis major muscle, followed 
by burning distress therein. — During evening severe pain under 1. arm nearer 
back. — ^Aching pain in chest all forenoon. — Itching blotches on r. breast ; r. 
side chest. 

xg. Heart. — Audible pulsation of heart. — Pulse accelerated. 

ao. Keck and Back. — Stiffness r. side neck, morning. — Backache. — 
Lameness in back, esp. loins. — Woke frequently with backache. — ^Weakness 
of loins ; feeling as if menses coming on. 

ax. Limbs. — Aching in limbs and loins wakes him frequently. — Frequent 
flying pains in hands, feet, toes. / 

aa. Upper Limbs. — Rheumatism of r. shoulder. — Lameness in muscles 
of r. upper arm. — Muscles stiff. — Frequent momentary pains in wrists and 
fingers. — Fingers stiff. — Hands dry and hot all day. 

as. Lower Limbs. — Sharp neuralgic pains along sciatic nerve from 
hip-joint to middle of thigh. — Drawing in (1.) sartorius muscle, when walking. 
— Pain in both knees ; < 1. ; severe, dull in r. for two hours in bed ; rheu- 
matic. — Legs heavy while walking ; trembling weakness ; nervous pains, < 1. 
’“—Cramp. — Dull pain in ankles ; flying pains. — With desire to urinate, after- 
noon, and at night, nervous sensation is felt, irresistible fidgets, < night. — 
VOL. II. 60 



930 PULS. NAT.— PYRETHRUM PAR. 

Elevated eruption on ankles and half-way up leg, several large blotches on 
back, dark red ; itches all the time, < night. — ^Very cold feet, evening. 

24. Generalities.-^Great debility; on rising; in evening.—Languid, 
feverish, depressed. 

25. Skin.— Elevated blotchy eruption on legs and back. — Slight rash on 
back and shoulders.— Itching scattered pimples r. side of chest ; light red, 
rash-like blotches on r. breast, itching severely at night ; < when heated. — 
Red rash on body, face, neck, back, chest, abdomen, limbs, < chest and 
abdomen; later erythema; later nodules, turn white after scratching (> 
Ant. c, 200). — Itching: intense all over; < night before^ bedtime ; > rub- 
bing ; < riding in cold air ; returned repeatedly throughout the winter. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepy ; sleep not refreshing. — Sleepless : for an hour 4 a.m. ; 
for several hours ; from over-eating. — Restless, with frontal headache. — Many 
dreams; confused. 

27. Fever. — Chilly; with full, uncomfortable feeling in stomach; with 
inclination to yawn ; with papescent stool ; shaking. — Heat ; feverish ; with 
debility; skin hot, flaccid; > cool, blustering wind. — Hot face, cold feet; 
hands hot and feverish. 


Pyrethrum Parthenium. 

Chrysanthemum parthenium (Bern.). Feverfew. N. 0 . Compositae. 

Tincture of fresh plant. 

Clinical. — Convulsions. Delirium. Dysentery. Fevers. Ldquacity. Rheumatism. 

CharacteristiCB. — Pyr. p. has bitter tonic properties like those 
of Chamomile {Anthemis nohilis) ; and is a popular remedy in slight 
fevers (whence the name ‘ Feverfew^). The smell of the whole Iksrb 
is said to be particularly offensive to bees ^^ ( of hot.). Some 
popular insect powders are made of the dried flowers of Pyrethrum 
roseum. Radix pyrethri^ or Pellitory of Spain, which is used as an 
irritant and as a toothache cure, is the root of Anacyclus pyrethrum. 
The roots of the genus have a hot taste, whence the name Pyrethrum 
(ttvp, fire). One observation has been recorded with Pyr. p. A boy, 
3J, took 50 minims of the tincture. It nearly proved fatal, causing 
diarrhcea, convulsions of a tetanic nature, twitchings, loquacious 
delirium, restless, rapid, and weak pulse, and profuse sweat at night. 
Some observations of Cooper^s will be found in the Schema. Cooper 
has also cured cases of subacute rheumatism with P. roseum. 

RelatioiiB . — Compare : Cham., Cin., Absin., Artemis, and other 
Compositae. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Very excited, talked incessantly for four hours. — Lying in 
state of stupor ; easily roused but quickly relapsing. 

8. Mouth. — Soreness of tongue. 

13. Stool.— Diarrhoea, $ with pain ; at first profuse and exhausting, 



PYROGENIUM 


931 

with tenesmus ; afterwards involuntary evacuations of mucus slightly tinged 
with blood ; better next morning. 

19. Heart.— Pulse very rapid (120 to 130) and feeble ; became normal 
• the fifth day. 

2z. Limbs. — Old subacute rheumatism of hands and small bones 
(relieved.— R. T. C.) 

24. Generalities* — Twitching of muscles of limbs (not those of face) ; 
subsided by morning of third day. — ^At 12.30 violent convulsions lasting an 
hour and leaving the child apparently moribund, but he gradually recovered. 
— ^Convulsive movSments like those of tetanus. — Restlessness. — Feet, legs and 
body, which were swollen, decidedly reduce, and next menstrual period is 
dark and deficient (in a gouty woman, 50. — R. T. C.) 

27. Fever. — Profuse perspiration ; and restlessness (first night). 


Pyrogenium. 

Pyrogen. Pyrexin. Sepsin. A product of the decomposition of 
• chopped lean beef in water, allowed to stand in the sun for 
two or three weeks. Dilutions ; (which should be made, accord- 
ing to Burnett, direct and without glycerine). 

Clinioal. — Abscess. Anus, sweating near. Bed-sores. Bright’s disease. Con- 
stipation. Diarrhoea. Dysentery. Eczema. Enteric fever. Fistula. Headache. 
Heart, rapid action of ; consciousness of ; failure of. Hectic fever. Indian continued 
fevers. Influenza. Intestines, ulceration of; obstruction of. Labour: puerperal 
fever. Ovary, abscess of Peritonitis. Phthisis pulmonalis. Ptomaine poisoning. 
Puerperal fever. Pycemia. Sepsis. Spine, Pott's curvature of. Tabes mesenterica. 
Tuberculosis. Typhilitis. Ulcers, varicose ; obstinate. Varicosis. 

** Charaifteristics. — John Drysdale was the first, in 1880, to suggest 
the use of this substance as a medicament {On Pyrexin or Pyrogen as a 
Therapeutic Agents Bailliere, Tyndale & Cox). Burdon Sanderson 
has stated {B. M. J., February 13, 1875) that only liquids which 
contain bacteria or have a marked proneness to their productions^ 
are capable of setting up pyrexia. This remark struck Drysdale, 
and though, of course, he could not endorse the only ” of the state- 
ment — many drugs known to homceopaths set up fever — he saw that 
the fact might be turned to account. Sanderson further defines 
Pyrogen as a chemical non-living substance formedjby living bacteria, 
but also by living pus-corpuscles, or the living blobd- or tissue-pro- 
toplasms from which these corpuscles spring.^’ In Sanderson’s 
experiments with Pyro, the following effects were observed, (i) From 
a non-fatal dose : The animal shivers and begins to move about rest- 
lessly. The temperature rises from 2® to 3® C., the maximum being 
reached in three hours. Thirst and vomiting come on, followed by 
feculent and thin mucous, and finally bloody diarrhoea and tenesmus. 
.In five hours these symptoms begin to subside, and the animal 
recovers with wonderful rapidity. When death occurs it is from 
heart failure. In non-fatal cases with gastro-enteric symptoms the 



932 


PYROGENIUM 


temperature ^adually rises for four hours, and as gradually subsides : 
in fatal cases it rises rapidly to 104° F., then rapidly declines to below 
normal, (a) From a fatal dose : There is intestinal haemorrhage, purg* 
ing, collapse, and death. After death extravasations of blood are found , 
in heart, pleura, and pericardium ; the spleen is enlarged and full of 
blood. Mucous membrane of stomach and small intestines is intensely 
injected with detachment of epithelium and exudation of bloody fluid, 
which distends the gut. The blood is dark, the corpuscles being in 
clumps instead of rolls, and many being dissolved in the liqifor 
sanguinis. White corpuscles partially disintegrated* Drysdale pre- 
pared a tincture of Pyro, — which he preferred to call Pyrexin, since 
it is not a mere Itvtx-producer : others have called it Sepsin ; but this 
is too close to Septiccemin^ a name given to a related and perhaps 
identical nosode : I have chosen to retain the name Pyrogen^ by which 
the remedy is best known in homoeopathy — and put his own sugges- 
tion into practice. His success was very encouraging, but as he con- 
tinued to use the <j> tincture and lowest attenuations the difficulty of 
keeping the preparation was not small ; and the remedy did not 
come into extensive use till Burnett published his pamphlet on Pyro- 
genium in Fevers and Blood-poisoning in 1888. Burnett used chiefly 
the 6th centesimal dilution, which is perfectly harmless, and which 
will keep indefinitely. Heath, who made one of the preparations 
used by Burnett, gave some of it to Swan, of New York, who ran it 
up into the high infinitesimals. Much of the American experience is 
with Swan’s attenuations, including a proving by Sherbino (Med, Adv,^ 
XXV. 369), whose symptoms I have marked (S) in the Schema. The 
remainder of the symptoms of the Schema are ;(or the most part 
clinical. Yingling {H, P., xiii. 402) collected symptoms from many 
reported cases, and arranged them with the symptoms of the proving. 
(Yingling erroneously describes Pyro. as prepared from pus from 
septic abscess.” This is Septicccmin, He refers, however, to Burnett’s 
pamphlet and to cases cured with Pyro,^ leaving the actual substance 
referred to not in doubt. H. C. Allen, who published the -proving 
and most of the cases in Med, Adv,, rightly describes Pyro, as a 
I* Product of Sepsis”). Drysdale’s origin^ cases include a number 
in which threatened typhoid was averted, a case of tabes mesenterica 
cured, and one of ulceration of the colon greatly benefited. Burnett’s 
were cases of fully developed typhoid all cut short at the height by 
Pyro, 6 given every two hours. In his pamphlet is included a success- 
ful experience of Dr. Shouldham’s with Pyro, 6 in two cases of 
diphtheritic sore throat. I have had ample opportunity of observing 
the power of Pyro, over typhoid fever, and typhoid and hectic states, 
including one of discharging abscess connected with Pott’s disease of 
the spine. T. M. Dillingham reports (Med, Adv,^ xxvii. 367) the case 
of a young German Jevvess who had been under treatment ‘at various 
hospitals for Bright’s disease, and at the Hahnemann Hospital of New 
York among others. To this she was readmitted on March 14, 1890, 
when she first came under Dr. Dillingham’s care. The urine showed 
an enormous amount of albumen and a variety of casts. Feet and** 
legs greatly swollen, face puffy. Throbbing headache, often accom** 
panied by profuse nose-bleed, nausea, and vomiting ; < motion and 



PYROGENIUM 


933 


light; abnormally bright eyes, widely dilated pupils. BelL gave 
temporary relief ; but on May 31st the condition was desperate. 
Dillingham then learned that the trouble dated from a large abscess 
resulting from a lanced, badly cared-for felon of the left thumb. She 
was ill six weeks with this abscess, having, as her doctors said, 

blood poisoning.’* Soon after this her face and feet began to swell. 
On May 31st the condition was this : Feet, legs, and genitals greatly 
swollen. Frightful throbbing headache, > by tight band constantly 
worn. > By heat ; very fond of the hot hath. Headaches had 
terrible aggravations lasting two to four days, during which time she 
could neither lie in bed nor sit up, but was in constant motion, groan- 
ing and crying piteously for help. Pyro. cmm, Swan, one dose was 
given, and no other medicine, although the patient on one occasion 
begged for something to stop the pain. In the course of June she 
began to mend, and on October 20th was discharged cured. In 
Sherbino’s proving he was cured incidentally of a consciousness of the 
heart and its working, and palpitation from least excitement or 
anxiety, < beginning to move ; congestion to head as if apoplexy 
would ensue. Cactus had done no good. Sherbino cured : (i) a case 
of puerperal fever with Pyro,^ being led to its selection by the very 
high pulse rate. (2) Relapse of typhoid, pulse 140, temperature 
102^^ F% ; both were normal in twenty -four hours. (3) Young lady, 17, 
fever, aching bones, bed felt very hard. Numb, paralytic feeling. As 
the fever left the pulse kept mounting up, Pyro. cmm. Swan, repeated 
as often as effect ceased, cured, — Pyro, is one of the germinal remedies 
of the materia medica. When once the idea of its essential action is 
grasped an infinity of applications become apparent. As Drysdale 
put it, The most summary indication for Pyro, would be to term it 
the Aconite of the typhous or typhoid quality of pyrexia,” and wherever 
poisoning by bacterial products {e.g.^ in the hectic of phthisis) is going 
01^ Pyro, will be likely to do good. Sepsis is the essence of the action 
of Pyro, fl. C, Allen gives this indication for its use in septic states : 

When the best selected remedies fail to relieve or permanently im- 
prove ” — analogous to the action of Pso, and Sul. in other conditions. 
Also : Latent pyogenic process, patient continually relapsing after ap- 
parent simillimum.” As Pyro. is a product of carrion, the carrion-like 
odour of bodily emaciations, secretions, and excretions is a keynote for 
its use. Other leading indications are : Restlessness ; must move con- 
stantly to > the soreness of parts. Constipation, from impactum of 
faeces in fevers ; stool large, black, carrion-like.” Chill begins in back, 
between scapulae.” Severe general chill of bonef and extremities.” 

In all cases of fever commencing with pains in the limbs,” Swan. 
“ Pulse abnormally rapid, out of all proportion to temperature.” 
Pyro. 5, five drops in water night and morning, assisted in the cure of 
a case of tinal fistula in a case of Burnett’s (fin Fistula, p. 66). Under 
its action a sweating at the seat which the man had had for many years 
disappeared ; and the skin of his hands, which were subject to dry 
eczema, assumed a much cleaner aspect. J. S. Hunt (H, W,, xxxi. 54) 
reports five cases of varicose ulcers, all of which healed quickly under 
Pyro. Bellairs (H. W,, xxxiv. 298) gave Pyro. 200 to an elderly woman 
who suffered for years with an ulcerated leg, which was riddled with 



934 


PYROGENIUM 


deep, burrowing wounds, extremely painful and discharging freely. 
Hep.y S//., Ar$,y Ham,^ did no good. Under Pyro. once or twice a day 
a large boil formed on the calf of the leg and discharged its con- 
tents, after which the various ulcers healed up directly. The symptoms 
are > by heat (drinking hot water ; hot bath). > Tightly binding 
head. > Stretching out limbs ; walking about ; turning over or 
changing position. Hearths action and cough < by motion. Eyeball 
< moving eye. Cough < motion and in a warm room. < Sitting 
up in bed ; rising. (Cough > sitting up ; < lying down.) 

Relations. — Compare : Septicaemin (B. Sanderson says bacteria 
and pus cells produce the same chemical result ; Pyro. ana Sept, may 
therefore be identical, but I think it best to keep them distinct) ; 
Malar, (the vegetable Pyrogen) ; Lach. In typhoid with soreness, bed 
feels hard. Bap., Arn., Rhus. > Motion and stretching limbs, Rhus. 
Cough < by motion and in warm room, Bry. Uterine haemorrhage, 
Ipec. (^‘ if Ipec. fails when indicated give Pyro.,^’ Yingling). Offensive 
diarrhoea, Pso. Black stools, Lept. Constipation, Op., Sanic., Pb, 
Lochia thin, fetid. Nit. ac. Vomits water as soon as warm in stomach, 
Pho. Throbbing headache. Bell. Varicose, offensive ulcers of old 
persons, Pso. Skin ashy, Sec. Suppuration, Hep. 

Causation. — Blood poisoning. Ptomaine poisoning. Sewer-gas 
poisoning. Typhoid fever (remote effects of). Dissecting wounds. . 

SYMPTOMS. 

X. Mind,— Loquacious ; can think and talk faster than ever before (S). 
Irritable (S). — Delirious on closing eyes; sees a man at foot of bed. — 
Whispers ; in sleep. — Sensation as if she covered the whole bed ; knew her 
head was on pillow, but did not know where the rest of her body was. — Feels 
when lying on one side that she is one person, and another person when 
turning on the other side. — Sensation as though crowded with arms and legs. 
— Hallucination that he is very wealthy ; remaining after the fever. 

2 . Head. — Staggers as if drunk on rising in morning (S.) — Dizziness on 
rising up in bed. — Pains in both mastoids, < r. ; dull throbbing in mastoid 
region (S). — Great throbbing of arteries of temples and head ; every pulsation 
felt in brain and in ears ; the throbbings meet on top of brain (S). — Painless 
throbbing all through front of head ; sounds like escaping steam (S). — Fright- 
ful throbbing headache > from tight band. — Excruciating, bursting, throbbing 
headache with intense restlessness (often accompanied with profuse nose- 
bleed, nausea, and vomiting). — Sensation as if a cap were on. — Rolling of 
head from side to side. — Forehead bathed in cold sweat. 

3 . Eyes. — L. eyeball sore, < looking up and turning eye outward (S). 
—Projecting eyes. 

4 . Ears.— Loud ringing, like a bell, 1. ear (also r.) (S).— Ears cold,— 
Ears red, as if blood would burst out of them. 

5 . Nose. — Nose-bleed ; awakened by dreaming it and found it was so. 
— Sneezing : every time he puts hand from under covers ; at night. — Nostrils 
closing alternately (S). — Cold nose. — Fan-like motion of alae nasi. 

6 . Face. — Face : burning ; yellow ; very red ; pale, sunken, and bathed 
in cold sweat ; pale, greenish, or chlorotic.— Circumscribed redness of cheeks. 



PYROGENIUM 


935 


8. Mouth.— Tongue : coated white in front, brown at back ; yellowish 
brown, bad taste in morning (S). — Tongue : coated yellowish grey, edges and 
tip very red ; large, flabby ; yellow brown streak down centre.— Tongue clean, 
smooth, and dry ; first fiery red, then dark red and intensely dry ; smooth 
and dry ; glossy, shiny ; dry, cracked, articulation difficult. — ^Taste : terribly 
fetid, as if mouth and throat full of pus (produced by dose of Pyro, cm. 
Swan) ; sweetish. — Breath horrible ; like carrion. 

9. Throat. — Diphtheria with extreme fetor. 

10. Appetite. — No appetite (S) ; or thirst. — Great thirst for small quan- 
tities, but the leas* liquid was instantly rejected. — > Drinking very hot water. 
— ^Thirst and vomiting (dog). 

11. Stomach. — Belching of sour water after breakfast (S). — Nausea and 
vomiting, — ^Vomiting : persistent ; brownish, coffee-ground ; offensive, ster- 
coraceous ; with impacted or obstructed bowels. — ^Vomiting and purging. — 
Vomits water when it becomes warm in stomach. — > By vomiting. — Urging 
to vomit ; with cold feet. — Stomach feels too full (S). 

12. Abdomen. — Full feeling and bloating of abdomen (S). — When lying 
on 1. side bubbling or gurgling sensation in hypochondria, extending back to 
1 . of spine (S). — Pain in umbilical region with passage of sticky, yellow stool, 
— While riding in a buggy aching in 1 . of umbilicus ; < drinking water ; > 
passing flatus downward. — Soreness of abdomen so severe she can hardly 
breathe, or bear any pressure over r. side. — Very severe cutting pains r, side 
going through back, < by every motion, talking, coughing, breathing deep ; 
> lying on r. (affected) side ; groaning with every breath. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Feculent and thin mucous, and finally bloody 
diarrhoea and tenesmus (dog). — Two soft, sticky stools, 8 to 9 a.m. — Involun- 
tary escape of stoo/ when passing flatus (S). — Profuse watery, painless stools, 
with vomiting. — Stool horribly offensive, carrion-like. — Stool very much con- 
stipated, large, difficult, requires much effort ; first part balls, last part natural, 
wj^h streaks of blood ; anus sore after (S). — Constipation : hard, dry 
accumulated faeces; stool large, black, carrion-like; small black balls like 
olives.-rCongestion and capillary stasis of gastro-intestinal mucous membrane, 
shedding of epithelium, bloody fluid distending intestines (dog). — (Sweat 
about anus removed ; fistula relieved.) 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine scanty ; only passed twice in twenty-four 
hours (S). — Urine : yellow ; after standing, cloudy with substance looking like 
orange peel ; red deposit on vessel hard to remove ; deposits sediment like 
red pepper (S). — Got up three times in night to urinate (S). — (Bright's disease 
of kidneys.)— Urine albuminous, containing casts ; horribly offensive, carrion- 
like, — Frequent calls to urinate as fever comes on. — Intolerable tepesmus of 
bladder ; spasmodic contractions, involving rectum, ovaries, and broad liga- 
ments ; [cured in a case of Yingling's with Pyro. cm Swan (and higher) ; 
patient's n.ext period came on naturally and painlessly, whereas before menses 
had been painful and extremely offensive.] 

15. Male Sexual Organs.- Testes hang down relaxed ; scrotum looks 
and feels thin. 

i6* Female Sexual Organs. — Puerperal peritonitis with extreme fetor ; 
a rotten odour. — Parts seriously swollen (Bright's disease). — Menses horribly 
offensive ; carrion-like. — Menses last but one day, then a bloody leucorrhcea, 



936 PYROGENIUM 

horribly offensive. — Haemorrhage of bright red blood with dark clots* — Septi- 
caemia following abortion ; foetus or secondines retained, decomposed. — (Has 
Glared prolapsus uteri, with bearing down, > by holding the head and strain- 
ing, as in the act of labour.)— Abscess of 1. ovary, acute throbbing pain, great • 
distress, with fever and rigors {Pyro» cm. Swan, produced an enormous flow 
of white creamy pus with general ». — Lochia : thin, acrid, brown, or foetid ; 
suppressed, followed by chills, fever, and profuse fetid perspiration. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Wheezing when expiring (S).— Cough ; 
with large masses of phlegm from larynx ; < by motion ; < in warm room ; 
cough SB burning in larynx and bronchi ; = pain in occiput ; s= stitching in 
small of back, only noticed in the chair ; coughs up yellow sputa through 
night (S).— Cough > sitting up, < lying down. — Expectoration ; rusty mucus ; 
horribly offensive. 

18. Chest. — Pain in r. lung and shoulder, < talking or coughing. — Neg- 
lected pneumonia; Cough, night-sweats, frequent pulse, abscess had burst 
discharging much pus of mattery taste (rapid recovery under Pyro, cm. three 
doses). — Chest sore, purple spots on it. — Severe contracting pain within lower 
sternum, sometimes extending to rib-joints and up to throat, as if oesophagus 
being cramped. — Ecchymoses on pleura (dog). 

19. Heart. — Pain in region of 1. nipple, as if in heart ; increased action ; 
pulse 120 (S). — Heart tired as after a long run ; increased action < least 
motion (S). — Every pulsation felt (painlessly) in head and ears (S). — Sensation 
as if heart enlarged ; distinct consciousness of heart (S). — Sensation as if 
heart too full of blood. — Feels as if the heart were pumping cold water 
(Yingling). — ^Violent, tiresome heart action. — Palpitation or increased action 
without corresponding increase of temperature. — Palpitation < by motion. 
— Loud heart-beats ; audible to herself and others. — Ctduld not sleep for 
whizzing and purring of heart ; when she did sleep was delirious. — Cardiac 
asthenia from septic conditions. — Ecchymoses on heart and pericardium (dog). 

20. Neck and Back. — ^Throbbing of vessels of neck running up in waves 
from clavicles. — ^Weak feeling in back ; stitching pain on coughing (S). 

21. Limbs. — Aching : in bones ; all over body as from a severe cold ; 
with soreness of flesh, head feels hard ; > motion (S). — Cold extremities.—* 
Numbness of hands, arms, and feet, extending over whole body. — Automatic 
movement of r. arm and r. leg, turned the child round from r. to 1. till feet 
reached the pillow : repeated as often as she was put right (cerebro-spinal 
meningitis). 

22 . Upper Limbs. — Pain in shoulder-joint ; in front, passing three 
inches down arm (S). — Hands and arms numb. — Hands cold and clammy. — 
Dry eczema of hands. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Aching above knees, deep in bones, while sitting 
by a hot fire ; > by walking (S). — On going to bed aching in patella ; > 
flexing leg (S). — ^Aching above 1. knee as though bone broken (S), — Aching 
above knees in bones, > stretching out limbs (S).— Tingling in r, little toe as 
if frost-bitten. — Feet and legs swollen (Bright's disease). — Numbness of f^et. 

24. Generalities. — Cannot lie more than few minutes in one position, 
> change (S).— Debility in morning, staggered on trying to walk (S).— 
Nervous, restless (^.—Aching all over, bed feels hard.— Great muscular 
debility ; rapid recovery in few hours (dog). 



PYRUS AMERICANA 937 

, 25. Skin. — Skin pale, cold, of ashy hue. — Obstinate, varicose, offensive 
ulcers of old people. 

26. Sleep. — Slept awhile ; woke to roll and tumble in every conceivable 
•position (S). — Unable to sleep for brain activity and crowding of ideas (S). — 
Restlessness > after sleep.— Cries out in sleep that a weight is lying on her.— 
Whispers in sleep. — Kept awake by purring of heart. — Dreams ; of various 
things; of business. 

,27. Fever. — In all cases of fever commencing with pains in the limbs '* 
(Swan). — Shivers and begins to move about restlessly ; temperature rises 
gradually and as '•gradually subsides (dog). — Temperature rises rapidly to 
104® F., and sinks rapidly from heart failure (dog, fatal dose). — Chilly at times 
and a little aching ; a little feverish (S). — ^After dinner, ache all over, chilly all 
night, bed feels hard (S), — After getting into bed, chilly, teeth chatter ; woke 
10 p.m. in perspiration on upper part of body ; > motion (S). — Feels hot as if 
he had a fever, but was only 99° F., feels like 105®. — Cold and chilly all day. — 
No fire would warm ; sits by fire and breathes the heat from it ; chilly when- 
ever he leaves it ; at night when the fever came on he had a sensation as if 
lungs on fire, must have fresh air, which gave >. — Frequent calls to urinate 
as soon as fever came on ; urine clear as water. — Every other day dumb 
ague. — Perspiration horribly offensive, carrion-like ; disgust up to nausea 
about any effluvia arising from her own body. — Cold sweat over body. 


Pyrus Americana. 

Mountain Ash (American). (Swamps and mountain woods from 
Maine to Pennsylvania.) N, 0, Rosaceae. Tincture of fresh 
bark^ 

Clinical.— Bladder, irritation of; prolapse of. Chills. Clairvoyance. Dys- 
pepsia. Gout. Heart, affections of. Hysteria. Rectum, constriction of. Rheu- 
matism. Sciatica. Tongue, paralysis of. Uterus, prolapse of. 

Charaoteristics. — P, amer,y the American Mountain Ash (the 
British is P. aucupana)^ was proved by Gatchell on himself, a married 
woman, and two lads. GatchelPs only symptom was “ irritation of 
the eyes.'* Another prover had a similar symptom. By far the 
greatest number were induced in the woman ; though hers were 
largely confirmed by those of the boys. Neuralgk, rheumatic, and 
gouty symptoms were very severe. The emotional oalance was dis- 
turbed and a kind of clairvoyance induced. Labour-like or spasmodic 
pains were frequent — ^in uterus ; in bladder like prolapse ; constrictive 
at base of lungs and round waist ; hke spasm of heart ; as if left leg 
drawn up. Peculiar Sensations are : As if full of cold water ; as if 
stomach full of cold water ; coldness extends up caesophagus under 
sternum. As if she were outside of herself and could see into herself. 
As if rectum were shrunken and dried up. As if left leg drawn up 
and would never straighten again. The symptoms were < by moving 
about (pains and chilliness) ; < by exposure to cold. 



938 


PYRUS AMERICANA 


Relations. — Antidoted by : Camph. Compare : Neuralgic and 
gouty pains, Pru. sp. Heart, Crataeg. Chilliness, Camph. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Feels like crying. — Sad, weeping mood ; tears will come (in 
a lad). — Feels gloomy and discouraged but cannot cry. — Feels resolute ; full 
of gloomy determination. — Hypochondriac, not nervous ; lazy, would like to 
lie in bed and be waited on. — Thinks she is clairvoyant, can read character 
and understand motions, see into herself. — Seems to be ablfc to go out of her- 
self for a short distance, to walk round and return into her body ; seems to 
her that fundus of stomach is depressed in abdomen, and pyloric end on fire, 
a red spot like raw beef there as if stomach burnt up with raw whisky. — 
Cries, feels babyish apprehension ; fears something terrible going to happen. 
— Feels weak as if about to die, moans, groans, calls for help. — Brain active, 
intellect clear, thoughts vivid, whole being intensified. — Indolent, indifferent, 
no inclination to read. 

2. Head. — Headache begins over eyes ; pains knife-like ; 1. side of head 

aches terribly, like a toothache. — Headache extends to r. side. — Head feels as 
if it would burst. — Great weight at vertex. — Shooting pains in forehead. — 
Headache penetrating in temples. » 

3. Eyes. — Irritation of eyes. — Eyes feel as if they had been crying a 
long time ; smart. 

8 . Mouth. — Tongue partially paralysed, cannot direct it. 

9. Throat. — Throat feels obstinate. 

11. Stomach. — Craves hot tea. — Wants soft food, f^els as if meat would 
not digest. — Stomach feels weak as if nothing would digest ; it feels dry and 
wrinkled. — Feels as if stomach full of cold water. — Thinks mucus accumulated 
in cold stomach. — Feeling of coldness extends up sternum and oesophagus. 

12. Abdomen. — Feels constricted round waist ; oblige^ to loocen 
clothes at once. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Sensation as if rectum were shrunken and 
dried up. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Irritation of bladder and urethra. — Sensation as 
if bladder prolapsed. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Sense of prolapse of womb. — Bearing- 
down and pressing out as if swollen and burning all over. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness. — Dry cough, as if pharynx 
stuffed with cotton. — Can hardly breathe, as if cold water in stomach. — Can't 
talk loud ; voice gone. — Some cough. — Spasmodic breathing as of nervous 
women (in a lad). 

18. Chest. — Feels as if lungs congested, esp. at base ; and constricted. 

19. Heart. — Aching at heart.— Oppression about heart as if it had stopped 
beating, as if going into convulsions. — Sense of spasm at heart ; as if blood 
too thick to circulate (> Caw^/^.).— Heart aches as if from some great sorrow. 

20. Neck and Back. — Sick feeling under r. scapula. 

21. Limbs. — Twinging pains in arms, legs, and toes. — ^Joints all feel, 
constricted and sore. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Some pain in finger-joints. 



PYRUS AMERICANA 


939 


23. Lower Limbs.*— Pains drawing, rending along backs of thighs to 
toes, < 1, — Feels as if 1. leg drawn up and would never straighten again. — 
Tight feeling of patella. — Knees and toes feel as if immensely swollen and 
.ache. — L. great toe feels as if torn from its socket,— Toes burn. — Pain in knees 
subsides and is followed by pain in tendons and along calves ; drawing, cutting 
pain. — Unendurable aching of bones of toes. 

24. Generalities.— Aches everywhere, in every joint; pains acute, 
intense, like inflammatory rheumatism. — Feels as if full of cold water. — < 
Motion ; dreads to move on account of joints. — < Cold ; sensitive to cold and 
air. — Pains seem to move in meandering lines. 

25. Skin. — Clammy feeling of skin. 

27. Fever. — Chilly when air strikes him. — Chilly down back and both 
legs. — ^Very cold, shivering internally ; thinks she must look blue. — Cold 
creeping all over. — Glow all over ; hands sweat. — Chilly and with a very 
tranquil feeling, esp. of consciousness. 



Quassia. 

Picraena excelsa (Jamaica) and Quassia amara (Surinam). AT, O. 

Simarubaceae. Tincture or cold infusion of the wood. 

Clinioal* — Intermittent fever. Worms. 

Gharacteristics. — The Quassia now found in the shops in the 
form of Quassia chips is the wood of Picraena, the Jamaica Quassia. 
The name Quassia ” was given by Linnaeus to Quassia excelsa, of 
Surinam, from the name of a negro, Quassi or Coissi, who employed 
its bark as a remedy for fever. The wood of this tree was formerly 
employed in this country under the name of Surinam Quassia, The 
wood is very bitter, and yields its properties best to cold distilled 
water. In the old school the infusion is used as a bitter tonic in 
dyspepsia, and as a clyster for clearing the rectum of threadworms. 
There is a short homoeopathic proving : J. O. Muller took a single 
dose of the tincture ; Eidherr four doses of 30X. ^ Lembke took the 
extract. The most peculiar characteristic symptoms were ; Drawing 
in hypochondria and sensation as if abdomen were empty and 
retracted ; with sensation as if he would have a stool ; stool at first 
hard, with effort, later pasty (Eidh.). Sticking in liver anrd abdoflien 
fMul.). Peculiar beating through abdomen, extending into extremities 
(MuL). Eidherr had coldness running over back, with Constant 
inclination to yawn and desire to stretch out the feet,^^ which gives a 
clue to its action in fevers. 

Relations. — Compare: Cedron, Botan. Fevers, Cedron. Worms, 
Cina. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — ^Awoke with great anxiety i a.m., unable to sleep or read ; 
next day could not perform any mental labour from absence of thought. 

2 . Head. — Constant dulness of head. 

11. Stomach. — Qualmishness. — Drawing in stomach, with sensation as 
if stomach full of hot water. 

12. Abdomen. — Slight drawing in both hypochondria, with sensation as 
if abdomen empty and retracted to spinal column ; < by deep breathing, 
with sensation as if he would have a stool. — ^Very acute sticking in hepatic 
region ; followed by dull pain. — Sticking pains between umbilicus and* 
stomach. — ^Abdomen hard and distended. — Peculiar beating through abdomen 
extending into extremities, with general nervous troubles. 

940 



QUERCUS 941 

13, Stool.— Stools at first hard, with great effort, afterwards pasty, once 

very thin. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Secretion of urine increased, solid constituents 
, diminished. 

20 Neck and Back. — Severe drawing pains in cervical muscles. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Drawing pain in calves. 

24. Generalities. — General discomfort. 

27. Fever. — Sensation of coldness running over back, with constant 
inblination to yawn and stretch out the feet. 


Quebracho. 

Aspidosperma quebracho. White Quebracho. N. 0 . Apocynaceae. 
Tincture and trituration of the bark. Trituration and solutions 
of the alkaloid Aspidospermine and its salts. 

Clinical. — Asthma. Cardiac asthma. Fever. 

Charaoteristios. — Quebracho is a Brazilian fever remedy from 
which the alkaloid Aspidospermine has been isolated. This is in small, 
very brilliant, white crystals, sparingly soluble in water, readily soluble 
in alcohol and ether. Hale says Queb, produces in animals respiratory 
paralysis, slowed heart, and paralysis of extremities. It relieves dysp- 
noea in phthisis and pleurisy, but without influencing the fever. The 
IX relieved asthma with livid face; and dyspnoea with cyanosis is 
frequently relievec^ by it. Hale gives these cases as relieved by it : 

(1) Mitral incompetence and stenosis with severe nocturnal dyspnaa. 

(2) Fatty heart {Queb. had no influence on the oedema, which was 
removed by Dig.), Jos. P. Cobb (quoted A. //., xxvii. 74) records a 
case of heart affection of some duration in a man, 24. There was some 
enlargement, especially of right side, much dyspnoea, and a slight 
mitral murmur. Following this were signs of emphysema and severe 
attacks of asthma. Rales were heard, and “ pearls of rounded gela- 
tinous masses were expectorated. Aspidospermine 3X gave more relief 
than any other remedy, 

Quercus. 

Quercus robur (var. pedunculata and sessilifera). English Oak. N. 0 . 
Corylacese or Cupuliferae. Tincture of acorns (peeled and 
crushed or shredded). Spirit distilled from the tincture 
(Spiritus glandium quercus). Water extract of acorns with 
addition of alcohol (Aqua glandium quercus.) 

Clinical.— Alcoholism. Breath, offensive. Constipation. Diarrhcea. Dropsy 
(splenic). Fistula. Giddiness. Gout. Intermitting fever. Leucocythaemia splenica. 
Spleen, affections of. 

Charaeteristios. — Quercus is one of Rademacher’s splenic reme- 
dies. It was introduced to homoeopathic practice by Burnett, who 



942 QUERCUS 

published in his Diseases of the Spleen a translation of Rademacher^s 
account of the remedy, and how he ^ came to learn about it. Rade* 
macher gave the tincture of acorns to an old brandy drunkard who 
had long suffered from the spleen, which was at times very painful,, 
and who was at that time ** sick unto death with ascites and dropsy 
of the legs. The urine at once increased, but the patient complained 
that each dose of the medicine caused constriction of the chest. This 
led Rademacher to prepare the Distilled Spirit, and finally the Aqua, 
as milder preparations, which they proved to be ; for the remedy 
completely cured the patient without causing further constriction of 
the chest. In the course of cures of spleen cases Rademacher noticed 
that not only was the flow of urine increased, there was also, especially 
in old spleen engorgements, an eliminative diarrhoea, with > of the 
symptoms generally. Another observation was this : “ Certain few 
people feel, as soon as they have taken it, a peculiar sensation in the 
head, lasting barely a minute or two, which they say \s like being 
drunky This put Burnett on the track of another use of this remedy, 
which he has elaborated in his Gout and its Cure, in the treatment of 
alcoholism and its effects. Here are some of his cases, (i) Military 
man, 64, broken down with gout and alcoholism and pretty severe 
chronic bronchitis. Heart irregular. Liver and spleen enlarged. 
Complained bitterly of gnawing at pit of stomach. Gait tottering, 
hands quivered. He had lost his wife and had to keep himself up 
with nips of spirits, for which he had a constant craving. Quer, gland, 
spir. 0, ten drops in water, three times a day, completely revolutionised 
his state and took away his abnormal craving for spirits. (2) In a 
merchant of 57, given to nips of sherry, Quer, g, s, ^ threw out a gouty 
eczema on scalp, poll, and backs of hands, which took three months 
to cure, after which Quer, g, s, was again given and completed the 
cure. (3) An officer who drank too much had foul breath ; eyes 
yellow, puffy underneath. Quer, g, s, 6 cured. (4) Hunting man,»40, 
free liver, gouty, had varicose veins ot legs, originating apparently in 
enlarged spleen, left by typhoid fever. Quer, g. s, ^ cured. The 
patient said it kept his bowels very regular.'^ (5) A country squire, 
60, bachelor, appeared in a hopeless condition. Was unable to state 
his own case. Flushed, much pain over the eyes and in both rib 
regions. Stooping caused great pain, < left hypochondrium. Liver 
and spleen much enlarged. Nervous, depressed, glum, taciturn, 
easily moved to tears. Could not walk without support on. account of 
his great giddiness. Breath in highest degree disgustingly stercoraceous, 
nearly caused Burnett to vomit when examining him. That smell of 
breath, says Burnett, is an unmistakable sign of the chronic tippler, 
indicating undigested alcohol in the primee vice, Burnett subsequently 
ascertained that he was quite a sober man, but took frequent nips, 
particularly when confined to the house by wet weather. The {a) 
Pain in left side ; {h) Giddiness ; (c) Flushed state indicated Quer., 
which was given. In a week the breath was normal j giddiness a 
little better ; tenderness of rib region much diminished. In six weeks 
quite well. Burnett does not find Quer. a remedy for the liquor • 
habit, it stops short at that ; but it diminishes the craving and antimtes 
the alcoholic state. On the other hand, Quer, is by no means a remedy 



QUERCUS 943 

for alcoholic effects only. Giddiness with spleen trouble is met by it ; 
and I have given it with good result to a young lady for extreme 
whirling vertigo, a sequel of influenza. The patient was greatly 
relieved when she took it in a severe attack ; but if she took it when 
the giddiness was only slight it caused severe aggravation. Patients 
to whom Cooper gave it complained that they felt as if in a vice ; 
dared not move for fear of a fit of apoplexy, or an attack of giddi- 
ness.” Deafness with noises in the head ” is another effect observed 
by Cooper. Palestine missionaries who used Quer, g, s. on Burnettes 
indications in spleen affections found it no less effective in the inter- 
mittent fevers v^hich gave rise to the enlarged spleens. Powdered 
Oak-bark is an excellent diy dressing for ulcers and discharging 
wounds. The Schema is made up of clinical symptoms (f.e., symp- 
toms either caused or cured in patients). 

Relations. — [The Oak is a near ally of the Willow, and the 
febrile and vertiginous properties of Salicin and its compounds are 
analogous to those of Querc. Tannin, Tannic acid, and Gallic acid 
are obtained from the bark of the oak and the “ galls ” or oak apples, 
produced by the puncture of gall-flies.] Antidote to: Alcohol. 
Compare: In giddiness, CoccuL, Gels., Chi., Nat. m., Nat. sal., Dig. 
In spleen affections, Cean., ScilL, Cedr., Urt. ur., Rubia tinct., Thuj. 
In ^Icqholism, Nux, Ars., Chi. 

Causation.-— Alcohol. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Nervous, depressed, glum, taciturn, easily moved to tears ; 
not quite capable of ^tating his own case. 

2. Head. — ^Wheeling vertigo. — Vertigo with affections of spleen and 1. 
side. — Afraid to move for fear an attack of apoplexy or giddiness would come 
on. — Peculiar sensation in head, feel as when drunk ; sensation lasts a minute 
or iavo. — Gouty eczema of scalp, poll, and backs of hands. 

3* . Eyes. — Eyes yellow ; puffy underneath. 

4. Ears. — Deafness and noises in the head. 

6. Face. — Flushed. 

8. Mouth. — Foul breath ; stercoraceous. — Tongue foul. 

11. Stomach.— Removes craving for alcohol. — Gnawing at pit of 
stomach. — Flatulent dyspepsia. 

12 . Abdomen.— Pain in splenic region.— Ascites.— Enlarged liver and 
spleen.— Pain in hypochondria, < L, much < by stooping. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Diarrhcea (eliminative, with > of symptoms ; 
and not weakening). — It keeps his bowels open." — Fistifla in alcoholics. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Increased flow of urine. 

18. Chest. — Constriction of chest ; in prrecordia. 

19. Hqart.— Fluttering, irregular heart. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Gouty eczema of backs of hands. — Hands tremble. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Dropsy.— Tottering gait.— Varicose veins. 

24. Generalities.— Flushed state.— Exceedingly nervous. 


Qaininum, see Ghininum Solphuricom. 



Ranunculus Acris. 

Ranunculus acris. Buttercup. Goldcup. Crowfoot. N, 0. Ranun- 
ciilacea?. Tincture of whole plant. 

Clinical. — Erysipelas. Fever. Gangrene. Lumbago. Neuralgia. Rheuma- 
tism. Ulcers. 

Charaoteristios. — Ranunculus acris is distinguished from R. hul- 
hosus by its slender cylindrical flower-stalk, that of R. bulb, being 
furrowed. Both are common buttercups,’^ and have acrid and 
poisonous properties. R. acris was proved by Franz and Lembke, 
and the chief skin symptoms were observed in a woman of seventy 
who applied a handful of the herb to her limbs, with the result of 
setting up violent constitutional symptoms and fever and intense in- 
flammation, going on to gangrene of the skin of the legs. In the 
provers a pain of a rheumatic character was experienced in the 
muscles and joints, especially ankles and wrists, which occurred when 
walking and also when at rest. Lumbar pains on bending or 
turning the body. Heat, faintness, and fever. 

Relations. — Compare : Ran. bulb. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Anxiety. 

2. Head. — Headache. — Tearing in forehead, in face. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes contained a quantity of fluid blood and showed* several 
livid spots of hard texture (in dog poisoned with the juice). 

6. Face. — Red face. — Violent tearing in r. cheek, towards temples, 
evening. — Skin of r. check has peculiar feeling as though touched here and 
there with a cold, thin body ; later in 1. cheek. 

9. Throat. — Continuous scraping taste in throat. 

II. Stomach. — Frequent eructations of tasteless flatus. — Nausea ; with 
much saliva. 

13, Stool and Anus.— Copious fluid stool without pain at 5 p.m, and 
at 7 p.m. — Two loose stools, morning. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Frequent micturition during night ; urine 
normal. 

18. Chest. — Tearing in muscles, r. side of chest behind nipple, < during 
inspiration ; next day similar pain r. chest. — Lungs red and congested (dog). 

19. Heart. — Pulse small and rapid.— Heart contained coagulated blood 

(dog)- 



RANUNCULUS BULBOSUS 


945 


20* Back. — Pain several times in lumbar muscles on bending and turning 
the body ; and in joints ; also when sitting or in motion. 

21. Limbs. — Joints sore. — Boring and drawing pain in r. tibia and in 
.elbow. — Violent pressing pain in joints of elbow, ankle, and knee when 
sitting; > motion. — Tearing in wrists, ankle, and thumb, in walking and 
resting. — Tearing in joint of wrist, ankle, and shoulder, in forehead and in 
muscles of r.^chest. — Tearing in hip, shoulder, and ankle-joint. — Wandering 
pains in limbs, in joints of hands, knees, feet, and toes. 

123 . Lower Limbs. — Heaviness and weakness in legs on walking ; also 
in bed in morning.-*-Tearing in front of tibine and in temples. — Drawing pains 
in ankle-joints ; tearing in 1., walking and at rest. 

24. Generalities. — Tremulous, faint, anxious, restless, small, rapid pulse, 
red face. — Awoke at night with most violent pains. 

25. Skin. — Obstinate ulcers. — Skin (of legs) hot, red, painful, blistered in 
places ; next day gangrenous. 

27. Fever. — Violent erethistic fever, with intolerable pains in legs and 
feet, which were burned, blistered, and gangrenous. — Intolerable heat and 
faintness. — Head hot and heavy. — Heat in head. — Skin somewhat moist in 
igprning. — Forehead damp. 


Ranunculus Bulbosus. 

Ranunculus bulbosus. Buttercup. Bulbous Crowfoot. iV. 0. Ranun- 
cujaceae. Tincture of whole plant. 

Clinical.— Alcoholism. pain hclow» Chest, pains in. Chilblains. Corns. 

Delirium tremens. Diarrhoea. Dropsy. Dyspncea. Eczema. Epilepsy. Feet, 
pains in. Gastral^^ia Hay-fever. Herpes zoster. Hiccough. Hydrocele. Jaundice. 
Liver, painin. Natralf^ia, Nyctalopia. Oviu*ies. neuralgia of. Pemphigus. Pleu- 
ritic ^!ldhesion» Pleurodynia. Rheumatism. Spinal irritation. Warts. Writer's 
cramp. . 

Characteristios. — The caustic and pain-producing properties of 
the Ranunculaceas reach their highest expression in the Buttercups 
themselves. R. bulb, forms a constituent of some arsenical plaisters 
used to disperse cancers. R, bulb, was proved by Franz, and some 
effects of its external application have been observed, and results 
of inhaling the fumes whilst preparing the plant, or when it has 
been burned. The last caused headache, and in one instance 
epilepsy, followed by cachexia, nodous gout, /headache, and 
death. In a child who was cured of ague with subsequent dropsy 
and hydrocele by applying R. bulb, to the wrist, ulcers of the 
fingers penetrating down to the flexor tendons were produced. In 
one proven the effect of expressing the juice with the fingers was 
to cause a long-lasting and recurrent eruption of vesicles on the 
fingers, a characteristic feature of which was the blueness of the 
vesicles and the horny nature of the scabs : “ Small, deep, trans- 
parent, dark blue little elevated blisters of the size of an ordinary 
pin*s head, crowded together in oval-shaped groups of the size of a 
shilling, with intolerable burning itching, emitting when opened a 
VOL. IL 61 



946 RANUNCULUS BULBOSUS 

dark yellow lymph, afterwards becoming covered with a herpetic, 
horny scurf ” ; — 2l complete picture of herpes. The pains as well as 
the appearance of herpes are met with in the pathogenesis of R. bulb. 
— pains in nerves, serous membranes, muscles, tendons, joints, eyes,^ 
and internal organs. The pains are lancinating, pressing and out- 
pressing, jerking and sticking, as if bruised with external sensitiveness. 
From the acrid vapour arising whilst the juice of the plant was being 
prepared these symptoms arose : “Smarting from eyes as from smoke 
in evening. Smarting in eyes, nose, and fauces ; the eyes run and are 
very painful, so that he has to stop using them for half an hour 
because he cannot see anything ; whites slightly inflamed ; mucus runs 
in torrents from nose ; fauces painful as if sore during an inspiration^ 
less during deglutition ” — symptoms which have led to many cures of 
hay-fever with R. bulb. The “ < during inspiration is part of the 
general sensitiveness of R. bulb, to air, to cold air, and to change, 
which is the grand keynote of the remedy, and which will serve to 
indicate it in a large number of the cases to which it is otherwise 
appropriate. Another keynote is sensitiveness to touch : sore, bruised 
sensation ; soreness of parts affected. These symptoms make R. bulb. 
an important vulnerary. Bering mentions “ hemeralopia as having 
been cured with R. bulb, in a woman during pregnancy, and in her 
three-year old son. The word “ hemeralopia ’’ has been used to 
denote both ^/^jy-blindness and «i^A/-blindness. Bering uses it in the 
latter (and rarer) sense, for he says of the woman, she “ can see well 
during the day.^^ B. C. Allen speaks of “ day-blindness as an indi- 
cation, probably translating “ hemeralopia literally. The concomi- 
tant symptoms were : Beat, biting, and pressure jn eyes ; redness of 
conjunctiva and lids, especially inner surface of lower lids ; lachryma- 
tion ; pus in canthi ; pustules on eyes ; eyes look weak ; pupils 
dilated ; candle-light appears as a bright circle ; can see well during 
day.^^ With the concomitant symptoms R. bulb, would probably^cure 
either day- or night-blindness. “ Pressure and smarting in eyeballs 
is very characteristic. R. bulb, causes a very painful form of indiges- 
tion ; White-coated tongue ; bitter, sour, or sweetish taste, with 
accumulation of saliva ; scraping burning in throat ; spasmodic hic- 
cough ; spasmodic feeling in oesophagus and pharynx, ascending ; 
eructations ; nausea, pressure on sternum with laboured breathing ; 
violent burning in cardiac end of stomach ; hunger early in morning, 
thirst in evening.” Conversely R. bulb, has proved one of the most 
effective agents for removing the bad effects of alcoholic drinks : 
hiccough ; epileptiform attacks ; delirium tremens. In the last case 
the quarrelsome, angry mood on the one hand, and the abject fear of 
ghosts on the other, further point to its appropriateness. Pains in 
liver and spleen region < by touch. In pleurisy, pleurodynia, inter- 
costal neuralgia and spinal neuralgia and herpes the pains are — sharp, 
stitching, shooting, come in paroxysms, are induced by atmospheric 
changes, sudden exposure to cold or heat, < in wet, stormy weather ; 
from touch, motion, or turning the body. The chest is particularly 
the seat of these pains. “ Muscular pains about margins of shouldert 
blades in women of sedentary employment, often burning in small 
spots, from needlework, typewriting, piano playing” (H. C. Allen). 



RANUNCULUS BULBOSUS 


947 


Jerks and shocks ; and sudden tearings in right forearm and between 
thumb and index finger while writing/* point to R, bulb, as one of the 
remedies in writer*s cramp and professional neuroses. Sensations of 
R. bulb, are : Confusion of head as if intoxicated. As if head would 
be enlarged. As if head pressed asunder. Hypochondria in lowest 
ribs painful as if bruised. As if everything in abdomen sore and 
bruised. As if there were subcutaneous ulceration. Burning in left 
side of chest ; in region of short ribs. As if something tearing in 
chest. As if cold wet cloths applied. As if a full breath could not 
be drawn. As of a knife thrust through side and into back. Muscles 
as if pounded. The ^‘cold-water feeling** occurred in a patient of 
Burnettes (quoted by A. C. Pope in a lecture reported H. W.y xviii. 
308). A woman, 30, had had a fall two years before Burnett saw her, 
and ever since had this peculiar sensation ; Whenever she goes out of 
doors she feels as if wet cloths were applied to three different parts of 
the anterior walls of thorax — both infraclavicular fossae, and under 
left breast. Never felt indoors, but constant as long as she is out. 
Guided by this symptom, “ Unusual chilliness of outer parts of chest 
when walking in open air/* with the general “ < in open air ** and 
“ < walking in open air,** Burnett gave R. bulb. In two days the 
patient was better ; in three weeks the sensation had completely gone 
and. tho general health very much improved. Dudgeon reports this 
case {B. J. //., xxiv. 160) : Lady, 27, three weeks after confinement 
went for a drive. The day was cold, and an accident occurred to the 
carriage which frightened her. In the evening she had a slight rigor, 
and complained of pain in left side about sixth and seventh ribs. < 
Slightest movement ; > sitting rather bent forward and leaning a 
little to the left. Pulse 120, no heat of skin. No signs of lung or 
pleural involvement. Bry.^ and later Arn.y gave no relief, and for two 
days the symptoms grew worse ; the patient having to be propped up 
with4-)illows, leaning forward and to the left, her head resting on her 
breast, not Saring to breathe at all deeply. R, bulb, i relieved her in 
ten minutes, when she “ felt a wrench in her side and the pain was 
gone.** She was able to lie down, slept all night, and made a rapid 
recovery. There were some slight returns of pain, now on one side, 
now on the other, but R. bulb, soon removed them. The symptoms 
are < by touch ; by pressure (consequence of falls). < Motion ; 
walking ; lying down ; lying on side (affected) ; sitting up ; change 
of position ; < evening and morning. < Change of temperature ; 
sudden exposure to cold or heat ; open air. < Inspiring. < When 
temperature becomes lower ; draught of air ; rainy/stormy weather. 
< After eating. < From anger. 

Relations.— by : JBry., Camph., Puls., Rhus. Incom- 
patible : Sul., Staph., Nit. sp. d.. Alcohol, Wine, Vinegar. Compare: 
R. acris, R: scl. Smarting and pressure in eyeballs, Pho. Burning in 
spots in back, Aga., Pho. Spinal irritation, Agar. Exposure to cold 
or heat, Aco., Arn. Corns sensitive, smart, bum, Sal. ac. < Touch 
and motion, Bry. (Bry. > lying on painful side, R. bulb. <). < 

Wet, stormy weather, Rhus. Effects of alcohol, Querc. Headache 
at vertex as if pressed asunder ; < evening ; < going from cold to 
warm air, and vice versd ; tearful mood ; acidity ; sore spots in chest 



948 


RANUNCULUS BULBOSUS 


after pneumonia, feeling of subcutaneous ulceration. Puls. Pain along 
inner edge left scapula, at times extending below inferior angle and 
through left chest, Chel. Diaphragmitis, Cact, Zona, Rhus, Mez., 
Ars. Eczema with horny scabs. Ant. c. (Act. c. callosities on feet). . 
Hay-fever, Pso., K. iod., Saba., Sil., Ars. Fear of ghosts, Aco., Ars., 
Bro., Carb. v., Coccul., Lyc., Pho., Pul., Sep., Sul., Zn. Hunger in 
early morning, Aga., Ant. c., Asar., Calc., Carb. a., Chi., Lyc., Mur. 
ac., Rhus, Saba., Zn. Sleeplessness from dyspnoea. Cad. s., Grind., 
Lach. 

Cansation. — Anger (slightest fit of, = trembling and dyspnoea). 
Change of temperature or weather. Injury. Alcohol. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Pusillanimity and inquietude, esp. in evening. — Fear of 
ghosts in evening; dares not be alone, — Hasty, irritable, and quarrelsome 
humour, esp. in morning. — Oppression, with much weeping. — Loss of ideas, 
— Difficulty in meditating. — ^Vanishing of thought on reflection. — Obtuseness 
of intellect. 

2 . Head. — ^Weakness, giddiness, and confusion of head ; as if intoxi- 
cated. — Whirling vertigo, to such an extent as to cause falling, when passing 
from a room into open air. — Headache with anxiety and weakness during a 
meal. — Semilateral headache above eye, with dejection and desire to weep. — 
Compression and expansive pressure in sinciput and vertex. — Sensation of 
puffiness all over head (as if head were too large and distended). — Tearing 
and pressure in temples. — Blows in occiput. — Rush of blood to head. — Press- 
ing headache (neuralgic) in forehead and on vertex, as if pressed asunder, 
with pressure on eyeballs and sleepiness. — Headache with nausea and sleepi- 
ness. — ^The headache is induced or < by a change of temperature. — ^The 
headache, for the most part, appears when passing from a hot to a cold jjlace, 
and vice versa, — Crawling, creeping, or burning-sticking in scalp.'^ 

3. Eyes. — Itching in eyes. — Aching in eyeballs. — Pressure in eyes. — 
Balls sore on moving them. — Pupils insensible. — Burning, soreness, and 
smarting in lids, — Smarting and burning pain in canthi, as from excoriation. 
— Smarting and sore feeling in r. outer canthus. — Smarting in eyes as from 
smoke. — Mist before eyes. — Nyctalopia. — Inflammation of eyes and lachry- 
mation. 

4. Ears. — Shootings in ears, esp. in evening. — Cramp-like sensation in 
and on ears. 

5. N ose. — ^Troublesome and painful tingling in nose. — N ose red, swollen, 
and inflamed, with tensive pain and many scabs in interior. — Hay-fever. — 
Obstruction of nose, esp. in a room, with pain as from excoriation. — Copious 
discharge of viscid mucus from nose. — Blood flows from nose. — Internal 
tingling and upward pressure. 

6. Face. — (Dry) heat in face, with bright redness of cheeks. — Vesicular 
eruption on face as from a burn ; smarts as if scalded ; eruption in clusters. 
— Tingling in face, principally in chin and nose. — Spasmodic and whirling 
neuralgic pains in face and jaws.—Crarnps (spasms) in lips. 

8. Mouth. — Toothache on waking in morning. — Incisive pains in molars 



RANUNCULUS BULBOSUS 


949 

as if being torn out. — ^Accumulation of much water in mouth. — Salivation. — 
White saliva with metallic taste (like copper). 

9. Throat.— Accumulation of much (tough) mucus in throat.— Spas- 
. modic sensation, of something which ascends oesophagus and passes into 
throat. — Inflammatory burning pains (scraping burning) in throat and palate. 

10 . Appetite. — Mawkish, sweetish taste, or taste of a sour bitterness. — 
Butter tastes too sweet. — Bitter, empyreumatic taste while eating, or after 
having eaten dry food. — Thirst augmented in afternoon. — Feeling of hunger 
arid rumbling in stomach early in morning. 

11. Stomach. — Frequent risings. — Spasmodic hiccough. — Frequent 
nausea in afternoon or evening, sometimes with headache. — Pains in stomach. 
—Pressure on scrobiculus. — Pain as from excoriation and burning sensation 
in pit of stomach, as also in cardiac orifice of stomach, esp. when the parts 
are touched. — (Inflammation of stomach.) 

12. Abdomen. — Contusive pain in hypochondria, sometimes when 
touched ; evenings ; pain in back and ill-humour. — Pain as from excoriation 
in 1. hypochondrium, principally on moving the trunk. — Lancinations (stitches) 
in hepatic region, arresting the breathing, with stitches and pressure on top 
of r. shoulder. — Stitches in 1. side of abdomen. — Pinching colic, sometimes 
alternating with pain in chest. — Immediately after eating violent stitches from 
1. lumbar region transversely through abdomen, esp. below umbilicus and 
towards r. groin. — Intestines painful when abdomen pressed upon ; pains as 
from subcutaneous ulceration. — PuLsations in 1. hypochondrium. — Dull pains 
in abdomen, with sensibility of intestines during a walk. — Pinching (colic) 
pains in abdomen (sometimes alternating with pains in cliest), with rotatory 
movements, and a sensation, on external pressure, as if contents of abdomen 
were bruised and ulcerated. — Burning pain in abdomen as from excoriation, 
as in chronic inflammation. — Frequent expulsion of very fetid flatus. 

13. Stool. — Slow and hard evacuations. — Frequent, easy, and profuse 
evaQiptions ; natural stool in afternoon. 

14. Urmary Organs. — Frequent urging to urinate.— The scanty urine 
soon becomes turbid and cloudy. — Dysuria. — Ulcers in bladder. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Frequent erections towards morning and 
dizziness in head. — Emissions towards morning. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Acrid and gnawing leucorrhoea. — 
Ovarian neuralgia always excited by atmospheric changes. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Short and obstructed respiration, with 
oppression of chest, as after grief or vexation, with want to take a full inspira- 
tion and to weep much. 

18. Chest. — Aching in chest. — Rheumatic pain in cliest, or pain as of 
subcutaneous ulceration. — (Rheumatism of either side of chest with pains in 
circumscribed areas. — Pain with some constriction of entire chest, with some 
bronchial catarrh in an old gouty subject. — Rheumatism of 1. chest which sets 
in suddenly, < on inspiration, with headache over 1. eye and in vertex. — 
R. T. C.)— Burning pressure on chest. — Lancinations in chest and in r. side 
of chest, frequently deeply seated, and extending to liver. — Painful ex- 
ternal sensibility of lower parts of chest and of epigastrium. — Painful 
sensibility of all the external parts of chest, intercostal muscles, pleura, &c., 
which manifests itself or is < esp. by movement, touch, and stretching the 



950 


RANUNCULUS BULBOSUS 


body. — Pain in chest as from adhesion of pleura. — ^Adhesion of the lungs 
after inflammation). — Immediately she goes out of doors a sensation as if she 
had cold wet cloths applied to three different parts of front of chest, viz., both 
infraclavicular fossae and just under 1. breast ; sensation remains as long as she • 
is out, and disappears as soon as she re-enters the house ; prevents conversa- 
tion while out (from a fall two years before). — ^Acute pain principally in 
shoulder, axilla, and breast, so severe in breast she dreaded cancer. 

20 . Back. — Contusive rheumatic pains in whole trunk and between 
shoulder-blades. — Pain along whole inner edge of 1 . scapula, at times extend- 
ing behind inferior angle and through 1. chest. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Spasmodic (rheumatic) tearing, shooting, and jerk- 
ing pains in arm (stitches in the arms and hands). — While writing he feels 
sudden tearings (stitches, jcrkings ?) in r. forearm and between thumb and 
index finger. — Rheumatic pain in both elbow and shoulder-joints early in 
morning. — (Chronic stiffness of r. wrist with shoots up arm and down to 
thumb, which is also stiff. — R. T. C.) — Visible spasmodic contraction in 
region of styloid process of 1 . ulna. — Coldness of hands. — Itching in hands 
and fingers. — Crawling in single parts of fingers. — Tetters on palms of hands. 
— Tingling in fingers. — Tetters, blisters, and ulcers on fingers ; penetrating 
down to flexor tendons. — Shining red, loose swelling of fingers, with inflamma- 
tion, &c., changing to flat, spreading ulcers. — Cauliflower-like wart pn outer 
side of terminal phalanx of r. thumb. — Pain under nail of r. index finger as 
from a splinter. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Drawing pains along thighs (extending down- 
wards). — Spasmodic, piercing pains, and itching in middle of thighs. — Great 
weakness in lower limbs when walking, forenoons. — Cr^acking in knee-joints. 
— Painful stiffness in joints of feet. — Cramps in instep. — Pulsative lancinations 
in heels ( 1 ., when standing). — Pain in heels as if pinched by boots (when boots 
were off). — Violent stitches in 1 . fourth toe. — Sore pain and stitches in tips of 
toes ; between the toes ; on dorsa of toes. — Pains as from excoriatioa and 
lancinations in toes. — Corns sensitive to touch, smart or burn, 

24. Generalities. — [Biting or pungent pain ; pain as if parts would burst, 
were pressed or pushed asunder. — Waking too early in morning. — Affections 
of external angles of eyes ; hypochondrium, particularly about spleen ; lower 
region of abdomen ; palms of hands. — Contusive pains ; shootings, or tearing, 
rheumatic, and arthritic pains in limbs and muscles. — Jerking of muscles. — 
Shocks throughout the body. — Epileptic fits. — (Indurations. — Icteric affec- 
tions.) — Pains excited by touch, movement, stretching, or change of position, 
esp. in trunk and extremities. — Many symptoms appear also on a change of 
temperature, also in morning and evening, and after a meal. — < On entering 
a cold place ; from spirituous liquors ; with drunkards ; when stretching the 
limbs ; at changes of temperature, whether from hot to cold, or vice versa , — 
H. N. G.]— Lassitude, and pain as from having been beaten, in all the limbs. — 
Trembling in limbs (with dyspnoea) after the slightest fit of passion. — Sudden 
weakness, as if about to faint, — Fainting with the pains in stomach. 

25. Skin. — Frequent and violent itching in different parts of skin. — Lan- 
cinations in skin, which change to itching. — ^Vesicular eruptions, like blisters^ 
after a burn. — Deep blue vesicles, small, deep, transparent, thickly grouped/ 
with burning itching and hard and tettery scabs. — Horny excrescences. — 



RANUNCULUS FICARIA 


95 ^ 


Flat, corrosive ulcers, with sharp edges, and burning and lancinating itchmg. 
— Callous and other excrescences. — ^Tetters over whole body. — Chilblains ; of 
amputated stump of leg. 

26. Sleep. — Inclination to sleep during the day. — Retarded sleep and 
nocturnal sleeplessness, frequently from oppression of chest (dyspnoea), heat, 
and ebullition of blood, but mostly without any assignable cause. — Frequent 
awakening in night and remaining long awake. — Waking early in morning. — 
Inability to remain lying on side. — Anxious dreams of danger (on the water), 
of vivid and lascivious dreams. 

27. Fever.--«Pulse : full, hard, and rapid in the evening ; slower in the 
morning. — Attacks of fever after a meal or in evening, characterised princi- 
pally by chilliness, with pains in abdomen and other distressing symptoms. — 
Heat in head, with coldness in hands. — Shivering in evening, with heat in 
face. — He feels the chilliness, esp. in the open air, and on the well-covered 
chest, — The fever consists only of a chill. — Heat in evening, esp. on face ; 
frequently only on r. side, with cold hands (and feet). — Heat, with internal 
chill at same time. — Perspiration very scanty, and only in morning on waking. 


Ranunculus Ficaria. 

Ficaria ranunculoides. Scrophularia minor. Lesser Celandine. Pile- 
wort. N, 0 , Ranunculaceae. Tincture of whole fresh plant. 

Clinical.— Haemorrhoids. 

Charaoteristios. — The Lesser Celandine is not botanically 
related to the true Celandine, Chelidonium magus, or to the Figwart 
trib# (Scrqphularia), though it is named in the old books Scrophulana 
minor, R. ficaria is in all respects a true Crowfoot except that it has 
three -deciduous instead of live persistent sepals, and nine petals 
instead of five. It groweth in medows, by commonwaies, by 
ditches and trenches, and it is common everywhere, in moist and 
dankish places. It cometh forth about the Calends of March, and 
floureth a little after : it beginneth to fade away in April, it is quite 
gone in May, afterwards it is hard to be found, yea scarcely the root” 
(Gerarde). Gerarde’s cut of the plant shows whence the idea of its 
use in piles was derived — the cluster of small tubers growing around 
the crown of the root bears a striking resemblance to a bunch of piles. 
Sir J. Sawyer, of Birmingham, has recently (Chem, & Drug., May 25th, 
1901) confirmed the old signaturists in these observations. He has 
successfully used an ointment prepared by macerating in lard at 100° F., 
for twenty-four hours, the whole plant, gathered when in bloom, and 
cut up. The proportions are one part of the plant to three of lard. 
Homoeopaths would do well to give it internally at the same time. 



952 


RANUNCULUS GLACIALIS 


Ranunculus Flammula. 

Ranunculus flammula. N, 0 . Ranunculaceae. Tincture of whole 

plant. 

Clinical.— Ulceration. 

Characteristics. — i?. flam, has produced gangrene of the ai'm 
down to tendons and bone, in the case of a female, fuom applying the 
plant to the wrist. It produces in horses who eat much of it 
distension of abdomen, and inflammation and gangrene of abdominal 
organs. But (according to Die. des Sc. Med.^ quoted by Jahr) it is only 
hurtful to horses if eaten in excess ; it promotes digestion when eaten 
moderately. 


Ranunculus Glacialis. 


R. glacialis. Carlina or Cacline (mountaineers of Viq). ,N.^ 0 . 

Ranunculaceae. Tincture of whole plant. 

Clinical.— Apoplexy. Cerebellum, pain in. Dyspnoea. Headache. Night-sweat. 
Thighs, sweat on. 

Characteristics. — Dr. Codde, of Spoleto, proved the 9 tincture, and 
3rd and 9th dilutions of this plant. It produced an dnormous weight in 
the head with vertigo and feeling as if apoplexy were impending, > 
by Coffee ; a right-sided early morning headache > by rising ; dyspnoea 
< lying down, and compression of chest ; intolerance of weight of 
coverlet (the < by touch and pressure of R. bulb.) ; ODldnefSS of 
thighs ; general copious night-sweat, especially abundant on thighs. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Towards 9.30 a.m., when walking in open air, enormous 
weight in head, vertigo ; as if seized with incipient apoplexy ; > cafi au lait. 
— Behind head in region of cerebellum, sense of tension. — Just before day- 
break, headache, < r. side, ceased on getting up. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — ^When lying in bed breathing became 
difficult. 

18. Chest. — On turning in bed, internal pain in infero-posterior chest. — 
Compression in whole chest, evening.— A little before midnight could not 
endure coverlet on chest. — Stitches r. chest. 

26. Sleep. — Sleeplessness at night. — Broken sleep. 

27. Fever. — Coldness, even on thighs. — General and copious nocturnal 
sweat, < on thighs.— At daybreak, slight general sweat. 



RANUNCULUS REPENS 


953 


Ranunculus Repens. 

Ranunculus repens. Creeping Buttercup. AT. 0. Ranunculaceae. 

Tincture of whole plant. 

Clinioal.'-Back, pulsation in. Eyes, smarting of ; inflammation of. (Feet, 
weakness of.) Sleep, short but refreshing. 

Gharaoteriatios.— Franz reports a number of symptoms ex- 
perienced from preparing the juice of this plant. The symptom of 
phantasmagoria appears in brackets as though there were a doubt 
about it, and I therefore leave it so. There is quoted in Jahr an 
account of the effects of eating R, rep, observed in a flock of sheep. 
Several fell down as if struck by lightning ; eyes rolled ; breathing 
hurried. Some reeled and died with their heads bent towards left 
groin. Mucous membranes of eyes injected ; mouth dry ; abdomen 
slightly distended ; ruminations ceased. Some raised themselves, 
reeled, fell down again, bleated piteously ; most were in profound 
coma. Bleeding < ; ether in milk gave much >. Great weakness in 
feet remained behind. R. rep. has furrowed flower-stalks like R. bulb,^ 
but it has a spreading calyx and creeping scions. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind,— (In, evening, in bed, he dreams while yet awake that he is 
in a large city, and sees well-dressed people, masquerades, Turks, &c.) — 
Profound coma (sheep). 

2. Head. — Evening in bed, crawling sensation on forehead and region 
of bait, > sitting up. 

3. . Eyes, — Smarting in eyes ; profuse lachrymation. — Eyes rolled ; 
conjunctiva injected (sheep). 

8. Mouth. — Mouth dry (sheep). 

12 . Abdomen, — Abdomen shgthly distended (sheep). — Reeled and died 
with heads bent towards 1. groin (sheep). 

20. Back, — Evening in bed, beating like full, strong pulsation in sacral 
region. 

23. .Lower Limbs.— Great weakness of feet remained behind (sheep). 

24. Generalities. — Fell as if struck by lightning (sheep). — Died with 
heads bent towards 1. groin (sheep).— Raised themselves, reeled, fell again, 
bleated piteously (sheep). 

26. Sleep.— Wide awake and feeling extremely well in morning, though 
he slept only a few hours. 



954 


RANUNCULUS SCELERATUS 


Rannnculus Sceleratus. 

.Ranunculus sceleratus. Marsh crowfoot. Celery-leaved crowfoot. 

N, O. Ranunculaceae, Tincture of whole plant. 

ClinicaL—Aneurism. Anus, itching in. Chesty sternum^ pain behind. Corns. 
Coryza. Diphtheria. Earache. Glossitis. Gout. Haemorrhoids. Herpes ; zoster. 
Livery pain tn. Neuralgia. Nose, ulceration of. Pemphigus. Quinsy. Sternum, 
pains in. Stomatitis. Toes, affections of. TonguCy pechngy mapped, Varicosis. 

ChaPaoteristios. — The best-known characteristic of R, sc, (which 
is a well-proved drug) is the mapped or peeled tongue, and when 
this is associated with smarting, burning, and rawness R, $c, will be 
the remedy. R, sc, has the acridity of all the Ranunculi, causing 
burning in mouth, throat, stomach, chest, urethra, and other parts. 
It causes blisters on the skin which leave a raw surface with acrid 
discharge. It has cured pemphigus in a three-months old infant, with 
continual thirst, weak, intermitting pulse, trembling, with anxious 
features. After Ars, 4 had caused improvement, R, sc, 3 healed up the 
resulting ulcers. External sensitiveness is a leading feature of R, sc., 
especially of region of chest and sternum. These symptoms with 
others have led to the cure of many chest affections, induding 
aneurism. A leading Concomitant of R, sc, is arrest of breathing ; 
pains in liver, spleen, chest, or heart, < on deep inspiration and 
associated with external soreness calls for R, sc. Gnawing and boring 
are common sensations with the remedy, and most of the symptoms 
are right-sided ; but there is one left-side symptom that is peculiar : 
continual gnawing in left palm. The right toes, especially the right 
big toe, are the seat of many acute pains, giving the remedy a high 
place in acute attacks of gout, and also painful corns. AmoM the 
Sensations of R, sc, are : As if head were too full and too laflge. "^s if 
face covered with cobwebs (this proved a keynote in a ’case of 
aneurism which was much relieved by R, sc,Y As if a plug were 
lodged in umbilicus. Pressure as from a dull instrument. As if 
diarrhoea would set in. As of a needle thrust deep into big toe. 
With pains in stomach there is fainting. Convulsive twitches of 
limbs. The effects of R. sc. (which German shepherds call cold 
fire on horned cattle is : Loss of appetite ; trembling and 
shivering; distention of abdominal veins. A dog poisoned with it 
became anxious, howled, tossed about, bent double, was very restless 
at night. He was killed, and after death the stomach was found 
contracted, inflamed in several parts, surface corroded ; papillae 
prominent ; swelling, pale redness and contraction of pylorus. 
Mahoney {M, A,, xxvi. no) cured with R, sc, 3 in an aged woman 
subject to gout aching in dorsa of feet, especially the right, with 
wakefulness at night. K, ca, 30 had previously removed pain passing 
downward over the glutei. The symptoms are : < By touch ; 
pressure ; blow. < By motion ; deep inspiration ; walking ; letting 
limb hang down. < Evening ; after midnight ; morxiing. < In 
open air. < After a meal. 



RANUNCULUS SCELERATUS 


955 


Relations. — Antidoted by : Puls. Wine and Coflee antidote only 
partially. The ulcers were somewhat relieved by Peruvian Balsam. 
Follows well : Ars. in pemphigus. Followed well by : Lach. in diph- 
theria with denuded tongue. Compare : R. bulb. (R. sc. more, irritative). 
Headache, gnawing in small spot at vertex, Puls. Mapped tongue, 
Nat. m., Ars., Rhus, Tarax. sc. has more burning and rawness 
than any). Cobweb sensation, Aim., Bar. c., Bor., Bro., Bry., Calc., 

Con., Graph., Mag. c. 

% 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Indolence, and aversion to (mental) labour, in the morning. 
— Sadness and melancholy in the evening. 

2. Head. — Vertigo, with loss of consciousness. — Headache, as if head 
were compressed in a vice. — Gnawing, drawing, spasmodic, dull pressure, 
often affecting only a very small spot on vertex (or temples). — Compressive 
and expansive pressure in temples. — Heaviness and sensation of fulness in 
head, which seems to be swollen and increased in size. — Contraction of 
integuments of head. — Smarting and itching in scalp. 

3. Eyes. — Pain in eyes on moving eyeballs quickly. — Biting- 
gn^iwi^^g in eyes and corners of eyes. — Frequent aching (painful pressing) in 
eyeballs. — Smarting in canthi, from time to time. — Eyes convulsed. — 
Lachrymation. 

4. Ears. — Otalgia (r. ear), with pressure (or gnawing pain) in head, 
and drawing in teeth. — Drawing, shooting, and boring at exterior of 
auditory duct. 

5. Nose. — Smarting and tingling in nose, — Pricking in point of nose. — 
Frequent sneezing. — Much serous mucus in nose. — Ulcers or large sores on r. 
side of nose. 

^ Fjee. — Face as if covered with cobwebs. — Drawing in face, with a 
sensation of coldness. — Spasmodic twitchings in facial muscles and extremities, 
risus sardonicus. — Sensation of quivering round commissures of lips, and 
lower lip. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache, with shooting pains, and bluntness of teeth. — 
Jerking and shooting drawings in teeth. — Red and painful swelling of gums, 
which bleed easily. 

8. Mouth. — Dryness of mouth. — Frothy salivation.— Tongue coated 
white. — Shooting in tip of tongue. — Inflammation of tongue, with burning 
sensation, and redness. — Desquamation and rhagades on^-tonguc. 

9. Throat. — Contraction, with choking in throat', < by eating bread. 
— Burning sensation in throat. — Scraping in throat. — Swelling of tonsils, with 
lancinations. — Smarting and shootings in gullet. 

10. Appetite. — Sweetish taste in the morning, with white and loaded 
tongue. — ^Anorexia. — Violent thirst with the fever-heat. 

u . Stomach.— Risings, with taste of the food, after a meal.— Frequent, 
empty risings. — Sour, rancid risings, in evening, — Nausea, esp. after midnight, 
or in morning, with inclination to vomit. — Pain in stomach, with fainting tits. 
—Violent pains in stomach, with uneasiness. — Sensation of fulness, of 
pressure, and of tension in epigastrium, < by external pressure, with < in 



956 


RANUNCULUS SCELERATUS 


the morning. —Constrictive pains in stomach. — Lancinations in epigastrium# 
— Pain as from excoriation, and burning sensation in epigastrium. — (Inflam- 
mation of stomach.) 

12. Abdomen.— Dull aching in hepatic region, < by taking a deep 
inspiration. — Lancinations in hepatic region.— Pressure and shootings in 
splenic region (in liver and kidneys), < by breathing deeply. — Shootings, 
shocks, and pressure in lumbar region. — Pains in abdomen, with syncope. — 
Dull pressure, as from a plug, or a sensation of twisting behind navel, at 
night, or in morning. — Spasmodic pains in abdomen.— Pinching and cutting 
in abdomen. — Jerks in abdomen (in abdominal integuments)'. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Itching, tickling, burning of anus. — Fine stitches 
into rectum.— Moisture in anus. — Itching and pressing-out sensation at anus, 
as if premonitory of haemorrhoids, < walking. — Great urging after a meal ; 
only flatus passes. — Retarded evacuations. — Frequent and urgent want to 
evacuate, with soft faeces. — Serous, fetid diarrhoea. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Strangury. — Burning in fore part of urethra a 
short time after urinating. — Tickling crawling at meatus. — Drops pass after 
urinating, wetting sheet. — Frequent desire. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Pullings in penis. — Lancinations in glans. 
— Smarting in scrotum. — Pollutions. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Small dry cough, seldom recurripg, ^nd 
without effort. — Obstructed and deep respiration. — Involuntary sighs. 

18. Chest. — Pain in chest as if beaten, with sensation of fatigue in that 
part, esp. in evening. — Oppressive pressure on chest. — Pinching and shootings 
in chest, and region of heart, sometimes with suvspended respiration, esp. in 
evening, or at night. — Stitches in chest and intercostal, muscles. — Gnawing 
behind sternum, which suspends respiration. — Painful .sensibility of exterior 
of chest, esp. of sternum. — Burning soreness behind xiphoid cartilage. — 
Painful drawing in pectoral muscles. — Constant pressure as of a dull instru- 
ment below r. false rib, < inspiration. — Painful sticking in r. chest-^sJ^ery 
painful pinching around 1. nipple. 

19. Heart. — Pressure as from a blunt piece of wood in region of heart. 
— Stitches in region of heart. — Sticking-contracting pinching in heart-region 
causing tightness of breath. 

20. Back. — Pain in loins, as if bruised or paralytic. — Pricking and 
tingling in back and chest. — Aching between scapulae. — Sudden violent jerks 
in loins during walk in open air, arresting breathing. 

21 . Limbs. — Gout in fingers and toes. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Soreness under r. arm in armpit. — Boring shootings 
in forearms, extending to fingers. — Gnawing in r. elbow-joint. — Stitch in 
elbow. — Boring in bones of hands. — Gnawings in palm. — Gnawing, boring, 
and shooting jerks in bones of fingers. — Swelling of fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Gnawing and boring throughout leg§ and feet, 
esp. in toes. — Gnawing pains in 1. heel, — Burning and smarting on dorsum of 
r. foot. — Jerking shootings, and tingling in great toes. — Sudden stitches in 
forepart of r. big toe as if needle thrust in deep, causing him to cry out.— 
Sudden stitches in r. big toe, passing into a burning. — Lancinations and 
burning pains in corns. 

24. Generalities. — Under this drug the symptoms usually appear on 



RAPHANUS 


957 


the r. side ; on crown of head ; toes. — Boring sensation ; gnawing pains in 
inner or outer parts ; prickling in outer parts. — < Evening ; before midnight. 
— (Arthritic affections.) — Piercing, gnawing, shooting, tingling pains, which 
manifest themselves, or are <, towards the evening. — Pressive and drawing 
pains. — Periodical affections. — Convulsive jerks (twitches of the limbs). — 
Syncope. — Fainting with the pains. 

25. Skin. — ^Vesicular eruptions, with acrid, thin, yellowish discharges. — 
Obstinate ulcers. — Itching, boring, biting, tingling, gnawing in various parts 
of body, now here, now there, < evening. — Pemphigus. — Large isolated 
blisters which bujst and leave ulcers. 

26. Sleep. — Sleeplessness after midnight, with anxiety, heat and thirst ; 
or with restlessness and tossing about. — Imperfect sleep after midnight ; wdth 
anxious, frightful dreams, of corpses, serpents, beetles, &c. — Early waking 
(3 a.m.), with prolonged watchfulness. 

27. Fever. — Pulse quick, full, but soft, with heat at night. — Chill and 
chilliness (shivering) during meals. — Heat in the evening in the room after 
walking in the open air. — Dry heat at night, with violent thirst and ebullition, 
mostly after midnight. — Waking after midnight, many nights in succession, 
with heat over whole body, violent thirst, pulse accelerated, full, soft. — Heat 
predominates. — Perspiration after the heat, towards morning, mostly on 
forehead. — Intermittent fever, after midnight; heat and violent thirst, with 
fuirj soft, quick pulse, followed by general perspiration, mostly on forehead. 


Raphanus. 

Raphanus sativus. Radish, (And R. raphanistrum. Wild Radish.) 
N. 0. Cruciferae. Tincture from fresh root immediately before 
flowering in spring. Tincture of whole fresh plant. 

Gliniioal . — Alcoholism. Amblyopia. Axilla, inflamed gland in. Breasts, pains 
beneath ; between. Catalepsy. Cough. Diarrhoea. Dysmenorrhoea. Emaciation. 
Epistaxis. Faintness. Fever. Flatulence. Flushings. Headache. Heart, palpita- 
tion of. Heel, pain in. Hernia. Hysteria. Insomnia. Lienteria. Liver, affec- 
tions of ; abscess of. Menorrhagia. Metrorrhagia. Myopia. Numbness, Nympho- 
mania. (Esophagus, affections of. Olecranon, pain in. Pemphigus. (Priapism.) 
Pregnancy, toothache of. Seborrhoea, Tonsillitis. Toothache. Yawning. 

Gharaoteristics. — Nusser proved both the Garden Radish and 
the Wild Radish (the former probably only a cultivated variety of the 
latter), and of the Garden Radish he took tinctures of the long, round, 
and black (the favourite in Germany) varieties, and ate the different 
radishes themselves. The Schema contains his symptoms, with others 
from effects of eating radishes ; and provings by Curie made on a 
woman with 15 th and 30 th dilutions. These provings developed many 
symptoms which have proved to be characteristics. Rap. affords a 
marked example of a common article of diet being at the same time a 
poison and a medicine. A patient of mine, a man, has these symptoms 
whenever he eats even a single radish : Burning sensation in epigas- 
trium, followed by hot eructations, lasting a whole day and ending in 



RAPHANUS 


958 

a headache.^^ Turnips {Brassica rapa) produce in him a similar 
effect, but in less degree. The leaves of Rap, are said to antidote 
its roots, and the arum root is said to antidote the effects of 
Radish leaves (Cooper). The hysterical, mental, and uterine sym- 
toms of Curie’s prover were very well marked ; a state approaching 
catalepsy was induced : On returning a little to herself she was 
unable to speak or stir.'' The ** globus " symptoms are as marked as 
with any other remedy : A number of balls ascend from abdomen to 
throat." A hot, foreign body goes up like a ball from uterus and 
stops at the beginning of the throaty where it feels like a ^morsel too large 
to be swallowed, thence descends to the stomach, causing a sensation 
of something hard to digest, leaving an empty sensation with hunger." 
Many of the symptoms of Rap. seem to make for the throat, and a case 
of mine bears on this. A man, 43, after taking Lyc. reported this condi- 
tion : “ Good deal of pain in back, sides, and body, < after eating. 
Cannot lie on either side. Very sinking ai^a.m. Bowels confined. Pass- 
ing wind after severe pain." Rap. 30 every three hours was prescribed. 
His next report, a week later, was this : “ He felt the first dose of Rap. 
lie at his throat all night ; it gradually passed down and the pains got 
better. After two or three days his water became thick like soap suds. 
[Turbid urine with yeast-like sediment is characteristic of Rap.] Can 
lie on sides better. Bowels less confined. Wind less." Rap. is.one of 
the most flatulent of remedies. Wind accumulates so that it almost 
stops the breathing. The most characteristic feature is when the 
flatus cannot be passed either up or down. Such a condition occur- 
ring after abdominal operations has been relieved by Rap. Many symp- 
toms, physical and mental, seemed to rise from the uterus, culminating 
in a very pronounced attack of nymphomania. With these was aver- 
sion to her own sex and to children, especially girls. Other mental 
symptoms were : Capricious manner, stupefaction, sadness, tears ; and 
this at times alternated with hopefulness. Brain excitement. JDne 
prover had sense of intoxication on waking in the morning.* Another 
felt intoxicated after dinner, though only water was drunk.. This 
should give Rap, a place in some forms of alcoholism. Extreme 
anxiety, with feeling of impending death. The following case from 
Allen’s Appendix is fairly typical of Rap. poisoning. A man ate freely 
of radishes. Thereafter he began to feel nausea and drawing pains, 
extending from sternum to middle of abdomen. This went on for 
about a fortnight, when at 7 p,m. on May 26th he began to feel very 
ill. The pains became <, and spread to back, but did not go lower 
than umbilicus. He took half an ounce of Castor oil ; during the 
night he became < ; pain still very severe. A 8 a.m. bowels relieved, 
when pain and nausea became < than ever and he was admitted to 
hospital, and soon after put in a warm bath. While in the bath he 
vomited dark, slimy matter. Vomiting went on till the 29th. Tym- 
panitic swelling and great (writhing and twisting) pain in region of 
ascending and transverse colon, and in left groin. Pain < by pres- 
sure. Small enema brought away lumps of faeces with > of pain 
and sickness. Convalescent, June 2nd. Among the Peculiar Symptoms 
of Rap. are : CEdema of lower eyelids. When she turns her eyes in 
the direction of the ear she feels a pain in the ear, temple, and parietal 



RAPHANUS 


959 


bone. Vertigo with loss of vision. Eyes filled with blood, sight lost. 
Loss of vision and hearing just before vomiting. Stopped sensation 
in ears. Teeth feel as if made of papier m^che. Appetite without 
hunger 4 a.m. in bed. Constant, violent thirst. (“ Woke between 3 
and 4 a.m. with headache and drank much water.”) “ Drinks more 
than he micturates.” Also “ Pains more severe when he drinks liquid.” 
Sensation as if she had put her cold feet into very hot water. Cough 
= jarring of head and chest ; seems to come from epigastrium ; can- 
not get low cough to loosen phlegm ; from laughing. Expectoration 
of a very large ^mount of tenacious white mucus from phaiynx and 
oesophagus with sensation of stricture in throat. On breathing, pain 
under breasts and in back. Heavy lump and coldness in centre of 
chest between mammae preventing sleep. Sensation of an iron band 
round waist. Sensation of stiffness. Numbness in hands ; in soles 
of feet and buttocks ; of the parts near the painful bones. Sensation 
of swelling of bones ; of hands, arms, eyes ; yet feet feel small. Swell- 
ing oi abdomen. Sensation of a hot foreign body like a ball going up 
from uterus to throat. Hot breath ; hot eructations. Sensation of a 
number of balls rising from abdomen to throat. Many symptoms 
ascend : Pain in vertebral column as if a foreign body passed through 
it from top to bottom and was stopped at certain points by obstacles 
caiising pain. Acute pains in coccyx ; sensation as if an abscess forming. 
Sensation as of an abscess in liver. Pressure in hypogastrium as if 
a hernia would protrude. Throbbings in the body that became 
lancinations. Chilliness along the back and posterior surfaces of 
arms. Icy cold knees. Feverish sensation as if a cold coming on. 
Many symptoms besides those of globus appear to have their seat in 
the oesophagus, including the pains in the back on swallowing. There 
are few remedies with a greater proportion of distinctive symptoms 
than Rap, — E. T. Blake reports {M, H. /?., xxxi. 7) two cases of sexual 
insomnia cured with Rap.^ one of which shows that Rap, has an 
influence T)n the male sexual sphere analogous to that it has on the 
female. A young man suffering from reflex epilepsy had had a 
generally adherent prepuce removed. Healing was delayed by furious 
priapism, which caused dragging at the sutures. Rap, 1 x given each 
night cured. Blake^s second case was in a woman of 40, with old 
pelvic troubles. Grig, had failed, and Plal. had helped only slightly. 
Rap, cured. The symptoms are < in night and morning on waking. 
< 3 to 4 a.m. < By touch (gland in axilla, abdomen, uterus — cannot 
bear touch of clothes ; pain in bones). < By jarring : jar of walking 
s= soreness and tenderness of bowels and brain. Cough =: painful 
shock in brain ; efforts to vomit ; pain in chest. Walking ss efforts to 
vomit ; pain in heel. Walking in open air > the symptoms. Lying 
down = nausea and faintness ; > the symptoms. Can only lie on 
back, ]^^tion < pain in belly. Throwing back head > pain in 
occiput. Laughing = cough. < By eating and drinking : but 
drinking > pain in chest. After breakfast, pain in heart. (Riding 
in carriage ss pain in heart.) Strangulation wlien she begins to eat or 
. drink. Cold water held in mouth > dryness of throat. Everything 
swallowed ss pain in back. Must keep mouth open in order to 
breathe j the air entering pains and burns. Epistaxis > (headache). 
Vomiting > (blindness and deafness). 



gSo 


RAPHANUS 


VielditionB,— Antidoted by : Copious draughts of cold water. (Milk 
and water < the pains in abdomen.) Follows well : Lyc. Botan*, 
Armor., Brassic., Cheiran., Thlasp. b. p,, Matthiol., Sinap. Cow- 
pare: In flatulence, Carb. v. Accumulation and retention of flatu- 
lence, Lyc. (Rap., flatus does not pass away ; bowels move, but no 
flatus passes). Pressure above root of nose, K. bi. Headache > 
by epistaxis, K. bi. Meli., Mill., Pso. Masturbation in females, 
Grat., Grig. Swallowing =s pain in back, Rhus, Globus, Ign., Asaf. 
Alternation of mental states, Ipec. < By jar. Bell., Nit. ac. < 3 to 
4 a.m., K. ca., K. bi., Thuj., Med. Extreme sensitiveness, K. iod. 
Sensitiveness to electric states, Rhod., Merc., Pho. Icy coldness of 
knees, Carb. v. Burning in tongue, Sang. Laughing = cough, Arg. n. 
Coughing jars head ; skin greasy, Bry., Nat. m. > Bending head back, 
Seneg. Uterine affections, Thlasp. b. p., Sep. As if intoxicated, 
Querc. Toothache in pregnancy, Rat., Mag. c. Sexual insomnia, 
K. bro. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Nymphomania with aversion to her own sex ; the touch of 
a woman's hand caused weariness, disgust, and fury. — Capricious mania, 
stupefaction with sadness and tears, alternating with hopefulness.— Excite- 
ment of brain ; sense of intoxication on waking; at dinner, though sfie only 
drank water.— Sadness, irrepressible tears, melancholy, and numbness.— 
Fatigue of mind and body ; loss of memory ; effort to pursue a train of 
thought as confusion of head.— Aversion to children, esp. to girls (in a 
woman). — Want of spirit, it seems to her as if she were dead, as if she could 
not bestir herself to drive away the flies that settle on her face. — Great 
anguish, with fear of death, which is believed to be so near that the patient 
desires religious consolations. 

2. Head. — Head, bewildered on awakening in morning, with dullpain 
(pressure) in forehead.— Vertigo : with dim sight; in evening, * heaJfeels 
tightly bandaged.— Headache, waking him from sleep ; 3 10 4 a.m.— Headache 
after dinner.— At ii a.m. violent rush of blood to head and chest, causing 
cough, preceded by burning.— Headache ; pressure on eyes from without 
inward, extending to behind ear.— When writing feels a shock in brain ; when 
sitting down suddenly, sensation in ears as when drowsy. — Headache and 
confusion in forehead and vertex in morning succeeded by flushes which end 
in coolness of whole surface. — Severe headache in temples, eyes, and root of 
nose.— Brain feels tender and .sore from least jar.— Violent pain in forehead.— 
Aching in (skin of) forehead, sometimes throughout night, or with confusion 
in head.— Aching (pressure) abc^vc eyes, with obscuration of sight, which dis- 
appears after a fit of vomiting.— Aching above root of nose.— Lancinating 
pains in vertex.— Tightness in skin of vertex.— Dull pain in occiput, > throw- 
ing head back.— Gnawing in occiput followed by numbness.— Sweit on head, 
after rising. 

3. Eyes. — Blue rings round eyes. — Eyes deeply sunken. — Redness of 
eyes.— (Edema of lower lid ; pupils slightly dilated.— Pricking in eyes ; heat 
when shutting them ; coldness when opening them.— Itching of 1. eye with ‘ 
deep stitches.— Coldness in 1. eye.— Eyes filled with blood, sight lost,— Sight 



RAPHANUS 961 ' 

stronger, sftid longer in a myopic patient. — Congestion with dim vision on 
awaking.— Pressure above eyes ; with loss of vision, > after vomiting. 

4 * Ears. — In 1. ear tearings and shootings, which seem to be in the 
bone, — Lancinations in r. ear. — Loss of sight and hearing just before vomiting, 
followed by vomiting with great effort. — Itching in concha of 1. ear, which is 
painful to the touch. 

5. Nose. — Nose pointed. — Epistaxis of deep red blood ; > head. — Dull 
pain in root of nose extending to occiput. — Pressure, as from a weight, on back 
of nose. — Breath feels burning hot in nose. — Smell as of bad oil burning, seems 
to come from interior of head or root of nose, where is a gnawing sensation as 
from a sore place. — Stoppage of nose. — Smell of horse-radish. — Frequent 
sneezing ; or at least frequent want to sneeze. 

6. Face. — Face, red, sombre. — Cheeks burn, are red ; whole head and 
face red.— Face disfigured, with pointed nose and yellow cheeks, or else 
with hollow eyes and livid complexion, so that the patient becomes alarmed 
at his own looks. — Face pale, with expression of anxiety, great feebleness, and 
much suffering. — Yellow complexion, csp. in morning, on rising. — 'fearing in 
r. malar bone ; and zygoma. — Gland of lower jaw hard and swollen. 

7. Teeth. — Lancinating toothache in ( 1 .) molars. — Incisors become loose; 
gums ulcerated. — Gnawing pains in teeth and gums ; teeth feel as if made of 
papjer mache. — Abscess on gums. — Gums turn black. — Gums feel as if 
separated ; painful, inflamed ; ulcerated. — Toothache < during pregnancy ; 
evening ; lying down ; > walking about. 

8. Mouth, — Tongue : white ; covered with a thick white coating. — 
Tongue pale and bluish red, with a deep furrow, and minute pale red spots in 
the centre (when the improvement commences).— Heat at root of tongue. — 
Frequent burning in fore part of tongue. — Must keep mouth open to breathe ; 
air entering = pain, burns as if everything was alive ; uvula swollen and red ; 
tongue rather white, red on edge. 

^ Throat. — Heat and burning in throat, at times, chiefly in tonsils, with 
lancinallons. — Swelling, redness and pain in tonsils, as if raw. — Accumulation 
of mucus in throat, as in bronchial catarrh, copious expectoration of white 
and very viscid mucus, which becomes detached from gullet and oesophagus 
in morning, after heavy sleep, with pain of excoriation in throat. 

10. Appetite, — Taste : of horse-radish ; mawkish ; bitter ; very disagree- 
able ; of pepper.—Voracious appetite, after eating feels smaller and less tight 
than before. — After dinner hollow, empty sensation ; her stays feel too large. 
— Appetite, without hunger, 4a.n1. in bed. — Anorexia. — Repugnance to food.' 
Repugnance to tobacco (in the case of one habituated to its use). — During the 
anorexia, longing for boiled milk. — Violent and constant ithirst. — Drank much 
more than he wanted. — Everything swallowed = pains in back. — Burning in 
oesophagus and chest. 

' II. Stomach. — Frequent eructations of air from stomach, having a 
putrid tastrf — Burning in epigastrum followed by hot eructations lasting whole 
day and ending with a headache (from eating a single radish). — Fits of nausea, 
as if about to faint, of such a kind that the patient is obliged to sit upright, 
being unable to lie down, although extremely weak. — Relaxation of stomach. 
— Inclination to vomit ; frequent, sometimes momentary ; with loss of sight 
and hearing, or with obscuration of sight, and dulness of hearing ; with regur- 
VOL. II. 62 



RAPHANUS 


962 

gitation of water and of mucus, which is sometimes streaked with blood ; 
when coughing, with pressure on chest, and regurgitation of acid, colourless 
mucus.— Vomiting : violent, of food ; of food, mingled with white mucus, 
sometimes with extreme nausea, great pressure on chest, and coldness ; of . 
mucus and of bile ; at first of a green and very bitter liquid, afterwards of 
clear water ; each time before vomiting, shuddering over back and arms ; 
heaving of the chest and coldness. — Black vomit. — Vomiting of faecal matter. 
— Pains in stomach, which urge continual eating. — Great pressure in stomach, 
and pit of stomach ; lancinations and pricking in those parts. 

12. Abdomen. — In hepatic region, lancinations, or ♦else aching, with 
pain of excoriation. — Violent pain in r. lobe of liver, like tightness. — Pinchings 
in abdomen, esp, in umbilical region, sometimes with shootings, and pressure 
at r. of navel. — ^Violent cuttings and lancinations in umbilical region, esp. on 
r. side, after breakfast. — Sensation of heat in abdomen, esp. in umbilical 
region. — Burning below navel. — Inflation and fulness of abdomen, followed 
by pinching, as if preceding a stool. — Borborygmi in abdomen, esp. at night, 
or else when about to vomit. — Emission of wind upwards and downwards, 
with odour of the medicament, esp. after drinking water. — No emission of 
wind takes place for a long time, either upwards or downwards (charac- 
teristic). — Abdomen greatly swollen, very hard, painful to pressure, esp. 
hypogastrium ; it seems she will choke with the swelling. — Great swelling of 
abdomen commencing at stomach. — In morning woke with cramping, sore 
pains in hypogastrium, distension and great tenderness, could not bear the 
clothes to touch her ; no < before nor > after stool ; pains constant, but 
much < on motion ; bowels sore and tender from least jar in walking. — Pains 
from incarcerated flatus, coming in paroxysms ; colon and other intestines 
project in little tympanitic tumours all over abdomen, which is flaccid in 
interval ; diarrhoea of yellow-brown fluid, with no passage of flatus by mouth 
or anus for a long time (22 days after ovariotomy). — When she leans on her 
side, loins immediately >, but at same time a pressing pain in IqweiJjowels 
and sensation as of a round body, impelled from beneath, rises suddenly and 
stops in throat, where it feels like a morsel too large to be swallowed ; thence 
it seemed to descend into stomach, where it = a sensation of something hard 
to digest and left an empty sensation with hunger and lancinations in lower 
abdomen ; each lancination = flushing as if blood rushed to eyes ; eyes 
burn ; dizziness ; ebullition of blood throughout body ; cold feet with 
pricking ; sensation as if she had put her cold feet into very hot water ; then 
great heat. — Pam in hypogastrium and kidneys as before menstruation ; lassi- 
tude in groins and top of thighs ; pain with heat in sides almost with every 
breath. — Feeling in hypogastrium as if a hernia would protrude. — Heat in 
lower abdomen, < 1 . 

13. Stool. — Frequent want to go to stool, esp. at noon. — Frequent, liquid 
and copious evacuations, sometimes ejected violently, of a yellowish brown ; 
or else, brown and frothy (characteristic).— Chronic diarrhoea, g^een, liquid, 
mingled with mucus and blood.— Loose stools of undigested substances.— 
Nine stools, mostly in morning, yellowish-brown liquid, rather copious. — 
Hard stool. — No stool. — Constipation ; bloating of abdomen ; no emission of 
gas up or down ; prompt satiety when eating ; sedentary life. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Tearing in region of kidneys, esp. on stooping. — 



RAPHANUS 


963 


Desire to urinate with pain in region of mons veneris, like a pressure in fundus 
of bladder. — Urine scanty ; or else more in quantity than the drink swallowed. 
— ^Want to urinate, with scanty emission ; it is necessary to wait a long time 
for the appearance of the urine.— Pale urine, of a dirty yellow, with sediment 
like yeast. — Turbid urine. — Burning in (forepart of) urethra when urinating. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — (Priapism.) — Drawing and tearing pains in 
r. testicle, afterwards in sole of r. foot also. 

^ 16. Female Sexual Organs. — Pain in uterus, in groins when touched 
and in abdomen; pain with inflammation; pains in bones, joints crack; 
weakness of vertebral column. — Sensation of a round foreign body, which 
rises from fundus of uterus and stops at entrance of throat. — Much pain in 
womb and groins ; much heat, urging to urinate every moment and inability 
to do so. — Burning pain starts from uterus, stops at pit of stomach, when it 
changes into nervous contraction and as sensation as if she would have con- 
vulsions. — Constant titillation in genitals, increasing till 1.30 a.m., when it 
abates with an abundant flow of mucus. — Nervous irritation of genitals, of 
clitoris, impelling to onanism. — Great flow of vaginal mucus without desire. 
— Every day between 3 and 4 p.m., a little blood flows from vagina, like rose- 
coloured water, and a very small quantity of it for about a minute, a little while 
after. — Menses very profuse and long-lasting ; blood in clots as in abortion. — 
Ahttndant menses from beginning of period ; flushes ascend from uterus to 
head, pass into loins and spread throughout the body, occasioning a sensation 
as if about to perspire ; pricking in legs and under soles ; vanishing of 
thought, faintness ; great difficulty in speaking ; these flushings occur three 
or four times an hour. — Nymphomania, beginning in morning, continuing 
unceasingly till ii p.m.; ceases after a very severe paroxysm, which lasts 2 ^ 
hours. — Great sexual excitement, violent desire. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Cough, with accumulation of mucus in 
throat, as in bronchial catarrh. — Breath of the smell of the medicament. — 
TieW’^jg ip larynx, as if in epiglottis. — Hoarseness. — Cough and hoarseness ; 
chest feels squeezed as if in a vice ; can scarcely breathe or speak. — Cough ; 
it seems as if something came from epigastrium j also when she laughs ; tick- 
ling at bottom of larynx, nevertheless it seems to start from epigastrium. — 
Sensation as if viscid mucus at bottom pf throat which cannot be coughed up ; 
cough does not seem to reach it. — After coughing, acid risings, as of bitter 
water. — Hawking =s irritation which excites a dry cough, producing a painful 
shock in head and sides of chest. — Sputa : sticky ; easy expectoration 
of round masses of mucus. — Uneasy respiration ; cannot continue in any 
position. — During expiration, pains between shoulders and in each .side of 
chest ; during inspiration only a tightness of chest. — Drawing pairs in whole 
chest, as if stretched fibres returned to their place which = great pain 
between shoulders and in each side of chest. — Uneasy breathing, oppression, 
some difficulty in swallowing, it seems as if water would return through the 
nose ; injrense burning in oesophagus and chest ; bad in morning ; > noon ; 
much < evening ; > walking in open air ; everything she swallows ss pain 
in back. — Strangulation when she begins to eat and drink. — Must keep mouth 
open in order to breathe. — Expired air feels very hot. 

iB. Chest. — Painful weariness in chest and under ribs. — When she 
breathes severe pain under breasts and in back. — Pain in chest gradually 



964 


RAPHANUS 


extending to spinal column.— -Pressure and sticking, extending from pit of 
stomach to pit of throat ; and to back ; < eating ; coughing ; somewhat > 
by drinking. — Heavy lump and coldness in centre of chest, between breasts, 
preventing sleep. — Acute sticking and lancinations in a small spot on large 
pectoral muscles externally near axilla. — Lancinations in chest on coughing 
or breathing deep. — Sticking in middle of sternum. — Pressure in middle of 
chest. — Rattling sensation in one or other side of chest almost under arms as 
if something about to be loosened, during respiration. — As if a band of iron 
round waist.— Superficial lancinations in or near sternum. — Frequent burning 
m r. chest. — Severe cramp in (clavicular portion of) sterho-cleido-mastoid 
muscle, followed by long-lasting pain. — ^Violent stitches in 1 . chest. — External 
heat in r. breast. — Little painless blisters on breasts. 

19. Heart and Pulse. — Violent, rapid beating (palpitation) of heart. — 
Pain at heart : in evening ; after breakfasting on chocolate ; and headache 
when riding in a carriage. — Pulse : accelerated ; feverish ; slow ; small, 
jumping. 

20. Back. — Numbness of muscles of neck near 1 . ear ; coldness in 1 . eye. 
— Cracking in nape of neck. — Painful lassitude throughout body, esp. back of 
head, neck, and loins. — Weak back, must wear stays as a support ; feels as if 
middle of back crushed, waist hollow, shoulders uneven ; could not keep her 
balance. — Tearing and tension along crest of r. scapula. — Spine we^k.>»,^in 
dorsal region ; in loins. — Acute pains in coccyx ; as if an abscess forming. — 
Pain in vertebral column as if a foreign body passed through it from top to 
bottom, and was stopped at certain points by some obstacle which ss pain in 
chest and any part it passes through. — Burning itching on the back. — Tearing 
in lumbar region, on stooping, pricking pains in 1. arm-pit. 

21. Limbs. — All bones crack, esp. in nape of neck. — Weakness and 
bruised feeling in limbs after a short walk, as after a long oni^. — Sensation in 
arms and legs as if garters too tight. — ^Trembling of limbs. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Tearing on top of 1 . shoulder. — Sticking p^yil^ in 1 . 
shoulder. — Gland in r. armpit, swollen and tender to touch. — A small, black 
mark appears on shoulder, and some reddish spots on chest. — Pulling and 
tearing in 1. arm and in joint, with weakness of elbow-joint as if carrying a 
heavy weight. — Burning lancinations in r. elbow-joint, as if in tendon of 
biceps. — Sticking in 1 . olecranon process. — Lancinations in 1 . elbow-joint, as 
if in the bone. — Weakness, tearing and pricking pains immediately above r. 
wrist. — (Transient) numbness in hands ; and slightly all over, sometimes in 
one place, sometimes in another. — Pain in fingers ; nails painful, esp. of 1 . 
hand ; pains under nails as of burns or pin stuck in. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Lancinations in 1. hip-joint, back of trochanter. — 
Numbness of buttock « r.). — Burning in small spot on thigh in upper outer 
part — Legs heavy, as if paralysed ; knees weak as if they would be dislocated. 
—Tibia painful to touch ; burning on spot as if hot coal held near tibia.— 
Numbness of soles and buttocks. — Lancinations under soles, feet at^Jirst cold, 
later warm. — Itching lancination in r. sole. — ^Violent pains in heel when 
walking, > at rest, and esp. when boot off.— Corns began to pain.— Sensa- 
tion of paralysis of 1. leg on lying down.— Coldness of knees and feet, with 
disposition to sleep, head confused, dull pain in forehead, and inclination to 
vomit.— Cramp in calf, at night, in bed. — Tearing pains in side of r. foot,— 



RATANHIA 


965 


Lancinations and tingling in sole of r. foot.— -Redness and swelling of r. heel, 
with violent pinching pains on planting foot on the ground, and on walking ; 
afterwards a blister forms there, full of clear and reddish water, which 
disappears after getting up. 

24. Generalities. — Great lassitude and depression, sometimes with con- 
tusive pain in all limbs. — A child lies down during the day in consequence of 
feeling ill. — Perceptible emaciation. — Hysterical attack ; on returning to her- 
self is unable to speak ; pain like a hot ball rises from uterus to chest — A 
nhmber of balls seem to rise from abdomen to throat. — Hysterical attacks 
preceded by crampss starting from uterus to chest. — Sensitive to electricity of 
atmosphere, and it =s painful feeling and low spii its.— Sensation of swelling ; 
eyes, hands, and arms seem swollen, but feet appear smaller ; wrists feel as if 
lashed with a whip. — Numbness, heaviness, paralytic pains. — Pains in bones 
when touched ; numbness in parts near painful bones. 

25. Skin. — Skin, generally moist ; a burning sensation passes from one 
part to another ; odour of horse-radish from all parts of body. — Skin greasy. — 
Itching and heat of skin ; fever ; pimples under skin ; a plaister on leg draws 
out a tetter. — Itching of whole body ; scratching = burning. — Itching in 
different parts, esp. inner canthi, r. wrist, r. thigh, scrotum, anus, back, and 
scalp. — (Painless pemphigus. — Hansen.) 

1^6.^ Sleep. — Nervous yawning. — Inclination to sleep ; drowsiness, during 
nearly the whole day, with mumbling while dreaming. — Agitated sleep, with 
frequent awakening, cephalalgia, nausea, and pinching in umbilical region. — 
Sleep, with dreamy reveries. — Sleeplessness from ii p.m. to 2 a.m., after 
which agitated sleep, with confusion in head. — Coldness of knees and feet 
with disposition to sleep. — Sleep which terminates at 3 a.m., with uneasy 
dreams. — Awakening at 3 a.m., with violent shuddering of back and arms. — 
During sleep, copious perspiration, or else low whispering, as if in conversa- 
tion with friends, or quarrelling, — Lascivious dreams. 

27^ Fever. — Shuddering, esp. along back and at posterior surface of arms 
and feeCcUiefly Jifter drinking cold water.— Frequent shuddering with heat in 
interior of head, and over whole skin ; after the shuddering, internal heat, or 
else alternation of shuddering with heat. — ^Woke 3 a.m. with violent shivering 
over back and arms. — Icy coldness of knees and feet at night, preventing 
sleep. — Coldness, evening, in bed, with weakness of joints, esp. elbows, and 
followed by profuse sweat, — Internal coldness, with skin hot and moist, the 
patient constantly complains of cold, while the skin is constantly burning 
to the touch. — Sweat having the odour of the medicament (likewise the 
breath). — Profuse perspiration during sleep, esp. towards morning. 

Ratanhia. 

Rhatanyjftoot. Ratanhia. Mapato. Pumacuchu. The root of several 
species of Krameria, especially Krameria triandra. N, 0. Poly- 
galaceae (or Leguminosae according to some). Tincture of 
the root. 

Oliiiioal. — Anus^ fissure oj. Breath, offensive. Constipation. Diabetes. 
Dysentery. Dyspepsia, atonic. Epistaxis. Eyes^ pterygmm. Fissures. Gonorrhcea. 



966 


RATANHIA 


Haemorrhages. Haemorrhoids. Hiccough Hydrothorax. Infra-mammary pain. 
Itching. Metrorrhagia. Miscarriage. Nipples, fissures of. Pimples. Pleurisy. 
Scurvy. Snoring. Speech, aiTCsted. Stomach, distension of ; ulceration of. 
Throat, contraction of. Tinnitus. Worms. 

Charaoteristios. — Krameria triandra^ remarkable for its entire, 
obovate, acuminate leaves, covered on both sides with silky hair, is 
one of the species most known as yielding the Rhatany root of com- 
merce, but all the species (of Krameria)^ as far as known, are intensely 
astringent. In Peru an extract is made from this species which is a 
mild, easily assimilated astringent medicine, possessed of great 
power in passive, bloody or mucous discharges ; it acts as a tonic in 
weakness of digestive organs and muscular debility, and is even 
useful in intermittent and putrid fevers. It is also styptic and restores 
tone to relaxed parts, and when applied as plaisters is said to cure 
all kinds of ulcers. An infusion is used as a gargle and wash, and the 
powder forms with charcoal an excellent tooth-powder. The colour 
of the infusion of the root of the Krameria is blood-redj on which 
account advantage is taken of it to adulterate port wine ” {Treas, of 
BoL). Teste (who puts Rat. in his Sulphur group), writing of its pre- 
homoeopathic use, says, “There is perhaps no plant the properties 
of which have been so well indicated by chance as this. Used as an 
astringent and tonic, this root sometimes arrests passive hiEmorrlip^es 
{epistaxisy hcemoptystSy metrorrhagiay &c.). It was successfully used 
against scimyj mucous discharges, such as chronic catarrh of the 
bronchia, vagina, large intestines, &c., against various forms of incon- 
tinence of urine, chronic oedema of the skin. Dr. Tournel, who, no 
doubt, did not suspect that Ratan, produced abortion, had the happy 
idea of prescribing it as a tonic in cases of incipient miscarriage, and 
thus preventing that accident in delicate and nervous females who 
had never yet been able to go their full time.^^ All these uses are 
really homoeopathic, as is also the cure of a case of fissure of the 
rectum by Breton neau, whom Teste quotes from Trous^s'e^ttr and 
Pidoux : A lady suffered from constipation and fissure of rectum, 
which caused her horrible pains and had damaged her health. 
Bretonneau ordered a daily injection mixed with one-fourth of Rat,, 
and in a short time constipation and fissure were cured. Other like 
cases were cured ; and then the same treatment was given in cases 
of fissure without constipation, and again with the same success. 
The provings (Hartlaub and Trinks chiefly) bring out the keynotes of 
Rat, in rectal cases : “ Straining, stool so hard she cried out, with 
great protrusion of haemorrhoids ; followed for a long time by burning 
in anus,^^ The burning persisting for a long time after the stool is very 
characteristic of Rat,; and it occurs when the stool is diarrhoeic as 
well as hard. Burning also precedes and accompanies the stool. 
Another peculiarity in connection with the stool is a burstj^ng head- 
ache, which accompanies and follows a straining at st^l. Dry 
heat with sudden stitching like knife-stabs. Oozing at anus. Drop- 
ping of blood from anus. One patient cured by Rat, of fissure 
had > by application of hot water ; he sat in a sitz-bath as hot as 
he could endure ; the relief only lasted while in the bath. In con- 
nection with the rectal symptoms is an important head symptom: 



RATANHIA 


967 


** Pains in middle of forehead, as if brain would fall out/^ and 
a similar pain after stool. The head pains are also < on bend- 
ing forward. The eye symptoms are striking : burning, smarting, 
twitching of lids, obscured vision. This symptom has led to the cure 
of cases of pterygium : Inflammation of whole of eye ; a membrane 
seemed to extend to central point of eye, which i>urned. The old use 
of RaL in nose-bleed, scurvy, and as a tooth-powder are justified by 
the symptoms of the proving : Violent nose-bleed ; bleeding gums ; 
toothache < lying down. A curious symptom in the aching molars 
is a sensation ^^as if coldness rushed out of them. Toothache of 
pregnancy compelling the patient to get up at night and walk about. 
“ Tasteless water collects in mouth may meet another condition 
of pregnancy ; and Rat. both causes and prevents abortion, 
metrorrhagia and leucorrhoea. It also meets fissure of the breasts 
in nursing women, as well as fissure of the anus. Contractive sensa- 
tions {Rat. is astringent ’*) are numerous : in stomach ; groins ; anus ; 
eyes ; neck ; muscles ; throat ; painful spasmodic contraction of 
throat during which she could not speak a loud word.^’ Peculiar 
Sensations are : As if intoxicated. As if head in a vice. As of a white 
speck before eyes ; skin before eyes. As if coldness rushed out of 
molars. As if rectum and anus were all twisted up. As if splinters 
of. ..glass in rectum and anus. As if rectum protruded and then 
suddenly went back with a jerk. As if abdomen (and chest) cut 
to pieces. Movement as if something alive in abdomen. As of 
cobwebs about right side of mouth. Jerkings and quiverings. 
Eyelids feel stiff. Right side is most affected. — Cushing, who made 
a proving of Rat.^ says {Med. Cent, quoted H. R.j xi. 142) it caused 
great itching in the rectum ; and he has cured with it since nearly 
every case of pin-worms in his practice. In a woman, old and 
feeble, he cured with Rat. 3X internally, and a Rhatany rectal 
suppository each night, frequent discharges of mucus, blood and 
pus trdffi the bowels night and day with great pain and burning in 
rectum almost wholly preventing sleep. Cushing considers that, next 
to Sang, nii.^ Rat. meets more rectal cases than any other remedy. 
Rummel (quoted H, R.^ i. 140) relates the case of a servant girl who 
had rapid twitching of the lids of right eye to such an extent as to 
hinder her seeing. There seemed to be also a rotary motion of the 
ball. Bell, and Calc, failed to' relieve. Rat. 12 relieved quickly. The 
symptoms are : < By touch (teeth). Pressure > pain in chest. < 
Lying down ; > by motion. < Straining at stool ; sitting bent over 
(headache) ; stooping. Stepping = pain in ribs. Sj,tting =: weariness 
and heaviness in right thigh ; pain in right knfee and great toe. 
Bending arm < ; extending it >. Eating < ; emission of flatus >. 
After dinner, hiccough ; before dinner, abdominal distension. > 
Hot- water applications. > Open air; moving about in open air. 
< Night ; “ most symptoms come in evening, night and morning. 
They are > by exercise and in open air, very much < by uneasi- 
ness of mind*^ (Teste). 

Relations. — Follows well: Sul., Bovis, Sep. in uterine affections 
(Teste). Compare : Botan. ; pleurisy, Seneg. Fissure of anus. 
Nit. ac. Anal symptoms, Sul., Ir. v., Canth., Pseon., Graph. (Graph. 



RATANHIA 


968 

is nearest, but has not the constriction of Rat). Splinters of glass in 
rectum, Thu. (Sticks, -^sc. h.). Pain in head from straining at stool, 
Indm., Pul., Sil. Hiccough, Cycl. Burning on tongue, Rap. Ran. s., 
Sang. Toothache of pregnancy, Rap., Mg. c., Cham. Alive sensation. 
Croc., Thu. Cobweb sensation, Ran. s., Bar. c. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind,— Irritable, peevish, and quarrelsome humour. — ApprehensiVfe 
depression when alone, > in company. — Woke with a start, 2 a.m., with 
trembling apprehension and fear — Changeable mind. 

2. Head. — Dulness of head as if intoxicated. — Bruised pain in small 
spots on head. — Jerking in small spot r. temple. — Pains in head, as if cranium 
were about to burst, esp. when sitting with body bent forwards. — Long-lasting 
headache as if screwed in a vice. — ^Jerking, smarting, and shooting in head. 
— Congestion in head, with heat and heaviness. — Dull, deep stitches on 
vertex. — Painful tearing and burning on vertex, even at night, > in open 
air, during menses. — Pain in middle of forehead, as if brain w^ould fall out 
while straining at stool. — Pains in head as if it would burst after stool. — 
Tearing from occiput to vertex. — Sensation as if scalp from root of nose to 
vertex were stretched. — Stiff feeling in forehead < knitting brows. — Itching 
of scalp not > by scratching. — Itching 1 . occiput, where small glandular 
swellings were found. 

3. Eyes. — Pains in eyes as if compressed in a vice, and could not 
be moved. — Sensation in r. eye as if screwed in, or as if there were an 
impediment so that it could not be moved, still she could move it easily. — 
Contractions and burning sensation in eyes, esp. in evening. — Inflammation of 
sclerotica ; a membrane seemed to extend to central point of eye that burned. 
— Sensation as if a cuticle were placed before eyes. — Agglutination of eyes 
at night, and lachrymation in morning. — Jerks and quivering of eyes and 
eyelids. — Twitching in r. eye and r. upper eyelid. — Stiffness of Spjer lids 
with soreness of upper tarsal edges. — White spot before eye, which obstructs 
the sight (in evening, by candle-light, with constant urging to wipe the eyes, 
and > after wiping). — ^Vision dim for distant objects. — Myopia. 

4. Ears. — Tearing in ears. — Itching and shooting in ear. — Violent 
stitch in r. ear ; chirping in r. ear ; crawling as if insect in r. ear. — Nocturnal 
tinkling, and ringing in ears. 

5. Nose. — Itching in nose. — Violent itching on tip of nose > by 
rubbing. — Nostrils inflamed and scabby, with burning sensation. — Epis- 
taxis.— Violent nose-bleed, three times a day, for five days in succession. 
— Dryness of nose, with frequent sneezing. — Dry coryza, with complete 
stoppage of nose. 

6. Face. — Heat in face. — Tearing pain in face and jaw bones. — ^Violent 
tearing in 1. malar bone, evenings.— -Sensation of cobwebs above r. side of 
mouth.— Tearing in inner surface of lips in a small spot.— Tearing in 1. side 
of lower jaw and corresponding teeth.— Burning vesicles on the red part of 
upper lip. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache in evening, esp. after lying down (compelling 
one to rise and walk about) ; or in morning, generally with tearing or jerking, 



RAT HI A 


969 


or at times with digging pains,— Pulsative pain in teeth.— Bleeding of teeth, 
— Painful sensation of coldness and elongation in the molars, and as if cold- 
ness rushed out of them. — (Violent pain in one 1 . upper incisor, which is 
painful to the touch.)— Acid blood from gums on sucking them. — Burning at 
tip of tongue. 

8. Mouth. — Dryness of mouth at night. — Tensibn and burning sen- 
sation on tongue. — Tasteless water collects in mouth. — Breath offensive. 

9. Throat. — Sore throat, generally felt during empty deglutition, — 
Paihful spasmodic contraction in throat, which stops the voice (unable to 
speak a loud word).* 

10. Appetite. — Mawkish taste in morning, in bed. — Thirst ; in evening. 
— Anorexia, with dislike to food and drink. — Constant desire to eat. — Risings, 
with taste of food ; empty. 

11. Stomach. — ^Violent hiccough, which causes pain in stomach. — Long- 
continued hiccough after dinner. — Nausea and disgust, esp. at night (i a.m.), 
with retelling and vomiting of food (> in open air). — Vomiting : of water ; 
of mucus streaked with blood. — Pains as from ulceration in stomach. — 
Excessive distension of stomach. — Stomach feels too full. — Digestion more 
difficult. — Rolling and constriction in stomach. — Painful constriction of 
stomach, which is .sometimes removed by risings. — Sensation in stomach, and 
above s£robiculus, as if abdomen had been cut to pieces, < deep breathing. 
— Heat and burning sensation in stomach and epigastrium. — Sudden painful 
bursting in pit of stomach. 

12 . Abdomen.— Repeated violent sticking in r. (and 1.) hypochondrium. 
— Pullings, and a sensation of coldness, in umbilical region. — Pinchings in 
«ibdomen, and sides of abdomen, sometimes with a burning sensation. — 
Movements in sides of abdomen as of something alive. — Shootings, 
pinchings, and contraction of groins. — Pinching in both groins > by 
emission of flatus, morning on waking. — Griping in lower abdomen, 
externally^ violent itching. — Constrictive pain in small spot in groins ; in 
r, groin. — STicking in groins, in afternoon while sitting. — Dragging down- 
ward in both groins, as before menses, with discharge of mucus from 
vagina. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Hard and broken evacuations, with urgent want 
to evacuate (with straining) and protrusion of haemorrhoidal excrescences. — 
Ineffectual want to evacuate, with troublesome pains in loins. — Straining; 
so hard that she cried out ; great protrusion of haemorrhoids, followed 
for a long time by burning in anus. — Sudden stitches. — Fissures ; excru- 
ciating pains immediately after stool, if costive. — Fissure with constriction. 
— Dry heat, with sudden stitches, like stabs with {fen-knife. — Oozing 
from anus. — Burning in anus before and during a diarrhoea- like stool. 
— Very urgent desire for normal stool. — Diarrhoea with evacuation of some 
drops of blood, accompanied by dragging in groins and rumbling in 
abdomen.-^tool yellow, diarrhoea-like, with burning like fire in anus. — 
Sensation as if splinters of glass sticking in anus and rectum in every 
direction ; as if rectum protruded and went back with a jerk ; > in hot sitz- 
^th. — Severe itching about anus.— Pin-worms. — Soft loose evacuations, 
preceded by cuttings, with burning pains in anus, before and after. — Thin, 
fetid stools, burning like fire in anus.— Sanguineous diarrhoea.— Discharge 



970 


RATANHIA 


of blood from the rectum, with or without stool — Pains in head, as if it would 
burst (during and) after evacuation. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Frequent and urgent want to urinate, with 
scanty emission. — More frequent and more abundant emission of urine, even 
at night.— Pale urine.— Urine more scanty, which soon deposits a cloud, and 
becomes turbid. — Burning in urethra (and root of penis) when urinating. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— (The chronic gonorrhoea became much 
worse.) — Burning in root of penis while urinating. — Itching in scrotum not 
> by scratching. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Pressure in groin«, as of a general 
bearing down towards genital organs, followed by leucorrhoea. — Leucorrhoea 
with itching in rectum and discharge of bloody mucus. — Catamenia too early 
and of too long duration, and too copious, with pains m abdomen and loins. 
— Metrorrhagia. — Miscarriage. — Uterine pains following retrocession of 
eruption on loins. — Menses suppressed, with swelling of abdomen and 
breasts, simulating a pregnancy of several months, accompanied by profuse 
leucorrhoea and constant pain in kidneys. — Menses delayed. — Fissure of 
nipples in nursing women. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Dry cough, with tickling in larynx, and 
pain of ulceration in chest. — Some tight mucus evacuated with great 
difficulty. 

18. Chest. — Pressure at chest on the least exertion, with sTiortness 
of breath. — Violent pressure in chest as from a stone, with short breath, 
on slight exertion. — Rush of blood and heat to chest, with difficult breathing. 
— Ulcerative pain in chest during and after coughing. — Burning stitch in last 
ribs near back on stepping. — Pain as if cut to pieces in small spot in upper 
sternum. — Coarse stitch as with a knife in sternum, felt at every breath on 
ascending steps, takes away breath. — As if pointed instrument sticking in 
sternum just above ensiform cartilage. — Sticking burning cutting beneath 
1 . chest, along one rib, evening. — Sticking and drawing along 1 . clavicle as 
if skin drawn in. — Stitch in 1 . ribs, so violent its: her to cry oiit^Several 
fine stitches beneath 1 . breast, on ribs, extending downward. — Throbbing- 
burning, cutting and ulcerative pains beneath 1. breast near pit of stomach < 
motion, > pressure. — Painful constriction in both sides of chest. — ^Shootings 
in chest, esp. when going up stairs, with obstructed respiration. — Conges- 
tion (of blood to) chest, with heat, and impeded respiration. 

IQ. Heart. — Sharp sticking in prsccordial region, rather external. — 
Pulse full 

20. Neck and Back. — Drawing tension, from nape of neck to the 
bottom of spine. — Stiffness in nape on turning head, > on violent motion. 
— Tearing in nape of neck, with heaviness of head. — Pain in loins and 
back, as if they had been beaten.— Bruised pain in whole spine. — Bruised 
pain in loins and hips, morning rising, > on motion. 

21. Limbs. — Tearing in limbs. — Contraction of flexor muscles. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Tearing in shoulder, arms, forearms, and wrists. — 
Spasmodic and painful contractions in elbows and fingers. — Pain in bend of 
elbow (r.) when flexed, > when extended. — Violent tearing in r. wrist,-;- 
Jerking, tearing, and stitches in thumbs. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Drawing and tearing in thighs, knees, legs, feet* and 



RHAMNUS CATHARTICUS 971 

toes.-— Tension and burning sensation in thighs.—Jerking in thighs, calves, 
and feet. — Tearing from 1 . tendo Achillis up, — Sprained pain in last joint of 
big toe, while sitting, > on motion. — Sticking and burning tearing in 1 . big 
toe. — ^Tickling on heels and soles. — ^Voluptuous itching in 1 . sole. 

24. Generalities.— "Weakness and prostration with anxiety and sweat 
over whole body.— Malaise with frequent yawning, reoeated and laboured 
attempts to draw a long breath and distressing constriction across chest. — 
Sore pain frequently mingled with fine sticking now in chest now in 
shoulders, &c.— Shooting pains, as from excoriation.— Jerking in different 
parts. — Haemorrhagic. 

25. Skin. — Sickly skin. — Small red and white pimples which do not 
suppurate, esp. between shoulders and on loins, remaining a long time. — 
Pimples; itching and burning after scratching. — Formication and itching 
eruption on back. — Itching : in nape and between scapuhe ; on scrotum ; 
front of thigh ; bends of knees, &c. 

26. Sleep. — Disposition to sleep, esp. after dinner. — Violent yawning. — 
Retarded sleep. — Frequent waking, and prolonged wakefulness. — Waking 
with a start, with trembling, inquietude and fear. — Snoring. — Dreams : of 
battles ; sick people ; quarrels, anger, vexation ; funerals, death of friends ; 
earthquakes. 

27. Fever. — Predominance of coldness, and of shivering, esp. in evening. 
— General chill 8 or 9 p.m. — Chilly even in warm room. — Heat of whole head 
with heaviness. — Heat and puffiness of face. — Dry heat in anus with cuttings. 
— Woke I a.m. with sweat, thirst, and dry mouth. — Nocturnal perspiration. 


Rhamnus Gatharticus. 

Rhamnqs^ ^atharticus. Buckthorn. N, 0. Rhamnaceas. Tincture 
or fluid extract of ripe berries. 

CllnioaK — Appendicitis. Colic. Constipation. Diarrhoea. Tympanites. 

Typhlitis. 

Gharaoteristios. — The common Buckthorn produces black, 
shiny, four-sided berries, with an acrid taste. From these a syrup 
is made, and forms the Rhamni succtis of the old school. It produces 
“ copious watery stools and occasions a good deal of nausea and 
severe tormina. Was formerly given in dropsy, but owing to the 
severity of the drug is now little used” (Milne). rThe Schema is 
made up of symptoms observed in a boy poisoned by eating the 
berries. The ileo-caecal symptoms seem to point to it as a possible 
remedy in cases of appendicitis. Homoeopaths have found Rham, 
cath.6 in doses of a few drops a useful palliative in cases of constipation. 

Relations. — Compare : Cascara, Cean. In appendicitis, Ir. t. 

SYMPTOMS. 

3. Eyes.— Eyes glistening and injected. 

6. Face. — Trembling of lips. — ^Commencing trismus. 



972 RHAMNUS CAT.— RHAMNUS FRAN. 

8. Mouth. — Coated tongue. — Extremely bitter taste, 

9. Throat.— Scraping in throat 

n. Stomach. — Complete loss of appetite. 

12. Abdomen. — Violent rumbling and griping, esp. cutting pains in 
ileo-caecal region and in transverse colon. — Colic. — Abdomen hard ; tym- 
panites. 

13. Stool. — Diarrhoea. — Liquid stools. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine highly coloured. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Respiration short, anxious. • 

19. Heart. — Pulse variable. r. 

21. Limbs. — Weakness and prostration in all limbs. 

24. Generalities. — Unable to rise ; seemed to desire to press his head 
against the wall. 

27. Fever. — Violent chilliness. — Skin at one time warm, at another cold. 


Rhamnus Frangula. 

Rhamnus frangula. Alder Buckthorn. N. 0 . Rhamnaceai. Tincture 
and trituration of the bark gathered in spring from the younger 
branches. Tincture of bark of root. Tincture of ripe berries. 

Clinical. — Anus, itching of. Appendicitis. Ardoi uriiiie. Creciim, gurgling in. 
Diarrhoea. Flatulence. Urethritis. Vomiting. 

Gharacteristios. — All parts of Rh.fr. appear to produce irritant 
and cathartic properties. The majority of the symptoms of the 
Schema were the result of the root bark, but the leaves were no less 
active. Stools of a dark-green colour were obseiwed, copious, thin 
or pasty. With the stools there was much rumbling in theit^o-caecal 
region and along the transverse colon with weakness after stool. 
(R/^. ca. has rumbling, griping, and cutting pains in ileo-caecal region.) 
There was more vomiting with Rh. fr. than with Rh. ca.j and the 
former was abandoned as a cathartic because it so frequently produced 
vomiting instead. “ Burning in urethra while urinating and frequent 
micturition ’’ may prove an indication in gonorrhoea. 

Relations. — Compare : Rh. ca., Cean., and Cascara (botan). 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Depression of spirits. 

2. Head. — Vertigo. — Dulness of head. — Frontal headache. 

8. Mouth.— Dry tongue.— Salivation.— Coated tongue. — Taste bitter 
(after stools). 

9. Throat. — Burning scraping taste and irritation along throat. 

II. Stomach. — Thirst. — Diminished appetite. — Aversion to food. — Eruc- 
tations and efforts to vomit. — Nausea, with increased salivation. — Frequent 
vomiting instead of diarrhoea. — Sourish vomiting. — Constant inclination to 
vomit. — Warmth in stomach and abdomen. 



RHEUM 973 

J2. Abdomen.— Distension.— Profuse emission of flatus.— Rumbling.— 
Increased sensitiveness.— Increased peristalsis. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Itching in anus.— Violent tenesmus.— Thin 
4>asty stools.— Fifteen thin stools with violent rumbling and gurgling, esp. in ileo- 
caecal region and along transverse colon, followed by distension of abdomen, 
thirst, coated tongue, bitter taste and weakness. — Stools without great urging, 
thick, pasty, dark green, copious. — Stools hard, scanty. — Constipation at first 
followed by diarrhoea. 

14, Urinary Organs. — Slight burning in urethra, while urinating. — 
Frequent micturitidn. 

19. Heart. — Accelerated pulse. 

24. Generalities. — General exhaustion. — Weakness ; after stools. 

26. Sleep. — Great sleepiness. 


Rheum. 


Rheum officinale. R. palmatiim. Rliabarbarimi. Rhubarb (though 
called Turkey-rhubarb,’^ the root comes from China, the 
exact species yielding it not being certainly known). V. 0 , 
Polygonace^e. Tincture and trituration of the dried root. [A 
tincture of the fresh leaves and young stalks should be investi- 
gated.] 

Clinical. — Ardor urinai. Breath, offensive. Constip.ition. Deafness. Denti- 
tion, difficult. Dtanha'a. Duodenum, catarrh of Dysentery. Ears, thickening 
in. Frowning. Headache. Jaundice. Kidneys, affcction^ of Meniere’s disease. 
Milk, abnormal. Mouthy tnucus in. Nipples, pain in. Nose, pain in. Nurselings, 
affections of. OKsophagus, constriction of. Khcumatism. Salivation. Screaming, 
of childre^^^Snoring. Stomach, disordcied. TastCy bad. Tongue, numbness of. 
Urination^ dilficuU, of childbed. Urine, red. 

Chal^aoteristics. — HahnenKum’s proving of Rheum has cotiHrmed 
many of its traditional uses. In the form of Compound Rhubarb 
Powder {Pnlv, Rhci. Co. — Gregory’s powder) along with Magnesia and 
Gingery most of us can remember it as one of the terrors of the 
nursery. In its homerjopathic form it has no terrors, but it remains a 
great remedy of sucklings and children, especially during dentition, 
to whom as well as to pregnant and nursing women it is particularly 
suited. Milne well summarises its action from the traditional point 
of view : Tonic, cathartic, and a feeble astringent, the latter property 
being overborne by the cathartic and only coming into play after- 
wards^^ [/.<?., the constipation which follows Rhubarb purgation]. 

In small doses, it improves digestion and appetite, and renders the 
renal secretions more healthy. In larger doses it is an excellent 
cathartic, acting on the whole bowel and especially the duodenum, 
and increasing the peristaltic action. It is well suited for the early 
sjtages of diarrhoea, as a laxative in constipation from debility of the 
digestive organs, and in disorders of children, such as flatulence and 
irritation of the alimentary canal. It renders the serum of the blood 



974 


RHEUM 


yellow, the urine is almost of a blood-red colour/^ In connection 
with the last observation it must be remembered that Rheum contains 
a large amount of Chrysophanic acid (named from its brilliant yellow 
crystals). Among its many other constituents is Oxalate of Lime 
{Calc, ox,) and Rheodannic acid. Milne’s observations agree in the 
main with homoeopathic experience, but it is the latter alone which 
brings out the distinctive characters of the medicine. The grand 
keynote of Rhe. is sourness : The stools are sour ; the taste is sour ; 
the whole body has a sour smell. No amount of washing will wash 
the sourness out of a characteristic Rheum baby. * Such a condition 
may occur in sucklings, or at the period of dentition ; and it may be 
associated with another characteristic Rhe, symptom, night-screaming ; 
and yet another, sopping-wet hair. The Rhe, child is as acid in 
temper as he is in body : peevish, impatient ; screams for things ; 
dislikes even his favourite playthings. Screaming of children with 
urging and sour stools’’ is characteristic. With a few drops of Rhe, 0 
1 have relieved severe constipation in an acid child who was intolerant 
of almost all remedies in the attenuations. But Rhe. is by no means 
exclusively a children’s remedy. Its symptoms are good for any 
period of life. The stomach disorders calling for Rhe, are charac- 
terised by : Sour, flat, slimy taste ; or insipid or nauseous. Food 
tastes bitter, even sweet things (there is no bitter taste independently 
of food). The mouth is covered with offensive mucus after sleeping ; 
and after sleeping there is bad taste and offensive breath. There is 
hunger for various kinds of food and the first few mouthfuls nauseate. 
The effects of eating plums or unripe fruit. There is nausea in 
abdomen. Colic is severe, compelling one to bend double, < stand- 
ing ; < just before stool ; not > after ; < at once by uncovering an 
arm or leg. The evacuations are accompanied by shivenng and followed 
by renewed urging. “ Shivering with stool ” should draw attention 
to Rhe. — That there is much yet to be learned of the a« 4 i#n of Rhe. 
is evident from the following : (i) Two cases (in men) of severe 
skin eruptions are quoted, H. IF., xxvii. 17, from the effects of 
Rhubarb root taken for constipation. The first symptoms in one 
case were rigors and pains in the legs. Soon lips, face, and tongue 
began to swell and became livid. A rash developed involving lips, 
beard, eyelids, and scalp, scabs , mixed with abundant bloody 
pustular exudations. Haemorrhages and pustular eruptions then 
appeared all over the body ; blebs with clear fluid on backs of 
hands. Lymphatic glands swollen and painful. Removal of scabs 
left shallow dirty ulcers. Blood passed freely from urethra, but 
sometimes the urine was wholly free from it. Urine brownish 
yellow ; free from albumen or sugar. Temperature 103*3® The 
second case was similar to the above. The patient had taken 
the powdered root. He woke one morning with burning sensation 
in face and found it covered with blisters and pustules. These were 
brownish red, irregular, size of pea or bean, deeply infiltrated at bases. 
Both surfaces of hands were also affected. The eruption, which 
closely resembled pemphigus, disappeared in a few weeks without 
treatment, leaving bluish pigmentation, but no cicatrices. There was 
no fever in this case. (2) From these cases given me by Cooper : 



RHEUM 


975 


(a) A lady suffering from characteristic symptoms of Meniere^s disease, 
feeling of things spinning round with extreme giddiness and noises in 
the head, was cured by a chemist giving her lo grains of powdered 
rhubarb, on the idea it was due to the liver. Before this great suffer- 
^ing had been endured without any relief. (6) In vertiginous symptoms 
due to brain exhaustion with flushings followed by perspiration and 
awful muffled and discordant tinnitus, great relief followed the sniffing 
of 3xtrit. of Rheum palmatum. Among the Peculiar Sensations and 
Symptoms of Rhe, are : Tendency to frown. Sensation as if brain moved 
when standing. Dull stupefying headache with bloated eyes. Sweat 
on hairy scalp, constant and very profuse ; whether asleep or awake ; 
in motion or quiet, hair always sopping wet ; may or may not be sour. 
Stupefying drawing in root of nose extending to tip, where it tingles. 
Bladder weak, must press hard to urinate. Sensations : as if in a 
dream. As of a lump around navel. As of a load on upper part of 
chest. Cutting as if in lumbar vertebrae. Heaviness as on waking 
from a heavy sleep. Coldness in teeth. Blunt feeling in teeth. 
Constriction of stomach ; of gullet. Crackling, crepitation, or 
bubbling in muscles and any part of body. Tongue numb, numbness 
of part of limb lain on. Symptoms are mostly left-sided or go from 
above dowai or from right to left. Localities are : Left loin ; brain ; 
upper part of body (sweat). “ Rite, has the property of setting up 
pains in old disease depots, in the seat of old cellulitis and old 
psoriasis patches, producing hot burning pains therein as well as in 
the unaffected veins of the thighs and other parts. Its good effect in 
old middle and internal ear thickenings seems due to the creation of 
tissue-activity in dormant structures (R. T. C.). Forcing pains are 
felt in dartrous patches. The symptoms are : < Night ; and 
morning after sleep. < Uncovering ; from cold. Uncovering arm 
or leg < colic. > Wrapping up ; from warmth. In open air : eyes 
full of Wtder. Hot weather < colic. > Lying doubled up ; takes 
the queerest positions in order to rest awhile. Lying on limbs = them 
to go tp sleep. Motion <. Walking <. [On the indication 
Diarrhoea only during active exercise,” Hurndall {H, W, xxxvi., 28) 
cured a horse of a diarrhoea which only came on when he was at 
work.] Standing < (vertigo as if brain moved ; colic ; uterine bearing 
down). < After eating ; after eating plums. < Before, during, and 
after stool (colic > or not > after stool). 

Relations.— by: Camph., Cham., Coloc., Merc., Nux, 
Puls. Antidote to: Canth., Mg. c. ‘‘May be given after abuse of 
Magnesia, with or without Rhubarb, if stools are sojar” (H. C. Allen). 
Complementary: After Mg. c. when milk disagrees and child has sour 
odour. Compatible : Ipec. Followed well by : Bell., Puis., Rhus, Sul. 
Compare : Botan., Polyg. h., Rumex, Lapath. Constituents : Chrys. 
ac., Calc, ox., Silic. Foul breath, Querc., Arn. < After sleep, Lach., 
Nat. m., Sul. Sour stools, Hep., Mg. c., Calc. (Rhe. has twitching of 
muscles of face and fingers during sleep ; also puts arms over head). 
Queer positions, Plb. Head sweat, Calc., Sil., Sanic. < Uncovering, 
•Rx. c. (Rhe., colic ; Rx. c., cough). Screaming children with diarrhoea. 
Jalap. Bubbling sensation, Berb. Difficult dentition, Kre., Cham, 
Sour body smell, Hep., Mg. c. (Mg. c. is deeper acting than Rhe.). 



976 


RHEUM 


Impatience, Cin., Stp. Children cry and toss all night, Pso. As if 
in a dream, Ambr., Anac., Calc., Can. i.. Con., Cup., Med., Strm., Val., 
Ver., Z\z. 

Causation. — Eating prunes. Eating unripe fruit. Dentition, 
Spasms, Dislocations. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Indifference. — Indolence, and dislike to conversation.— 
Peevish disposition, with tears. — Restlessness, with desire to weep. — Impetuous 
desire for particular objects. — The child demands various things with vehe- 
mence and weeping ; even its favourite playthings. — Screaming of children 
with urging and sour stools. — Unable to collect her senses for long after 
waking. — State of mind as if half asleep (or in a dream). — Delirium.— 
Incoherent talk. 

2. Head. — Stupefying cloudiness of head, as after intoxication, with 
prominent (bloated) eyes. — Vertigo, which occasions falling sidewi^ys, when 
standing. — Giddy headache, with anxiety. — Pressive headache, esp. in sinciput, 
temples, and vertex. — Pressure as with a finger at point where head joins 
neck. — Heaviness of head, with heat and tearings. — Dull and cramp-like 
tension in head. — Throbbing in head, sometimes proceeding from abdomen. 
— Movement of brain when stooping. — Sweat on forehead and scalp after 
slight effort. — Hair always (awake or asleep, active or still) sopping wet, may 
or may not be sour. 

3. Eyes, — Eyes weak and downcast, with aching pain, esp. when 
looking steadily at any object. — Pressure and pullings in eyelids. — Smarting 
in eyes, as if caused by dust. — Painful throbbing in eyes. — Convulsive starting 
in lids. — Lachrymation (swimming eyes, full of water), esp. in open air. — 
Pupils contracted. 

4. Ears. — Otalgia with itching in ear. — Pressure (at meatus as from a 
finger) and throbbing in ears, — Dulness of hearing, as from fflSxation of 
tympanum, with rumbling in ears, > by violent swallowing but only for a 
moment. — Crackling and bubbling in ear and in muscles on side of neck, — 
(Meniere’s disease). — (Old-vStanding and frequently recurring deafness with 
cicatricial membrana tympani gets well after single dose of Rhe, <p. — R. T. C.) 

5. Nose. — Stupefying drawing from root of nose to tip, where it tingles. 
— Sensation of heat in nose. 

6. Face. — Face pale ; or one cheek red, the other pale. — Tension of skin 
of face. — Frowning and contraction of muscles of forehead.— Itching rash on 
forehead and arm. — Cold perspiration on face, esp. on mouth and nose. — 
Twitching at commissures of lips. 

7. Teeth. — Digging pains in teeth which are carious. — Painful sensa- 
tion of coldness in teeth (with accumulation of much saliva), — Difficult 
dentition of children. — Teeth feel blunt. 

8. Mouth. — Sensation of numbness and insensibility in tongue, with 
loss of taste for whole day (from chewing the stem). — Tongue swollen, 
articulation affected (poisoning case).— Salivation with colic or diarrhoea.— 
Mouth covered with offensive mucus after sleeping.— Offensive breath (after 
sleep). — Dryness and sensation of dryness in mouth. . 



RHEUM 


977 


9» Throat, — Contraction of gullet. 

10 . Appetite, — Loss of taste. — Mawkish, clammy, or sour taste. — Bad 
taste after sleep.—Food has a bitter taste. — Appetite for different things, 
which, however, changes to disgust at the first mouthful— -Dislike to fat and 
insipid food. — Repugnance to coffee (not sweetened with sugar). — Hunger 
without appetite. 

11. Stomach. — Nausea, as if proceeding from stomach, with colic. — 
Fulness in stomach, with pressure, as if overloaded. — Contractions in stomach. 
— Shootings and throbbings in pit of stomach. 

12. Abdomeft. — Distension of abdomen, with tension. — Pressure in 
umbilical region. — Cutting and rumbling in abdomen as from flatulence. — 
Nausea in abdomen. — Cuttings in abdomen, which force a curving of the 
body, often shortly after a meal, < by standing ; < from eating. — Colic : < 
at once by uncovering an arm or leg ; not > by stool ; before and during 
stool, > after ; with very sour stools in acid children. — Incarceration of 
flatus, with aching and tension in chest. — Palpitation and jerking (swelling- 
bubbling sensation which seemed as if it could be heard) in abdominal 
muscles. — Itching stitches in inguinal gland. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Urgent and frequent want to evacuate, without 
any result, < by movement, and walking. — Diarrhoea only when exercising. 
— Desire for stool after a meal. — Loose evacuations, generally of a sour smell, 
liquid, or of the consistence of pap, preceded and followed by tenesmus, with 
constrictive pinching in abdomen, and shuddering during the evacuation. — 
Stools frequent, soft, semi-liquid, evacuated with great pain in back and 
burning in rectum. — Stools: brown, slimy ; loose, thin, curdled, sour-smelling ; 
corroding anus ; mucous and fecal ; whitish, curdy, turning green on exposure 
on diaper ; pea-green ; fetid ; frothy. — Liquid, slimy stools as if fermented, 
with pale face, ptyalism ; child draws up legs ; smells sour. — Grd^ish or brown 
diarrhoea, mixed with mucus ; followed by tenesmus, pain in back, and great 
burning ii\^anus and rectum. — Profuse diarrhoea, with vomiting, and great 
weakness. — Diarrhoea of lying-in women ; of children, — Constipation after 
the proving. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Increased secretion of urine. — Urine red ; or 
grcenLsh-3^cllow, — Blood flows freely from urethra (poisoning case). — Weak- 
ness of bladder : the urine cannot be discharged without effort. — Burning 
sensation in bladder. — Burning urine. — Urine has agreeable benzoic odour. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Unusual emissions. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Bearing down in uterine region while 
standing. — Drawing burning in 1 . ovarian region. — Uri^ry complaints after 
abortion. — Milk yellow, bitter. — Diarrhoea after confinement. — Stitches in 
nipples. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Cough : dry in evening ; with expectoration 
of mucus. — Snoring inspiration during sleep. 

18. Chest. — Dyspnoea on breathing deeply, as from a weight on (upper 
part of) chest. — Lancinations in chest,— Rush of blood to chest.—Crackling 
bubbling (even audible) in r, then 1 . pectoral muscles. — Palpitation of muscles 
qf chest. — Pains and lancinations in breasts. — Milk of nursing women bitter 
and yellow ; the infant refuses the breast. 

20, Back. — Violent cutting, as if in lumbar vertebra?, < from stool. — 
VOL. ir. 63 



978 RHEUM-RHODIUM OXY. NIT. 

Cutting-drawing in 1. lumbar region beneath short ribs, and in front of 1. 
lower abdomen, just above pubes, or cutting in intestines,— Tension in 
back and small of back. — Rigidity in loins and hips, which does not permit 
standing upright. 

21. Limbs .—Simple pain in all joints during motion. — The limbs on 
which he lies fall asleep.— Lameness of wrists and knees after spasms and 
dislocations. 

22 . Upper Limbs. — Lancinations in arms. — Tearing in arms, forearms, 
and joints of fingers. — Jerking in arms and hands. — Muscular palpitatibn 
(bubbling sensation) in joints of elbows. — Veins (on hands) k/wollen, and hands 
hot. — Perspiration, sometimes cold, on palms of hands. — Jerking in fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Great lassitude in thighs. — Jerking in muscles of 
thighs.— Numbness of legs when crossed. — Muscular palpitations in hams, 
legs and toes. — Stiffness of ham, with pain during movement. — Shootings in 
knees and legs. — Bubbling sensation from bend of knee to heel. — Stiffness in 
bend of knees with pain on motion. — Intermittent burning as from glowing 
coals between internal malleolus and tendo Achilles. — Sticking itching in 
hollows of soles. — Bubbling-crackling sensation in ball of 1. big toe. 

24. Generalities. — [We use this remedy most particularly for sour- 
smelling children ; stools, vomit, breath, all smell sour. Before or during 
stool there are colicky pains about umbilicus; straining before stool, which is 
finally voided with ease ; infants who cry a great deal with colic in the night ; 
tenesmus without stool. — H. N. G.]. — Affections of 1. side of body. — Perspira- 
tion on upper part of body. — Soreness of the joints during movement. — 
Pulsative pains. — Palpitation in muscles, esp. round joints. — Numbness of 
the limbs upon which patient has been lying. — Lassitude and heaviness in 
whole body as after waking from deep sleep. 

25. Skin. — Pemphigus on face, scalp, and hands ; face, lips, and tongue 
swollen ; face livid (poisoning cases). — Itching rash on forehead and arms. 

26. Sleep. — Sleep and yawnings. — Disturbed sleep at night, with tossing, 
cries, moaning and snoring, or with convulsive quivering of eyelids, muscles 
of face, and of fingers, esp. in children. — ^I'he hands are passed over Jhe head 
when going to sleep, and during sleep. — Nocturnal raving and moving about 
in bed, although eyes arc closed. — After sleep, headache and dizziness ; or 
fetid mucus, of a putrid smell and taste, in mouth. — Anxious, sad, vivid dreams. 

27. Fever. — Shuddering, without external coldness. — Alternate shivering 
and heat, with anxiety, and repugnance to everything.— Heat in hands and 
feet, with coolness of face. — Perspiration easily excited by the least exercise, 
esp. on forehead and scalp. — Sweat stains yellow. 

Rhodium Oxydatum Nitricum. 

Nitrate of the Oxide of Rhodium, (Rhodium Rh. A.W. 103.) 

Solution, 

Clinical, — Anus, itching of ; burning in. Constipation, Ears, pains in. Haemor- 
rhoids. Headache. Hearing, illusions of. Impotence. 

Charaoteristios. — The metal Rhodium is found in association 



RHODIUM OXYDATUM NITRICUM 979 

with Platinum. The preparation of it used by Hering was thus 
obtained : A small quantity of Rhodium sponge, hydfate of potassa 
and nitre were exposed to the action of the blowpipe until oxidised. 
After having the oxide well washed and boiled in nitric acid for a few 
minutes and exposed to a gentle heat for an hour, the nitrate was 
obtained from the oxide : a fluid of a golden colour, and of the con- 
sistency of syrup.’’ Dilutions of this were made, and the 4th was 
proved for Hering by Dr. Pehrson, the 2nd and 3rd by Dr. Negen- 
dank. The bowels were affected in both, constipation with piles being 
relieved in one, and constipation with itching of the anus being caused 
in the other. Some Peculiar Symptoms were : Headache on being 
waked up in the night. Headache alternating with faintness. Faint- 
ness > by passage of stool. Heat preceding chill and alternating 
with it. Sensation as if teeth blunt ; as if sand between them. 
Scraping or harsh noise == disagreeable sensation in teeth. Hearing 
more acute ; illusion that he hears whispering. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — During whole day very unusual hilarity and gladness. — 
Illusions of whispers. — Irritation of the mind making regular meditation 
impossible, and causing a sense of dissatisfaction. 

2. Head. — On being disturbed at night aching in forehead, preventing 
further sleep. — Tearing in forehead on being awakened ; and at other times. 
— Headache alternating with diarrhtva. 

3. Eyes. — Everything appeared as if the degree of light was lessened, 
principally the point (print ?) whilst reading, which continued during the 
following day. 

4. Ears. — Stitches* in membrana tympani ; hearing more acute. — In 
evening unnatural irritation of sense of hearing, a constant whispering being 
heard as^iJlusive as if caused by human beings ; a few times he went to see 
if there. was not some one there. 

5. Nose. — Eruptions on nostrils temporarily removed. 

6. Face. — Heat and sweat over face. 

8. Mouth. — Teeth feel blunt ; every scraping and similar noise s 
most disagreeable sensation in them. — Teeth feel as if sand between them. 

II. Stomach. — Stinging pain in pit of stomach, which after two hours 
changed into a griping pain in integuments of bowels. 

13. Stool and Anus. — The usually large stool passes with less difficulty 
than usual ; piles improved. — Stool in small round balls like cockles, with 
burning in anus during and for some time after.— Much odourless flatus 
passed. — Tenesmus as if stool would come, but only flatus passes. — Loud 
emission of flatus. — Diarrhoea with much wind, stool bubbling out ; from 6 to 
9 a.m., when it ceased and a headache commenced. — Passage of stool > faint- 
ness. — Foul stool. — Itching of anus, as if caused by the piles, stools tardy. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Burning in urethra towards head of penis. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Lack of desire, power, and pleasure. 

21. Limbs. — Aching on inside 1. thigh and on 1. little Anger. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Aching in upper joint of r. middle finger, evening. 
— Intense aching 1. wrist, evening. — 7 p.m. aching in r. wrists. 



98 o rhodium OXY. NIT.— RHODODENDRON 

23. Lower Limbs.— Burning, sticking pain rushing downwards in 1 . 
leg. 

24. Generalities. — From 4 to 7 p.m., after mental exertion, faintness, 
not > by eating, drinking, rest, &c. ; at 7 as this began to diminish r.-sided 
headache began and was still felt on waking, $ a.m. ; during the faintness 
urging to stool with inability, stool felt in 1. side of rectum ; by pressure 
around anus round balls were evacuated, causing intense burning in anus ; 
faintness ceased instantaneously the moment the stool had passed. — Constipa- 
tion lasting several days. 

27. Fever. — Fever with sweat over face, 3 p.m., followed by chill ; fever 
and chill alternated till 6 p.m. 


Rhododendron. 

Rhododendron chrysanthum. Siberian Rhododendron. Yellow Snow- 
rose. N. 0 . Ericaceae. Tincture of fresh leaves. 

Clinical. — Amenorrhoea. Asthenopia. Bouc^ faius tn, Bunions. Chorea. 
Ciliary neuralgia. Coryza Delirium. Diarrhexju. Diphtheritic paralysis. Ear* 
ache. Epistaxis. Eyes, affections of. Fever. F'latiilence, incarcerated. Gums, 
itching of. Hydrocele. Licnteria Lumbago. Mcmor\\ weak. Ncuralgta. Night- 
mare. Ovary, cyst of. Rheumatism. Spleen, pain in. Sprains. Stiff-neck. 
Testes, affections of. Tinnitus. Toothache. Vagina, cysts in. Wrists, pains in. 

Characteristics. — The golden-flowered Rhododendron is not much 
known in general medicine, but the Treasury of Botany says of it that 
it is narcotic in its properties and is used medicinally.'^ Growing 
among the fogs and storms of the Siberian mountains, its provings (by 
Seidel, Wahle, flerzog, Helbig, and others) show that it produces 
sensitiveness to storms and weather changes ; and this gwes the 
grand keynote of its use in medicine. Rhod. disturbs all parts of the 
economy, producing delirium, fever, headache, neuralgias (earache, 
toothache), rheumatism, and inflammations, but the chief determining 
characteristic is that the symptoms come on or are < on the approach 
of a storm ; during a storm ; or in wet weather. Sensitiveness to 
electric changes. It is suited to nervous persons who dread a storm, 
and are particularly afraid of thunder ; < before the storm ; affections 
which come on in the spring and autumn, the seasons of change. 
This is the chief modality, and will be found in some degree present 
in a large number of cases requiring Rhod, But Rhod. has other 
characteristics. Among these is loss of memory : Words are omitted 
while writing ; sudden disappearance of thought ; forgets what he is 
talking about, has to think awhile before he can recall it. Vertigo 
and confusion, brain feels as if surrounded by fog." The narcotic 
reputation of Rhod. is borne out in the provings, for it produced actual 
intoxication, and also made the provers extraordinarily sensitive to the 
action of wine. Vertigo occurs whilst lying in bed, and is > by 
moving about. An intense degree of tinnitus aurium was caused by it,‘ 
and this, associated with the vertigo, gives Rhod. a place in Meniere's 



RHODODENDRON 


981 


disease. A Peculiar Symptom is : “ Loud sounds re-echo long in 
ears.’^ Like the other Ericaceae, Rhod. has a strong effect on the 
kidneys, producing increased urine, with offensive smell, clear, brown 
red, or of greenish tinge, and, whatever colour it may be, of offensive 
smell. This offensive smell reappears in the axillary sweat. But the 
general sweat may be aromatic in odour and not unpleasant. For- 
mication with sweat is characteristic. Rhod, sets up diarrhoea ; and 
also a paralytic condition of the rectum, so that an effort is required 
to expel a soft stool. Pains in rectum extend to genitals ; and the 
male generative* organs experience the most intense action of the 
drug. The scrotum shrinks ; testes are retracted ; or else they swell 
(especially at night), and are the seat of a bruised pain, as if they had 
been crushed violently. These pains are < by touch : < sitting ; > 
moving about. They may be so violent as to arrest breathing. The 
menses arc too early and too profuse ; the menses are always accom- 
panied by fever and headache. Menses reappear soon after they 
have ceased. In one prover Rhod. restored the menses after six 
months’ absence. It has cured cysts in the vagina, and has caused 
the rupture of an ovarian cyst. Chorea of left leg, arm, and face, < 
on approach of a storm, has been cured by it. The paralysing effect 
of Rhod. was exemplified by the poisoning of a flock of sheep from 
eating the leaves. A number of them died immediately after the 
administration of stimulants, and the autopsy showed that cause of 
death was paralysis of the swallowing muscles (T. C. Collings, quoted 
H. IF., xxix. 158). Cooper cites a parallel case of death from post- 
diphtheritic paralysis affecting the throat muscles, occurring a few 
minutes after drinking tea. In both instances the fluid entered the 
trachea instead of the gullet and caused suffocation. Both sides are 
affected by Rhod, Symptoms frequently alternate : left and right 
nostril ; burning in uterus and pains in limbs ; chilliness and heat. 
Pains go from within outward. H. S. Budd (H. /?., xv. 300) relates the 
case of Mrs. X., 44, married ten years, three children. Neuralgia for 
three years. Attacks occur usually on Friday or Saturday and last till 
Monday or Tuesday, but are induced any time by high winds, damp 
weather, or an approaching storm. Amnionolj Phcnacetiii^ Antikamnia^ 
had all failed, and Passif. only partly relieved, sometimes enabling 
patient to get sleep. The pain was < after hard work ; during any 
movement ; in very cold weather ; from hot applications. Intense 
soreness all over right half of head. Cannot rest on pillow or endure 
even lightest hairpins when pain is worst. < At night. Intensely 
nervous and hysterical at being touched^ even by accident. During 
pain increased activity of kidneys, ceasing whe^i pain ceases. Pain 
greatest in right lower jaw. Sometimes > for an hour by chewing 
gum or eating. Afraid of thunder. Omits words when writing. 
Rhod, i6x ' every hour was given on May 12th. Each dose caused 
immediate <. Next morning pains stopped suddenly and did not 
return. On June 7th there was a premonitory twinge, and a powder 
of Rhod. im was given, after which there was complete immunity. 
• E. V. Moffat (quoted Am, H.y xxiii. 268) treated a girl, 10, for neuralgia, 
which had existed for several years. The patient was of marked 
gouty heredity, and had been treated by leading old-school doctors in 



RHODODENDRON 


982 

New York. She was well during the summer, but suffered intensely 
during winter. Pains general and shifting, sometimes intercostal, 
sometimes sciatic ; in bad weather never absent. The last form was 
prostrating headache, incapacitating her for school work. The eyes 
were normal. While the sun shone she was comfortable. If it stormed 
or threatened she was miserable. If she had a headache on a stormy 
day and the sun came out, in ten minutes she was relieved, and it 
returned at once if snow or rain came on. A cold day, especially if 
damp, was almost as bad as a storm. Rhod. 0, in repeated ai>d 
increasing doses, cured in three weeks. Colour, .spirits, strength 
returned, and she no longer minded the weather or missed her school. 
Peculiar Sensations are : Brain as if in a fog. Scalp as if bruised. As 
if a worm in ear. As if water rushing into ear. As if throat lined 
with mucus. As from tension under short ribs. Testicle as if violently 
contused or crushed. As if a list pressed forcibly against stomach. 
As if blood ceased to circulate in arms. As if arms asleep. As if feet 
and legs asleep. As if heavy weights hanging to feet. As of sub- 
cutaneous ulceration. Undulating sensation arising from abdomen. 
Warm undulations in heart. Bruised pains. Pains flying about. 
Crawling sensations. A Peculiar Symptom in the eyes is : One pupil 
dilated, the other contracted. There is a splenic stitch on walking 
fast. The incarcerated flatus is felt in the hypochondria and small of 
the back. It is not at all unusual to meet this symptom, Flatus felt 
in the back,’^ in cases of flatulent indigestion. “ Increased warmth of 
hands even in cold weather” is another peculiar symptom. The 
symptoms are < by touch (toothache, testicles, chest — this sensitive- 
ness is general). Rest < ; motion (especially commencing motion) >. 
(Walking = stitches in spleen ; motion < pain in ears ; and proso- 
palgia). Rheumatic pain in shoulder on which he rests ; goes off on 
turning. < Sitting. > Rising. < Standing. < When writing. 

< Wind ; east wind ; rough weather ; wet, cold weatherj getting 
wet. < Before a storm (ciliary neuralgia ; pains through eye from 
head ; toothache ; diarrhoea ; dysentery ; pain in deltoids ; paroxysmal 
chorea). > Warmth. > Wrapping up. (But heat in bed < formi- 
cation of anus ; and toothache.) Dry heat >. < Change. < Thunder. 
Toothache > whilst and after eating and from warmth. Pain in left 
side > by eating. Drinking cold water = pressure at stomach. < 
Drinking wine ; easily intoxicated. Belching >. General sw'cat >. 

< Night ; morning in bed and on rising. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Bry., Camph., Clem., Rhus. Com- 
pare: Arbut., Kalm., Led., Uva ursi, and other Ericaceae. < Wet 
weather ; < weather changes, < rest, > motion, Rhus (Rhus affects 
periosteum more than Rhod. ; Rhod. > commencing motion, Rhus <). 

< During thunderstorm, Nat. c., Phos., Pso., Sil. < From wine, Zn. 
Heat in heart, Croc., Lchn., Op. Orchitis become chronic, indurated 
testicle, Clem., Puls. (Rhod. has tendency to atrophy ; and crushed 
feeling in testes). Orchitis, crushed sensation, Aur., Cham, Wander- 
ing rheumatism < in wet and stormy weather ; right side neuralgia, 
Kalm. Fibrous deposits in great toe, Colch., Led. (Led. has > by* 
cold). < In stormy, wet weather, Dulc., Nat. s., Nux m. (Rhod. most 
before the storm). Diarrhoea from fruit, Rhe. > Wrapping up head, 



RHODODENDRON 


983 

Sil Sensation of subcutaneous ulceration, Pul,, Ran. b. Bruised 
pains, Arn., Con. One pupil contracted the other dilated, Cad. s., 
Phys. Hydrocele, Bry, Intoxication, Querc. Sounds re-echo, Caust, 
Pho., Ph. ac., Sars. 

Causation.— Stormy weather. Thunder. Sprains. Eating fruit. 
Getting wet. Catching cold. 

SYMPTOMS. 

• I. Mind.— Delirium ; staggers ; falls asleep on his knees ; starts and 
appears terrified* in sleep but awakes cheerful. — Mental derangement. — 
Frightful visions. — Sombre, morose humour. — Excessive indifference, with 
dread of all kinds of labour. — Nervous persons who dread a storm, and esp. 
thunder. — Excessive forgetfulness. — Sudden loss of ideas. — Leaves out whole 
words when writing. — While talking forgets what he is talking about. 

2. Head. — Reeling sensation in head ; brain feels as if surrounded with 
a fog. — Head bewildered in the morning after rising, with sleepiness. — Intoxi- 
cation. — Vertigo with anguish. — Whirling vertigo in bed, as if the head were 
about to be turned backwards. — Headache (in forehead and temples) excited 
or < by wine or by cold, damp weather (> after rising and moving about). — 
Tension in the forehead. — Drawing pressure in sinciput and temples, princi- 
pally in bones. — Violent drawing and tearing in bones and periosteum of 
cranial bones ; < when at rest, in morning ; > from wrapping head up 
warmly, from dry heat and from exercise. — Aching in 1. half of forehead, 
spreading to 1. temple, continuous, < by wine. — Tearing boring in 1. temple. 
— Lancinations in the sinciput and sides of the head. — Throbbing in head.— 
Painful sensibility of the exterior of head as from subcutaneous ulceration. — 
Pain as from contusion or blows in the occiput. — Violent pain r. occiput as if 
a foreign body had been forced in. — Gnawing itching (biting and burning) in 
scalp, esp. in evening. — Hair stands up as if electrified (R. T. C.). 

3. Eyes. — Pressive shootings in the margin of orbits, with spasmodic 
contraction of eyelids. — Darting like arrows through eye from head < before 
a storm. — (Severe r. keratitis with aching in r. side of head and forehead, < in 
thunder. — R. T. C.). — Aching in eyes, commencing on one side of face. — 
Sticking pain in r. eyeball, as with a red-hot needle darting from within out- 
ward. — Sensation of dryness and burning in eyes from time to time, esp. in 
bright daylight and when looking steadily at an object. — Suppuration of lids 
at night. — Irritation of lids (agg. R. T. C.). — Swollen lids which become easily 
red. — Agglutination of lids. — Quivering jerks in lids. — Contraction of one 
pupil while the other is dilated. — Clouded sight when reading and writing. — 
Eyes tire easily (agg. and cure. — R. T. C.). 

4 . Ears. — Otalgia (r. ear) with jerking teariiigs. — Tearing and boring 
in and near the ears. — Sensation as of a worm in ear. — Continued dull hum- 
ming in ears, < by swallowing. — Loud sounds re-echo long. — Continued 
buzzing in ears, feeling as if water rushing into them. 

5 . Nose. — Epistaxis. — Diminished smell. — Semilateral obstruction at 
root of nose, esp. in morning. — Fluent coryza with obstruction of one nostril 
(1. nostril, sometimes alternating with r., > in open air), and loss of smell and 
taste. — Increased secretion of nasal mucus in open air. — A bright red spot on 
nose, sensitive to touch, lasting several days. 



RHODODENDRON 


984 


6. Face. — Shuddering chilliness over face. — ^Violent tearing, jerking 
faceache, < in wind and changes ; > while eating and from warmth.— Proso- 
palgia extends from temple to chin ; spreads over r. side of face. — Lips dry 
and burning, — Vesicles on the lips (on inner side of under lip), with pains as 
from excoriation when eating. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache with drawing tearing in molars, in cold, damp 
weather ; or on approach of or during a storm ; < by touch. — Rheumatic 
toothache radiating from r, lower jaw to teeth. — Nocturnal odontalgia with 
otalgia. — Itching in the gums. — Swelling and pain as from excoriation between 
lower gums and cheek. 

8. Mouth. — Copious accumulation of saliva in mouth, with dryness of 
gullet and smarting vesicles under tongue. — Greenish coated tongue with 
bitter, putrid taste. 

9. Throat. — Scraping in throat; sensation as if lined with mucus. — 
Constriction and burning sensation in throat. 

10. Appetite. — Dulness of taste. — Food has no flavour. — Augmented 
thirst, — Gnawing, hungry sensation before a meal. — Speedy satiety, with good 
appetite, followed by uneasiness. 

11. Stomach. — Nausea, with inclination to vomit, pressure in stomach, 
and waterbrash, > by eructations. — Gulping of rancid or bitter fluid. — Empty 
eructations. — Vomiting of green, bitter substances. — Vomiting after an5dhing 
fluid, esp. cold water. — Aching (and heaviness) in stomach at night, or after 
drinking cold water. — Contractive pressure in scrobiculus with obstructed 
respiration. — Pressive shootings in pit of stomach and hypochondria. 

12 . Abdomen. — Spasmodic pains in hypochondria. — Pain as from ten- 
sion under short ribs. — Tension in the region of the spleen (when or) after 
stooping. — Shootings in spleen on walking quickly. — Distension of abdomen, 
esp. in upper part, with sensation of fulness, which hinders respiration, morn- 
ing and evening. — Painful incarceration of flatus in hypochondria and loins. 
— Grumbling and borborygmi in abdomen, with risings and expulsion of fetid 
flatus. — Drawing pain in r. and (slighter) 1 . inguinal ring while sitting. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Urgent want to evacuate, with slow evacuation. 

-As soon as he gets out of bed diarrhoea comes on. — Difficult evacuation, 

even of soft fjeces. — Faeces of consistence of pap. — Mucous evacuations. — 
Diarrhoea after eating fruit or in cold, damp weather ; food passes undigested. 
— Diarrhoea which does not weaken. — Shooting pain in rectum extending to 
just below ribs. — Crawling in anus as from -ascar ides. — Throbbing in anus. — 
Drawing from rectum to genital organs. 

14. Urinary Organs. — More frequent want to urinate, with drawing in 
the region of the bladder and in the groins. — Pain in urethra as from sub- 
cutaneous ulceration. — Increased discharge of a fetid urine. — Urine clear, 
greenish, hot. — Twitching and stitches at urethral orifice between acts of 
micturition. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Pain as from excoriation between genitals 
and thighs. — Throbbings and shootings under glans. — Drawing and pain as 
from a bruise in testes extending into abdomen and thighs. — ^Testes, esp. 
epididymis, intensely painful to touch. — Testes swollen and retracted. — Itch- 
ing, sweat, and shrinking in scrotum. — ^Transparent swelling of the scrotum, 
as from hydrocele. — Swelling of the testicles after gonorrhoea. — Induration of 



RHODODENDRON 


985 


testes ; induration and swelling of 1. testicle.— Contusive pain in first one then 
in the other testicle. — Drawing pain in r. testis and cord, > by motion ; 
sometimes pricking, beginning r. testis, spreading in zigzag manner along 
perinaeum to anus, so violent it arrested breathing. — Crawling pain in testes. 
— Increased desire. — Aversion to coitus and want of erections. — Profuse 
emission with amorous dreams. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Suppressed catamenia.— Premature and 
too profuse catamenia. — Fever with headache at each menstrual period. — 
Pain in ovaries ; < in change of weather. — Caused rupture of cyst in r. ovary. 
— Serous cysts in vagina. — After parturition, burning in uterus alternately with 
pains in limbs, fingers flexed. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Catarrh and hoarseness of trachea. — Dry, 
shaking cough, with oppression of chest and roughness of throat, esp. night 
and morning (in paroxysms from tickling in the trachea). — Scraping cough 
with scanty expectoration of mucus. 

18. Chest. — Transient, dull pain from chest to 1 . hypochondrium when 
walking fast. — Pressure at chest with obstructed respiration. — Dyspnoea from 
constriction of chest. — Warm undulation in chest and about the heart. — Rush 
of blood to chest. — Bruised pain at chest externally. — Knife-like cuttings in 1 . 
chest when bending to r. and backward. 

19. Heart. — Boring pain in region of heart. — Warm undulations at 
heart. — (Heart irritable, pulse weak and quick. — R. T. C.). — Heart beats 
stronger. — Pulse : slow ; feeble, small, and slow. 

20. Neck and Back. — Rigidity of nape. — Rheumatic tension and draw- 
ing in muscles of nape and of neck. — Stiff-neck, gums and teeth sore, pains 
fly about everywhere. — Pain in sacrum, becoming intolerable on stooping. — 
Wrenching or contusive pains in back and loins « at rest and in rainy 
weather). — Small of back painful when sitting as if back had been bent too 
long, or as if he had been lying on it too long. — Rheumatic drawing and 
tearing in back and shoulders. 

21. Limbs. — Rheumatic and arthritic drawing and tearings as if in the 
periosteum of limbs, excited by rough weather and < by repose. — Wrenching 
pain and ‘searching drawings in joints, with redness and swelling. — Chronic 
rheumatism affecting the smaller joints and their ligaments. — Restlessness, 
tingling, weakness, and sensation of paralytic stiffness in some of the limbs. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Drawing pains in arms in rough weather. — Sensa- 
tion as if the blood did not circulate in arms. — Weakness w’ith tingling and 
heaviness in arms, extending to tips of fingers during repose. — Pulling and 
tearing in forearms and hands as if in periosteum (during wet, cold weather), 
< during repose. — Wrenching pain in joints of hands. — Sensation as if the 
wrists were sprained, — On small spot of metacarpal bones painful sensation 
as if an exostosis would form, — Increased heat in hands, even in cold weather. 
— Itching of r. middle and ring fingers with erysipelatous redness. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Wrenching pain in joints of hip and knee.— Sensa- 
tion of soreness in thighs near the genitals. — Itching of inner surface of 
thighs. — Sensation as if skin were cold and shrivelled in certain parts of the 
legs. — Perspiration on legs.— (Dropsical) swelling of legs and feet.— Feet and 
legs as if asleep. — Drawing and tearing in legs and feet as if in periosteum, 
esp. during repose. — Excessive coldness of feet, even in a warm room ; can- 



986 RHODODENDRON— RHUS AROMATICA 

npt be got warm in bed ; prevents sleep. -—Pain in tendo-Achillis on stepping, 
—Rheumatic e:.,.irgemenl of great toe mistaken for bunion.— Gout with 
fibrous deposit (not urate of soda). — Sensation as if heavy weight were hang- 
ing to feet. — Corns on feet with shooting pain. 

24. Generalities.*— We think ot this remedy chiefly for the sufferings 
that are < in windy weather, even if the patient be not exposed to it ; he may 
be in bed or in a warm, comfortable room, but the blowing of the wind < 
the symptoms. — Tendency to faint in young girls of phthisical tendency who 
grow rapidly and are upset by thunderstorms (R. T. C.). — Affections 
in general of the r. upper extremities ; r. abdominal ring ; 1. side of 
nose ; testes ; r. lower extremity ; inner surface of thigh. — Serous cysts 
in vagina. — Induration or swelling of the testicles, particularly of the r. 
one. — Diarrhoea after eating fruit ; flatulent colic. — Arthritic nodes.— 
Dragging up or rooting sensation ; crawling of the skin or over the skin like 
ants ; toothache which ceases suddenly, beginning again in two or three 
hours ; feeling of heaviness in stomach after drinking cold water. — Great 
dejection and painful w’earmess after the least exercise. — Dropsical swellings. 
— Frequent remission of sufferings, and appearance of them generally in 
morning. — Sufferings excited or < by cold, damp weather, or by the approach 
of a storm, as also during repose. 

25. Skin. — Eruptions. — Burning and tearing with erysipelas. — Itching, 
burning, and creeping. 

26. Sleep. — Strong disposition to sleep during day, with burning sensa- 
tion in eyes. — Profound sleep before midnight, after having gone to sleep 
early in evening. — Sleeplessness after midnight. — Sleep in morning, disturbed 
by bodily agitation and pain. — During sleep oppression of chest, a sort of 
nightmare. 

27. Fever. — Pulse slow and weak. — Chilliness in morning in bed and 

during day if cold air blows on him. — Shivering alternately with heat. — Aug- 
mented heat, esp. in hands. — Fever in evening with heat in head, coldness of 
the feet (after lying down, continuing long), burning sensation in eyes and 
nose, painful weariness and adipsia, followed by nocturnal heat and {ilcepless- 
ness. — Sensation of heat, esp. in hands, although they feel cold to the touch. 
— Profuse debilitating perspiration, esp. when exercising in the open air. — 
Offensive-smelling perspiration in the axilla. — While perspiring the skin itches 
and tingles, like formication. — Perspiration with tingling and itching in skin, 
— Perspiration of an aromatic smell. ' 


Rhus Aromatica. 

R. canadensis. R. suaveolans. Betula triphylla. Lobadium aromati- 
cum. Turpinia glabra. Fragrant Sumach. N/ 0 , Anacar- 
diaceae. Tincture of fresh root bark. (Pharmacop. of Amer. 
Inst, says of fresh leaves.) 

Clinical. — Atony. Bladder, haemorrhage from. Diabetes. Diarrhoea, chronic. 
Dysentery, chronic. Enuresis. Hiemorrhages. Kidneys, haemorrhage from. 
Uterus, haemorrhage from ; atony of. 



RHUS AROMATICA 


987 


Characteristics. — Hale quotes J. T. McClanahan’s account of 
Rhus arom, : It is a shrub, growing from two to six feet high, on 
high, rocky soil ; stems straight, branching near the top ; flowers 
yellow, fruit clustered, red, seedy, and acid. When the bush is frac- 
tured it emits a strong odour. The bark of the root is the proper 
medicinal part.’^ McClanahan’s grandfather, Dr. John Gray, used 
Rk a. as a remedy in diabetes, and his father, Dr. F. McClanahan, in 
other genito-urinary diseases. J. T. McClanahan records these cases : 
(i),Mr. A., 27, cadaverous, emaciated, haggard, had diabetes insipidus. 
Rh, a,, teaspoonful doses of the powdered root bark in sweet milk, 
three times a day^ completely cured in four months. (2) Mrs. B., 37, 
had diabetes mellitus. F'lrst noticed increase of urine ten months 
before ; became so weak she had to abandon house-work. Pain in 
back ; thirst ; appetite, now ravenous, now deficient. Skin sallow, 
doughy. Temperature 101*5^ F. Cough and night-sweats occasion- 
ally. Diarrhoea at times. Specific gravity of urine, 1032. Rh. a.^ 
half-teaspoonful doses every four hours. Quantity of urine diminished 
next day, and as this diminution progressed the doses of Rh. a. were 
given at increasing intervals, and in three months it was discontinued, 
proper diet having been observed in the meantime. Cod-liver oil and 
hypophosphites were given after the Rh. a. was discontinued. (3) 
Mr. C. had incontinence of urine more than a year, constant dribbling. 
Rh. a. (j) gtt. X, three times a day, improved at once, and cured com- 
pletely in eight weeks. (4) Ciirl had enurCsSis during day and night for 
two years. Rh. a. 0, one part to glycerine three parts, a teaspoonful 
three times a day, cured. (5) Boy, early in summer had diarrhoea, 
stools pale and thin, running from him like water ; no particular pain 
or fever. Pale, emaciated, limbs trembling, scarcely able to stand. 
Abdomen flabby. Rh. a. (p gtt. iii, in water after each stool, cured 
rapidly. (6) A labourer had “ chronic dysentery ” two months. On the 
average five stools a day, sometimes copious and painless, sometimes 
scanty and with pain. Stools consisted largely of blood and mucus 
or clear blood. Patient thin, anxious, bowels (abdomen) flabby. Skin 
sallow. Rh. a. <p in ten-drop doses, with boiled milk diet, cured. McCla- 
nahan also mentions haemorrhage from kidneys, bladder, and uterus ; 
menorrhagia and other excessive discharges accompanied by a relaxed 
condition of the uterus as indicating the remedy ; also atonic condi- 
tions generally. These experiences have been confirmed by others. 
J. A. McKay {Horn. Neivs^ quoted Am. //., xxii. 394) relates the case of 
Mrs. S., 45, who had severe, profuse uterine luemorrhage for eight 
days, whicli three old-school doctors failed to arrest. The condition 
was becoming desperate, large clots passing away, and the patient 
fainting from the loss. Rh, a. ^ gtt. x, every six hours, was given. 
The first dose checked the flow, which ceased entirely after the 
second. 

Relations. — Rh. a. is closely allied to Rh. g. They are both non- 
poisonous, and have terminal ilowers, instead of the axillary flowers 
of the poisonous varieties. 



988 


RHUS DIVERSILOBA 


Rhus Diversiloba. 

R. diversiloba. Californian Poison Oak. N, 0 , Anacardiaceae. 

Tincture of fresh leaves. 

Clinical. — Chicken-pox. Eczema. Erysipelas. Skin, sensitive. 

Characteristics. — Murray Moore observed the effect olRh. rf.,on 
three persons : (i) Miss M,, 25, of brown hair and fair complexion, 
walked up a hill one warm morning, and whilst perspiring gathered 
ferns which grew among the Rh. d, trees, the leaves of which she 
must have touched, though she did not pull any. The result was a 
very severe poisoning, which provided the majority of the symptoms 
of the Schema. (2) J. W., light-haired, robust Englishman, 23, lay 
down whilst sweating among the bushes and was smartly poisoned. 
Ver, (p internally and a lotion of Magnesia sulph. externally checked 
the spread of the disease. (3) Boy, 10, pure blond type with thin, 
freckled skin, plucked some of the leaves, and in eighteen hours the 
poisoning symptoms came on, facial esysipelas with extreme oedema, 
closing both eyes, itching and burning. The symptoms became 
general. M. Moore relates also the case of a man who was poisoned 
in California in September and returned to the Eastern States and 
there had an annual eruption for six successive years. During the 
seventh attack he was carried off with pneumonia, which Moore 
thinks would not have been the case but for the Rhus complication. 
(C. Z). P.) 

SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Dull frontal headache. — Head hot. 

3. Eyes. — L. eye closed entirely by swelling ; r. partially. 

6. Face. — Vesicular erysipelatous rash with great oedema and swelling 
of glands in neck ; vesicles dried into a crust so dense that movements of 
mouth and face were painful. 

II. Stomach. — Loss of appetite ; nausea ; vomiting. — Whole digestive 
system deranged for three weeks. 

13. Stool. — Bowels costive. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine scanty, high-coloured ; felt hot when 
passed. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Heat and itching of scrotum and adjacent 
surfaces of thigh, < on hairy parts. 

21. Limbs. — Stiffness of limbs ; of all joints on first moving them. 

24. Generalities.— Extreme languor. — On rising from bed fainted ; 
again later in day. 

25. Skin. — Eruption very like chicken-pox. — ^After the erysipelatous con- 
dition of the skin subsided extreme irritability (to flannel) remained, and 
hypersensitiveness to cold air. — Five months after the poisoning there was a 
recurrence (without fresh exposure) shortly after taking a bath rather too hot, 
— ^The day after he had been among the bushes heat and itching commenced 
on scrotum and adjacent surfaces of thighs, < on hairy parts; next day 



RHUS GLABRA 


989 


papules on red oedematous base appeared on forehead and neck, rapidly 
spreading in all directions, with heat, itching, and burning, but very little 
pyrexia ; itching > by cold ; < by heat, warmth, rubbing, or scratching. 

27. Fever. — In afternoon chills and feverishness by turns, and general 
malaise,— Slight pyrexia. 


Rhus Glabra. 

R. carolinensis. R. elegans. R. virginica. Common Smooth Sumach. 
Pennsylvania Sumach. Upland Sumach. (Rocky or barren 
soils in North America.) N, 0 . Anacardiaceae. Tincture of 
fresh bark ; of root ; of berries. 

Clinical. — Debility. Diarrhtea. Dreams, annoying. Dysentery. Epistaxis. 
Haemorrhages. Headache. Mouth, ulcers in. 

Characteristics. — Rhus ^lahra^ R. tryphinay and R. coriaria have 
acid fruit and astringent bark, which is used in tanning. Rh, g. is a 
deciduous shrub with stem 2 to 12 feet high, and has terminal flowers, 
and fruit clothed with acid crimson hairs, like the other non-poisonous 
Rhoes. The tincture of the bark was proved by Dr. A. V. Marshall 
on himself with very substantial doses. The symptoms of the Schema 
are his, and they bear out the traditional uses of the remedy. One of 
these is, “ profuse perspiration arising from debility (Scudder) ; and 
Marshall had profuse sweat during sleep and such a degree of 
debility that he was obliged to leave off the proving. Hale mentions 
that an infusion of the root has a popular repute in diarrhoea and 
dysentery, especially when the discharges are fetid ; and that the 
berries are used for chronic cough, wheezing cough, and laryngeal 
asthma. A tincture made of the whole pannicle (“ Sumach-bobs 
cured a patient of his who had every spring an attack of laryngeal 
cough with dyspnoea and almost complete loss of voice. Farmers 
place “ bobs in the mangers of horses who have heaves,’’ Cooper 
observed an aggravation in a case of psoriasis ; the patient felt irri- 
table and despondent, and the skin became irritable. In the proving 
there were dull, heavy headaches, > by exercise. (Hale says it has 
cured occipital headaches.) Tliisre was < of stomach symptoms by 
either food or drink. < By touch (abdomen ; ulcers in mouth). < 
After sleep. > By movement. 

Relations. — Compare : Rh. a, and other Anacardiaceae, and the 
Xanthoxylacese, which are an allied order. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1, Mind. — Distaste for society. — Stupid ; forgetful ; indifferent to sur- 
rounding objects. 

2, Head. — Dull, heavy headache on waking, > by exercise. — Dull, 
heavy pain in front and top of head. 

5. Nose. — Bleeding from 1 , nostril and mouth. — Bloody scabs in 1 . 
nostril. — L. nostril hot and dry. 



990 RHUS GLABRA— RHUS TOXICODENDRON 


8. Mouth.— Tongue furred white.— Several small, very sensitive ulcers 
on mucous membrane opposite the bicuspids. — Taste flat, alkaline. — Taste of 
drug remains long. — Bleeding from mouth. 

9. Throat.— Expelled two clots of blood from throat soon after waking. 

11. Stomach.— Loss of appetite (3rd d.). — Hunger (4th d.). — ^At break- 
fast could eat but little though feeling as if he had fasted many days (6th d.). 
— Distress in stomach, disturbed, very restless. — Pain in stomach much < by 
all food or drink. 

12. Abdomen. — Sharp cutting in umbilical region and abdomen. — 
Umbilical region tender to pressure. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Diarrhoea in afternoon, < towards evening (ist 
d.) ; later dry, hard stool ; then first part dry, later moist ; then natural ; and 
again diarrhoea of short continuance. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Scanty, high-coloured urine. 

20. Back. — Pain in small of back. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Aching and fatigue of lower limbs, can hardly 
stand. 

24. Generalities. — Lost two pounds weight in three days. — Exhaustion 
and painful fatigue compelled him to relinquish the proving. 

26. Sleep. — Sleep : disturbed by annoying dreams ; very restless. — 
Dreams of flying through the air. 

27. Fever, — Sense of coldness while there is actual increase of heat in 
the skin. — Skin hot, dry, with thirst. — Sweat, profuse during sleep. 


Rhus Radicans. 

POISON IVY. 

Rhus Toxicodendron. 

POISON OAK. 

[Under the name /?//«s Hahnemann published his proving of R. radi- 
canSj also called Toxicodendron,^] Botanists agree in recognising 
no distinction other than that of habit between the two. Mills- 
paugh {American Medicinal Plants) tells in his masterly account 
of the plant that he has seen the two varieties springing from 
the same root-stock. He advises that the tincture should be 
made from specimens of both. Rhus tox. is a shrub with erect 
stem from two to four feet high. The stem is devoid of root- 
lets. Rims r. has more or less tortuous stems, four to thirty feet 
high, profusely studded with dark -coloured rootlets, by which 
it clings to its support. — Our own Ivy {Hedera helix) in the 
same way may run along the ground, rooting at intervals if it 
cannot find a support, and growing to a great height if it can 
and it may be an erect shrub with no rootlets and no tendency 
to climb. — The two forms have been proved independently, and 



RHUS TOXICODENDRON 991 

when necessary to distinguish them I shall name them Rh, r. 
and Rh, t When reference is made to both or either in this 
work I use the term Rhus without distinction. All other varie- 
ties of Rhus will be distinguished.] N, 0 , Anacardiaceae. 
Tincture of fresh leaves gathered at sunset just before 
flowering time. 

Clinical* — Abortion. Acne rosacea. After-pains. Amenorrhoea. Anus, fissure 
of. Appendicitis. Appetite^ lost. Beri-beri. Bones, pains in. Caecum, inflamma- 
tion*of. Chilblains. Circulation^ feeble. Cyanosis, Denflue fever. Diarrhcea ; 
chronic. Diphtheria. ^ Dysentery. Dysmenorrhcea. Dyspepsia. Ear^ eczema of. 
Ecthyma, Enteric fevei. Erysipelas. Erythema nodosum. Exostosis. Eyes^ in- 
flammation of ; choroiditis ; sights weak. Feet, pains in. Gastro-enteritis. Glands, 
inflammation of. Gout. Haemorrhages. Hiemorrhoids. Hands^ pains in. Hernia. 
Herpes. Herpes zoster. Housemaid's knee. Hydrocele. Influenza. Intermittents. 
Jaw^ cracking in. Liver, abscess of. Lumbago. Measles. Menorrhagia. Metror- 
rhagia. Neuralgia. Ovary, tumour of. Paralysis. Paraphimosis. Pemphigus. 
Periosteum, pains in. Pleurisy. Pleurodynia. Pneumonia ; typhoid. Ptosis. 
Pycemia. Redgum. Relapsing fever. Rheumatism. Scarlatina. Sciatica. Sleeps 
restless. Small-pox. Spine, diseases of. Sprain. Strictures. Tongue^ affections of. 
Typhus fever. Urticaria. Warts. Wens. Yawning, 

Charaoteristics. — The Poison Ivy grows in thickets and low 
grounds in North America, flowering in June. It was introduced 
into England as a plant in 1640. In 1798 Dufresnoy of Valenciennes 
first used it as a medicine. It was brought to his notice by the cure 
of a young man of an herpetic eruption {dartre) of six years’ duration, 
through his being accidentally poisoned with the plant. Dufresnoy 
used it successfully in eruptive diseases, paralysis, rheumatism, and 
amaurosis. The milky juice, which turns black on exposure, is used as 
a marking ink (like Anacard.) and as an ingredient of varnishes for 
finishing boots. The tincture contains Rhoitannic acid (Ci8H380,3) 
and Toxicodendric acid, a poisonous, volatile principle. A peculiarity 
of the plant is that it is more poisonous during the night, and when 
bursting into leaf, or at any time in June or July when the sun is 
not shining upon it. Absence of sunlight, together with dampness, 
seems td favour the exhalation of Toxicodendric acid. “An acri- 
monious vapour, combined with carbiiretted hydrogen, exhales from 
a growing plant of the Poison Oak during the night. It can be 
collected in a jar, and is capable of inflaming and blistering 
the skin of persons of excitable constitution who plunge their arms 
into it^^ (Porcher, quoted by Millspaugh, from whose work I take 
the above facts). Those who care for Signatures will not fail to 
connect the cardinal aggravations of Rhus — at night and from damp 
— with the increased virulence of the plant at night and in damp 
atmosphere. (One prover of Rh. ven. was not influenced by contact 
with the leaves when his skin was dry, but only when perspiring ; and 
the worst poisonings with Rh. happened to persons when moist 

and heated.) Millspaugh relates instances of Rhus poisoning : Out of 
ten men employed to clear a piece of land of shrubs among which 
the Poison Vine greatly predominated only four escaped : “ Most of 
tfie men soon began to show signs of being tired, and at the end of 
the fourth day six of them were flat on their backs too sick for any- 
thing.^^ Actual contact with the plant is not necessary in order to 



992 


RHUS TOXICODENDRON 


produce its effect. One sultry day in June a young lady drove a 
croquet ball across a lawn to a clump of Poison Ivy that grew beside 
it. Knowing her susceptibility she reached under the plant and drew 
out the ball without touching a leaf. During the evening of the same 
day her face began to itch and burn, and in the night it swelled so 
that the eyes were not merely closed, the lashes even disappeared in 
the swelling. It took nearly two weeks for her to recover. Mills- 
paugh summarises the effects of RJms (the majority of poisonings have 
been caused by Rh. rad.) as follows ; First redness and swelling 
of the affected part, with intolerable itching and bu.'ning, followed by 
vertigo, weariness, and a sort of intoxication. Inliltration of face and 
eyes, and agglutination of the lids after sleep ; great restlessness, 
pain, thirst, and fever. The surface of the skin becomes after a time 
studded with confluent bullas where the cellular tissue is loose, then a 
dermatitis follows resembling eiy^sipelas ; this may spread rapidly and 
finally be communicated to the mucous membranes. This is followed 
by swelling of the mouth and throat, cough, nausea, and vomiting. 
Rheumatoid pains develop about the joints, and a painful stiffness 
asserts itself in the lumbar region, while the legs and arms become 
numb. Confusion of mind and delirium may then set in, during 
which the patient may become so ill-humoured, restless, and anxious 
that he will jump out of bed. Concomitants are : Inflammation of 
eyes, dilation of pupils, weak vision, sometimes diplopia ; cpistaxis ; 
brown-coated tongue with triangular red tip ; swelling of parotids ; 
difficult swallowing ; griping ; diarrhoea ; profuse urination ; oppres 
sion ; rapid pulse ; prostration ; soreness of muscles, < by rest ; > 
by exercise ; sleepiness ; chilliness followed by fever and copious 
sweat. — The American provings were made with Rh. rad.j and the 
majority of the poisonings have occurred from this plant. Though it 
is not certain that Hahnemann used Rh. tox. at all, or exclusively, 
Jahr gave a separate presentation of the Rh. rad. symptoms. H. C. 
Allen (quoted Critique^ vi. 409) notes in Rh. rad. a periodicity which 
marks it as a great antipsoric. It is, he says, on deeply psoric or 
tubercular constitutions that its toxic effects are most felt and longest 
lasting, and these constitutional effects seem ineradicable without 
the antipsoric. One case of his showed a return of symptoms at 
12.45 a.m. on July 5th, each year during sixteen years, except the year 
1898, when the previous use of Tuhercuhnumj a dose once each month, 
prevented an attack ; and modified the 1899 attack. Guernsey con- 
siders Rh. rad. deeper acting than Rh. iox.y being indicated in 
phlegmonous erysipelas, especially where it begins in ankles and 
moves gradually up the leg, moving in the deeper tissues, no 
fever ; and for axillary glands when the swelling is very deep 
and hard. Farrington gives as distinctive indications for Rh. rad. : 
Occipital headache with rheumatic stiffness of nape* Drawing 
tearing pains in legs. Pleurodynia when the pains shoot into the 
shoulders. Mahony (M. A., xxvi. 109) reports a case of eczema 
on perineum and scrotum with sweat in cleft of nates^ both relieved 
in a week with Rh. rad. 12, twice daily. — Hahnemann quickly per 
ceived the keynote of the Rhus symptoms : “ We observe,^* he says, in 
his preface to the proving, ‘Hhis curious action (which is found in few 



RHUS TOXICODENDRON 


993 


other medicines, and in these never to such a great degree), viz., 
the severest symptoms and sufferings arc excited when the body or the limb is 
at restj and kept as much as possible without movement. The opposite of 
this, namely, an increase of the symptoms by movement, is much 
more rarely observed.” He contrasts Rhus with Bry,^ which has 
almost identical rheumatic pains with the opposite Conditions. Neid- 
hard adds a note in HempePs ffahr which brings out a modification 
of this “ < by rest ” which is of the greatest practical importance, as 
I can testify. Neidhard says that the disease in which he has made 
most use of Rhus Is. a form of rheumatism common in North America, 
and characterised by the following symptoms : Rigidity, paralytic 
weakness of the joints, with stinging pain along the tendons and 
muscles. Swelling and redness on or near the joints. Rheumatism 
of the hip-joint and wrist seem to be most effectually controlled by 
its action. The greatest rigidity and pain ts experienced on first moving 
the joints after rest^ and on waking up in the morning. After the joints 
are moved for a while the pain is lessened.” Contrasted with 
Rhus has : “ The more he moves the > he is ” ; whereas Bry, has 
^^The more he moves the < he is.” It is necessary to bear 
in mind this distinction or a wrong prescription will often be 
made. Rhus has not only < during rest, but < after resting also. 
However, Rhus and Bry. complement each other : it is not unusual for 
the Conditions of a case to change under one of these remedies, and 
then the other will be required. Hahnemann says these two antago- 
nistic sister remedies ” — each in its place — successfully met the typhus 
which prevailed in the countries desolated by the war which raged 
from the summer of 1813 and onwards. Of 183 cases treated by 
Hahnemann in Leipzig not one died. This restlessness of Rhus will be 
found to qualify the symptoms in a large proportion of the cases in 
which it will be called for. It is as restless as Aeon, and -drs., but in 
a different way from either. With Rhus it is due to the pain and 
soreness temporarily > by movement ; or a nervous internal uneasi- 
ness which makes the patient want to be on the move when there is 
no particular pain present (Nash). The presence of restlessness is a 
leading indication for Rhus in fevers, typhoid and other. Other indi- 
cations are — clouded sensorium, stupefaction, muttering delirium, dry 
tongue. The characteristic tongue of Rhus is dry or dark coated, 
with triangular red tip. In intfcrmittents a characteristic is Cough 
during the chill.” Hahnemann pointed out another keynote of Rhus : 

Multiplied experience has taught me that Rhus is the most efficacious 
and the specific remedy for the frequently fatal effects of over-lifting, 
inordinate exertions of the muscles, and contusions.” He was, of 
course, led to this inference by the “bruised and sprain-like pains” 
and “ stiffness ” of the provings. Rhus is in the front rank of vul- 
neraries. It meets threatened abortion from a sprain ; and also pro- 
longed after-pains and other effects of the strain of a severe labour ; 
axillary abscess from this cause has been cured with Rhus. Straining, 
theumatic coughs. Ailments from straining a single part, muscle, or 
tendon ; over-lifting, particularly from stretching high up to reach 
things. There is an analogy to this in the dreams — dreams of great 
exertion ; rowing, swimming, working hard at his daily occupation. 

VOL. 11. 64 



994 


RHUS TOXICODENDRON 


Rhus has cured many forms of paralysis : Rheumatic paraplegia from 
getting wet, lying on damp ground ; sleeping in damp sheets ; after 
exertion ; after parturition, sexual excess, or fevers. Ptosis. Paralysis 
of single limbs. Numbness of parts paralysed. Facial neuralgia, 
lumbago, and sciatica (esp. of left side), with restlessness ; coming on 
after a wetting or after a bath are cured by Rhus, The neuralgic 
pains and eruptions make Rhus a perfect simillimum in many cases of 
herpes zoster. Fever-blisters round mouth. Howard Crutcher relates 
(M. A,j xxii. 38) how’ after standing on a wrharf with his right side 
exposed to a cold w4nd from the river he began to have severe pains 
shooting up the ulnar nerve, a steady ache uniforni throughout arm 
and forearm, but extremely severe in structures beneath deltoid. The 
pain w^as much < in a warm place ; it did not interfere with move- 
ment. At 8 p.m. Crutcher took Rhus 30 dry on the tongue, and almost 
immediately he was called into the open air again. In thirty minutes 
the pain was decidedly better ; in ninety minutes it w'as gone. A 
case of Rhus poisoning reported by Morey {Med. Cent,^ February, 
1898 ; H. W.y xxxiii. 309), showed an effect on the menstrual period, 
and was remedied by Crocus. Miss M. was severely poisoned by Rh. 
rad, (it is called “ Ivy ’^) in July, 1895, during her menstrual period. 
She was treated with Bell, and Rhus internally, and an Oxide of Zinc 
ointment externally, and appeared to make a rapid recovery. On 
September i, 1897, without further knowm poisoning, another similar 
attack developed during the menstrual period, and frequent minor 
attacks had occurred in the two years, always at the time of the 
menses. Later on she had another attack wdiich developed rapidly 
and greatly alarmed her. The menstrual flow' commenced a w^eefe 
before she came to Morey, was very scanty, dark^ and clottcdj as had 
been the case for some time. The flow had scarcely well begun when 
it ceased suddenly and the eruption appeared. Croc, was given, and 
the first dose re-established the flow’, which was normal in appear- 
ance and quantity, and the eruption at once disappeared. Peculiar 
Sensations are : As if intoxicated. As if asleep. As of a weight behind 
right orbit. As of a band strapped across forehead. As if head wrere 
swelling out. Brain, as if loaded ; as if torn ; as if loose ; as if 
fluctuating ; as if a quantity of blood shot into it w^hen stooping. As 
if muscles of back of head screwed together. As if a hundredweight 
on nape of neck. As if a veil before eyes. As of sand in eyes. As if 
lids difficult to move. As if jaw would break. Teeth as if being torn 
out ; too long ; loose. As if tongue had been skinned. As if a hernia 
about to protrude. As if pharynx inactive or paralysed. Stomach, as 
if overloaded ; as if a stone in ; as if pit of stomach swollen or drawn 
together. Hypochondria and abdomen as if beaten. Digging as if 
caused by a worm. As if a knife in right abdomen. As if something 
torn loose in abdomen, chest, and inner parts generally. As if a lump 
lay like a pressing heavyweight in abdomen. As if one side of rectum 
grown up. As if everything would come out of rectum. As if breath 
were stopped at pit of stomach. As if sternum were pressed inward. 
As if sprained or dislocated : back, jaw, arms, wrist, hip, knee, anlde. 
As if one had been lying in an uncomfortable position. As if bruised 
in right side of lumbar vertebrae and in small of back. As if flesh of 



RHUS TOXICODENDRON 


995 


small of back had been beaten. As if back were broken. As if some 
one were pressing on left shoulder. As if hand were held in hot 
water. Hand, as if withered ; as if lame ; as if pins pricking points 
and palmar surfaces of first phalanges of fingers. Rectus cruris 
muscle as if bruised. As if hamstrings and tendons of limbs too short. 
As if knee too short. Legs (and right foot) as if made of wood. Feet 
and ankles as if asleep. Heels as if stepping on pins. As if running 
nails under skin of heels. As if walking on needles. Joints as if 
bruised. As if bones ached. As if sinking through bed. As if some- 
thing forced him out of bed. Bones, as if being scraped ; as if flesh 
being torn loose lErom them. As if whole body was burning. As if 
cold water poured over him. As if blood ran cold through veins. As 
of subcutaneous ulceration. As if inner parts grown together. Pecu- 
liar Symptoms are : Craving for cold drink and laborious dreams. 
Herpes alternating with asthma and dysentery. Chokes easily on 
swallowing. Swallowing = pain in middle of back. Anorexia in 
palate and throat. Nausea in chest. Taste of blood with cough (no 
blood being raised). Coldness in left tibia. Scalp sensitive, < turn- 
ing hair back. Hour-glass contraction of abdomen. The symptoms 
are : < By touch; > by nibbing. < From riding ; blows ; jars ; 
sprains. < By rest ; and commencing motion ; > continued motion. 
(Lying down > colic and diarrhoea.) Lying on hard floor with 
pillow under back > pain in back. Must hold head to > weight in 
it. Bending head back > pain in occiput ; = pain in head and down 
spine. Limbs lain on fall asleep ; no sweat on them. < Side lain 
on. Lying on left side = palpitation and pain in heart. Swallowing 
sss pain in back. Inclination to stretch. Stretching = cracking in 
knees ; soreness in abdomen. Unwonted exercise = paralysis. 
Over-exertion = palpitation ; < coxalgia. < Evening ; night ; 
morning after sleep. Sensitive to cold open air ; raw north-east 
winds. Effects of drinking cold water ; getting wet, especially after 
being heated ; cold bathing ; sea bathing. > By warmth and hot 
applicaitions. < Warmth of bed. Sciatica is > by warmth from 
exercise. < Change of weather ; damp, stormy weather ; before a 
storm ; snowstorm ; in autumn ; in winter. Nausea < after eating. 
Craves cold water, which is vomited immediately. 

BslnMons.—’Anluiotcd by : Bry., Bell., Camph., Coff., Crot. t., 
Grind., Merc., Sang., Sul., Verb. h. Aniuiok to: Bry., Ranunc., Rhod., 
Ant. t., Sapon, (Ars.). Complementary : Bry. Inimical : Apis, before 
or after, especially in skin affections. Compatible : Arn., Ars., Bry., 
Calc., Calc, ph., Cham., Con., Lach., Ph. ac., Pu^., Sul. Followed well 
by: Calc., Bell., Graph., Nux, Pho., Pul., Merc.', Sep., Sul., Ars., Bry. 
Compare: The other Rhoes and Anacardia. Eye symptoms, > by 
motion, Comoc. (Rhus > by warmth ; Comoc. <). Rheumatic 
paralysis from exposure to damp and cold, Caust. (Rhus restless, > 
by motion day and night ; Caust. restless only at night). Parotid 
gland, Am. c. (Rhus left ; Am. c. right). Result of working in water, 
Calc. Granular ophthalmia, Arg. n. (Rhus has more spasm ; if lids 
*are forced open scalding tears gush out and cause pimples round the 
eye). Cough excited by cold drink, Sil. (> Caust.). Sweat of body, 
head dry (Sil. sweat of head, body dry). Nose-bleed at beginning of 



996 


RHUS TOXICODENDRON 


typhoid, Ph. ac. (with Rhus it >, not with Ph. ac.). Enables persons 
to withstand muscular fatigue, FI. ac., Ars., Coca. Hypertrophy of 
heart from over-exertion, Bro., Arn., Aco. Ulcers on legs in dropsy, 
Ars., Lyc. (Lyc. in dropsy from liver disease). Fear of being poisoned, 
Glo., K. bro., Hyo., Bap. Profuse gushing tears excoriating cheek, 
Euphr. (Rhus < right eye ; pus thinner). Ptosis or any ocular 
paralysis, Gels. (Rhus rheumatic patient, from wetting ; Gels, with 
sluggish thought and suffused face). Scarlatina, er>^sipelas, &c., with 
drowsiness and oedema, Apis (Rhus dusky red, bodily restlessness ; 
Ap. rosy red, fidgetiness, Rhus itching preponderates ; Ap. less ten- 
dency to form pus). Enteritis, peritonitis, typhlitis, Lach. Heart 
affections with numbness of left arm, Aco. (tingling in fingers), Kahn., 
Puls, (numbness, e.specially about elbow), Act. r. (as though arm 
tightly bound to body), Phyt. (right arm). Dreams of business of day, 
Bry. (Rhus and Bry. have opposite Conditions ; and Rhus menta. 
state is hopeless and despondent, Bry. fretful, peevish, irritable.) 
Typhoid, Pho. (follows Rhus well ; pneumonia ; stools yellow 
apd blood- streaked, at times like flesh water”), Ars. (irritable and 
anxious in spite of prostration), Bapt. (face dark red, besotted ; stool 
dark, fluid, very offensive ; drowsy, stupor ; tossing about with delu- 
sion that limbs are scattered about ; bed feels hard), Arn. (complete 
apathy ; involuntary stool and urine ; bloody sputa if lungs affected). 
Empyema and induration of axillary glands, Bell. (Bell, at climaxis, 
Rhus after labour). Eczema, Mez., Jug. r. (favus). Cough < from 
evening to midnight, Mez. (Rhus also from uncovering). Colic > 
bending double, Coloc. (Rhus also > moving about). Conjunctivitis 
from getting wet, Calc. Glaucoma, Caust. Cracking and breaking 
pain in jaw, Ign., Petr. Paralysis from rheumatic meningitis (from 
rheumatic myelitis, Dulc.). Acute spinal paralysis of infants, Sul. 
(complementaiy). Averse to be uncovered, Ars., Hep. Bearing down 
in hypogastrium, Puls. Flesh feels beaten off the bones, Thuj. 
Aversion to darkness, Am. m.. Bar. c., Calc., Carb. a., Stro., Val., 
Stram. Averse to be washed, Ant. c., Clem., Hep., Sep., Spi., Sul. 
Effects of raising arms high to lift things, Pho. Bloody urine dis- 
charged in drops. Pul. Phimosis, Cann., Merc., Sul., Nit. ac., Sep., 
Thuj., Sabi. Hunger in early morning, Aga., Ant. c., Asar., Calc., 
Carb. a., Lyc., Ran. b., Saba., Zn. Semilateral coat of tongue, Daph,, 
Lob. (Rhus w^hite). Hot breath, Calc., Carb. s., Sul. Nocturnal saliva- 
tion, Cham., Nux, Pho, Difficult swallowing of solids, Atrop., Bell., 
Bar. c., Calc., Chi., Dro., Lyc., Plb., Sil. Parotitis, Aur., Merc., Pilo. ; 
metastasis to testes, Rhus, Pul., Bell., K. ca. Yearly returns, Ars. 
Cold from wetting head (Bell, from hair-cutting). Sensation of sub- 
cutaneous ulceration. Ran. b., Pul. Chokes easily when swallowing, 
K. ca. > Warm food, Lyc, Epistaxis at night, (Bry. morning). 
Punctured wounds as if stepping on nails, Hyper., Led. • Backache 
> lying on hard floor, Nat. m. Hydroa, Nat. m. Acne from getting 
wet, or ice-cold drinks, when heated, Belhs. Desires cold drink and 
vomits it immediately, Ars. Ailments from spraining a single part, 
muscle, or tendon. Calc., Nux. Vertigo < lying down (Apis >) ; < • 
rising from lying or stooping, Bry. Jelly-like stools, Colch., K. bi. 

Causation,— Slightest anger. Cold. From wetting head. Damp 



R*HUS TOXICODENDRON 997 

sheets. Bathing, in fresh or salt water. Getting wet when heated. 
Strains. Over-exertion. Over-lifting. Raising arms high to lift 
things. Drinking ice-water. Beer (headache). 

SYMPTOMS. 

1, Mind. — Anxious sadness and excessive anguish, esp. (at twilight) in 
evening and at night, with wish for solitude and inclination to weep. — Rest- 
lessness which will not suffer the patient to remain seated ; and compels him 
to throw himself adout in bed. — Anguish with fear of death and sighs. — Fear 
of being poisoned. — Suicidal mania (desire to tlirow lumself into the water). — 
Irritability and ill-humour, with repugnance to labour. — Moral dejection with 
anthropophobia. — Helplessness and profound despondency. — Uneasiness 
respecting one’s children, affairs, and the future, with want of self-confidence. 
— Weakness of memory and forgetfulness (cannot remember the most recent 
events). — Want of ideas and of mental energy. — Difficult comprehension. — 
Slowness of conception and mental dulness. — Delusions of the imagination 
and visions. — Mild delirium ; with insensibility. 

2. Head. — Head bewildered as from intoxication. — Stupefaction ; with 
tingling in head and pain in limbs, > on motion. — Staggering gait without 
vertigo. — Staggers to r. when w’alking. — Vertigo and staggering as if about to 
fall ; esp. when getting out of bed (chilliness and pressure behind eyes). — 
Vertigo as if he were held up high, while sitting. — Emptiness in head. — 
Vertigo, with fear of death, on lying down in evening. — Headache « in the 
morning, while lying ; from cold) immediately atter a meal or after drinking 
beer, and also on moving the arms (> by heat and when moving about). — 
Headache < morning, r. side, with vertigo as if she would fall back on getting 
out of bed, acute darting pains in both temples, can hardly hold up, and a 
mist comes before sight when doing anything quickly or getting up in a 
hurry (produced. — R. T. C.). — (Incito-motor function defective). — Attacks 
of head^iche with need to lie down ; every vexation and exercise in the 
open air renews the attack^. — Peiiodical headache. — Pain in head as if 
brain were bruised, esp. in morning, < by moving and lifting up head. — 
Passive congestion of head > by repose. — Heaviness and pressive hilness of 
head (esp. in forehead ; as if a weight were falling forward, with heat in face), 
with sensation, on stooping, as if Pie brain were about to burst. — Head so 
heavy obliged to hold it upright to > the weight pressing forward into fore- 
head. — Sensation of compression or expansion in head. — Drawings and tear- 
ings in head, and esp. in temples, principally in evening and at night. — 
Lancinating headache day and night, extending as far as ears, root of nose, 
and the cheek-bones, with the teeth set on edge. — Beating and pulsations in 
head, esp. in occiput. — Pains, esp. in occipital protuberances. — Sanguineous 
congestion io head. — Burning sensation, esp. in forehead (when walking) and 
occiput. — Occipital headache with rheumatic stiffness in nape {R, rad ,). — 
Painful tingling in head. —Sensation as if a quantity of blood shot into brain 
when stooping. — Rush of blood to head with burning-tingling and beating in 
l?rain, bright redness of face, great restlessness of body in morning when at 
rest, < after eating. — Liability to take cold from having head wetted. — 
Buzzing and nois^ in head. — Balancing and sensation of fluctuation in head 



998 RHUS TOXICODENDRdW 

at every step, as if brain loose, also when shaking -head. — Painful sensi- 
bility of exterior of head, as from subcutaneous ulceration, esp. on turning up 
hair and on touching it; < on side on which he does not lie, and from 
becoming warm in bed. — Contraction of the scalp as if the hair were pulled. 
—Drawing and tearing in scalp. — Swelling of head, — Erysipelatous swelling 
of head and face with vesicles drying up and forming itching scabs. — Gnawing 
tingling in scalp. — Dry herpes on scalp. — Periodical scald-head, reappearing 
every year. — Scald-head with thick scabs, which destroy the hair, w|th 
greenish pus (offensive smell), and violent itching at night. — (Eczema of 
entire hairy scalp, causing loss of hair. — R. T. C.).— Small, soft tubercles on 
the scalp. — Wen of many years’ duration cured with Rh. i, which caused 
erysipelas at same time (H. PT., xxxi. 199). 

3. Eyes. — Pains in eyes on moving ball of eye. — Pressure and burning 
sensation in eyes. — Eyes fixed, dull, and downcast. — Smarting in eyes and 
lids. — Affections of internal surface of eyelids. — Inflammation of the eyes and 
lids, with redness and nocturnal agglutination. — Profuse lachrymation (eyes 
full of water, blear-eyed ness) with cedematous swelling round eyes. — 
Meibomian glands enlarged, cilia fall out. — Photophobia. — Bladder-hke swell- 
ing of the lids, closing the eyes. — Swelling (erysipelatous) of whole eye and of 
surrounding parts. — Rheumatic ophthalmia, particularly of r. eye. — Gouty 
keratitis, < in damp, rainy weather, sight dim. — Paralytic rigidity of the eye- 
lids. — ^Jerking and quivering of eyes and eyelids. — Blue colour about the eyes. 
— Heaviness of the eyelids. — Styes; on the lower eyelids. — Veil before eyes 
and weak sight ; all objects appear pale. 

4. Ears. — Otalgia. — Painful throbbing in ear at night. — Swelling of ears. 
— Discharge of sanguineous pus from ears, with deafness. — Whistling, squeak- 
ing, or ringing in ears when walking, changes to low resonance when lying 
down, as if membrana tympani were burst. — Swelling and inflammation of 
parotids with fever. — Suppuration of parotids. 

5. Nose. — Redness of point of nose, with pain as from excoriation on 
touching the part. — Hot swelling of the nose. — Breath seems so hot it burns 
the nostrils. — Dryness of the nose. — Discharge of greenish fetid pus from nose 
— Epistaxis also at night and on stooping or hawking ; blood dark ; scabs 
about nares. — Frequent violent and almost spasmodic sneezing. — Abundant 
discharge of mucus from nose, without coryza. 

6. Face.—Face pale, sickly, wan, with eyes surrounded by a blue circle 
and nose pointed. — Drawing and burning in superciliary region and in cheek- 
bones. — Face disfigured and convulsed. — Face red, with burning heat. — 
Erysipelatous inflammation and swelling of face, with pressive and tensive 
shootings and burning tingling. — Vesicular erysipelas, with yellow serum in 
the vesicles. — Humid eruption and thick scabs on face, with running of fetid 
and sanguineous serum. — Acne.— (Acne rosacea ; impetigo on the face or on 
forehead.) — Commissures of lips sore and ulcerated. — Herpetic, -crusty erup- 
tion round mouth and nose, with itching, jerking, and burning sensation. — 
Exanthema on cheeks, chin, and around mouth. — Desquamation of skin of 
face. — Incisive contractions- and burning spasmodic pains in cheeks (which 
are red and hot). — Cold sweat on face. — Eruptions of burning pimples round 
lips and chin. — Cramp-like pain in jaw-joint when at rest and when moving 
the jaw, with cracking on least movement, > by strong pressure from without 



RMUS TOXICODENDRON 999 

and by taking warm things. — Spasms in the jaw. — Constant desire to yawn 
until it seems as though the jaw would break. — Hard and painful swelling 
(pressive digging) of the parotid and submaxillary glands (with sticking on 
swallowing). — Lips dry and brownish. 

7. Teeth, — Toothache as from excoriation, or with tearings, shootings, 
jerkings, digging, and tingling, frequently at night, or < in open air and > 
by external heat (and in warm room), sometimes also in consequence of a 
chill. — Looseness of teeth. — Teeth feel elongated. — Looseness of lower 
incisors, cannot bite with them. — Fetid exhalation from carious teeth. — 
Burning pain in g^ms as from excoriation, also at night. 

8. Mouth. — Dryness of mouth with violent thirst. — Copious accumula- 
tion of saliva in mouth. — A yellow, and sometimes also a sanguineous, saliva 
flows from mouth at night. — While sitting asleep in afternoon saliva runs from 
mouth. — In morning in bed mouth full of salt water. — In morning mucus and 
tongue are salt. — Copious accumulation of viscid mucub in mouth and throat, 
with frequent expectoration. — Offensive smell from mouth. — Tongue : dry, red 
or brownish, and cracked ; triangular red tip ; yellowish- white at root. — Tongue 
white ; often on one side. — Sensation as if tongue covered with a skin. 

9. Throat. — Sensation of dryness of throat. — Sore throat, as if caused 
by internal swelling, with pain as from a bruise even when speaking, and with 
pressure and shootings during deglutition.— Sensation in throat as if some- 
thing were torn out of it. — (Sore throat after exertion in speaking.) — Difficulty 
in deglutition and pain in swallowing solid food as from contraction of throat 
and oesophagus ; difficult swallowing of liquids as from paralysis. — Brandy 
causes an extraordinary burning sensation in throat. — Copious accumulation 
of mucus in throat, with frequent hawking in morning. — Pulsative pain in 
bottom of gullet. 

10. Appetite. — Putrid taste, esp. in morning and after a meal. — Insipid, 
clammy, acrid, bitter, sour, or metallic taste. — Greasy taste in mouth but food 
tastes all right. — ^I'aste as if stomach had been deranged with putrid meat, but 
food tastes right. — Sweetish taste in mouth. — Bitter taste of food, esp. of 
bread, which appears rough and dry. — Anorexia with repugnance to all food, 
esp. bread, meat, coffee, and wine. — Anorexia in palate and throat with empty 
feeling at stomach, and at same time ravenous hunger, which goes off after 
sitting for some time.— Sensation of fulness and satiety in stomach, which 
takes away all appetite. — After a meal strong disposition to sleep, pressure 
and fulness in stomach and abdon^n, nausea whth inclination to vomit, lassi- 
tude, vertigo, and shuddering. — When eating sudden vomiting. — Bread lies 
heavy on stomach. — Want of appetite with unquenchable thirst. — Hunger 
without appetite. — Pain and heat of head after drinking beer. — Thirst most 
frequently from a sensation ol dryness in mouth, also at night or in morning, 
with desire chiefly for cold water and cold milk. — ^Craving for dainties ; for 
oysters. 

11. Stomach. — Risings with taste of food. — Empty risings after a meal 
or after drinking. — Eructations from stomach, which seems to be transferred 
to r. side of chest, as if it settled there. — Violent risings with tingling in 
stomach, > by lying down, < on getting up.— Pituita in the stomach,— Pain 
in stomach and nausea from drinking ice-water. — Nausea and disposition to 
vomit, principally after a meal and after drinking, as als6 in night or morning 



1000 RHUS TOXICODENDRON 

after rising, > by lying down. — ^Vomiting immediately after eating, — Pains in 
stomach as if there were a stone in it, esp. after a meal ; and when standing. 
— Pressure at stomach and scrobiculus, often with obstructed respiration. — 
Beating and shooting in epigastric region. — Squeezing, sensation of swelling, 
and pain as from ulceration in pit of stomach. — Sensation of coldness in 
stomach. — Sensation in pit of stomach as if something were torn away from it, 
esp. on stooping or making a false step. 

12. Abdomen. — Distension of abdomen, esp. after a meal.— Pressive 
drawing from below upward, in 1. hypochondrium. — Soreness, as if beaten, in 
hypochondria, and still more in abdomen ; < on side laiq on when turning 
and when beginning to move. — Pressive heaviness in abdomen, as from a 
weight. — Contractive spasms in abdomen, which force patient to remain bent 
double. — Hard and visible contraction of abdomen across navel ; abdomen 
distended above and below this stripe. — (Pain in abdomen with tightness 
across forehead and sleeplessness. — Violent and continuous pain round 
navel, caused by retching.— R. T. C.). — Digging turning in abdomen, as if 
caused by a worm. — Incisive tearings, jerks, and pinchings in the abdomen 
(esp, after eating; > after stool).— Pain in region of ascending colon. — Burn- 
ing sensation in the abdomen. — Relaxation of the abdomen, with internal 
shaking at every step. — Violent colic, often at night, or < by all kinds of food 
or drink, sometimes with sanguineous evacuations. — Sensation in abdomen 
as if something were torn away. — Scarlet colour of abdomen. — Soreness in 
integuments of abdomen, as if they Avere ulcerated, esp. on stretching in 
morning. — Swelling of inguinal glands. — Pressure in groins towards exterior 
as if a hernia were about to protrude. — Bloated abdomen, esp. jifter eating. — 
Great flatulence, with grumbling, fermentation, and pinching movements in 
abdomen. — Exceedingly offensive flatus. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation, sometimes alternating with diar- 
rhoea. — Hard and slow evacuations. — Tenesmus, sometimes with nausea, and 
tearing or pinchings in abdomen. — Painful tenesmus without stool. — Evacua- 
tions loose, bloody, watery, or mucous, frothy, gelatinous, red, or streaked 
with white and yellow. — Dysentery ; jelly-like, odourless stools, more frequent 
after midnight, preceded and followed by much pain with great restlessness. — 
Obstinate or dysenteric diarrhoea. — Pieces perfectly white. — Nocturnal diar- 
rhoea, with violent colic, headache, and pains in all limbs (> after an evacua- 
tion or when lying on abdomen). — Chronic painless diarrhoea, only in morning 
preceded by marked commotion in the boWfCls. — Diarrhoea with tearing pains 
running down back of the leg with every stool. — Involuntary stools when 
asleep at night. — Short respiration during stool. — Tingling and itching in anus 
and rectum. — Sense of constriction in rectum, as though one side had grown 
up. — Protrusion of haemorrhoids fiom anus after a soft evacuation, with pain 
as of excoriation. 

14. Urinary Organs.— Retention of urine. — Frequent and urgent want 
to urinate, day and night, with profuse emission. — Incontinence of urine, esp. 
during repose (at night or when sitting). — Urine emitted in a divided stream. 
— Emission, drop by drop, of blood-red urine, with tenesmus. — Diminished 
emission of urine, although much drink may be taken. — Deep-coloured, 
irritating urine, which soon becomes turbid. — White, turbid urine. — Urine 
clear as water with a snow-white sediment. — Swelling of urethra. 



RHUS TOXICODENDRON 


JOOl 


xj. Male Sexual Organs*— Profuse eruption on genital organs (closing 
the urethra by swelling).— Inflammation of the glans.— Running vesicles on 
the glans. — Swelling of the glans and prepuce ; prepuce dark red. — Paraphi- 
mosis.— Red spots (blotches) on the interior of prepuce.— Swelling and thicken- 
ing of scrotum (with intolerable itching). — Erysipelas of scrotum. — (Hydro- 
cele ; from over-lifting). — Scrotum flaccid and hanging low. — Moist eruption 
on scrotum. — Frequent erections at night, with want to urinate. — Strong 
sexual desire in morning. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Catamenia premature and too profuse. — 
Menstrual flow lighi-coloured and acrid, causing biting pain in the vulva. — 
Erysipelatous inflammation of the external genitals. — Soreness of vagina soon 
after (or hindering) coitus. — Catamenia of too long duration. — Menstrual dis- 
charge = violent pain in vulva. — Membranous dysmenorrhoea. — Menorrhagia 
from strains ; from wetting. — Discharge of blood during pregnancy. — Pain as 
from excoriation and shootings in vagina. — (Uterine polypus with metrorrhagia. 
— Relieves shooting pains of cancer uteri. — R. T. C.). — Bearing-down pain ; 
when standing. — After-pains of too long duration, after severe labour, with much 
and excessive straining, — Discharge of blood and clots of blood from uterus, 
with labour-pains. — After labour, vitiated discharge from vagina, with shootings 
upward in the parts and a bursting sensation in the head. — For weeks after 
delivery pain in r. limbs with numbness from hips to feet (varicose veins). — 
Abortion from strain. — Axillary abscess after delivery. — Breasts painfully 
distended, red in streaks, rheumatic state. — Amenorrhcea from getting wet ; 
with milk in breasts. — Milk-leg, typhoid metritis after delivery. — Diminished 
secretion (or suppression) of milk ; with burning over body. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness and roughness of throat, with 
a sensation of rawness in chest. — Sensation of coldness in throat on taking an 
inspiration. — Tendency to be choked when swallowing. — Burning exhalation 
from larynx. — Sensation of constriction in throat-pit after a short walk, — 
Cough excited by a tickling in air-passages ; generally short and dry, with 
anguish and shortness of breath, and principally in evening before midnight. 
—Dry, fatiguing cough. — Dry, teasing cough coming on just before the chill 
and continuing during the chill. — Cough with vomiting of food, esp. in even- 
ing, and when lying on back. — Cough after waking in morning. — During the 
cough gets a taste of blood in the mouth but does not cough up blood. — Short 
cough with bitter taste in mouth, in evening after lying down and in morning 
after waking. — Cough with stitches Ai chest and profuse general perspiration. 
— Whooping-cough ; spasmodic, violent cough, caused by tickling in larynx 
and chest, with expectoration (except in evening) of acrid pus or greyish-green 
cold mucus of putrid smell ; or of pale, clotted, at times brown blood. — 
Putting hand out of bed brings on a cough. — Pneumonia with typhoid symp- 
toms, often after re-absorption of pus. — Cough with pain in stomach, or with 
shaking in chest and head. — Terrible cough which seems as if it would tear 
something out of chest. — Cough with expectoration of a bright-red blood and 
sensation of faintness in chest. 

18. Chest. — DifEcult respiration after a moderate walk. — Anxious oppres- 
sion of chest, even at night. — Nausea in chest ; < stooping.— Respiration 
impeded by a pressure and squeezing in pit of stomach.— Shortness of breath 
m evening with tension in chest. — Frequent want to take a full inspiration. — 



1002 


RHUS TOXICODENDRdN 


Weakness in chest, which renders speech difficult after a walk in open 

Sensation of constriction in chest.— Shootings and lancmfions in chest and 
sides of chest ; c.^p. when sitting with bod}^ bent forwards, when speaking, 
when breathing deeply, when sneezing, seldom when walking or when using 
vigorous exertion. — Inflammation of lungs, also pneumonia nervosa. — Pleuro- 
dynia, chest pains shoot into shoulders (JRk. rad,). — Tingling in chest, with 
tension of muscles of chest, < by repose. — Rush of blood to chest. 

19. Heart. — Weakness and sensation of trembling in heart, — Violent 
palpitation of heart while sitting quietly. — Shootings in region of heart, with 
painful sensation of paralysis and numbness of 1. arm.-' Pulse rapid, small, 
compressible. 

20 . Neck and Back. — Rheumatic stiffness of nape and neck, with 
painful tension during movement. — Painful swelling of axillary glands. — 
Rheumatic tearing between scapulae, not affected by movement, < by cold, 
> by heat. — ^Tearing between shoulders, drawing together from both sides. — 
Transient coldness in back. — Contusive pain in loins, esp. on touching the 
parts, and during repose. — Pain in small of back when sitting still or when 
lymg \ > when lying on something hard or from exercise. — Bruised pain in 
sacrum when he lies still on it or sits still ; feels nothing of it when moving. 
— Painful rigidity in loins. — Painftil exostosis on sacrum. — Distortion of the 
vertebral column. — Pains in loins, in back, and nape, as from lifting too great 
a weight. — Drawing and stitches in back, esp. when seated and on stooping. 
— Opisthotonos. 

21 . Limbs. — Swelling, stiffness, and paralysed sensations in joints, from 
sprains, over-lifting, or over-stretching. — Lameness, stiffness, and pain on first 
moving after rest, or on getting up in morning ; > by constant motion. — 
Trembling or sensation of trembling in limbs. — The limbs on which he lies, 
esp. arms, go to sleep. — Rheumatic tension, drawing, tearing in limbs, during 
rest. — Excessively cold hands and feet all day. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Burning shooting under 1. axilla, on the arm. — 
Tearing and burning sensation in shoulder, with paralysis of arm, esp. during 
the cold season, during repose, and in heat of bed. — Coldness, paralysis, and 
insensibility of arm. — R. arm weak ; rheumatic paralysis. — Exostosis in 
arm, with burning sensation and ulcers, which discharge a sanious pus. — 
Erysipelatous swelling and pustules, with burning itching in arms, hands, 
and fingers. — Red spots on arms. — ^Violent stitches in r. upper arm from 
without. — Jerks, shootings, and tearing in arms. — Tension in elbow-joint. — 
Jerking tearing in elbows, wrists, and joints of fingers. — Digging in bones 
of the forearm. — Weakness and rigidity of forearm and fingers during move- 
ment, and trembling of those parts after the least exertion. — Hot swelling 
of the hands in evening. — Swollen veins on hands. — Vesicular eruption in 
clusters on wrist.— Rhagades ; smarting of back of hands. — Back of hand 
covered with chaps and hot ; skin hard, rough, and stiff. — Tearing in all the 
finger-joints. — Warts on hands and fingers. — Hang-nails. — Swelling of fingers. 
— ^Jerking in thumbs. — Contraction of fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs. — (Eruption with sweat in cleft of nates.) — Aching 
pains in legs ; must change position every moment. — (Pains in 1. lower limb, 
thigh chiefly, from septic absorption in old abdominal disease, with vesical 
irritation.— R. T. C.) — Shootings and tearings in hip-joint, extending to ham, 



RHUS TOXICODENDRON icx)3 

esp. when resting on foot ; or with dull drawings and burning sensation 
during repose, and painful sensibility of joints on rising from a seat or 
on going up stairs (or other over-exercise ; involuntary limping). — Tension 
and stiffness of the muscles and joints of hips, thighs, legs, knees, and 
feet. — Paralysis of the lower extremities. — Cramp in calf after midnight, 
when lying in bed, and when seated after walking ; it goes off on bending 
the knee. — Cramps in buttocks, thighs, and calves, esp. at night, in bed, 
or when seated after walking. — Spasmodic twitching of the limbs when 
stepping out. — ^Tension in the knee as if the tendons were too short. — Painful 
swelling above knee* — Drawing and jerking tearing in the thighs and legs. — 
Lancinations in the thighs, legs, knees, feet, and toes. — Heaviness in legs, esp. 
in hams and calves. — Tingling pain in shafts of tibiae at night when the legs 
are crossed, with constant necessity to move, preventing sleep. — Coldness in 
1. tibia. — Paralysis of legs and feet. — Shootings and wrenching pain in ankle- 
bones when resting on foot. — Inflammatory swelling of instep, sometimes 
with pustules and miliary pimples on part affected. — Swollen round ankles 
after sitting too long, particularly in travelling. — Erysipelatous swelling of 
feet. — Swelling of feet in evening. — Numbness and paleness of feet (feet 
dead). — Distortion of toes. — Corns on feet, with burning sensation and pain as 
from excoriation. 

24. Generalities. — [We are led to think of this remedy where we find 
an irresistible desire to move or change the position every little while, 
followed by great relief for a short time, when they must again move, and 
experience the same relief for a short time ; this condition is usually < at 
night. — ^After resting for a time, or on getting up from sleep, when first 
moving about, a painful stiffness is felt, which wears off from continual 
motion ; but relief is experienced from continual motion — e.g., a nursing 
mother may have sore nipples, and when the child begins to nurse, the nipple 
hurts exceedingly, but on continued nui Miig it becomes much easier. — Pain 
in chest (often rheumatic), < by using arms — as in making a bed, sweeping, 
&c., stiffness of nape of neck ; sensation as if flesh were beaten off the bones, 
or as if a dog were gnawing it off ; as if any part were contracted ; as if a part 
were increased in size ; as if certain parts were grown together ; of heaviness 
in outer or inner parts ; jerking pains in outer parts ; darting and rending 
pains ; of tension or tightness in outer or inner parts ; arthritic pain in the 
joints ; trembling sensation in inijer parts ; dyspeptics often complain of 
trembling in the stomach ; of scraping along the periosteum. — For any 
troubles or complaints, whether acute or chronic, resulting from a sudden 
and a thorough drenching by a shower of rain ; by getting wet in any way ; 
there may be troubles of very long standing, which were so caused. — Troubles 
in general affecting the r. abdominal ring ; 1. chest ; 1. arm ; 1. lower 
extremity ; 1. side of body ; of scalp, as in erysipelas when it runs up to the 
scalp ; glands about the neck, particularly if they are swollen or inflamed 
with red streaks, as often are in scarlet fever ; joints of the jaws, particularly 
when they are < on beginning of motion, and get > from continued motion ; 
of the abdominal cavity in general ; mons veneris, there may be a great deal 
of itching, sometimes a hard blue boil is found there ; shoulder-blades ; small 
of the back, as, e.g., when one stoops his back hurts so that he cannot 
straighten up without help— this may result from an old sprain, or from a 



1004 RHUS TOXICODENDRON 

sudden "crick ' in the back ; sacrum ; buttocks ; forearm ; shoulder, back of 
hiad; Bngers; joints in general; shoulder-joint; elbow, wrist, bones of the 
arm : calves ; joints of the leg ; hip-joint, knee, and ankle ; weakness of 
joints.— Coagulated blood from the nose; cough bloody, blood being coagu- 
lated ; face covered like erysipelas : increase of saliva ; difficulty in swallow- 
ing, it hurts so in the back ; fluent catarrh of the nose. — Inability at first to 
move the parts affected. — One is very easily sprained by lifting ; palsy of the 
limbs ; staggering when walking. — Strictures after inflammation, and hence 
may sometimes be used for strictures resulting after gonorrhoea ; swelling’ in 
general, with inflammation and without ; debility ; avOrsion to washing ; 
wounds, with sprained muscles. — Axillary glands where the swelling is very 
deep and hard. — Symptoms < before a storm of rain ; after midnight ; in the 
morning ; before falling asleep ; from bathing ; can’t bear cold water ; com- 
plaints coming on in autumn ; on taking a deep breath ; on inspiration ; from 
cold in general ; in cold air ; in cold and wet weather ; from coughing ; while 
chewing ; from drawing up the limbs ; from exertion of the body ; after 
drinking ; after fatigue ; on uncovering the head ; from surgical injuries ; 
from sprains ; from l3nng down ; fiom lifting ; from cold food; cold water ; 
anything cold ; during perspiration ; from wet poultices ; while resting ; on 
first rising ; while sitting ; while talking ; after undressing ; in foggy, or 
foggy and wet weather ; from getting w^et ; m w'inter ; from getting w^et 
while perspiring ; women in confinement ; small-pox ; after-effects of 
syphilis, — H. N. G.] — Epidemic diseases with a'deina of fauces threatening 
oedema glottidis, vessicles stud pharynx and voice is hoarse ; rawness and rough- 
ness of pharynx (Dunham). — Rheumatic and arthritic drawings, tension, and 
tearings in limbs, increased to the highest degree during repose, as well as in 
bad weather, at night, and in the heat of the bed, often with sensation of torpor 
and numbness in the part affected after moving it. — Cramp and tension in 
different parts as from contraction of tendons. — Contraction of some of the 
limbs. — Tensive shootings and stiffness in the joints, < on rising from a seat, 
and in open air. — Paralytic rigidity in limbs, esp. on beginning to move the 
part after repose. — Ready benumbing of parts on which patient reclines. — 
Torpor of some parts with tingling and insensibility. — Tingling in parts 
affected. — Wrenching pain in limbs. — Paralysis, sometimes semilateral. — Red 
and shining swellings, with shooting pain as from excoriation when touched. 
— Contusive, or else a sensation in some places as if the flesh were detached 
from the bones. — Pressive drawing m periosteum as if the bones were scraped. 
— Sensation in internal organs as if something were torn away. — Swelling and 
induration of glands. — Icterus. — Jerking in muscles and limbs. — Convulsive 
movements and other sufferings, resulting from a cold bath. — Semilateral 
affections. — < And appearance of pains and symptoms during repose or at 
night, as also on entering a room from the open air ; > obtained by move- 
ment and walking. — The cold, fresh air is not tolerated ; it seems to make the 
skin painful ; (a keynote on rheumatism. — Dunham). — Reproduction or < of 
many sufferings in unfavourable weather. — General excitability of nervous 
system, < by slightest indulgence of anger. — Drawings in all the limbs when 
lying down. — Trembling of limbs after the least fatigue. — Unsteady gait. — 
Great lassitude and weakness with want to lie down. — Syncope. — Inability to 
bear the open air whether it is hot or cold ; it makes a painful impression on 
the skin. 



RllUS TOXICODENDRON 


1005 


^5* Skin.— Vesicular erysipelas where the vesicles are large.— Exanthema 
on face in general — on chin, face, cheeks, mouth, nose, forehead, causing 
much burning itching. — Pustulous chilblains. — Exanthema in general ; burn* 
ing ; burning itching ; pustulous ; with swelling ; blotches ; like milk-crust ; 
moist ; like nettle-rash ; blue with erysipelas ; scurfy ; tensive or tight feeling 
in ; pock-shaped ; black ; purulent ; zona or shingles ; petechias ; prickling ; 
tickling ; blisters which will sometimes spread up the limb, and are some- 
times circular in form, spreading with a red edge in the advance, which 
gradually turns to a blister, the red border still keeping in advance (if the 
edges be black, ; itching < after scratching.— Tetters in general. — 

Ulcers burning ; with corroding pus ; with ichorous pus. — Rash itches a great 
deal, in scarlet fever, small-pox, &c., with the peculiar restlessness. — Phleg- 
monous erysipelas, esp. where the erysipelas begins in the ankle, and moves 
gradually up the leg, running up in the deeper tissues, no fever. — Itching over 
whole body, chiefly in hairy parts. — Stinging and tingling on skin, burning 
after scratching. — Humidity of skin. — Hardness of skin with thickening. — 
Swelling (hard) of affected parts. — Erysipelatous inflammations. — Nettle-rash. 
— Eruptions, generally vesicular, scabby, with burning itching, appearing 
esp. in spring and autumn. — Eruption of small pustules on a red bottom, like 
zona. — Gangrenous ulcers resulting from small vesicles, with violent fever. — 
Petechiae, with great weakness, amounting to entire prostration. — Black pus- 
tules. — Herpes, sometimes alternately with asthmatic sufferings and dysenteric 
looseness. — Warts, esp. on hands and fingers ; large jagged, often peduncu- 
lated, exuding moisture and bleeding readily. — Rhagades on hands. — Pana- 
ritium. — Tingling or shooting or else burning smarting in ulcers, esp. at 
night. — Chilblains. — Corns on feet, wath burning sensation, and pain as of 
excoriation. 

26. Sleep. — Frequent, violent, and spasmodic yawnings. — Spasmodic 
yawning without inclination to sleep, and with stretching of limbs and pain as 
from dislocation of articulation of the jaw. — Yawning in general ; with violent 
stretching of the limbs ; falling asleep late ; lying on the back during sleep. — 
Strong disposition to sleep during day, and aEo in morning in bed. — Somno- 
lency, full of distressing and broken dreams. — Sleeplessness, esp. before 
midnight, generally caused by a sensation of heat, ebullition of blood, and 
uneasiness which does not permit patient to remain lying down. — Disturbed 
sleep, with anxious and frightful dreams. — Coma somnolentum, with snoring, 
murmurs, and carphology. — Sleep hindered by gloomy ideas. — Waking caused 
by bitterness and sensation of dryness in mouth. — Sleep at night hindered by 
a pressure at stomach, digging pinchings m abdomen, and nausea, with 
inclination to vomit. — Inability to remain lying on side at night. — Starts with 
fright and jerking of body during sleep. — Incomplete and agitated sleep, 
with tossing and many troublesome thoughts, — Vivid dreams of the business 
of the day, with talking during sleep. — Weeping while asleep. — Dreams of 
fire. — Sleep, with open mouth and short breathing. 

27. Fever. — Pulse irregular ; generally accelerated but weak, soft ; 
sometimes it cannot be felt or is intermittent. — Shivering and coldness, 
generally in evening, and accompanied by paroxysms of pain, and other 
accessory symptoms. — External coldness along skin ; coldness, but does not 
mind cold air. — Shivering and shaking in open air, with violent thirst. — ^Con- 



1006 RHUS TOX.-RHUS VENENATA 

tinual transient shiverings, as if cold water had been thrown over body. — 
Sensation of coldness on moving even but a little. — Chill in back and heat in 
anterior portion of body. — Coldness and paleness of face, alternately with 
heat and redness, — Shiverings and heat intermixed, either general and simul- 
taneous (internal shivering with external heat, and vice versa), or in different 
parts. — General heat, as if hot water were thrown over him, or as if the blood 
were flowing hot through the veins. — General perspiration, frequently already 
during the heat, and then often not in the face. — Fever in evening, first shivering, 
then heat and thirst, (and perspiration) accompanied or followed by cuttings 
and diarrhoea. — First headache (throbbing in temples) ; afterwards chilliness, 
with thirst and tearing pains in limbs as from fatigue ; afterwards general 
warmth, with slight chills during motion and livid face ; finally profuse, sour- 
smelling perspiration. — Tertian or quotidian fever. — Tertian fever with nettle- 
rash, which disappears after the attack ; during the apyrexia burning and 
redness in sclerotica. — Double tertian fever ; first shivering and thirst, then 
general heat, with shivering on least movement, lastly perspiration. — During 
the shivering pain in limbs, headache, vertigo, pulsativc toothache, accumula- 
tion of saliva in mouth, and inclination to vomit. — During nocturnal heat 
drawing in all limbs. — Transient heat with perspiration, commencing from 
umbilical region, and rapidly alternating with shiverings. — During or after the 
fever, jerks, tingling in ears, deafness, dry coryza, sleeplessness, with restless 
tossing, jaundice, and nettle-rash, pressure in pit of stomach, palpitation of 
heart with anxiety, colic, diarrhoea, and other gastric affections, and nocturnal 
thirst. — Malignant fever with loquacious delirium, violent pains in all limbs, 
excessive weakness, dry or black tongue, dry, brownish, or blackish lips, heat 
and redness in cheeks, carphologia, pulse quick and small, comasomnolentuni, 
with snoring and moans. — Sweat during the pains. — Perspiration in general ; 
with heat ; offensive. — Perspiration when seated, often with violent trembling. 
— Nocturnal sweat, sometimes with miliary and itching eruption. — Sweat in 
morning, sometimes of an acid smell. — Sweats from warm drinks. — Constant 
perspiration. 


Rhus Venenata. 

Rhus venenata. Poison Elder. Poison Sumach. Swamp Sumach. 
— ^^It is frequently named ‘‘ R. Vermx/’ and it is given under 
this name in HempePs Jahr., but the name belongs properly 
to the allied Varnish -tree of Japan. (North America, in 
swampy ground.) N, 0. Anacardiaceai. Tincture of fresh 
leaves and stem. 

Clinical* — Boils. Chilblains. Diarrhoea. Dyspepsia. Dysphagia. Eczema. 
Eruptions. Erysipelas. Erythema nodosum. Glands, cervical, ulceration of. 
Haemorrhoids. Herpes. Hydroa. Impetigo. Irritation. Lips, swollen ; sore. 
Lumbago. Measles. Menorrhagia. Ophthalmia. Paraplegia. Prurigo. Purpura. 
Scabies. Stiff neck. Tongue, cracked. Urticaria. 

ChaF&ctCPistics. — Rhus ven. is one of the most actively poisonous of 
the Rhoes. P. B. Hoyt, who (according to Hale) first drew attention 
to it, and made the first provings, says it is more poisonous than 



RHUS VENENATA 


1007 


Rh. t.f which he can handle with impunity, whilst he was violently 
affected by Rk v, in spite of extreme caution. Further, he considers 
it more actively curative ; in a case of Rhus sore throat, when Rh, L 
failed Rk v, acted with excellent effect. Another observer, Butman, 
says that persons who have been poisoned by Rk L are more liable 
than others to Rk v. poisoning, the Rh. v. is “ set to work by the 
Rk /. On the other hand Rk v, in the attenuations is credited with 
the cure of -Rh, /. poisoning. Hoyt's experience is interesting. 
Wishing to prepare a tincture he went to a swamp and procured 
some sprouts. doing this he had on a pair of buckskin gloves, 
and kept carefully to the windward side of the plant. Nevertheless 
in an hour and a half a most intense itching and burning (more 
burning) set in in scrotum and penis. 'I'lie glans was very painful ; 
slight friction > for a moment the itching but not the burning. The 
symptoms continued next day. At ii a.m. he made the tincture, 
using great caution in manipulating the plant. At 3 p.m. itching and 
burning began on back of right hand. A restless night followed. 
Awoke in morning with itching, especially on palmar surface of 
wrists. This spread all over body, symptoms steadily advancing. 
Dizziness ; eyes and ears became affected, fever set 111. When the 
symptoms passed off it was found that some chronic dyspeptic 
symptoms and inflammation of the eyes had been much benefited, — 
I have frequently used Rh. v. with good effect in skin diseases. Bayes 
told me of a case of universal eczema with intense distress in an old 
man which he cured in a fortnight with Rh. v. A case of pemphigus 
in a young man of 27 came under my care after years ot treatment 
under allopathic specialists who had given him Arscmc until they 
could give no more, telling him at the same time that nothing but 
Arsenic could do him any good. Rh. v. 3X and 30 completely cured 
in a few months, and the cure enabled the patient to marry. I have 
found Rhus an excellent remedy for arsenical overdosing. A minor use 
of Rh. V. is as a topical remedy in itching, burning chilblains. The 0 
tincture’ painted on relieves almost instantly and practically cures 
the chilblains in a large number of cases. Rh. v. has many symptoms 
referring to the bones ; and according to Bering it affects those parts 
where the bones are directly covered with skin, as the forehead, 
backs of lingers, &c. There is a half way down the cesophagus'’ 
wliich is probably a valiant of the Rhus “ Pain between the shoulders 
on swallowing food.” Peculiar Sensalwus of Rh. v. are: Sensation as 
if mouth and tliroat had been scalded. As if sand on lips ; in mouth. 
Sensation in arm as if the bone would break. Pains wander about ; 
upward and downward along the periosteum ; come and go suddenly ; 
chili runs up back. Butman observed that blondes are more suscep- 
tible to Rk V. poisoning than brunettes. When once affected persons 
are liable to a renewal of the affection (without further poisoning) 
each year at the same time. Persons poisoned by Rh. i. and r. are 
more liable to be poisoned by Rk v. Children are more readily 
poisoned than adults. Hale records a case bearing on the compara- 
tive action of Rh. v. with Rh. n and Rk i. : A lady had several times 
every year a sore mouth, with intense redness of mucous membrane 
of tongue, cheeks, and fauces in small vesicular points ; intense burning 



RHUS VENENATA 


1008 

and feeling as if mouth and throat had been scalded. If unchecked 
every mucous membrane including those of rectum and vagina 
became involved. No rflmedy helped till Rhus was tried. Rh, k 
and Rh, L only slightly relieved, but Rh, v, 3 alw^s removed the 
affection quickly. Under the name Rhus vernix E. F. Beckwith 
relates (A/. A.^ xx. 369) the poisoning of Mrs. T. Williams, 32, sandy 
hair, light complexion, good geneial health. Twelve years before 
she had worked all day over a stove in which the wood of Swamp 
Sumach was burned. She was badly poisoned, was unable to see^for 
four or five days, and was treated with lotions of , sugar of lead and 
butter-milk. Ever since then she had a rash just before the menses, 
or if she took cold. At the time Beckwith saw her she had a lump 
in centre of left breast, a dense mass occupying nearly one-half the 
gland substance, which she believed to be cancer, a sister having died 
of what was said to be cancer of the breast. She had first noticed it, 
the size of a hazel-nut, six years before when nursing her last child. 
The symptoms connected with this were also < before menses and 
had Rhus characteristics. The symptoms from this patient I have 
marked (B) in the Schema. The symptoms were < by touch and 
pressure. > Gently rubbing and scratching. < Before stools. < 
Damp days, < Hot weather. < Rest. > Moderate exercise or 
open air. > Hot bath. Chills in warm room. Washing with cold 
water or snow' > itching on back. < Mental exercise. Motion < 
pain in elbow. Walking < frontal headache. Eating raw things < 
burning of lips. All symptoms < morning after waking. Diarrhoea 
4 a.m. “ Pain as if sprained shows the relation of this Rhus to 
sprains. It is most poisonous on hot days in summer ; to persons 
immediately after a meal ; and to those in a state of perspiration — if 
my skin was perfectly dry when collecting the juice of Rh, z»., it had 
not the slightest effect on me (Bigelow, quoted by Hale). 

RelationB . — Aniidoted by: Pho., Bry. ; Clem, (itching on hands 
and genitals, anus, lips, mouth, and nose) ; Ranunc. (rheumatic pains 
< on taking cold) ; Nit. ac. (sprained pain in r. hip). Blue clay 
applied externally > itching and burning entirely (Hering). Coffee 
had no effect on the symptoms. Folloivs well : Rli. t. Compare : Skin 
and botan., Anac., Comoc. Rh. r., Rh. t. Stitchi-ng pains, K. ca. 
Wandering pains, Puls. Pains come and go suddenly, Lyc. Pain at 
root of tongue, K. iod. 

Causation. — Sprains. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Great sadness, no desire to live, or do anything, everything 
seems gloomy. — ^Apprehensive, restless, variable feeling ; sometimes cheerful, 
then hypochrondiacal. — Cannot connect ideas or concentrate mind ; forgetful ; 
dull; stupid. 

2. Head. — Dizzy when first getting out of bed (B). — Whirling vertigo, 
much < evening. — Head enormously swollen, eyes closed. — Dull, heavy 
stupefying headache. — Sharp pains in parietal bones. — Jerk-like drawing here 
and there in nerves of head. — Dull frontal headache < by walking and 
stooping. — Headache as though brain squeezed. < Stooping (B). — Tearing 



RHUS VENENATA 


1009 


in r. temple extending from forehead upwards into 1. half of head> alwayb 
seated in the bone ; thence to 1. occiput and d(jwn to nape. — ^Jerk-like head- 
ache in occiput. — Skin of forehead rough ; pimples ; herpes phlyctenuloides. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes nearly closed with great swelling; red. — Eyes feel as 
if being pressed out of head. — Eyes ache as though pressed on (B), — Eyes 
feel as if sand in them (B). — Smarting, burning irritation and acridity about 
eyes ; profuse lachrymation. — Blear-eyes, < night ; cannot read by candle-light 
(B). — Photophobia. — Sharp pain in r. eye, extending to supraorbital region. — 
Constant dull aching pains in eyeballs. — Sight dim. — It becomes black before 
eyes while looking.-^Flashes of light before eyes (B). 

4. Ears. — Transient stitches in r. concha. — Jerk-like tearing in bone 
behind r. ear. — Much earache ; hammering-throbbing deep in ear after 
dark (B). — Jerk-like cutting stitches in ear. — Vesicular inflammation of cars, 
exuding a yellow watery serum. — ^Very troublesome deafness. — Ringing, 
rustling, and noises in r. ear. 

6. Nose. — Nose red and shiny, redness not removed by pressure. — 
p>ysipelas. — Profuse secretion from r. nostril of thin ichorus fluid ; 1. stopped. 
— Both nostrils filled with tenacious mucus. — Nose dr}' ; sore. — Loss of 
smell. — Nose sore internally coming on a few days before men.ses, lasting 
three or four days after (B). 

6. Face. — Nose and r. side of face much swollen, esp. under r. eye. — 
Skin of face dry, rough, scurfy, seems thickened and indurated. Face red, 
swollen, shining, glistening ; desire to rub constantly ; hot water > and ss 
peeling. — Face more swollen 1. side than r. — Heaviness in swollen face. — 
Boring in r. upper jaw. — Drawing pains in r. upper and lower jaw. — Sensation 
as if sand on lips. — Face and esp. upper lip swollen. — Lips sore, swollen, 
blistered, cracked. — Cannot get lips cool. — Itching ot upper lip and chin 
4 p.m. 

8 . Mouth. — Drawing in r, upper teeth. — Gums swollen. — Eruption on 
gums of upper incisors. — On drinking anything warm, slight initation on 
inner lips, gums, and tip of tongue. — Tongue . coated white in middle, back 
and edges red ; red on tip ; red and cracked in middle ; cracked in 
middle and covered with little vesicles ; several vesicles on under side. 
— Sensation as if tongue were being pulled out by the roots. — Distress 
in root of tongue and fauces. — Scalded feeling in tongue ; while at 
dinner it extends to mouth and fauces, causing dryness. — Tongue and 
mouth as if burnt with an acid.-^Itching of tongue and roof of mouth. 
— Tongue and lips feci cracked. — Breath hot, feverish, offensive. — 
Breath hot, and not offensive ; feels like steam. — Fever sore on mouth. — 
Mouth feels rough as if sand under mucous membrane when touched. — 
Saliva increased ; viscid. — Hot water runs from mouth when lying down, 
with sickness at stomach < at night (B). — Slimy, nasty, putrid taste (B). — 
Taste : lost ; slimy ; flat, rough. — Cannot speak distinctly, palate fallen and 
ffiels as if something in mouth impeding speech, unchanged by hawking and 
clearing throat. 

0. Throat. — Soreness 1. side throat, swelling extending downwards. — 
Throat sore, swollen. — Irritation and acridity about throat and eyes. — Tonsils 
red, congested, dull aching distress in them. — Irritation ; dryness ; burning in 
throat.-— Pharynx and oesophagus irritable and sensitive, painful and difficult 

VOL. II. 65 



lOlo RHUS VENENATA 

to swallow, food caused pain and seemed to stop mid-way to stomach ; cold 
water produced the same effect as very hot tea, and an aching such as is felt 
after drinking ice- water, though thirst was great. — Frequent desire to swallow. 
—Swallowing difficult. — Feels as though hairs in throat way back; lasting 
several days at a time (B).— Difficulty in swallowing solid food, throat feels 
as though it were drawn up (B). 

11. Stomach. — Appetite : improved ; lost. — Thirst very great. — Eruc- 
tations. — Nausea and loathing. — (Dyspepsia and belching relieved.) — Severe 
pain in stomach 2 a.m. ; sudden call to stool two hours later. — Much distress 
and pain in (cardiac end of) stomach. — Sudden vomiting when at table 
eating (B). — Pressure in stomach after eating, and I can pound lightly on 
stomach and throw up any meal (B). — Pressure in pit of stomach (B). — 
Creeping or crawling sensation in stomach (B).-“Stomach feels bad in evening 
(B). — Pork =s vomiting instantly (B). 

12. Abdomen. — Hard beating or throbbing a little below pit of 
stomach (B). — Distress in umbilicus with dry, lumpy, dark stools. — Abdomen 
bloated, very sensitive to least pressure. — Swelling of abdomen, in morning 
have to rub it down with my hand before I can button my clothing (B). — 
Sharp cutting pain in umbilical and hypogastric regions. — Colic, rumblings 
and soreness to touch. — Pain in hypogastrium before every stool ; very little 
warning. — Pain in bowels < mornings. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Bleeding haemorrhoids with extensive itching 
and burning. — Discharge of blood from rectum after a stool. — Neuralgic 
pains in anus. — Most intolerable burning and itching in anus. — Diarrhoea 
2 to 5 a.m., stools nearly white. — At 4 a.m., large watery stool passed with 
great force and attended with violent colicky pains ; during next two hours 
there were similar profuse stools, after which pains ceased. — Stool : very 
dark ; dark and partly undigested ; dark, hard, and small in quantity. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Burning in urethra. — Urine increased. — Desire 
to void urine often, but in small quantities. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Groins and penis affected in morning. — 
Scrotum red, swollen, much corrugated, covered with vesicles prepuce 
swollen ; glans swollen and very sore ; cuticle of penis and scrotum peels 
off in patches as large as a sixpence, 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses (which were near at hand) 
came on immediately in very large clots like pieces of meat. — Every month, 
dull heavy pain in 1. ovarian region (B). — Hard, labour-hke pains for one day 
before menses (B). — Soreness of vagina during menses (B). — Menstrual 
discharge regular, rather scanty, always bright pink in colour. — Terrible 
lancinating pains through 1. breast < for three days before menses (B). — 
Burning in 1. breast and 1. side of body (B). — Sometimes sensation as if a 
thousand small needles were sticking in 1. breast (B). — Breast symptoms : 
< moving 1. arm forward and across body ; by pressure ; just before and 
during menses ; at night and when lying down ; > by motion ; continuous 
work (B). — Breast must be supported ; it aches when it hangs down (B). — 
Eruptions just before menses (B). 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Dryness and pains in larynx. — Hoarseness. 
— Harsh, dry cough, lasting more than two weeks. — Sense of oppression as if 
the air was too heavy. 



RHUS VENENATA 


lOI T 


i8. Chest.—Violent stitches through chest with great suddenness.— 
Violent stitches in 1. lung causing anxiety, esp. on breathing. — Stitches in 
both lungs ; in apices. — Rush of blood to chest with anxiety. — Stricture in 
chest. — Pain over sternum ; lancinating in sternum and r. leg. — Drawing pain 
in lower 1. side. 

ig. Heart. — Stitches in heart. — Palpitation with stitches in heart. 

20 . Neck and Back. — Stiff neck or crick-in-neck. — Ulceration of 
cervical glands, which discharged a very offensive dark-coloured pus ; dark 
red areola round ulcers. — Dull pain in cervical, dorsal, and lumbar regions. — 
Back very stiff. — Wilh rumbling of flatus in bowels, pains in back extending 
from lumbar region to umbilicus. — Sharp pain under 1. scapula, extending 

• through to ribs. — Rheumatic pains between scapulae. — Dull, heavy pains in 
lumbar region < stooping or walking. — Drawing in lumbar muscles extending 
into hips. — Drawing in 1, loin. — Dull, aching pain and weakness across loins. 
— A little pain in sacrum. — Lumbago from a strain or a cold. 

21. Limbs. — ^Trembling of limbs with twitching of muscles. — Swelling 
of all the limbs with redness, and thirst. — Wrists, ankles, feet ached so 
severely he could not sleep. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Tearing in 1. arm, extending up from elbow ; a 
sensation as if the bone would break. — Pain from 1. breast extends into 1. arm 
(B). — Drawing in 1. arm, forearm, and last three fingers ; arm feels paralysed. 

— Paralytic drawing in r. arm, esp. wrist, extending to tip of fingers. — Jerking 
pain in muscles of both arms. — Crawling in 1. arm, esp. when resting it upon 
anything. — Severe pain in 1. elbow-joint preventing moving it. — Rheumatic 
pains in 1. elbow and shoulder-joints < on motion. — Weakness of forearm and 
fingers, which are cold. — When hand becomes numb and goes to sleep it 
feels as if puffed up (B). — L. hand becomes numb on sitting or lying down 
(B). — Dull, drawing pains in wrists and fingers. — Wrists and fingers very stiff. 

— Dark-coloured ganglion on wrist. — Drawing pressing pain in r. wrist, 
extending through the bones to elbow. — R. hand swelled without redness. 
—Constantly aching dulness in hands and fingers. — Drawing in r. fingers. — 
Backs of hands swollen and puffy. — Blue finger-nails. — Hands swelled and 
clumsy. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Paralysed and bruised sensation in legs. — Pain 
as if sprained or dislocated in r. hip. (> by NiL ac). — Drawing, cramp-like pain 
in 1. thigh. — Crop of boils on r. thigh. — Paralytic drawing with pains in bones 
of left leg. — Streaks of pain run dotvn 1, leg (B). — Great weakness of knees 
and ankles, they ache constantly. — ^Jerk-like drawing in leg. — Wandering 
drawing pains. — Drawing in knees. — Cramp-like pain and tension in calves. — 
Ankles and feet ached so that it was painful to stand or walk, < afternoon. — 
Throbbing in both feet as if distended with blood. — Jerk-like drawing in r. 
foot, extending from ankle to heel, and shooting up with pains in the bones. — 

» Crawling and prackling in r. foot. — Pulsation in r. foot. — Eczema of (1.) foot. — 
Swelling of feet < at night ; sensitive to touch (B). 

24. Generalities. — Great lassitude ; stretching. — Great restlessness. — 
Swelling of whole body with intolerable irritation. — Numbness and lameness 
of 1. arm, side, and leg(B). — Bruised feeling in all the limbs.— All muscles stiff, 
esp. back of r, leg. — Stiffness and soreness. — Rheumatism before a storm (B). 
-^Lying on I side = shortness of breath (B). — Sensation as though blood hot 
and rushing along the vessels (B). 



1012 


RHUS VENENATA— RICINUS 


25. Skin. — A fine white rash keeps under the skin. — Ulcers, cuts, and 
other lesions surrounded by a miliary whitish rash. — Nightly itching, and 
an eruption very like erythema nodosum. — Within twenty-four hours itching 
with swelling, which gradually extends over body assuming erysipelatous 
appearance. — Red indurated elevations, esp. on face, neck, and chest. — Red- 
ness, swelling, and vesicular rash on skin of eyes, nose, cheeks, lips, ears, behind 
ear and front of neck. — Boils on forehead, neck, and arms. — At night much 
itching of face and sexual organs. — Rash-like pimples appear under skin just 
before menses, esp. on head, face, back, and hands ; burning, but not quite like 
burning in breast and side (B). — Rash appears also if sKe takes cold (B). — 
Fine vesicular eruption on forearm, wrist, back of hands, between and on 
fingers ; vesicles are situated on an inflamed erysipelatous base, and accom- 
panied with most intolerable itching, esp. in evening in a warm room and in 
bed ; after scratching and rubbing (which cannot be resisted) the itching is 
intolerable ; large quantities of serum run from each vesicle after it is 
scratched. — Clusters of vesicles. — Boils on r. thigh. — Desquamation. — Itching 
and complete desquamation of skin of hands. — Deep, corroding phagedenic 
ulcers with cadaverous-swelling pus. — Itching and creeping sensation, < by 
warmth. 

26. Sleep. — Restlessness with dry, hot skin. — Sleep disturbed by many 
dreams : of death and near future ; lascivious ; with whid fancies. — Bad dreams, 
which impress her much next day (B). — Sleep bad till after midnight on 
account of nausea and pressure in stomach and chest ; restless, tossing (B). — 
Starts on falling asleep (B). 

27. Fever. — Chills : over whole body ; run up back even when warm 
and in a warm room. — Feeling of coldness when moving (B). — Shivering 
down the back. — Skin hot, dry, burning, at night with restlessness. — Inter- 
mittents without sweat. — Frequent attacks of ague (B). — Dry, burning. — 
Flashes of heat as though a stream of hot air was passing over body, w'ith 
throbbing and tearing pains from each temple back to occiput and down neck 
to each shoulder. — Hands constantly very dry and hot. — Slight moisture 
behind r. car. 


Ricinus. 

♦- 

Ricinus communis. Palma Christi. N, 0 . Euphorbiaceae. Tincture 
(made with hot alcohol and water) or trituration of fresh seeds. 
Tincture of fresh plant. 

CUnioal* — Albuminuria. Aphthae. Cholera. Cholera infantum. Diarrhcea. 
Duodenum, catarrh of. Dysentery. Eruptions. Gangrene. Gastro-enteritis. 
Jaundice. Lactation. Peritonitis. 

Characteristios. — The castor-oil plant is a native of India. In 
the tropics it is a small tree growing to the height of eight or 
ten feet. Under the name of Palma Christi it is cultivated as an 
annual in this country, its stems reaching from three to five feet. 
The oil of medicine is obtained from the seeds. The blandest 
which is in common use is ‘‘cold drawn/^ ue.y expressed with- 



RICINUS 


1013 


out the aid of heat, and contains the smallest amount of the 
acrid principle. A decoction of the seeds, which is used in the 
East and West Indies, contains a much larger proportion. The 
homoeopathic preparation should be made in such a way as to 
secure the full properties. The leaves have an especially powerful 
action on the breasts and female generative organs. Hale made the 
first collection of the pathogenetic effects of Ric,^ and pointed out its 
analogy to cholera, which Salzer {On Cholera) confirmed. Cases of 
poisoning, some of them fatal, have been recorded from the ordinary 
oil, but the greater number of the pathogenetic effects have resulted 
from eating the sdbds. Fatal effects have followed eating three seeds, 
and one seed has caused violent effects. After twenty seeds gastro- 
enteritis and death preceded by general convulsions and collapse 
occurred. The most detailed case is that of a sergeant who ate 
seventeen seeds (two years old) as a purgative. Four hours later 
he had several loose stools, pyrosis, cramps in the stomach, nausea 
and vomiting, the vomit containing fragments of seeds and drops of 
oil. The stools became more numerous and more copious of serous 
liquid mixed with mucus, and were passed without tenesmus or colic. 
Later the diarrhoea was accompanied with cramps and chilliness. 
Other symptoms were : Pale face ; forehead covered with cold 
sweat, features drawn, eyes convulsed and turned up, conjunctiva 
injected, copious lachrymation. Intelligence quite clear. Headache, 
vertigo, buzzing in ears, and sensatwn as y a bar were laid over his 
stomachy with profound anguish. Burning thirst ; pyrosis, vomiting 
fluid lightly coloured with bile, and containing some glairy filaments. 
Epigastrium very sensitive, pains radiate therefrom to navel and hypo- 
chondria, not < or > by light or strong pressure. At the same time 
he felt a sensation of violent constriction in intestines. Diarrhoea 
became colliquative, stools like cholera - stools. Complete anuria. 
Voice veiled. Profound adynamia. Next day severe fever followed. 
A small quantity of dark, thick urine was passed, and was found to be 
highly albuminous. On the fourth clay pronounced jaundice appeared. 
On the ‘sixth day the urine had ceased to be albuminous, and the 
patient was discharged. Salzer gives to Rtc. the same importance in 
cholera with diarrhcca that Camph. occupies in relation to spasmodic 
cholera. The stools of Rtc. correspond exactly to the rice-watei 
stools in cholera, whilst those o^^ Ver. a. do not. Ric. also has painless 
evacuations which are met with in many cases of cholera. Ric. there- 
fore corresponds to the diarrhoeic stage of cholera, and also to the 
collapse stage if vomiting and purging still continue. Salzer quotes 
B. L. Bhaduri as having observed rice-water stools, cramps, and 
suppression of urine brought on by eating the seeds.’^ Hale says 
that before he had learned to use Ric. as a homoeopathic remedy he 
had often been discomfited by seeing aphthous diarrhoea cured with 
small (half-teaspoonful) doses of castor oil, repeated three or four 
times a day, by old nurses or impatient mothers. Such diarrhoea 
often arises in improperly -fed children. It begins with sickness, 
frequent and griping evacuations, greenish yellow to dark gxeen, 
becoming more liquid and more or less mixed with slimy or gelatinous 
mucus or blood. Each stool is accompanied with pain and tenesmus, 



1014 


RICINUS 


mouth dry and aphthous, anus inflamed, belly tumid and painfid, child 
becoming more and more feverish and somnolent. Hale later gave a 
I X trituration of the oil with sugar. In acute and chronic dysentery, 
and in those cases in which there is impaction of fseces, Hale has seen 
,the oil promptly curative. Post-mortem examination in the fatal poison- 
ing cases has shown the gastro-intestinal mucous membrane abraded 
and inflamed. In one case the whole intestinal membrane was coated 
with blackish blood and that of the stomach reddened and softened. 
Hering remarked that puerperal fever had become much less common 
in Philadelphia (where it used to be very common) since homoeopaths 
interdicted the use of castor oil in confinements. Rtc, has great power 
over lactation. O. McWilliams (quoted by Hale) observed in the 
Cape Verde Islands that the leaves of the plant were applied to the 
breasts to increase the flow of milk if it were delayed, and even to 
produce it in women who had never borne children or who had not 
suckled for years. In increasing the flow of milk in nursing women 
the breasts were fomented with a decoction of the leaves of the plant, 
the boiled leaves being afterwards thinly spread on the breasts. For 
producing milk in others more vigorous measures were resorted to. 
The women had to sit over a boiling decoction of the leaves, care 
being taken to prevent the escape of steam. When the decoction 
was sufficiently cool the parts were bathed with it, and also the 
breasts, to which the leaves were applied as in the other case. 
Women with well-developed breasts are more easily influenced. 
When the breasts are small and shrivelled this treatment acts more 
on the uterine system, bringing on the menses long before their time 
or causing immediate flow if the time is near. Tyler Smith experi- 
mented with the leaves. In his cases the application produced : 
Swelling of the breasts, throbbing and other pains in them ; swelling 
of the axillary glands, with pains running down the arms. Pains in 
the back like after-pains were caused in every case. Leucorrhoea was 
increased. §oon discharges from the breasts became milky, and 
menses came on too soon. The radiating pains ; bar sensation ; 
constricting and cramping pains are the most peculiar. 

Relations. — Compare: Croton., Jatr., and Euphorbiaceae. In 
cholera, rice-water stools. Agar, ph., Jatr. Bar sensation, Haema- 
tox. Galactogogues, Agn. c., Asaf., Puls. Duodenal catarrh, Berb., 
Chi., Hydrs., Lyc., Merc., Pod. , 

SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — ^Vertigo. — He cannot go into open air after a dose of Castor 
Oil as the brain seems exhausted and easily overpowered (R. T. C.). — Head- 
ache ; severe. — ^Acts on base of brain (R. T. C.). — Sudden pain as if seized 
by something in occiput extending round to backs of ears, eyes, and forehead 
with rush of blood to head and shocks which come and go as from electricity, 
thirty times in five days (agg.— R. T. C.). 

3. Eyes* — Eyes convulsed and turned up ; conjunctive injected, copious 
lachrymation ; pupils only moderately dilated. 

4. Ears.— Buzzing and humming in ears. 



RICINUS XOI5 

6. Face. — Features drawn. — Face slightly congested. — Face pale; 
features strongly contracted. — Twitchings of mouth. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue : coated white ; and dry ; furred. — Salivation. 

9. Throat. — Burning pain in gullet accompanied the vomiting. 

11. Stomach. — Anorexia. — Thirst, great; burning. — Pyrosis. — Nausea 
and vomiting persistent ; vomited mattery liquid, slightly coloured by a little 
bile ; contains only a few mucous threads in suspension. — Vomiting profuse ; 
with burning in gullet and all the symptoms of Asiatic cholera. — ^Vomiting and 
pillaging. — Painless vomiting. — Vomits pultaceous substances. — A kind of bar 
across stomach, which caused profound anguish. — Pit of stomach very sensi- 
tive ; pains radiate from this centre, shooting to umbilicus and hypochondria. 
— Cramps; burning, in stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — The different segments of the recti muscles can be seen 
successively and individually contracting under the skin. — Rumbling. — Feels 
as if all the intestines violently drawn together. — Violent colic ; and yellowish- 
green vomiting. — Cramps with the diarrhoea. — Pain over abdomen < by 
pressure. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Violent purging with the diarrhoea. — Bloody 
diarrhoea. — Diarrhoea without pain. — Diarrhoea almost incessant, colliquative, 
like cholera. — Rice-water stools. — Stools serous liquid mixed with mucus. — 
Diarrhoea incessant, with cramps and chilliness. — Complete confinement 
of bowels for five days ; this made him uncomfortable, and caused 
headache. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Complete anuria. — Passes a little dark, thick, 
highly albuminous urine (lasted four days). 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses too early ; excessive. — Leucor- 
rhoea. — Breasts thick, swell, with swelling of axillary glands and pains running 
down arms. — Thin discharge from breasts becomes milky. — Brings milk in 
breasts of virgins and women who have not suckled for years. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Voice altered ; veiled. 

19. Heart. — Pulse : extremely small, scarcely perceptible, though normal 
in frequency ; very frequent. 

20. Back. — Pains in back like after-pains. 

21. Limbs. — Prurigo on wrists and bends of knees. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Gangrene of one foot necessitates amputation. 

24. Generalities. — Pale and listless. — Anaemia. — Profound adynamia. 

— Collapse. — Convulsions. — Muscular contractions. — Very painful cramps in 
trunk and limbs. * 

25. Skin. — Pronounced jaundice ; skin saffron yellow. — Pruriginous 
eruptions, or redness and itching, at wrists and bends of knees. 

26. Sleep. — Great desire for sleep. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness with the diarrhoea. — Perspiring freely. — Skin 
moist and cool, esp. lower limbs. — Forehead covered with cold sweat. 



ROBINIA 


ioi6 


Robinia. 

Robinia pseud-acacia. Common or False Acacia. North American 
Locust. A'. 0. Leguminosac. Tincture of fresh root bark. 
Tincture of fresh bark of young twigs. Trituration of the 
beans. 

Clinical. — Acidity. Coryza. Dyspepsia. Flatulence. Headache, gastric. 
Hyperchlorhydria. Indigestion, nocturnal. Intermittents. Neuralgia. Pyrosis. 
Stomach, affections of. Urticaria. 

Charaoteristics. — The roots of Robinia (says Treas. of BoL) 
“ have the taste and smell of liquorice, but are a dangerous poison, 
and accidents have occurred from their being mistaken for liquorice 
roots.” The poisonings that have been recorded have been due to 
eating the beans or chewing the bark. Of thirty-two boys so poisoned 
{H, /?., iv. 72) in the mildest cases there occurred — Vomiting of ropy 
mucus, dilatation of pupils, dry throat, flushed face. In the severest 
the vomit was more copious and mixed with blood ; with retching, 
epigastric pains, debility, stupor, cold extremities, dusky pallor, 
heart’s action feeble, intermittent, extremities pulseless. Recovery 
took place in two days. The provings of Burt and Sprangcr have 
developed the symptoms which have led to the chief clinical uses, 
but some of Houatt’s symptoms have also been confirmed. The 
chief keynote of Rob. is acidity ^ especially if the time of aggravation 
is night. Cooper has observed improvement which was going on 
under Rob, cease at night-time. Sour stomach ; vomiting of intensely 
sour fluid which set the teeth on edge. Eructations of a very 
sour fluid. Clinical experience has added to these : Sour stools 
of infants, with sour smell of body and vomiting of sour milk. 
Heartburn and acidity coming on when lying down at night and 
preventing sleep. Halbert {Clinique j March, 1899, H, IF., xxxiv. 
373) relates a case of hyperchlorydria treated with Rob. : Mrs. S., 
40, had had stomach troubles many years, for which she had had 
bitter tonics, stomach douchings, electric massage. She had acid 
eructations and vomitings of intensely sour food ; extreme appetite, 
but gastric pains an hour or two after meals ; stomach and bowels 
distended with gas almost constantly, and flatulence was extremely 
irritating. Craved meats, but could .lot tolerate vegetables; craved 
solid food, but did not dare take it. Emaciated and cachectic. 
Meat, eggs, and milk was the diet prescribed. Lavage was performed 
every alternate day, and after it the patient was directed to eat a full 
meal ; Rob, 3X was given every two hours, and steady improvement 
occurred in all particulars, till health was practically restored. Burt 
had a severe neuralgia irf left temple, preventing sleep from midnight 
to daylight. He had also a dull, heavy aching in stomach,” and a 
constant dull, heavy frontal headache, much < by motion and 
reading. The combination of gastric and hekd symptoms has placed 
Rob, among the chief remedies in migraine and sick headaches. 
Among Houatt’s symptoms was a facial neuralgia spreading to eyes; 
forehead, with contraction of the jaw and features ; and also a sensa- 



ROBINIA 


1017 


tion as if the jaws would be dislocated or fractured. Hering gives 
this case of neuralgia as having been cured with Rob» : ‘‘ Jawbone 
feels as if disarticulated ; intensely sour taste and vomiting.” The 
paralytic symptoms were very marked in one of the poisoning cases. 
Flatulence and diarrhoea were produced, and also constipation, with 
constant ineffectual urging. Among the Peculiar Sensations are : As if 
brain revolved. As if head were full of boiling water. As if brain 
struck against skull. Jawbone as if disarticulated. Stomach as if 
sc?.lded. As if whole body would pass away with stool. The left 
side was most affected. A sleepy, dull feeling in head and limbs 
changed from ri^ht to left. A. L. Fisher (quoted //. /?., iv. 27) has 
relieved with Roh.y when everything else failed, the intensely acid 
vomiting in four cases of gastric cancer. Millspaugh points out 
that TrifoL prat.^ which is a domestic remedy for cancer, is a near 
botanical ally of Rob. The symptoms are < by touch (neuralgia 
from contact of food), < by motion. < By reading (headache), 
< Lying down (heartburn and acidity). < Being raised from the 
horizontal (nausea and vomiting). < Night. < From fat, gravies, 
flatulent food, cabbages, turnips, new bread, ice-cream, raw fruit, &c. ; 
they = gastric headache. 

Relations. — Compare : Laburn. In acidity, Rhe., Calc., i5£th., 
Mg. c., Puls. In neuralgia, Ars., Chi. Flatulence, Chi., Carb. v., 
Lyc. Ineffectual urging to stool, Nux. Gastric headaches, Ir. v. 
Jawbone as if dislocated, Rhus. Changing sides. Lac c. (Rob. right 
to left). Heart, Phaseol. Dilated pupils, dry throat, and flushed 
face. Bell. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Very low-spirited.— Excessively irritable. — Tried to write 
but could not (agg. — R. T. C.). — Can hardly tell what she is doing (agg. 
-^R. T. C.). 

2. 'Head. — Vertigo and dulness of head in whatever position it is 
placed.— Sensation as if brain revolved, < lying on r. side. — V^ertigo with 
unsteadiness and nausea. — Unable to hold his head upright ; on eighteenth 
day could hold it up for a time, but it dropped if the effort was long con- 
tinued (in a child who ate locust beans). — Constant dull, heavy, frontal head- 
ache, much < by motion and reading. — Dull headache : with profuse nasal 
discharge and frequent sneezing f with sharp stitches in temples. — Steady 
headache with sensation as if head full of boiling water ; as if brain struck 
against skull when moving. — Sick headache, with sour stomach ; from fat 
meat, gravies, flatulent food, cabbage, turnips, warm bread, pastry, ice-creams, 
raw fruits. See. — Severe neuralgic pain in 1. temple, preventing sleep from 
midnight to daylight. 

3 . Eyes. — Eyes sunk. — Eyes sore, watery ; with rough throat. — Pupils 
contracted (in poisoning cases dilated). 

4* Nose. — Profuse continual discharge from nostrils, with sneezing and 
dull headache. — Wax-like tumour on nose. 

6. Face. — Neuralgic faceache, spreading to eyes, forehead, ears, and 
teeth, changing the whole features. — Spasmodic pains in jaws, feels as if they 



ioi8 


ROBINIA 


would be broken or disarticulated; intensely sour taste in mouth.--Face 
flushed (in mild poisoning cases) ; dusky pallor (in severe cases). 

8. Mouth. — Burning, lancinating pains, esp. in carious teeth, spreading 
to cheeks, eyes, and temples, < at night or on contact of food, esp. if cold or 
spiced ; teeth become loosened from the spongy and easily bleeding gums. — 
White coating on tongue, with red tip. — ^Tongue covered with whitish-brown 
fur, smooth and slimy. — Mucous membrane of mouth pale. 

9. Throat. — Dry scratching in throat. — Dryness of throat, with flushing 
of face. — Rough soreness. — Roughness, with sore eyes. 

11. Stomach. — Thirst. — Constant eructations of a very sour fluid. — 
Heartburn and acidity of stomach at night on lying down. — Regurgitation of 
acid and bitter substances, everything turns to acid. — Nausea for three 
hours, followed by vomiting of an intensely sour fluid. — Nausea and 
attempts to vomit when placed in sitting posture. — Water taken before 
eating, at night, returned in morning green and sour.— Vomiting of intensely 
sour fluid, setting teeth on edge. — Vomiting of ropy mucus ; tinged with 
blood ; retching and epigastric pains. — Vomiting, with slight convulsions.— 
Sour stomach. — Dull, heavy, aching dulness in stomach. — Very severe, sharp 
pains in stomach all day and night. 

12 . Abdomen. — Constant dulness in epigastric region, with cutting 
pains in stomach and bowels and a good deal of rumbling. — Burning distress 
in stomach and region of gall-bladder. — Bowels greatly distended with flatu- 
lence, seemed to till up whole abdomen ; tympanites ; > passing flatus. — 
Soreness in bowels when moving or by pressure. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Desire for stool, but only flatus passes ; finally 
constipated stool. — Sour stools of infants, with sour smell from body and 
vomiting of sour milk. — Diarrhoeic stools, yellow, green, burning, with 
nervous agitation, weakness, cold sweat, dyspnoea. — Stools : loose, black, fetid, 
with great tenesmus; watery, whitish, excessively frequent and generally 
involuntary, with sensation as if whole body would pass away with stool ; 
heat and pressure in epigastrium ; cramps. — Sudden attacks of purging and 
vomiting. — The daily motion has a slimy look and bilious tinge. — Bowels 
costive, with frequent ineffectual desire for stool. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine scanty and painful ; or profuse and turbid. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Nymphomania ; whitish, greenish, 
yellowish, thick, and acrid, purulent leucorrhoea, with tumefaction and 
bruised feeling in neck of womb and general prostration ; ulcerative pains in 
vagina, with acrid, yellowish leucorrhoea ol most fetid smell. — Hard swelling 
of womb. — Cramps in womb. — Menses too late, black. — Haemorrhage between 
the periods, accompanied by purulent leucorrhoea. — Eruptions and ulcers 
like herpes on vagina and vulva. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Voice reduced to a whisper and efforts 
to cry exceedingly feeble, suddenly ceasing with a slight sigh, as if from 
exhaustion. — Feeble respiration. 

19. Heart. — Heart’s action very feeble ; embarrassed when moved from 
horizontal position. — Almost pulseless. 

21. Limbs. — Could not move in slightest degree fingers, hands, arms, or 
legs ; later could move fingers of r. hand a little ; later could stir legs, but not 
draw them up ; tickling feet caused much distress (from the beans). 



ROSMARINUS 


1019 


34. Generalities.— Features and limbs shrunken as if from excessive 
diarrhoea (but there was none).— Faintness < when raised from horizontal 
position.— Child cried when its arms were laid hold of. — Improvement which 
was going on ceases at night-time (R. T . C.). 

25. Skin. — Covered from head to foot with the worst form of 

urticaria. , 

26. Sleep. — Sleepiness and dulness in limbs and head ('with stinging 
pain in temples), changing from r. to 1. side.— Restless sleep all night on 
account of frequent sneezing ; from indigestion. 

27. Fever. — H^nds and feet cold. — Paroxysms of pain late in afternoon, 
lasting till 3 to 4 a.m., face hippocratic, much flatulence.— Hectic fever with 
night-sweats. 


Rosa Canina. 

Dog-rose. N. 0 , Kosaceae. Tincture of the hairy excrescence of 
insect origin called Cynosbati. Tincture of ripe fruits. 

Clinical. — Bladder, affections of. Dj'suria. 

CharacteFistics. — Hips are used for making the very pleasant 
Confection of Roses used in general medicine as a basis for pills and 
electuaries. Cynoshali has been used in ancient times as a remedy in 
urinary difficulties. Burnett has confirmed this to some extent. A 
proving made by himself only evoked a somewhat increased flow of 
urine and a little heat in the urethra. 


Rosa Damascena. 

Damask or Damascus Rose. N, 0 . Rosaceae. Tincture of the 
flowers (?). 

Clinical. -Hay-fever. 

Charaoteristics. — Farrington mentions that R. dam, was intro- 
duced by Jeanes as a remedy at the beginning of rose-cold when the 
Eustachian tube is involved, ^with some degree of deafness and 
tinnitus. 


Rosmarinus. 

Rosmarinus officinalis. Rosemary. N, O, Labiatre. Tincture of 

whole plant. 

Clinical •—Abortion. Baldne^ss. Menses, too early. 

GhaFaoteristios. — The most violent of the symptoms of Rostn, 
were observed on a woman who took a strong infusion for eight days, 



1020 ROSMARINUS— RUMEX ACETOSA 


with the result that miscarriage occurred. In another woman it 
brought on the menses four days too soon. Chilliness predominated, 
the chill not being followed by heat. Oil of Rosemary has an ancient 
reputation as a remedy for baldness, headache, and flagging mental 
powers. Hence it has been called “ Herb of Memory.^^ This Shake- 
spere alludes to when he makes Ophelia say, “ There^s Rosemary, 
that's for remembrance.’^ 

Relations. — Compare : Hedeo., Menth. pul. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Anxiety. — (Memory deficient.) 

2. Head. — ^Vertigo. — Headache. — Heaviness and dulness of head. — 
Weight and tension round head. — (Baldness.) 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Violent pains followed by uterine 
haemorrhage and miscarriage, succeeded by faintness, spasms of chest, cold 
hands and feet, small, rapid, irregular pulse. — Menses four da5’^s too early. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Oppression of breathing. — Spasms in chest. 

26. Sleep. — Overpowering sleepiness with yawning. — Sleeplessness. 

27. Fever. — Coldness so that she could not leave the bed. — Chill over 
whole body, legs icy cold, no thirst and no subsequent heat. 


Rubia Tinctorum. 

Rubia tinctorum. Madder. N. O. Rubiaceac. Tincture of the root. 

Clinical. — Anaemia. Bones, affections of. Spleen, affections of. 

Characteristics. — The bones of young animals fed on Madder 
become tinged red. Burnett has found Rub, t, an excellent remedy 
(in ten-drop doses of the 0) in anasmia and under»nourished 
conditions, especially in splenic anaemia. 

Relations. — Compare : Chin., Coff., Galium (bot.). In anaemia, 
Ferr. 


Rumex Acetosa. 

Rumex acetosa. Sorrel, N, 0, Polygonaceae. Tincture of the 

leaves. 

Clinical. — Convulsions. Gastritis. QCsophagus, inflammation of. Paralysis. 
Throat, sore. Uvula, elongated. 

Characteristics. — Sorrel was at one time cultivated in this country 
as a salad, and the Buckler-shaped, or French Sorrel, is still cultivated 
in France, where it is considered as a powerful antiscorbutic. The 
leaves contain a large quantity of Binoxalate of Potash (Kali oxal)- 
The symptoms of the Schema were observed on three men who ate 
largely of the leaves. In one very violent convulsions were induced 



RUMEX ACETOSA 


102 1 


of a peculiar kind, the limbs being thrown reciprocally backwards and 
forwards and the head from side to side ; the hands being alternately 
clenched and unclenched, the eyes prominent. Other remarkable 
symptoms were : Swelling of lower eyelid. Elongated uvula. Pain 
all down oesophagus < by swallowing. Persistent short, dry cough. 
There was complete paralysis of bodily powers ; copious green vomit ; 
constipation. 

Relations. — Compare: Kal. ox., Lapath. In persistent cough, 
Rk. c. 

* SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Unconscious. 

2. Head. — Distress in head and an inch and a half below tip of 
sternum. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes sunken. — Lower lid puffed; pupil duggish. — Eyel>alh> 
fixed, glassy, pioininent. 

6. Face. — Features collapsed. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue : moist and furred ; white and furred and rather 
swollen ; furred in middle, tip and edges red. 

9. Throat. — Pharynx congested, anterior part covered with limpid 
secretion, uvula much elongated ; constant pain from throat and throughout 
oesophagus to cardiac orifice of stomach, < when swallowing. 

11. Stomach. — Appetite lost. — Great thirst. — Vomiting ; thick, pulpy, 
dark-green matter, — Continued retching. 

12. Abdomen. — Soreness at epigastrium and fulness of abdomen. — Very 
severe pain at epigastrium with occasional exacerbations. — Violent and 
universal pain in bowels, so intense he pressed them firmly and rolled, 
vociferated loudly, with a pallid, haggard countenance, and, as it were, thrust 
out his eyes. 

13. Stool. — Constipation. 

14. , Urinary Organs.— Deficient urine and alvine evacuations.— Urine 
increased, phosphatic, turbid, and whey-like. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Unremitting short cough, unattended with 
expectoration (persisted ten days). — Perpetual groaning or moaning. 

19. Pulse.— Pulse : feeble ; small and weak ; small and frequent. 

24. Generalities. — Lay on his back in a paroxysm of general convul- 
sions, with arms elevated rcciprcfcally, casting them forward and bringing 
them backward, doing the same with his legs, opening and reclosing his fists, 
and alternately throwing his head from r. to 1. ; eyeballs fixed, glassy, pro- 
minent ; rattling and grinding of teeth without foaming at mouth , absolutely 
senseless (fit lasted a quarter of an hour). — About 3 p.m. suddenly fell from 
his seat exhausted ; was lifted up and taken into the air ; legs again lost 
power and ,he fell, and when down vomited a difiluent, raw, greenish mass ; 
was again raised, but could only support himself feebly.— Bodily powers 
prostrated. 

26. Sleep. — Sleeplessness. 

27, Fever. — Heat and rigors. — Linen saturated with cutaneous exudation 



1022 


RUMEX CRISPUS 


Rumex Crispus. 

Rumex crispus. Curled Dock. Yellow Dock. N. 0 . Polygonacese. 

Tincture of fresh root. 

ClinioaL — Abortion. Aphonia Asthma. Borborygmi. Bronchitis. Catarrh. 
Corns. Coryza. Cough. Diarrhoea. Dyspepsia. Epistaxis. Feet, tender. , Gas 
tralgia. Heart, pain in; affections of. Indigestion. Irntation. Lichen. Moi^th, 
ulceration of. Phimosis. Phthisis. Prurigo. Rheumatism. Throat, sore ; ulce- 
rated. Trachea, affections of. Urticaria. 

Gharaoteristios. — The Yellow Dock or Curled Dock is a 
common British weed, introduced and growing wild in North 
America, where the provings w^ere made. The common Dock of our 
fields and roadsides, Rumex obttisifolia^ has a reputation among chil- 
dren as the best antidote to the nettle’s sting ; a reputation which is 
very well deserved, as I can testify. Rumex crispus^ according to 
Joslin, quoted by Hale, was used by allopaths intimally and externally 
for the cure of itch. This points to one of the leading actions of 
Rx. c, as developed in the provings. Among the constituents and 
salts of Rx. c, are Sulphur and Calc.ph, (Hale) ; and SuL, Calc.j and 
Pho, are strongly represented in its action. Rx. c., again, is a close 
ally of Rheuniy and has analogous purgative and other properties. 
The provings were made by Houghton, Joslin, H. M. Paine, Bayard, 
Rhees, &c., both with the tincture and with attenuations, and its 
characteristics were well defined. A keynote of many Rx. c. cases is 
sensitiveness to cold air. The cough and skin symptoms are < by 
uncovering or exposure to air. Guernsey thus describes the cough of 
Rx. c. : Cough caused by an incessant tickling in throat-pit, which 
tickling runs down to the bifurcation of the bronchial tubes ; touching 
the throat;brings on the cough ; by covering up all the body and head 
with the bed-clothes there is no cough.’' Correspondingly this symp- 
tom of Paine’s has led to many cures of skin cases : “ While undressingy 
and for some time after, considerable itching of surface of lower 
limbs’' — where exposure to air is again the exciting cause. The 
characteristic diarrhoea of Rx. c. occurs in the early morning, driving 
the patient out of bed ; it comes on after catarrh, and is often asso- 
ciated with the characteristic cough of*the remedy. The Rx. c. cough 
causes expulsion of urine ; and it may e^en cause expulsion of the foetus 
in pregnant w^omen. P. P. Wells relates this case (Hale) : Mrs. X. had 
had eight miscarriages in the early months, each miscarriage being 
attended with a dry, shaking, spasmodic cough in paroxysms of great 
violence, which was regarded as the cause of the abortions. At the 
beginning of the ninth pregnancy she came under homoeopathic 
treatment. The cough came on — very dry, harsh, loud, shaking, < at 
night, preventing sleep, excited instantly by pressure on the trachea. 
Rx. c. 30 promptly relieved. Wells also cured with Rx. c. 200 (Lehr- 
man’s preparation) the following in a man : Cough beginning with 
tickling behind top of sternum, sometimes in paroxysms lasting for. 
five to ten minutes. Trachea sore to external pressure ; feels 
excoriated through its whole extent, as also do the fauces. Cough is 



RUMEX CRISPUS 


1023 


excited by pressure on throat-pit ; violent with scanty difficult 
expectoration ; shakes head as if it would fly to pieces and chest so 
that he feels he might raise blood any minute. Paroxysms exhaust 
him ; headache during cough. Joslin pointed out the left chest had 
more verified symptoms than any other region. Further Conditions 
of Rx, c. are < lying on left side ; > lying on right side. < At 
II p.m. and 4 a.m. Another Condition of the cough is that it is 
induced or < by any irregulm ity of respiration^ such as a little deeper 
breath than usual or a little more rapid. Cough when eating. Joslin 
reports a number of cases of gastric derangement cured with Rx. c. 
(i) A young lady nad shootings from pit of stomach into chest in 
various directions ; sharp pains in left chest ; dull aching in forehead 
and slight nausea. One dose of 30th removed all her symptoms and 
restored her appetite. (2) A lady, 50, had had for three weeks pain 
in pit of stomach, aching in left chest, flatulence, eructations, pains 
and distension in stomach after meals. Rx. c. 200, one dose, cured in 
two or three hours. (3) Young lady had sensation of fulness and 
pressure in pit of stomach extending up towards throaty carried down on 
swallowing and nsing again to throat, Rx. c. 200 cured. (4) A gentle- 
man not used to tea took a cup, very weak, of the black kind ; then 
followed aching in pit of stomach and aching above it in chest, and 
especially on each side of lower end of sternum. Rx. c. 30 cured in a 
few minutes. The flatulence and rumbling of Rx. c. are well marked, 
and I have found it the best general remedy for the painless but 
annoying borborygmi frequently complained of by women. The left 
side is more markedly affected than the right. The circulation is 
much disturbed, violent palpitations of the heart and throbbing 
throughout the whole body being noted. Carleton Smith points out 
(H. P., X. 275) that in a case of cough cured by Cardoza with Rx. c. 
the characteristic was “ cough only during the day, not at all at 
night.” This gives Rx. c. a place beside Fer. and Mang. Smith has 
cured with Rx. c. many cases of indigestion in which this symptom 
was present : Lump in throat, not > by hawking or swallowing ; it 
descends* on deglutition, but immediately returns.” Peculiar Sensations 
are : Eyes pain as if from dryness. Tongue as if burned. Lump in 
throat ; it descends on deglutition, but immediately returns. Hard 
substance in pit of stomach. Bunch in throat or behind sternum. 
Pressure of a stick in rectum. As if urine could not long be retained. 
As if she could not get another; breath. As if air did not penetrate 
chest. As if a feather swaying to and fro in bronchi. As if head 
would fly to pieces (with cough). As if he might raise blood any 
minute. As if cough did not reach low enough to raise phlegm. As 
if heart suddenly stopped. Sternum feels sprained. Raw feeling 
under clavicles. Hands cold when coughing. The symptoms are < 
by touch ; pressure ; riding. < By cold ; > by warmth. < Change : 
warm to cold or cold to warm; changing rooms. < Lying down 
(pain in pit of stomach > lying perfectly quiet). < Lying on left 
^de ; burning in left side. > Lying right side. < Talking. < 
l^eep inspiration ; or irregularity of breathing. < Walking. < 
Evening and night ; and morning on waking, 3.30 and ii p.m.,2 to 5 a.m 
< When eating and after meals. > Discharge of offensive flatus. 



1024 


RUMRX CRISPUS 


BAlhtions.—Anlidoied by : Camph., Bell., Hyo., Con., Lach., Pho. 
Compare : Hard, diy, tickling cough, < reading, < touching larynx, 
Cin. Asthma of consumptives < 2 a.m., Meph., Sticta. Pains in left 
lung < moving ; cough from change of temperature, Bry. (Bry. 
more when change is to warm air ; Rx. c. more when to cold). 
Tickling cough from suprasternal fossa excited by speaking, Sil. 
Morning diarrhoea hurrying jiatient out of bed, Sul. Annoying, tick- 
ling cough on lying down, Hyo., Con. Urticaria, morning diarrhoea, 
Apis (opposite Conditions). Dry cough from tickling in supraster/ial 
fossa < least cool air or deep inspiration, Bell. Effects of tea, Thuj. 
Stitching pains in chest, pulsations over whole body, K. ca. Tough 
mucus, K. bi. Cough when eating, Calc. Burnt sensation in tongue. 
Ran. b. Stick in rectum, .^sc. h. Cough < changing air, Spo., Pho. 
< Lying left side, Pho., Pul. Raw sensation in larynx and trachea 
when coughing, Caust. Spurting of urine with cough, Caust., Pul., 
Scil. Early morning diarrhoea, Alo., Nat. s., Pod., Sul. Skin symp- 
toms < uncovering, Hep., Nat. s., Oleand. Cough starting in throat- 
pit (Bell, more in fauces ; Pho. more in bronchi). Incessant cough and 
botan., Rx. ac. Diarrhoea and botan., Rhe. Botan., Fago., Polyg., 
Lapath. Cough only during day, Fer., Mang. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Low-spirited : with serious expres^ion of face ; with suicidal 
mood. — Irritable ; disinclined to mental exertion. — Indifference to surround- 
ings. — Stagnation of ideas, lassitude, and uneasiness. 

2. Head. — Headache after waking in morning, preceded by a disagree- 
able dream. — Dull (and bruised) pains ; on r. side ; in occiput ; in forehead 
with bruised feeling, < on motion. — Darting pain or sharp piercing in 1. side 
of head. — Catarrhal headache with great irritation of larynx and trachea, 
clavicular pain and soreness behind sternum. — Bruised sensation on waking, 
continued till noon, disappeared suddenly after dinner. — Headache < in open 
air. — Pungent drawing in 1. occiput with a similar pain in 1. nostril and feeling 
as if coryza would ensue. 

3. Eycs.—Pain in eyes as from dryness ; lids inflamed, < evening.— 
Sore feeling in eyes without inflammation. — Deep-seated pain in r. eye, — 
Sharp, shooting pain in (and over) 1. eye. 

4. Ears. — Ringing in ears. — Itching deep in ears. — Pain, throbbing, 
stopped sensation in ears. 

5. Nose. — Great desire to pick nose.— Nose obstructed ; dry sensation, 
even in posterior nares. — Sudden, sharp, tingling sensation in Schneiderian 
membrane, followed by violent and rapid sneezing five or six times in succes- 
sion, with watery discharge. — Violent sneezing with watery coryza and head- 
ache), < evening and night.— Accumulation of mucus about posterior nares.— 
Yellow mucus discharged through posterior nares. — Epistaxis, violent sneezing, 
and painful irritation of nostrils. — Influenza with violent catarrh, followed by 
bronchitis. 

6. Face. — Great paleness of face while standing. — Heat of face ; red- 
ness < evenings ; dull headache ; with pulsations over whole body. — Pain in 
side of face, including r. temple and ear ; also 1. side of upper lip. — Pain in r. 



RUMEX CRISPUS 


1025 

jaw, morning.— After retiring late at night, lancinating pains in lower jaw at 
root of 1. canine teeth. 

8. Mouth. — Pain in teeth of both sides, morning, — Toothache : entirely 
> after eating dinner ; > by rinsing mouth with cold water. — Grumbling 
stinging toothache in r. upper molars, while riding in a cold wind ; with pain 
in forehead. — Tongue coated : white ; yellow ; yellowish-brown, or reddish- 
brown. — Dryness of anterior part of tongue, with sense of repletion in 
stomach and as if one had eaten spice. — Sensation of excoriation at edges of 
tongue. — Front of tongue dry and hot. — Soreness of r. edge of tongue. — Sen- 
sation as if tongue land mouth burnt. — Ulceration of mouth and throat. — 
Taste : bitter (mornings) ; nasty ; flat (on rising). — Flow of saliva. 

9. Throat. — Scraping in throat ; excoriated feeling with secretion of 
mucus in upper part.— -Sensation of a lump in throat, not > by hawking or 
swallowing ; it descends on swallowing, but immediately returns. — Sensation 
of a lump in oesophagus. — Aching in pharynx with collection of tough mucus 
in fauces. — Catarrhal affections of throat and fauces. — Throat dry, swallowing 
difficult ; pain in 1. side on swallowing. 

11. Stomach. — Appetite : much increased ; lost. — Thirst. — After meals : 
flatulency ,* heaviness in stomach or epigastrium ; aching in 1. breast ; pressure 
and distension in stomacli. — Nausea in night before diarrhoea. — Sensation of 
hard substance in pit of stomach. — Fulness and pressure in pit of stomach 
extending toward throat-pit ; descends with every empty deglutition but 
immediately returns. — Tight, suffocative, heavy ache in epigastrium, 
through to back ; clothes seem loo tight ; weak feeling in epigastrium, all < 
when talking ; frequently takes a long breath. — Shooting from pit of stomach 
to chest ; sharp in 1. chest ; slight nausea ; dull aching in forehead. — Aching 
and shooting in pit of stomach and above it on each side of sternum. — Eruc- 
tations ; empty ; tasteless. — Hiccough. — Pyrosis. — Nausea ; > by eructations. 
— Nausea and vertigo while dressing in morning, compelling him to lie down 
again. — Sensation of undigested food and upward pressure in throat-pit. — 
Severe pain in digestive organs on waking. — Fain in stomach with the pain in 
the lungs.— Burning and cutting in stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Pain in hypochondnum from walking or deep inspira- 
tion. — Griping near navel partially > by discharge of offensive flatus ; flatulent 
colic soon after a meal. — Pain occurring or < during inspiration. — Sensation 
of heaviness and fulness in abdomen with rumbling. — Borborygnius. — Pain 
in abdomen in morning, followed Iw a stool. — Colic from a cold, with cough, 

I3» Stool and Anus. — Stoop : painless, offensive, profuse ; brown or 
black, thin or watery ; preceded by pain in abdomen. — Before stool ; sudden 
'^^SlngT driving him out of bed in morning. — Morning diarrhoea, with cough 
from tickling in throat-pit. — Diarrhcea 6 to 10 a.m. — Copious diarrhoeic stool 
with colic pain just above hypogastrium, and a very disagreeable rumbling in 
bowels together with nausea and loss of appetite ; these sensations continued 
throughout the day with four or five evacuations which passed away in a 
stream as if a large quantity would be discharged ; nevertheless each dis- 
charge was suddenly arrested, and the inclination passed away entirely for a 
shqpt time ; but on rising the urgency returned, and on returning to the closet 
a new stream poured forth as before. — Fmces black ; scanty. — Constipation 
for several days, followed by a drv, hard stool, — Itching at anus with dis- 
VOL. u. * 66 



1026 


RUMEX CRISPUS 


charge of offensive flatus.— Sensation as from pressure of a rough stick forced 
up rectum, painfu/ on walking. — Haemorrhoids protrude ; much heat and 
itching at anus, and sensation as if a foreign body there. 

14. Urinary Organs* — Sudden urging. — Frequent inclination with 
feeling as if urine could not long be retained. — Involuntary micturition with 
cough. — Copious colourless urine in afternoon. — Urine less copious, flocculent 
deposit, oily surface ; marked brick-dust sediment. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — ^Tendency to phimosis. — During evening 

feeling of soreness and excoriation, with redness of end of prepuce. — Itching 
of prepuce. — Sexual desire diminished ; lost. , 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness < evenings; voice uncertain. 
— ^Voice : changes suddenly ; on two consecutive days at 2 p.m. rose several 
notes ; higher with catarrh ; nasal. — Aphonia after exposure to cold. — (Reflex 
aphonia from tubercle of 1 . apex.) — ^Tenacious mucus in larynx, constant 
desire to hawk. — ^Violent irritation to cough in larynx while eating (at three 
meals). — (Cough all day, > lying down at night.) — Pain in top of larynx ; 
mostly 1. side. — Dry, spasmodic cough, like beginning of whooping-cough ; 
in paroxysms ; preceded by tickling in throat-pit, with congestion and slight 
pains in head, and wrenching pains in r. chest ; began a few minutes after 
lying down at night (ii p.m.) ; lasted 10 to 15 minutes, after which he slept 
all right ; a less severe paroxysm in bed on waking and throughout day ; this 
lasted two weeks, when he began to expectorate adhesive mucus in small 
quantities, detached with difficulty. — Hacking cough. — Cough < by any 
irregularity of breathing. — Hoarse, hacking cough ii p.m. and 2 to 5 a.m. — 
Cough with pain behind mid-sternum. — Pressure on throat ss cough. — Dry, 
tickling, spasmodic cough, with tenderness in larynx and trachea, rendering 
cough quite painful. — ^Teasing periodical cough, < in cool air or by anything 
which increases the volume or rapidity of inspired air. — Cough < from 
changing rooms. — Cough originally caused by inhaling extremely cold air 
during winter, < lying down, esp. ii p.m. — Cough provoked by change from 
cold to warm or warm to cold. — Cough < lying 1 . side ; > lying r. ; > 
covering up mouth ; > wearing respirator. — Sensation of breathlessness ; as 
if air did not penetrate chest ; or as when falling or passing rapidly through 
the air. — Frequent feeling as if she could not get another breath. 

18. Chest. — Clavicular pain ; raw pain just under each clavicle while 
hawking mucus from throat. — Pain in chest : in both sides ; dull aching in 
anterior part, with headache and belching. — Sharp stitching or stinging 
through 1. lung.—Acutc stitch along 1. mai.gin of sternum.—Burning stinging : 
in 1. side near heart ; in whole 1. chest suddenly when taking a deep inspira- 
tion while in act of lying down in bed at night. — At 3.30 p.m., while writing 
at desk, stitches in substance of 1. lung. — Burning, shooting pain in r. chest. 
— Sharp pain near 1. axilla. — Pain in centre of 1 . lung. — Sternum feels sprained. 
— Great pressure and sense of depression in upper part of breast. — ^Very sharp 
pain in breast running r. to 1. — Sharp cutting pain in 1. breast at noon lasting 
an hour. 

19. Heart. — Heart feels as if it suddenly stopped beating’; followed by 
a heavy throbbing.— Dull pain in region of heart, with dull pain and heavi- 
ness in 1. upper arm, esp. elbow. — Dull pain in heart on deep inspirations.— 
Burning in region of heart.— Severe stinging in region of heart, extending 



RUMEX CRISPUS 1027 

through chest to apex of 1. scapula, with frequent desire to take a deep breath, 
which < the pain (afternoon for two or three hours), — Sharp pain in 1. side 
of heart. — Palpitation : after supper ; < going upstairs ; violent with throb- 
bing carotids. 

20. Neck and Back. — Sensation as if a thread were tightly tied round 
neck just below ears, with a slight roaring in the ears. — Pain : in back of 
neck ; running down back. — Aching between scapulae. — Stinging burning 
just below inferior angle of 1. scapula ; followed and accompanied by sting- 
ing, almost itching pain 1. chest just below nipple. — Pain under r. scapula. — 
Pain in 1. scapula.**-Burning pain in small of back near tip of r. sacro-iliac 
joint. — Sore pain in 1. sacro-iliac joint, lame as from over-lifting; < by 
sudden motion ; followed by pulsation in nates. — Aching and sense of great 
fatigue in loins. 

21. Limbs. — Twitching of r. arm and leg. — Pain in upper and lower 
limbs of same or opposite side. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pains in shoulder down to elbow, arms feel strained. 
— Hands cold when coughing, — Bruised aching and stinging pain in arms, 
hands, elbows, and r. wrist. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Stitching in back of r. hip ; limping walk. — Legs 
ache. — Stitch-like pain in knee-joint when standing. — Legs covered with 
small red pimples. — Feet cold. — Feet sensitive, stinging in corns. — Tender 
feet. 

24. Generalities. — Lassitude and weariness. — Restless in evening. — 
Pains not fixed or constant anywhere. — Throbbing through whole body. — 
Unusual sensitiveness to cold or open air. 

25. Skin. — Itching in various parts, < on lower limbs. — Eruption 
covered uniformly several regions of skin, with exception of face ; itching 
more of a pricking than a burning ; < by cold, > by warmth. — Contagious 
prurigo or “army itch." — Stinging-itching or prickling itching of skin. — 
Vesicular eruption, itching when uncovered and e.xposed to cool air. — Periodic 
itch. — yrticaria ; < in open air. 

26. Sleep. — Sleep : disturbed ; wakeful, restless ; short naps and unplea- 
sant fancies, even when awake. — Unpleasant dreams ; of danger and trouble ; 
early in the morning ; of being naked in the street ; of murders ; of autopsies, 
— Wakes early with headache. 

27. Fever. — Chilly, < on back ; colic, nausea, stitches near middle of 
chest. — Increased frequency of piise and afternoon fever. — Sensation of heat, 
followed by that of cold, without Shivering. — Flushes of heat, < on cheeks. — 
Sweat on waking from a sound sleep. 


Rumex Obtusifolia, Lapathum 



1028 . 


RUTA 


Russula. 

Russula fcetens. N. 0. Fungi. Tincture of the fresh mushrooms 

Clinical. — Blindness. Chorea. Convulsions. Enuresis. 

Characteristics. — Some species of Russula are edible, and are 
much esteemed as a food on the Continent. Alphonse Barrelet 
observed the effects of eating cooked Russula fcctens^ which produced 
a very severe poisoning. Hallucinations, muscular tremors, and 
clonic spasms recall the effects of Aganc, The eye symptoms were 
even more pronounced, complete blindness lasting many days 
occurred, with this peculiarity of the pupil, that it was sometimes 
normal, sometimes dilated, and sometimes contracted. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Unconsciousness. — Muscular spasms, deathly anxiety, dysp- 
noea. — Hallucinations constant for three days after spasms ceased. 

3. Eyes. — Pupils at one time normal, at another dilated, at another 
contracted. — Consciousness returned on third day, patient could hear but was 
completely blind. 

6. Face. — Cyanosis. 

II, 12, 13. Stomach, Abdomen, and Stool. —Nausea, colic, vomiting, 
diarrhoea, cold extremities. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Involuntary micturition. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Dyspnoea. 

ig. Heart. — Pulse small and contracted. 

24. Generalities. — Constant trembling of muscles, at times interrupted 
by tonic contractions, increasing to general clonic spasms with complete loss 
of consciousness. — Patient recovered after two or three weeks. 

25, Skin. — The attack was followed by pseudo-erysipelas on elbows and 
painless furuncles over whole body, esp. on scapulae and small of back. 

Ruta. 

Ruta graveolens. Rue. N, 0. Ru'^aceae. Tincture of whole 
fresh plant. 

Clinical. — Amblyofia. Anus, prolapse of. Bone^ bruised ; pains in. Bruises. 
Bursitis. Cartilages, bruises ot , pains in. Chest, sternum, pains in. Constipation. 
Dislocations. Dyspepsia. Enuiesis. Epistaxis. Exostosis. Eyes, sight weak; 
pains in. Facial paralysis, fioin cold. Fe\crs. Ftaciurcs, Ganglion. Haemor- 
rhages. Hands, pains tn. Paralysis. Pcnchondrtlts. Periostitis.* Rectum, 
affections of ; prolapse of. Restlessness. Rheumatism. Sciatica. Spleen, affec- 
tions ol. Sprain. Stamineiing, longue, cramp m ; swelling of. Urination, 
difficulty of. Varicocele. Veins, swollen ; varicose. Warts. 

Characteristics. — The common Rue of our gardens is a native of 
Southern Europe. It was formerly in great repute in medicine ; 
epilepsy, hysteria, hydrophobia, weakness of sight (from excessive 



RUTA 


. 1029 


reading), ozaena, epistaxis, foul gumboils, flatulent colic (in hysteric 
females), inertia of the bowels, having been cured with it empirically 
(Teste). It was also supposed to be a kind of universal antidote : 
‘^Even in our own time the Roman ladies imagine that the most 
odoriferous flowers may be left in their rooms without the least 
danger provided a bush of garden rue be amongst them (Teste). 
Practitioners (says Treas. of BoL) have perhaps been deterred from 
employing it by the symptoms of acrido-narcotic poisoning induced 
by an overdose. Locally applied Rue is a powerful irritant, and one 
species, Ruta montana, is dangerous to handle even with gloves. 
Ruta is useful in feverish complaints, promotes perspiration and 
removes noxious material ; in headache, nervous and hysteric com- 
plaints, weakness of the stomach and pains in the bowels, suppressed 
menses, and if taken for a long time it benefits epilepsy. The expressed 
juice benefits nightmare^’ (Greenes Herbal), In large doses it causes 
violent gastric pains, excessive and sometimes bloody vomiting, profuse 
salivation and swelling of the tongue, great prostration, confusion of 
mind, and convulsive twitchings, with, in pregnant women, abortion 
(M. Helie). In olden times it was used to ward off plague, and is 
at the present day the great remedy for pip or roup in fowls : a 
disease which affects the throat and causes chokiness and turns the 
comb of the fowl black ; it is due to impure water and is contagious. 
** It certainly acts strongly on deposits of scirrhous material in both 
the breasts and in the vagina and sometimes lessens the size of these 
(Cooper). Hahnemann^s proving shows how largely the old uses were 
founded on a homceopathic relationship. The vulnerary remedies 
indicate in symptoms of their provings the peculiar form of injuries 
for which they are adapted ; there are the sprained pains of Rhus^ the 
bruised pains (in skin and muscles) of Arn, ; Ruta also has bruised pains, 
but these are more particularly manifested in bones. Ruta is one of the 
chief remedies for injured bones, and especially bruised bones. This 
power, of Ruta does not appear to have been known before the 
provings were made. But impaired sight due to straining the eyes 
was an old use of the remedy ; and here are symptoms from the 
provings : His eyes feel as if he had strained the sight too much by 
reading ; Weak, pressive-like pain in right eye, with dimness of 
surrounding objects, as if from having looked too long at an object 
that was fatiguing to the eyes j A feeling of heat and burning in 
the eyes, and pain in them yhen he reads (in the evening and by 
candle-light).” Each of these symptoms was experienced by a 
separate prover. Another effect of bruising is se^n in prolapse of the 
rectum after confinement. But Ruta has, independently of this, a 
powerful action on the rectum, and caused prolapse in the provers 
and many severe symptoms. Tearing stitches in rectum when sitting. 
The prolapse is < by stooping, and especially by crouching together ; 
it comes on immediately on attempting a passage. Rushmore (H, P., 
X. 516) cured with one dose of Ruta 900 (Fincbe) a case of prolapse 
preceding a very difficult stool. — ^Tearing in rectum and urethra while 
urinating. Constipation ; from inactivity of rectum or impaction of 
faeces following mechanical injuries. A curious clinical symptom is 
a sensation of nausea located in the rectum. Among the general 



•1030 


RUTA 


symptoms are : Great weakness after a short walk ; limbs feel 
bruised ; small of back and loins painful. Tottering as if thighs 
were weak ; limbs pain when walking. Does not know where to lay 
his legs on account of uneasiness and heaviness ; lies now in one 
place, now in another, and turns from side to side. All parts of the 
body on which he lies, even in bed, are painful as if bruised. Facial 
paralysis from catching cold, in robust, sanguine persons. Rheumatic 
paralysis of wrists and ankles. Ruia is specially suited to robust, san- 
guineous persons ; and corresponds to haemorrhages from nose (with 
pressure at root), gums, rectum. Peculiar Sensations^' are : Pain as if 
from a fall in periosteum. As if a nail were driven into head. Head 
as if bruised or beaten. Eyes, as if strained ; as if a shadow flitting 
before them ; as after looking too long and intently at an object ; as 
if eyes were balls of fire. As if one were digging about in the ear 
with a blunt piece of wood. As of a lump in throat. Bladder as if 
constantly full. Spine as if beaten and lame. Wrists as if sprained. 
As if pain were in marrow of bone, or as if bone were broken. Thighs 
as if beaten ; as if weak. As if there were an ulcer on ankle. All 
parts of body bruised at night, feeling as if it were time to rise. 
Restlessness is a very frequent Concomitant of Ruta conditions. A 
peculiar symptom is cramp in the tongue with embarrassed speech. 
A prolonged use of Ruta 3X has cured ganglion in front of left wrist 
(Oran W. Smith, H, P., ix. 308). Slow pulse, contracted pupil, saliva- 
tion and swollen tongue are features of its action. The symptoms are : 

< By touch. Pressure < sore spot on sternum ; > pain below r. scapula, 
and stitches in small of back. Backache > lying on back. [This is 
characteristic, and has led to many cures ; and the relief of a case of 
malignant disease of kidneys and bladder (Rushmore, H. P., x. 516). 
This is important in connection with a use Cooper has made of Ruta 
ointment, prepared by extracting the plant in warm vaseline as an 
application in broken cancer of the breast.] Walking or riding ss 
chafing. Dyspepsia from straining stomach by carrying heavy 
weights. Scratching >. Rubbing >. Rest<. Motion >. Lying 
down = parts lain on to be sore ; > pain below right scapula ; > 
stitches in small of back. Sitting <. Stooping <. Bending over 
sz faeces to escape. Exertion <. Ascending <. Going up and 
down stairs = hamstrings to feel shortened and weak. < At night. 

< Morning. (Vertigo on rising. Rhejimatic pain in back < before 

rising. Sweat in bed.) Warm stove » chilliness. Indoors ss yawn- 
ing and stretching. Open air = vertigo. Cold applications <. Cold 
wet weather <. < Reading and straining eyes. < During 

menses. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Camph. Antidote to : Merc. Com- 
plementary : Calc. ph. in joint affections. Compatible : After Arn. in 
joint affections ; after Symphyt. in bone injuries ; Calc., Caust., Lyc., 
Ph. ac., Puls., Sul., Sul. ac. (diseases of bone). Compare : In diseases 
of bone, Angust. (also botan.), Conchiol. Restlessness, effects of cold 
and damp, Rhus. Eye-strain, Nat. m., Onos., Seneg. Prolapse of 
rectum, ./Esc., Bell., Chi. s.. Nit. ac.. Pod. Pain in back < in morn- 
ing before rising. Pet. Sore as if bruised in parts lain on, Arn., Ekip., 
Pyro. Constipation after injuries, Arn. Warts on palms, Nat. c., 



RUTA 


1031 

Nat m. (on backs of hands, DuL). Chafing. Compare also: Arg. n., 
Con., Euphras., Lye., Cham., Sep. 

CauBation. — Bones, injuries of. Bruises. Fractures. Sprains. 
Carrying heavy weights. Over-exertion of eyes. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Anxiety, as from a troubled conscience. — Disposition to 
quarrel and to contradict. — Unfitness for labour. — Cross and suspicious, 
imagined he was always being deceived. — Patient dissatisfied with himself 
and others, and disposed to weep. — Melancholy and moral dejection (towards 
evening). — Slowness of conception. — Frequent absence of mind. 

2. Head. — Head bewildered, as from too little sleep. — Whirling vertigo, 
which causes falling when rising in morning, also when seated, and when 
walking in open air. — When sitting, sudden vertigo : all turned round him in 
a circle ; thereafter glowing cheeks. — Headache as from stunning pressure on 
whole brain, with great inquietude. — Headache as if a nail were driven into 
head. — Headache after excessive use of intoxicating drinks. — ^Throbbing or 
tearing pain in forehead, with confusion in head, in evening before lying 
down, and in morning on waking. — Heat in head (with much restlessness). — 
Intermittent boring stitches in r. side of forehead. — Shooting, drawing pain 
from frontal to temporal bone. — From temporal bones to occiput, in the 
periosteum, pain as from a fall.— -(Occipital headache < during menses, with 
pains in backs of eyes « in 1. eyeball), with dyspepsia ; cannot bear a bright 
light, eyes tire, ache and prick and turn bloodshot when she uses glasses — 
R.T.C.) — ^Tensive drawing or lancinating pains in exterior of head, as from 
a blow or contusion, esp. in periosteum. — Gnawing itching in scalp. — Nodes 
and abscesses on scalp, with pain as from excoriation when touched, formed 
after a tearing pain had been felt in the part which they occupy. — Biting 
itching .(ulcers) on scalp. — Small ulcers and running sores on scalp. 

3. Eyes. — Pains in eyes when viewing an object minutely. — Itching 
smarting in canthus. — Aching in eyes. — Eyes hot like balls of fire ; ache ; feel 
strained. — Burning sensation in eyes when reading by candle-light. — Burning 
under 1 . eye. — Itching in inner canthi and on lower lids, which becomes 
smarting after rubbing them, whereupon the eye becomes filled with water. — 
Lachrymation in open air (not m room). — Speck on cornea. — Red areola 
round candle in evening. — Quivei^g and jerking in muscles of eyebrows. — 
Spasms in (lower) lids ; the tarsus is drawn hither and thither, and when it 
ceases water runs from both eyes for an hour and a half» — Tendency to stare. 
— Contraction of pupil (Aitken). — (Detachment of retina.) — Asthenopia. — 
Astigmatism (?). — Sight confused, as if directed through a mist, and complete 
cloudiness at a distance. — Obscuration of sight from reading too much, with 
clouds, or like a veil before eyes. — A green halo around the light in evening. — 
Bad effects from over-straining eyes, from reading too much, esp. fine work at 
night. — Dancing spots before eyes. 

4* Ears. — Earache witli scraping pressure ; as if a blunt piece of wood 
were pushed about in it. — Itching lancinations in car. — Pain in cartilage of 
ear and under mastoid process as from a bruise. 



1032 


RUTA 


5. Nose.— Acute and hard aching in root of nose.— Perspiration on back 
of nose. — Epistaxis with pressure at root of nose. 

6. Face. — Pains in face, in periosteum, as if caused by contusion or 
blows. — Spasmodic tearing in cheek-bone. — Itching and gnawing at face and 
on cheeks.— Erysipelas in forehead with swelling. — Eruption of pimples on 
lips. — Lips dry and sticky. — Acne. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache with digging pain (in the lower teeth). — Painful 
sensibility and ready bleeding of the gums. 

8. Mouth.— Mouth dry and glutinous.— Cramp in tongue, with embar- 
rassed speech. — Profuse salivation and swelling of topgue (Taylor, Med, 
Juris), 

9. Throat. — Sore throat, as if a tubercle were in bottom of gullet, 
during empty deglutition. — Sensation as from excoriation and pressure on 
velum palati when swallowing. 

10. Appetite. — Mawkish and dry taste of food, like wood. — ^Violent 
thirst for cold water in afternoon. — Disgust at first mouthful with a sensation 
of fulness and satiety in abdomen, although the appetite is good. — Sudden 
nausea when eating, with vomiting of food. — Pains in stomach after eating 
bread, or crude and indigestible food. 

11. Stomach. — Empty risings or with the taste of food. — Hiccough 
when smoking. — Putrid risings after eating meat. — Risings like those of 
hysterical women. — Nausea at pit of .stomach. — Vomiting, even of food.— 
Pains in stomach after having eaten uncooked or indigestible food. — Pmeh- 
ings in stomach after eating bread. — Gnawing (sensation as from emptiness 
or hunger), burning, or pressive pains in .stomach. — Tearing shootings in 
epigastrium. 

12. Abdomen. — Gnawing pressure in hepatic region. — Gnawing and 
eating pain about navel. — Sick feeling in abdomen followed by soft stools. — 
Pulsation and pricking in 1 . hypochondrium. — Painful swelling of spleen. — 
Pain in abdomen as from a bruise, with digging in lumbar region. — Pressive 
pinchings in hypogastrium. — Incisive pinchings in sides of abdomen. — Shoot- 
ing pains, which pass into abdomen, when sitting down. — Sensation df cold- 
ness or of heat, and burning sensation in abdomen. — Gnawing in abdomen. 
— Colic with burning or gnawing pain. — Colic as from worms (in children). 
— Lancinations in muscles of abdomen, which compel retraction of abdomen. 

13. Stool and Rectum. — Difficult faeces, as from inactivity of rectum 
(or impaction following mechanical injuries), evacuated only with straining. — 
Constipation alternating with mucous, fryhy stools. — Faeces scanty, hard, 
knotty, like sheep-dung. — Slimy diarrhoea alternately with constipation. — 
(Chronic and obstructed diarrhoea.— R. T. C.) — Frequent want to evacuate, 
with scanty but soft evacuations. — Ineffectual want to evacuate, with pro- 
lapsus recti. — Prolapse of rectum immediately on attempting a passage ; from 
slightest stooping ; after confinement ; frequent unsuccessful urging. — Pro- 
lapsus recti at every evacuation (whether hard or soft stool).— Disjcharge 
of blood with stool. — When sitting, tearing stitches in rectum. — Pruritus 
ani with smooth appearance of skin round anus. — R. T. C.). — Tearing in rectum 
and urethra when not urinating. — Nausea felt in rectum. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Want to urinate, sometimes very urgent, with' 
pressure on bladder and scanty emission of green urine. — Pressure on bladder 



RUTA 


1033 


(as if continually full), sometimes also after emission of urine and at other 
times. — Frequent and profuse emission of urine, even at night. — Continued 
want to urinate, even immediately after an emission. — Retention of urine. — 
Involuntary emission of urine at night in bed and by day during movement 
(walking). — Urine charged with gravel. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Increased sexual desire. — Pollutions. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Sterility. — Catamenia very irregular. — 
Symptoms < at menstrual period. — Catamenia of too short duration, preceded 
and followed by leucorrhcea. — Corrosive leucorrhoea after the catamenia. — 
(Pruritus pudendi.-ij-Vaginal pruritus with irritation of skin elsewhere. — 
Pruritus vulvac, very severe, affecting external lips, which are swollen, began 
in vagina with pain under I. breast and dimness of sight. — R. T, C.) — 
Metrorrhagia as a forerunner of miscarriage. — Bearing-down pains. — Mis- 
carriage ; at seven months. — Lameness and soreness all over ; with feeble 
contractions during labour. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Bruised pain in larynx. — Cough in evening 
after lying down, with copious expectoration of viscid mucus, and heaving as 
if about to vomit. — Croaking cough at night with scraping in chest. — Cough, 
with copious expectoration of purulent matter. — Expectoration of thick, 
yellowish mucus, almost without cough, but with a sensation of fatigue in 
chest. — Wakened about midnight with a choking cough. 

18. Chest. — Breath very short, with dyspnoea. — ^Aching at chest with 
sensation of fulness. — Nocturnal compression in lower part of chest. — Lanci- 
nations in chest, often with suspended respiration, principally when going up 
stairs. — Sensation of coldness or of heat in chest. — Gnawing in r. chest 
with corrosive burning. — Gnawing sensation in ( 1 .) chest. — Phthisis after 
mechanical injuries of chest. — A place in region of sternum is painful when 
touched. 

19. Heart. — Palpitation of heart with anxiety. 

20. Neck and Back. — Drawing in nape of neck and in the shoulder- 
blades. — Pressure on inside of r. scapula. — Pricking itching between scapulae, 
not > by rubbing. — Contusive pains in back and loins, often with oppressed 
respiration. — Pain in loins and sacrum as from contusion. — Shootings in loins 
when walking and when stooping, or only when seated, > by pressure and 
when lying down. — Backache > lying on back. — Pain in lumbar vertebrae as 
if bruised. — Bruised pain in spine ; and in iliac bones. — Pain from cocc>tc to 
os sacrum as from a fall or blow. 

21. Limbs. — Pains in the lin^s, joints, and bones as if beaten, or after a 

blow or fall. * 

22. Upper Limbs. — Wrenching pain in the shoulder-joint, esp. when 
permitting arms to hang down or when resting on them. — Shocks in arms as 
if in bones. — Dull tcarings in bones of the arm and joints of elbow.—Pain as 
from contusion in joint of elbow. — Pain in forearms as well as in bones and 
joints of hands as if they had been beaten. — Pressive and spasmodic drawing 
and tearing in forearms, hands, and fingers. — Paralytic stiffness of wrist. — 
Wrenching pain or shootings in wrists.— Sensation as from a sprain and stiff- 
ness in wrist. — Bones of wrist and back of hand painful as if bruised when at 
rest and when moving. — Pain in wrist (as from a sprain) on lifting a weight. 

Numbness and tingling in hands after exertion. — Spasmodic contraction of 



1034 


RUTA 


fingers.— Swollen veins on hands ; after eating.— Warts ; with sore pains ; 
flat, smooth, on palms of hands. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Falling from side to side when walking, legs will 
not support him, no power or steadiness in thighs. — Legs give out on ascend- 
ing or descending stairs. — Sciatica ; < by cold applications, and in cold, wet 
weather. — Spasmodic drawing in thighs, extending into the hip-joint and 
sacrum. — Contusive pain in hip- joint and bones of the legs, esp. on touching 
and stretching them. — Weakness in thigh-bones on rising from a seat, as if 
they had been broken. — ^Weakness, trembling, and paralytic heavinessT of 
knees and legs, which prevent standing firmly, fatigue and heaviness of legs 
after walking. — Sensation of contraction in tendons of knee (as if they were 
shortened, and weakness in them, esp. on descending). — ** Rue pounded with 
honey and salt helps swelling of knee.” — Culpepper). — Fistulous ulcers in 
legs. — Flexion of knees, esp. when going down stairs. — Lameness and pain in 
the ankles after a sprain or dislocation ; as if ulcerated. — (Pain and tender- 
ness in soles, aching in ankles and very acute shooting in back of 1. heel, 
sometimes of r. with pinkish discoloration of it ; and shootings up through 
limb settling in one spot (sacro-sciatic foramen), with aching and heavy 
drawing across back of neck as if being dragged down ; patellae stiff and 
snap on bending knees. — R. T. C.) — Burning, gnawing pain in bones of the 
feet, which does not permit standing or walking. — Paralytic stiffness of 
instep. — Small epithelial swellings on joints of toes. 

24. Generalities. — [We are led to the use of this remedy for injuries of 
the periosteum (as when a fall or an accident injures the periosteum), making 
it very sore and causing a bruised sensation ; when the rectum protrudes 
from the anus after confinement ; prolapsus ani, which may come down every 
time the bowels are moved ; pain as if bruised in the outer parts and in the 
bones ; wounds where the bones are injured ; gnawing in the inner parts ; 
affections in general of 1. side of head ; of the bladder ; wrist-joints ; lumbar 
region ; bones of the lower extremity ; < from lying on painful side ; looking 
fixedly at an object, as in cases of those who have looked closely at watch- 
making, fine sewing, &c. ; from taking uncooked food — H. N.G.]. — Contusive 
pains in limbs, joints, and bones, esp. when touched. — Burning or gnawing 
pains in periosteum of limbs. — Sensation of soreness of the parts on which 
one lies. — Pain in long bones as if broken. — Pressive, spasmodic tearings, and 
drawings m the limbs. — Sensation of fulness in whole body, with obstructed 
respiration. — Lassitude, weakness, and heaviness in all limbs, esp. when 
seated, with great restlessness in legs. — Lal^eness after sprains, esp. the wrists 
and ankles. — Tottering, unsteady gait, from weakness of thighs. — Sensation in 
all limbs as if severely beaten, with painful sensibility of sacrum and loins 
when sitting down after a short walk. — Sensation in head and body as if he 
had not slept enough. — Knows not where to put his legs on account of rest- 
lessness and heaviness, puts them first in one place, then in another, and 
turns his body from side to side. — Whole body feels as if stuffed full, whereby 
breathing is impeded. — Cannot bend his body, all joints and hip-bones painful 
as if bruised. — On touching the painful parts, and esp. hips and thigh-bones, 
they are painful as if bruised.— Acts specially on yellow elastic tissue (R. T. C.). 

25. Skin* — Gnawing itching on skin. — Erysipelatous inflammation. — 
Tendency to excoriation in children, either when walking or riding on horse- 



RUTA 


1035 

back.— Inflamed ulcers.— Anasarca.— Warts ; with sore pains ; flat, smooth on 

palms. 

26. Sleep. — Frequent yawning and stretching. — Strong disposition to 
sleep in evening and after a meal, waking with a start, and piercing cries on 
least touch. — Nocturnal agitation, with tossing and frequent waking. 

27. Fever. — Pulse only accelerated during heat. — Coldness running over 
one side of head. — Chilliness principally in back and running up and down. — 
Heat over whole body, mostly in afternoon, without thirst, but with anxiety, 
restlessness, and dyspnoea. — Heat in face, with red cheeks and cold hands 
and feet. — Cold perspiration on face in morning in bed. — Perspiration all 
over when walking in open air. — Shuddering, coldness, and shivering, even 
•when near the fire. — Coldness in liands and feet, with heat in face, confusion 
in head, and thirst. — General heat with agitation and excessive uneasiness, 
feeling of suffocation, and pressive headache. — Frequent flushes of heat. 



Sabadilla. 

Asagraea officinalis. Veratrum officinale. Sabadilla officinarum.’ 

Cebadilla. Cevadilla. N. O. Melanthaceas (of the Liliaceae). 

Tincture of seeds. 

Clinical. — Coryza. Debility. Diphtheria. Dyspepsia ; of pregnancy. Ear- 
ache. Epistaxis. Hay a-ithma. Headache. Hcad-Itcc. Im.iginary diseases. 
Influenza. Intermittents. Mania. Melancholia. Neuralgia. CEsophagus, stricture 
of. Rheumatism. Tapeworm. Throat, sore. Toothache. Uvula elongated. 
Vertigo. Worms. 

Charaoteristios. — Asagrcea is a Mexican genus belonging to the 
Colchicum family, Melanthaceie. It has only one species, A. officinalis^ 
which furnishes the Cebadilla seeds from which Verairine is prepared. 
The seeds were formerly used to destroy vermin {Treas. of BoL). 
Saba, first appears in homceopathic literature as one of Stapf^s addi- 
tions, Hahnemann being one of the provers. Stapf s Additions forms 
a kind of appendix to the Matena Medica Pura. The plant, says 
Stapf, was first described by Monaides about the year 1572. At first 
it was almost exclusively used for destroying lice, and also worms 
in putrid ulcers and in the intestines. Stapf points out that the 
provings reveal remarkable febrile symptoms. Saba,j he says, is not 
only specific to a certain kind of very bad angina, and to a rare kind 
of pleurisy where no inflammatory fever nor thirst is present, where 
the patient complains of coldness mingled with isolated flushes of 
heat ; but also to some forms of fever and ague, where the chilliness 
sets in with nausea and inclination to vomit, recurs frequently, and 
sometimes alternates with flushes of heat ; where the heat is more 
perceptible in the face and on the hands than on the rest of the body, 
with absence of thirst both in the clully and hot stage.^^ The same 
authority says that Saba, has a long^period of action ; the primary 
syijiptoms develop in the first five days, then recur after the lapse of 
some time. Symptoms are periodical and paroxysmal. The perio- 
dicity of Saba, may be as clock-like as that of Cedr.j and renders it a 
leading remedy in intermittent fevers and neuralgias. Saba, is a chilly 
remedy, the symptoms, especially the coryza, being generally < in 
the open air. The catarrhal symptoms are very severe, and corre- 
spond to many cases of hay asthma. I have often relieved cases with 
Saba.f though it does not cure the diathesis. Sore throats charac- 
terised by a sensation of a lump or foreign body in the throat, and a 
constant necessity to swallow^ I have frequently cured with Saba, Kent 
(Med, Adv,y August, 1894) says it is suited to old, chronic sore throats 

1036 



SABADILLA 


1037 


that are < from cold air. The patient is sensitive to cold air. Every 
time he takes cold it settles in his nose and throat. Tonsillitis going 
from left to right.^^ The desire for hot drink distinguishes Saba, from 
Lack, The traditional use of Saba, as a destroyer of parasites is 
depicted in the provings : Violent itching of hairy scalp, compelling 
her to scratch till blood comes.^^ Itching of the vertex as if a 
quantity of vermin had collected there, obliging him to scratch inces- 
santly.’^ Itching of anus and rectum as from ascarides.^’ Itching 
of anus alternating with itching of alae nasi and meatus auditorius.” 
Kent gave Saba, to j pet dog which had great irritation of anus, and 
soon afterwards he passed a very large number of worms. Saba, has 
extreme amount of giddiness in its pathogenesis ; it may cause 
staggering and even fainting. Objects seem to whirl round, or to 
whirl round each other. Stapf had ‘‘ Vertigo early in the morning 
after rising.^^ After a dose of Saba, in high potency I astonished 
myself by falling back on the bed with giddiness on rising the 
following morning. Among the characteristic mental symptoms are : 
Tendency to be startled. Erroneous impressions as to the state of 
his body. Imaginary diseases ; imagines parts shrunken, &c. ; if 
there is distension from Hatus imagines she is pregnant, &c. Saba, is 
intolerant of mental exertion ; thinking s headache. Digestion is 
disordered and the tongue loaded, sinking at stomach and gnawing 
hunger. Saba, corresponds to many forms of indigestion, including 
that incident to pregnancy. Peculiar Sensations are : As if things 
were turning around each other. As if she would fall if she did not 
hold on to something. As if eyes went round with the whirling sen- 
sation. Lips as if scalded. Tongue as if full of blisters. As if uvula 
were down. As if oesophagus would be closed. As of a body in 
throat which he must swallow down. As of a lump in throat. As if 
a morsel of food had lodged in throat. As of a worm in oesophagus. 
As if a sore spot was pressed upon. As of a lump in abdomen. As if 
a ball of thread were moving and turning rapidly through abdomen. 
As if kniVes were cutting abdomen. As if abdomen were shrunken ; 

' were empty. Croaking as of frogs in abdomen. As of something 
alive in abdomen. As if stomach were gnawed. As of a thread or 
string in throat. As if throat were tied with a string. As if articula- 
tion were suspended. As if tape prevented circulation in chest. As 
if interior of bones were scraped out with a sharp knife. As if hot 
‘ breath came out of his mouth and nose. As if everything were in 
motion. As if the air itself we/e in tremulous motion. As if he had 
taken wine. Shaking as if in a severe chill. As if something sharp 
in throat. As if a soft body in throat must be constantly swallowed. 
Pressure on larynx = throat sore. Scratching > itching of scalp ; 

burning of anus. Lying perfectly still > vertigo. Lying down — 
cough immediately, < expectoration. Sitting < vertigo. Rising 
from seat vertigo. Opening mouth wide ss: cracking of jaw-joint. 
Walking s= vertigo and afterwards headache ; pain in stomach. 
Getting into sweat when walking < itching of scalp. > Afternoon. 
Chill 3 p.m. < Morning ; and evening. Gastric symptoms < morning. 
< At new or full moon ; at regular periods. Alternating : canine appe- 
tite and disgust for meat and sour things ; thirstlessness and bulimia 



1038 


SABADILLA 


with aversion to food. Hot drinks : < toothache ; mouth intolerant 
of ; craved in sore throat, more easily swallowed. Cold < all symp- 
toms ; < cough. Cold drinks < toothache. Walking in cold air < 
toothache. Open air : > vertigo ; feels > in ; cs lachrymation and 
spasmodic sneezing. Warm stove > chilliness. When over-heated 
itching of scalp <. Mental exertion <. Fright = hysterical 
paroxysms. < From wine. Saba, is suited to : Persons of light hair, 
fair complexion, with a weakened, relaxed muscular system. Children, 
Old people. 

Relations. — Antidoted by: Camph., Puls., ^on. Follows well: 
Bry. (pleurisy). Folloived well by : Ars., Bell., Merc., Nux. Compare : 
Botan., Verat. alb., Verat. v., Helon. Congestion, Verat. v. Feels >; 
in open air. Puls. Ovaritis, Coloc. Chill in afternoon, Lyc. < From 
4 to 8 p.m., Lyc. Imaginary diseases, Thuj. Sensation of something 
alive in abdomen, Croc., Thuj. ; of machinery, Nit. ac. Effect of mental 
exertion, Nux, Pic. ac. Fever without thirst. Puls, (with unquenchable 
thirst, Nat. m.). Attacks at same time every day, Ars., Ced. Hunger in 
early morning, Aga., Ant. c., Asar., Calc., Carb. a., Chi., Lyc., Mur. ac.. 
Ran. b., Rhus, Zn. Nausea at sight of food, Colch., Lyc. String sen- 
sations ; coryza. Cep. (Cep. coryza > out of doors ; Saba. <). Easily 
startled by noises. Borax. < From wine, Zn. Nervous diseases 
from worms, Cin., Pso. Worm affections of children, Con., Sil., Spi. 
Delirium during intermittents. Complaints go left to right, Lach., 
Lac c. Illusions about his body, Bap. Alcaloid, Veratrin. 

Causation. — Fright. Mental exertion. Thinking. Worms. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Uneasiness and anguish, with great agitation, — Disposition 
to be frightened. — Startled by noises. — Hysteric paroxysms after fright. — Ill- 
humour and passion. — Dislike to labour. — Rage. — Difficulty in thinking, — 
Thinking = headache. — Delusions of the imagination with respect to oneself ; 
the body seems to be collapsed, like that of a corpse, the stomach to be eaten 
away, &c. — Imaginary diseases. 

2 . Head. — Vertigo, with nausea, > by supporting head.-- Vertigo : as if 
things were turning around him ; as if all things were turning round each other ; 
ill morning after rising ; had to rest his head on the table the whole afternoon 
to keep off the fainting; more sitting than standing; when going to bed, — 
Vertigo with fainting and cloudiness of t^yes (everything becomes black) on 
rising from a scat. — Headache with vertigo, > while eyes are fixed steadfastly 
on an object, and while patient is thinking of one subject. — Headache as if a 
thread had been drawn from middle of forehead to occiput above temples, 
leaving a burning sensation behind. — Stupefying headache with coryza, itch- 
ing, and burning of scalp and general lieat of whole body ; < in forenoon.— 
The headache begins in r. side, whence it extends more and more to 1 .— 
Corrosive burning point on top of head, — Headache with tensive pain, esp. 
during intellectual labour. — Headache, esp. after every walk; after eating. — 
Hemicrania with taenia. — Pressive and stupefying headache in forehead and 
temples. — Painful heaviness of head. — Boring pains in head after taking 
exercise. — Pulsative and painful throbbing in head. — Burning, tingling, and 



SABADILLA 


T039 


pricking in forehead and scalp (as from lice).— Burning, crawling itching on 
hairy scalp and forehead, > from scratching, < from getting into a sweat 
when walking. — Forehead covered with cold sweat. 

3. Eyes. — Burning smarting in eyes. — Pressure on eyeballs, esp. when 
looking up.— Redness of margins of eyelids.— Lachrymation, esp. during 
exercise in open air, when looking at anything bright, when coughing, yawn- 
ing, and on feeling the slightest pain in other parts. — Weakness of sight. 

4. Ears. — Otalgia with troublesome pressure ; with snapping as of 
eletftric sparks before ears. — Tickling in ears. — Itching at anus alternately with 
itching at meatus auj^litorius externus. — Burning itching and shootings in tips 
of ears,— Deafness as if there were a band over ears.— Humming, gurgling, 
and detonation in ears. — Boring in parotids. 

5. Nose. — Itching tingling in nose and contractive smarting. — Epis- 
taxis. — (jreat sensibility to smell of garlic. — Sensitive dryness of upper part of 
nose. — Violent spasmodic sneezing (shaking the abdomen, then lachrymation). 
— Obstruction of nostrils, alternately. — Fluent coryza with altered features 
and bewildered head (influenza ; hay-fever). — Great masses of white and 
transparent mucus are blown from nose, without coryza. — Bright red blood 
conics from posterior nares and is expectorated. 

6. Face. — Heat of face with fiery redness, esp. after drinking wine. — 
Blue circles round the eyes. — Marbled and herpetic skin on the face, burning 
sensation, pain as from excoriation, pricking and itching tingling in bps. — 
Beating and jerking in muscles of 1. upper jaw, with itching. — Boring in 
lower jaw and submaxillary glands. — Cracking of the articulation of the jaw 
on opening mouth wide. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache with drawing and pulsative pain. — Shooting 
pains in molars. — Caries of teeth. — ^Gums bluish. — Pricking in gums, 

8. Mouth. — Sensation in mouth and on tongue as if they were burnt 
and excoriated. — Cannot bear anything hot in mouth. — Tongue feels sore as if 
full of blisters. — Pricking (soreness) in tip of tongue. — Tip of the tongue bluish. 
— Tongue loaded with a thick yellowish coating (more in middle and at back). 
—Dryness of the mouth without thirst. — Copious accumulation of (sweetish) 
saliva in the mouth. — Jelly-like saliva. 

9. Throat. — Pam in the throat as if caused by a plug or an internal 
swelling during deglutition and at other times. — Constantly obliged to 
swallow, with pain in mouth and behind larynx as if something lodged there, 
with scratching roughness ; hawks constantly, < morning and during and 
after eating. — Sensation of a skin hanging loosely in throat, must swallow 
over it ; as if uvula were down.— Much tough phlegm in throat, must hawk.— 
Feeling of constriction in the throat (in fauces as from an astringent drink).— 
Can swallow warm food more easily, in sore throat.-»^Pressure and burning 
sensation in throat during deglutition and at other times. — Dryness in throat. 
— Roughness and scraping in throat,^with continued want to swallow or to 
hawk. — Inflammation of uvula. 

10. Appetite. — Taste bitter (or of a sickly sweetness). — ^\^iolent thirst 
for cold water, milk, or beer, also in morning. — Hunger, with dislike to all 
food, esp. meat (coffee, wine, and acids). — Bulimy esp. in morning and even- 
ing (principally for honey, pastry, and farinaceous food). — Thirst lessness or 
thirst only in evening for cold water. — ^Craves hot things, hot tea (in sore throat). 



1040 


SABADILLA 


11. Stomach.*— Risings, generally empty, and sometimes with shudder- 
ing. — Painful and imperfect risings. — Pyrosis. — Corrosive burning pain in 
stomach and oesophagus; when walking. — Coldness in stomach. — Empty 
feeling in stomach. — Nausea with inclination to vomit, often with shuddering, 
> by eating.— Nausea ; with constant spitting of insipid water.— Nausea, 
retching, and feeling of worm in oesophagus. — ^Vomiting of lumbrici. — Soft- 
ness, uneasiness, and coldness in stomach. — Digging in epigastric region, with 
pains as from excoriation (as if a sore spot were pressed below pit of stomach), 
when pressing upon it (and on inspiration). — A frequent sudden sensatiorf of 
obstructed respiration in scrobiculus, with anxiety. — S^insation of heat in 
scrobiculus and burning in stomach. 

12. Abdomen . — Pressive scraping in hepatic region. — Digging drawing 
in liver, with pain as from excoriation when pressing upon it. — Sensation of 
heat in hepatic region. — Colicky pain in abdomen as if caused by worms (or 
from actual worms). — Constriction in abdomen. — Turning and twisting 
through whole abdomen as from a lump. — Cuttings as by knives. — Colic : 
with sensation as if a ball were moving and turning through abdomen, cries 
out, *^0h ! my bowels, they go like a wheel" ; with violent urging to stool 
and borborygmus; from worms. — ^\^iolent shootings in sides of abdomen, 
which force the patient to bend double. — Boring, digging, and rolling in 
abdomen. — Rumbling in abdomen, as if empty. — Croaking as of frogs in 
abdomen. — Sensation of coldness or burning in abdomen. — Spasmodic con- 
traction of muscles of abdomen ; of 1. side, with burning pain ; he bent double 
on 1 . side. — Red spots and specks on abdomen. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation. — Broken, hard, scanty stools. — 
Very difficult stools with much burning in abdomen and sensation as if some- 
thing alive in abdomen. — Urgent want to evacuate, with scanty evacuation. — 
Loose brown or fermented fasces, mixed with mucus and blood (floating on 
the water). — Pinchings, tearing, and tingling in rectum. — Crawling in rectum 
and anus as from ascarides. — Itching of anus, violent burning after scratching. 
— Itching of anus, alternating with itching of nose or ear.— Discharges of 
worms (lumbrici, tapeworm). 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urgent want to urinate, esp. in evening, with 
tenesmus and scanty emission. — Increased secretion of urine. — Turbid, thick 
urine, like clay-water. — Burning in urethra when urinating. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Digging and pressive pain in testes. — 
Diminished sexual desire. — Tensive and painful erections, without desire for 
coition. — Pollutions, with flaccidity of penis. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Catanienia : retarded but profuse, and of 
longer duration ; flow by fits and starts ; painful bearing down a few days 
previous. — Cutting pain as from knives in ovary (ovaritis). — Nymphomania 
from ascarides. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hot iJrcath. — Hoarse, rough voice. — Hawk- 
ing up of bright red blood, which comes from the nasal fossae. — Short, dry 
cough, also at night, provoked by a scraping in throat. — Cough dry, with 
perspiration and water in the eyes. — ^Cough with vomiting, shootings in 
vertex, and pain in stomach.— Dull cough, sometimes with haemoptysis.-*- 
Cough immediately on lying down. — Cough with expectoration and lancina- 
tions in chest, 



SABAD4LLA 


104 1 


i8. Chest.— Respiration obstructed, as if there were a stone in the chest. 

— Short, difficult respiration. — Wheezing respiration. — Pressure on the chest. 
— Burning sensation in the chest. — Pain from r. (sometimes 1 .) shoulder into 
chest as if circulation of blood arrested by a tight bandage ; not > by un- 
fastening dress ; < in open air. — Shootings in sides of chest, esp. when 
drawing breath and coughing, which disturbs the sleep at night and does not 
permit lying on the side. — (Inflammation of pleura.) — Red spots and points on 
chest, 

<9. Heart. — Palpitation of heart with pulsation throughout body, 

20. Back. — Coniusive pain in back and loins, esp. when seated. — Burning- 
tingling stinging sensation between scapulae. — Stitches in rapid succession in 
r. side of back. 

21. Limbs. — Weariness and heaviness in all the limbs, < towards 
evening, obliging her to lie down. — Coldness of the limbs. — Painful drawings 
m limbs as if in marrow of bones, with inclination to stretch limbs, > by 
repose. — Painful sensation of paralysis of the limbs, esp. in knees. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Convulsive movements of arms. — Trembling of 
arms and hands. — Red spots, bands, and points on arms and hands. — Pricking 
lancinations in forearms. — Dryness of skin of hands. — Distortion of fingers. — 
Yellow spots on lingers. — Desquamation of skin round nails. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Shootings in thighs and knees. — Weakness and 
flexion of knees. — Tearing and tension in calves of legs, also at night. — 
Heaviness of feet. — Swelling of feet, with painful sensibility of soles. — Profuse 
perspiration on soles, 

24. Generalities. — [Intermittent complaints which come every week, or 
two weeks, or four weeks apart. — Esp. suited for children who are disposed 
to worms ; worms discharged with stool, whether lumbrici or tapeworms. — 
Sweetish taste. — No thirst during chill ; heat often internal. — Troubles 
appearing on the r. side ; on toenails. — Sensation of knocking, throbbing, or 
pulsation in the outer parts ; great sleepiness in the forenoon. — < in forenoon ; 
before midnight ; from cold in general ; while resting. — > From moving ; 
while swallowing something; while getting warm ; from warmth in general. — 
Many complaints appear, esp. during the new and full moon. — H.N.G.] — 
Pricking, pressivc, and dull lancinations in different parts. — Tingling in the 
limbs. — Twitchings, convulsive tremblings, or catalepsy from worms. — Nervous 
diseases from worms or deeply seated abdominal irritation. — Great debility ; 
in intermittents ; paralytic debility in pleuritis. — Convulsions. — Heaviness of 

. tread and of movements generally. — Lassitude and heaviness in all limbs, < 
evening, or towards noon, at whidf times the pains in the limbs are also <. — 
In general, < at same hour every day. — Pains in the bones, as if caused by 
sSome one cutting and scraping inside with a knife, esp. in the joint ; < by 
touch, > by a quick movement of the part affected. — The patient feels 
^ better when lying down than when walking or standing ; in the open air. — 
Several symptoms appear first on the r. and then on the 1. side.— Great sensi- 
bility to cold air, which ^ the uneasiness and pains. 

25. Skin.— Parchment-liko' dryness of skin.— Tingling and burning 
shootings under skin. — Red bands, spots, and points in different parts of skin, 
appearing with greatest intensity in cold air, 

26. Sleep. — Great incliilation to sleep during day, with continued )^awn- 

VOL. II. 67 



1042 SABADILLA— SABAL SERRULATA 

ing and stretching.— Sleep retarded by a multitude of thoughts.— Imperfect 
sleep in evening, with mental fatigue from wandering thoughts. — Agitated 
and unrefreshing sleep at night, with anxious dreams. — In the morning he 
starts up from his sleep as from a fright. 

27. Fever.— Pulse small but spasmodic.— Sensation as if the circulation 
were suspended. — Chilliness in evening always at same hour ; frequently not 
followed by heat ; the chills run up the body. — Heat principally in head and 
face, often interrupted by chilliness, always returning at same hour. — Fever 
without thirst, manifested only by chilliness, with intermittent heat, which is 
more perceptible in the face and hands than in other parts of body. — Hot 
perspiration in face with coldness of rest of body. — Intermittent fever which 
returns at same hour ; chill, then thirst, then thirst with headache. — Shivering 
or external coldness and trembling of limbs without shivering, and with more 
violent thirst or complete adipsia; afterwards heat with moderate thirst, 
accompanied or followed by perspiration. — In the morning hours perspiration. 
— During the shivering pain in upper ribs, dry, spasmodic cough, and tearing 
in all the limbs and bones. — Delirium, yawning, and stretching during the 
heat. — Sleep during the perspiration. — Quotidian, tertian, quartan fever at 
regular intervals, with anorexia, pressive inflation of stomach, pains in chest, 
cough, shivering, weakness and thirst between the shiverings and the heat. — 
Thirst only between hot and cold stage, — Fever where the gastric symptoms 
prevail, with dry, convulsive cough in cold stage (quartan ague). — During the 
apyrexia painful weariness of the limbs without any other symptom. 


Sabal Serrulata. 

Serenoa serrulata. Saw Palmetto. (Sandy soils of sea coast South 
Carolina to Florida ; most luxuriant nearest the sea.) N, 0 . 
Palmaceae. (i) Tincture of fresh ripe berries and seeds, all 
crushed and macerated in 90 per cent, alcohol for fourteen days 
and decanted (Hale). (2) Fluid Extract, probably four times 
stronger than the tincture^’ (Hale). [C. S. Estep (Affi, Hom.j 
xxvi. 133) uses a dark-green Fluid Extract which is made from 
the fresh green berries, and is “ almost as green as grass and 
has an oily surface.’' He makes his dilutions from this. Other 
preparations have disappointed him.] (3) Oil (prepared from 
the expressed juice of the friiit^y allowing it to stand a few 
days). (4) Saccharated Oil (one part of the oil to seven parts 
of cane sugar). (5) Malted Sabal (one part of the Oil to seven 
of Maltine). (6) Aqua Olei Sabal (a preparation suggested by 
Haje made by triturating gtt. xvi. of the Oil with Mag. carb. 
5j, gradually adding a pint of distilled water and decanting. 
For use as a spray). 

Clinical. — ^Appendicitis. Asthma, catarrhal. Atrophic pharyngitis. Atrophic 
rhinitis. Atrophy. Backache. Breasts, inflamed ; painful ; atrophy of. Bron- 
chitis. Catarrh. Cystitis. Dysmenorrhoea. Dysuria. Enuresis. Glands, affec- 
tions of. Gleet. Gonorrhoea. Headache. Hoarseness. Impotence. Innutrition. 
h Iritis. Lactation, defects of. Laryngitis, catarrhal. Lumbago. Menses, delayed. 



SABAL SERRULATA 


1043 


Neuralgia. Neurasthenia. Obesity. Ovaries, affections of. Peritonitis. Phthisis. 
Proctitis. Prostate, enlarged; affections of. Puerperal fever. School-headache. 
Sterility. Strangury. Testes, atrophy of. Throat, sore ; catarrhal. Urine, incon- 
tinence of. Uterus, affections of ; misplacements of ; tumours of. Whooping-cough. 

Charaoteristios.— In his little book entitled Saw Palmetto, 
Hale has put together most of our available knowledge respecting 
this plant. It is a dwarf palm with creeping (or leaning), branching 
stem, the edges of leaf and petioles serrate, roots fibrous, large, half 
exposed. The fruit (so-called berry is a one-seeded drupe about the 
size of an olive, dcy;k purple when ripe, and ripening in October and 
November. The branching spadices form large pendulous panicles. 
When eaten the taste is at first exceedingly sweet, but in a few 
seconds this is followed by an acrid, pungent sensation that spreads 
to fauces, nasal mucous membrane, and larynx. This is in turn suc- 
ceeded by a feeling of smoothness as if the parts had been coated 
with oil. The seeds are enveloped in a tough, fibrous membrane, are 
very hard, and when cut show a white, oily substance, which burns 
with a blue flame, giving off an odour of roasted coffee. The fruit is 
richer in sugar than sugar-cane, and contains two oils, one volatile 
and one fixed. The volatile oil is considered to possess the most 
characteristic properties of the medicine. Hale describes it as 
^‘yellow,^^ but he quotes John Uri Lloyd, of Cincinnati, as writing to 
him, The principal constituent is a volatile oil. This oil possesses a 
deep ^reen colour.’^ And he goes on to say that the colour is not 
due to chlorophyll nor to the copper of the worm used in condensing 
it. This agrees with Estep’s contention that the preparation of Sahcd 
should be dark-green ox grass-green. The preparation Estep used was a 
Fluid Extract prepared by Burrough Brothers, of Baltimore, from the 
“fresh green berries.” (Hale directs that the fresh ripe berries should 
be used.) The preparation used by Dr. Mullin’s prover was made by 
Boericke and Tafel. All are agreed that preparations of the dried 
fruit and of the root-bark do not possess the curative powers of the 
remedy! While on a hunting trip through the wilds of Florida Hale 
observed the great fattening properties of the berries on animals. 
During summer food is scanty, and the wild animals become very 
thin, but as soon as the Palmetto fruit ripens they improve rapidly, 
and in a few weeks have put on so much fat that they become an 
easy prey to the hunter. This fat, says Hale, “ consists principally of 
olein, and will not make lard.” Sahal serrulata was introduced into 
medicine by J. B. Read and A. M. Solomons, both of Savannah, Georgia. 
Read gave a “ Saccharated oil,” of which he says : “ By its peculiar 
soothing power over the mucous membranes it produces sleep and 
relieves the most troublesome coughs, promotes expectoration, im- 
proves digestion, and increases fat, flesh, and strength. It has been 
used with benefit in cardiac asthma, phthisis, especially laryngeal, 
chronic bronchitis, and dilatation of the bronchial tubes. Its action 
^in catarrhal affections is rapid and permanent. A cold in the head 
may be checked with two or three doses (of the saccharated oil) 
mixed with boiling water, and used by inhalation it has been found 
beneficial in chronic ozsena.” Dr. Will Scott Mullins, of Louisville, 
Kentucky, published the first proving made for him by a former 



1044 


SABAL SERRULATA 


student of his, Miss Annie Roask. This prover is described as a very 
intelligent lady of twenty-three, mediumly developed, small breasts, 
red hair, blue eyes, 5 feet 7 inches in height, weight, 109 pounds, bust 
measure 32 inches. These details are important, as this prover developed 
some of the most characteristic effects of the drug, especially those of 
the mammary glands, and at the end of the proving (from December 
8th to March ist) her breasts had increased fully one-third in size, 
and her bust measure was 33^ inches, and her weight 119^ pounds. 
This prover had also many symptoms in the head and ovaries. Her 
symptoms are for the most part not distinguished from the others in 
the Schema, but when I have wished to distinguish them I have 
appended the letter (R). Another remarkable proving by a woman is 
that of Dr. Freda M. Langton, of Omaha, Nebraska. Her symptoms, 
when distinguished, have the letter (L) appended. Mind, bladder, 
ovaries, and uterus were all strongly affected in her case. One symp- 
tom she developed was an irritability and depression ; and sympathy 
did not merely < as with Nat. n/., it made her angry. (This condition 
of mind was present in one of the prostatic cases cured by SbL) 
Dr. Langton relates that she was unable to lind an antidote, and 
suffered for three months after the proving before she found one. 
In searching for a remedy for a case of dysmenorrhoea she found the 
leading symptoms under Silic.^ and it struck her that the symptoms of 
Silic. corresponded to her own symptoms. She took it twice daily, 
and was better in two hours. In three days all the bladder and 
ovarian trouble was gone. Stl. was also given to the dysmenorrhoea 
patient, but only partially relieved. Shi. was then given, and quickly 
and permanently cured. Shi. was proved by two men, Dr. R. Boo- 
cock, and an unmarried prover whose symptoms are given by Hale 
{H. R.j xiii, 103). Both experienced well-marked symptoms in the 
genito-urinary sphere, including increased sexual power. I have 
marked some of Boocock’s symptoms (B). Hale’s prover had this 
urinary symptom, w'hich he justly says may prove a valuable indica- 
tion : “ Fears to fall asleep lest something should happen ; starts up 
with this fear as he is dozing.” In all the provings the 0 tincture, or 
Fluid Extract, were used in from 5- to lo-drop doses, repeated two 
or three times a day ; and in the clinical use of the remedy a similar 
dosage has been adopted. Sbl. is an organ remedy of great power, 
selecting the uterus and prostatic gland (which is the male analogue 
of the uterus), ovaries and testes and bladder. But the provings are 
sufficiently detailed to warrant closer homoeopathising, and Dr. 
Langton says that though she gives 5-drop doses four times daily in 
cases of over-worked brain and school-headache for the tonic, nutri- 
tive, and stimulating” effect of the remedy she gives the i x as soon 
as relief has been obtained, and she finds that the dilution often gives 
greater relief in the headaches than the larger doses. Mullins also 
says (H. R., xii. 68) : “ I now found the use of the dmg in the 3rd and 
6th attenuation curative in nearly all of the diseases of the uterus and 
appendages. Also in headache from reflexed uterine troubles, in 
mammary abscess, mental irritations, and nervous debility. It is^ 
indeed an anti-lean, and well deserves the name of The Homoeo- 
pathic Catheter.*’ But, he adds, it must be given on its individual 



SABAL SERRULATA 


1045 


indications, W. E. Reily published (Hahn. Adv.j December, 1898) 
these cases illustrating the prostatic action of Sbl. : (i) Mr. J., 56, very 
despondent ; irritable. Sympathy seemed to anger him. Great 
tenesmus in neck of bladder, with heavy, aching pains, with sense of 
coldness extending into external genitals. Occasional sharp pains extend- 
ing up into abdomen and down into thighs. Appetite capricious. 
Constipation chronic. Urination too frequent, disturbing sleep. 
Sbl. (p was given, five drops night and morning. Steady improvement 
followed, and in eight weeks all the symptoms had gone, and with 
them an annoying eczema of the hands. (2) Mr. M., 45, for a year 
had gradually increasing frequency of micturition. Despondent ; 
distressed. Appetite capricious. Vertex headache and gastric 
catarrh. Little sexual desire ; coitus followed by digging pain in 
back and tenesmus of bladder with difficulty in commencing to 
urinate. Genitals cold, dull aching in region of prostate, extending 
to abdomen and thighs. Sbl. (/> gradually relieved and cured in three 
weeks. (3) Mr. E., 35. Frequent urination for li years. Heavy, 
dragging pains, extending into back and thighs ; back pains miwh < 
after coitus. Considerable loss of prostatic lluid at tunes. Sexual 
desire much impeded. Severe headache on vertex and gastric 
catarrh. All symptoms removed by Sbl. </>. Hale says E. S. Evans, 
of Columbus, Ohio, considers Sbl. “ almost specific in iritis when the 
prostate gland is involved. I have cured cases with the 3X which 
could not be relieved in any other way.^' (This is a noteworthy obser- 
vation. The connection between gonorrhoea and syphilis and the eye 
is well known, and I have knowai several cases of ophthalmia develop 
in patients who were taking another prostatic remedy, Solidago virg- 
aureaj for their trouble.) A. L. Davidson (H. R.^ x. 525) relates a case 
of impotence in a man, 51, who had difficult micturition, tenderness 
of prostatic portion of urethra, loss of power, testicles shrunk, penis 
shrunk and cold. Sbl. 0, gtt. xv., four times a day, w^as prescribed. 
At the^end of the first week he complained of drawing pains in sper- 
matic cords, there was freer How of urine ; he slept better and felt 
better. At the cud of the second week the testes were gradually 
increasing in size, tenderness of urethra had nearly disappeared, and 
erections were established. In two weeks more the cure was com- 
plete, the testes were even larger and firmer than normal. J. Martin 
Kershaw, of St. Louis, treated a young lady of twenty-three who had 
had great difficulty in controlling her urine all her life. Undue exer- 
tion, lifting, straining, laiighiAg, caused it to dribble away. Unless 
she rose several times in the night she was sure to wet the bed. 
Sbl. 0, gtt. i., four times a day, was given. In ' one month she was 
much improved, and under the same remedy she gradually got quite 
well. Elias C. Price reports the*>e cases, (i) Very nervous lady with 
chronic inflammation of bladder, frequent painful urination, ten to 
twelve times in the night and every fifteen to thirty minutes during 
the day. Spells of pressing pain on rectum, > by warm water 
enemas, which generally brought away hardened faeces. Lil. t. 3X 
.s removed this temporarily. Rectal examination disclosed a hard 
fleshy tumour the size of half a hen’s egg on the posterior aspect of 
the uterus. Sbl. (Fluid Extract) gtt. v., thrice daily, diminished the 



1046 SABAL SERRULATA 

tumour by half in two months, and removed it entirely in three 
more. (2) Mrs. X., primapara, had, five days after confinement, irrita- 
tion of kidneys, and a week later symptoms of pelvic peritonitis. 
Uterus much enlarged, very tender. Did not urinate very often, but 
when she did the pain was so excruciating that she fainted away> and 
sometimes did not come to for an hour. For three days no remedy did 
any good. Then she had violent pain right side of head above and 
behind the ear, and paralysis of left arm and leg ; became unconscious 
and could not be aroused ; at times would talk of things which bad 
occurred before her illness ; insensible to external impressions. She 
remained thus ten days. SbL (Fluid Extract), gtt. xx., every two hours, 
relieved the pain on being raised to urinate after the second dose. 
Recovery from the other condition was very gradual. (3) Miss X., 
22, had had irregular menses for years, having once gone nine months 
without a period. When she came to Price she was three months past 
her time ; one breast was much smaller than the other, SbL (Fluid 
Extract), gtt. v., thrice daily. In about a month the menses came on 
freely, lasted four days instead of the usual two. Breasts began to 
increase in size. In three months one was as large as the other. 
The following year she again missed her time, and SbL brought it 
right in a week. Price has cured with SbL cases of pelvic cellulitis, 
peritonitis, puerperal fever, inflammation of uterus, tubes, ovaries, and 
even appendicitis; and proctitis, especially if the prostatic gland is 
involved. Showerman gave Hale a summaiy of his experience with 
SbL : (i) A lady who had been for two years unable to rise in the 
morning without a cup of coffee and something to eat was cured with 
SbL in a week. (2) An impotent man was cured in thirty days. (3) 
Man, 76, enlarged prostate, had to use catheter for three years. 
Cured in four months. (4) Man passing blood with urine for six 
months : cured in two weeks. (5) Cases of incontinence. (6) A lady 
to whom he gave SbL for nervous debility had to discontinue it because 
** her sexual passions made her almost furious from its use. (7) In 
catarrhal affections he found it very efficacious, and he cured himself 
with it in four months of a bronchial trouble of seven years’ duration 
which no medicine had relieved before. — Mullins confirms the value 
of SbL in catarrhal states, which is one of the uses the remedy was put 
to by Read, who introduced it. Mullins says : “ In chronic bron- 
chitis, with a wheezing, hard cough, < on lying down till 6 a.m., < 
in damp, cool air and cloudy weather, it is promptly curative.” The 
fattening properties of SbL have been utilised in medicine. For this 
purpose it has been given in the form of Saccharated oil (gr, x. to gr. lx.) 
or Sabal Maltine, The Aqua Sabal Hale found useful as a spray. The 
symptoms are < in early morning ; from rising to bedtime. < By 
motion. > After sleep. Backache < after coitus. Catarrhal symp- 
toms are < in cold, damp weather. Cough < on lying down at 
night. < Before menses (depression). Stinging pains appear to be 
characteristic. Wandering, radiating, and cramping pains were also 
prominent. SbL has several groups of associated regions of pain : 
pains affecting head and ovary ; ovaries and breasts ; lower back and 
right temple ; prostate and eye. 

Belattons. — Antidoted by: Sil. (Sbl. grows on the sandy shore) ; 



SABAL SERRULATA 


1047 


Puls, (delayed menses ; Puls, also grows on sandy soils). Compare : 
Stinging pains in ovaries, Apis, Merc. Pain in right ovary and thigh, 
Apis. Breasts painful, Con., Calc. School-headaches ; < by sym- 
pathy, Nat. m. (Sbl. is most fruitful nearest the sea ; compare Sil. 
marina). Prostatic affections, Fe. pic., Cham., Arg. n., Dig,, Solid. 
Prostate and eye, Solid. < From coition, K. ca. Wandering pains, 
K. bi. (the roots of Sbl. are very rich in potash salts). Over-worked 
women, Mg. c. Hale classes Sbl. with remedies ‘^primarily aphro- 
disiac ”—Pho., Turn, aph., Nux, Orig., Coca, Aur., Can. i,, Plat, Lit, 
Santal. ; primarily anaphrodisiacs ” according to him being — Con., 
Sal. n., Salicin., Agn., Nuph., Ars., Pic. ac., Calad., Camph., lod., 
Lupulin. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Unusual, full, confused sensation ; thinking difficult ; cannot 
grasp or remember what is read. — Irritability ; impatience ; fretfulness, — 
Immutability with indifference to wants of others ; mind self -concentrated on 
her own sufferings, wants to be left alone. — Broods on her symptoms. — Sym- 
pathy makes her angry. — ^Wants to go away and die alone. — Fearfully blue 
and low down before menses. 

2. Head. — Vertigo with headache (from fumes of oil). — Severe head- 
ache with giddiness and dim vision. — Sharp, darting pain coming and going 
suddenly (like Bell.), now here now there in sides, top, and back of head, 
through eyes and in temples. — Shooting pains in temples and across forehead. 
— Soon after rising a very sharp pain in 1. temple ; pain across forehead to 
both temples, < r. ; vague aching on vertex ; pain r. temple running across 
vertex to 1. — Sharp pain in either r. or 1. temple, running up across forehead, 
with pain in 1. ovary and uterus ; severe pain in 1. temple and a sharp pain on 
vertex. — Dull, aching pain in r. temple and on vertex, almost unbearable by 
3 p.m. — Pain running up from nose and centring in forehead. — Pain and 
irritation at base of brain and upper third of cervical spine (like that of Gels,). 
— Sensation as if something tightening in bruin. — (Neuralgic pains before and 
after catarrhal attacks.) 

3. Eyes. — (Iritis when the prostate gland is involved.) 

4. Ears.— (Chronic inflammation of middle ear.) — Fulness in nose and 
ears, only bits of dry crumbling wax got away on picking. — Frequent sharp, 
stitch-like pains inward from ears. — Hearing diminished ; voices seem far off 
(B. — ^proving discontinued in consequence). 

5. Nose. — Pain running \fp from nose and centring in forehead. — 
Sneezing and ISchrymation, coughing and gagging.-rFulness in nostrils com- 
pelling him to pick them, only dry crumbs came away. 

6. Face. — Papular eruption op 1. temple and about mouth.— Slight 
neuralgia in .r. temple and r. jaw.— Pallor. 

8. Mouth. — Pungent burning sensation in mouth and fauces, extending 
up and down and causing sneezing, coughing, and gagging; afterwards 
smooth, numb feeling, as if mouth coated with fat. — Burning on tongue as if 
scalded. 

9. Throat. — Sharp pain in I. side of throat. — Pungent, burning sensa- 
tion in fauces ; followed by smooth sensation, as if coated with oil. 



1048 SABA.L SERRULATA 

11. Stomach.— Appetite good throughout proving.— Appetite poor and 
capricious. — Constant desire for milk (usually disliked). — Belching and 
acidity. — Sharp pain running through stomach ; severe pain in 1. side of 
stomach. — Irritation of stomach. — Acute gastritis; fearful burning as from 
Sulphuric acid; could not take meat, vegetable, or pudding, only bread and 
milk ; > by Robin, 3 (B). 

12. Abdomen. — Suddenly most intense, cramp-like pain through 
abdomen ; soon radiated in different directions, to legs, stomach, then to 
ovarie.s, where it settled. — Stinging pains running up I. side of abdomefa. — 
Sharp pains running up and down front of abdomen, and also r. side. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Stools unusually easy ; free from haemorrhoidal 
troubles (to which the prover — Boocock — was subject). — (Some return of*’ 
haemorrhoids with dryness of stool and pressure from within out. — Stools 
dark, almost black — B.) 

14. Urinary Organs. — Painful urination ; connected with ovarian pain 
(L). — ^Tenesmus as in cystitis, a few drops of blood voided on one or two 
occasions (L). — Feeling as if bladder too full ; starting the flow was painful 
as if forced through ver)^ narrow meatus (B). — Feeling as of a stricture about 
two inches down urethra (B). — Pain extending from bladder up above pubes, 
with a radiating pain across epigastrium, stitching in region of 1. kidney, 
severe headache with giddiness and dim vision (B). — Scalding on passing 
water, burning smarting after ; slight gluing of meatus and twisted stream 
(all removed in the proving, stream larger and stronger, no longer required 
to rise at night — B). — Pain or irritation in region of kidneys ; later a trace of 
albumen and a few renal cells. — Excruciating pain and fainting on being 
raised up to urinate (cured in a puerperal case). 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Slight irritation of prostate.— Some in- 
crease of sexual power. — Great excitement fir.st two days and throughout 
proving ; discharge of prostatic fluid. — Amorous feelings, firm erections but 
fully under control ; testes very warm ; slight itching deep in perinaeum 
(sperm ducts ?), > by deep pressure. — Increased power and enjoyment in 
coitus. — Semen feels thick and flows slowly, but causes a hot feeling along 
the cord. — Testicles tightly drawn up, almost painfully (one of the most pro 
minent and constant symptoms — B). — Sense of coldness extending ihto 
external genitals ; sharp pain extending up into abdomen ; tenesmus, frequent 
micturition ; despondent, irritable, sympathy ss anger ; constipation, enlarged 
prostate (Sahal 0 cured and removed at same time a distressing eczema of 
hands). — (Coldness of external genitals, dull aching in prostate extending into 
abdomen.) — (Pain in back much < after coKus.) — Drawing pains in spermatic 
cords ; shrunk testes increase in size. — Hard erection, slight twisting chordee 
as if stretched from the root. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Furious sexual passion. — Awakened by 
stinging pain running up from 1. ovary into abdomen, and also a sharp pain 
in r. ovary. — Slight stinging pain in 1. ovary at 2 p.m. — Sharp pain in r. ovary, 
running down r. thigh. — Stinging pain in uterus. — Stinging pain in r. ovary. — 
A tense, slightly heavy feeling over womb. — Pain in 1. ovary, running down 
the thigh. — Menses delay four days ; nine days. — Sore feeling in 1. ovary 
Pain in 1. ovary after going to bed. — Slight pain low down over womb.-- 
Awakened by a most distressing itching of labia majora.— Pain in 1. ovary 



SABAL SERRULATA 1049 

and uterus, coming and going between 2 and 7 p.m.— Sore, heavy feeling in 
uterus until bedtime. — Intense pain through abdomen radiated down into 
legs, up towards stomach, then to ovaries, where it settled ; never knew the 
exact location of the ovaries before ; painful urination was added on awaking 
next day; mental indifference with irritability (L). — (Uterine tumour.) — 
Breasts increase in size ; pains in. — (Defective lactation.) — In nursing woman, 
for four months after confinement, stinging pain in both breasts, < r., com- 
mencing at nipple and extending into and pervading entire gland about 
fiffeen minutes after child had been at breast ; caused excessively nervous 
state and affected whole body ; Melon, relieved somewhat, Sahal ^ cured in 
two days. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — ^Voice changed, throat feels husky. 

18. Chest. — Sharp pain in 1 . side of chest, running through 1 . mamma. — ' 
Breasts quite tender from pressure, stinging soreness after cold bath. — 
Breasts feel swollen and sore for many days. — Very sharp pains in mammary 
glands. — Itching of breasts ( 1 .). — Breasts increased fully one-third in size (in 
less than three months — R.) 

20 . Back. — ^Aching across lower part of back. — Deep pains in back, low 
down. — Fearful backache, low down, before and at commencement of menses. 
— Pain in back much < after coitus (prostatic case). 

22. Upper Limbs. — (Annoying eczema of hands.) 

23. Lower Limbs. — Sharp pain running down right thigh ; third day. 
— Sharp pain in r. thigh ; fourth day. — Pain running down 1 . thigh ; second 
day. — Sharp pain in r. thigh ; second day. — Aching in calf of r. leg ; seventh 
day. — Aching in 1 . knee and calf of leg; first day, w’hich continued until bed- 
time. — Pains frequently in 1 . thigh ; fourth day. 

24. Generalities. — A feeling of buoyancy all the time notwithstanding 
the pains. — Increased feeling of vitality and strength all the time the medicine 
was taken, and for a week alter felt as if a stimulant had been taken from her 
(R). — Much nervous erethism, cannot keep quiet. — Weakness. — (Poorly 
nourished women, — Neuralgia of all kinds. — Feeble patients. — “ Anti-lean.”) 
— All pains were < in early morning ; or from noon until bedtime. — Pains in 
ovaries or uterus, < on motion. — Character of pains mostly sharp and stinging. 
— Most pains > by sleep. — An uncomfortable feeling all over the body ; third 
day. 

25. Skin. — Papular eruption on face. — (Annoying eczema of hands.) 

26. Sleep. — Fears to fall asleep lest something (undefined danger) should 
happen ; starts up with this fear as he is dozing. — Awakened by stinging 
pains in both ovaries ; second dty. — Awakened at 5 a.m. by a severe stinging 
in r. ovary ; fifth day. — Awakened at i a.m. by a most distressing itching of 
labia majora ; eighth day. 



1050 


SABINA 


Sabina. 

Juniperus sabina. Savin. N. 0. Conifera\ Tincture of the young, 
fresh tops of the branches. Tincture of the oil. 

Clinical* — Abortion ; after-effects of. After-pains. Boils. Condylomata, Cys- 
titis. Dysmenorrhoea. Gonorrhoea. Gout. Inter-menstrual flow. Leucorrfkea. 
Menstruation^ excessive. Miscarriage. Moles, promotes expulsion of. Nephritis. 
Nymphomania. Ovaries, affections of. Penis, cartilaginous spelling on. Phimosis. 
Retained placenta. Rheumatic gout. Strangury. Sycosis. Toothache. Uterus^ 
bleeding from. 

Gharaoteristics. — Stapf made the first collection of the symptoms 
of Sabina^ and Hahnemann and his son were among the provers. A 
number of observations on women who had taken the drug to bring 
on the menses or procure abortion have also been added ; and some 
cases of fatal poisoning are on record. Sbi. acts as a widespread 
irritant, inflaming the pyloric end of duodenum and causing patches 
of inflammation in other portions of the intestines, especially the upper 
intestines, the omentum and peritoneum (R. T. C.). The action of Sbi. 
on the generative organs of both sexes is pronounced. It produces fig- 
warts with itching and burning of the external genitals, phimosis of 
the male, swelling of the dorsum of the penis, gonorrhoea ; in the 
female uterine haemorrhages, and in the case of pregnant women, 
abortion. The haemorrhage is partly pale red and partly clotted, < 
from the least motion ; but may be > by walking. The flow is in 
paroxysms, and is accompanied by labour-like pains. A grand 
characteristic of Sbi. is a pain from sacrum to pubis, and this will be 
a guiding symptom in a large number of the uterine cases requiring 
Sbi. Other characteristics are : (i) discharge of blood between the 
periods with sexual excitement ; and ( 2 ) obscure abdominal pains due 
to inflammatory states of the peritoneum. In the mental sphere there 
is much irritability, hysteria, and hypochondriasis, and a peculiar 
feature of it is that music is intolerable ; it produces numbness and 
goes through bone and ma-rrow. A close botanic ally of Thuja^ Sbu 
is yet not too close to be complementary to that great anti*sycotic ; 
broad condylomata, fig-warts with much itching and exuberant granu- 
lations are characteristic. Like Thuja, it removes w^art-like growths 
from the muco-cutaneous surfaces. It |is suited to : chronic ailments 
of women ; arthritic pains ; tendency to miscarriage ; to the gouty 
diathesis. Peculiar Sensations are : As if she would fall. As if parts of 
temporal eminence were pressed asunder. As if skin had grown fast 
in forehead. As if eyes would be pressed out. As if tooth would 
burst. As if he had to swallow over a foreign body. As of a lump 
in throat. As if vomiting would come on. As if something alive in 
abdomen. Right shoulder-joint as if sprainpd. Sbi. is one of the 
remedies which affect the heels. Farrington says it is suited to 
plethoric women who suffer from what they call rheumatic inflam-, 
mation of the heels. There is an ‘‘ intermittent aching in the solar 
part of the heels. Intermittence and a paroxysmal character are 



SABINA 


1051 


a leading feature with Sbi, Pains are paroxysmal and labour-like 
Hsemorrhage comes in gushes. Suddenly increasing and slowly 
disappearing pain. The symptoms are < by touch, though pres- 
sure >. The dysmenorrhoea pains were > lying on flat of back with 
limbs extended. < Stooping ; sitting bent ; letting limbs hang 
down ; motion. Walking > metrorrhagia. Lies on left side during 
sleep. < Evening, night, and morning. Sleepless and restless after 
midnight. < In warm air or room. < Warm in bed. > In open 
airf (Warmth > pain of dysmenorrhoea). Cold applications > 
wandering pains i^ joints. < By music. < Taking a deep breath ; 
> exhaling. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Puls. Complementaiy to : Thuj. Com- 
patible : Ars., Bell., Rhus, Spo. Compare: < By music, Ainbr., Thu., 
Sep. Inter-menstrual flow, Ham., Ambr. Condylomata, Thu., Nit. 
ac. Haemorrhage < from least motion, Sec. Menses partly fluid, 
partly clotted, Per. Retained placenta, Caul., Sec. Promotes expul- 
sion of moles or foreign bodies from uterus, Canth. > In ‘fresh air. 
Puls, Affections of the heels. Am. m.. Led., Puls., Caust., Mang., 
Ant. c., Grap., Nat. c.. Cep. Desires lemonade, Puls. Clotted 
haemorrhage, Millif., Plat, (Plat, dark ; Sbi. bright red). Miscarriage 
at third month, Croc., Kre. Sensation of something alive in abdomen. 
Croc., Thu. Suddenly increasing and slowly disappearing pain (Sul. 
ac. slowly increasing, suddenly disappearing). < In foggy weather. 
Hyper. < In bed at night, Sul., Merc., Puls., Cham, (toothache), 
Bry. (rheumatism). Phimosis, Cann., Merc., Sul., Nit. ac., Sep., Thu., 
Rhus. T}^mpanites, Tereb. Rheumatism > by cold applications. 
Led. Menses only when lying down (only at night, Bov., Mg. c.). 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Dejection, discouragement, and sadness. — Hypochondriacal 
mood. — Great anxiety and apprehension. — Irritable nerves ; music intoler- 
able. — Moroseness with dislike to conversation, esp. when exercising in open 
air. — Irascibility, with tears and sobs. — Listlessness. — Weakness of memory. 

2. Head. — Stupefying vertigo, which occasions falling, with cloudiness 
of sight. — Giddiness, with congestions to and heat in head. — Attacks of 
megrim. — Heaviness and distressing pressure in head, often extending from 
sinciput to nape. — Splitting sensation m forehead and temples. — Circumscribed 
pain in temples. — Painful constriction in temples. — Drawing pains in head, 
esp. in forehead and temples.-^Shooting pains in head, with smarting or 
aching, often in entire brain. — Digging and boring in head. — Pulsative head- 
ache with heaviness and stupefaction. — The headaches (esp. in temporal 
eminences, r. side) often appear pddenly, diminish slowly, and return 
frequently. 

3. Eyes. — Tensive pain in eyes, as if muscles too short. — Eyes dull and 
downcast.— Heat in eyes.— Smarting tears. — Jerking quivering of lids. — Clouds 
before eyes. 

4* Ears. — Pinching in ears. — Hardness of hearing. — (Gets deaf in foggy 
weather, or any change of weather ; also when tired. — R. T. C.) 

5« Nose. — Dry coryza. 



1052 


SABINA 


6. Face.— Face pale, with blue circles round eyes.— Black pores in 
cheeks and round nose. — Paralytic pain and pressure in zygomatic process. — 
Lancinations (drawing pain in r. angle of jaw) from the lower jaw to cheek- 
bone « on touch). 

7. Teeth.—Drawing toothache during and after a meal and mastication. 
— Toothache only when chewing. — ^Aching and throbbing in teeth, esp. in 
evening and at night, with sensation as if a tooth were being pulled out, < 
by drinking, smoking, and by heat of bed, > after rising. — Drawing in teeth 
in consequence of drinking, eating, and contact with air. — Tearing in rbots 
of molars. — (Toothache after gouty pain in great toe had been driven away 
by external applications.) — Painful sensibility and white swelling of gum round 
a carious tooth. — Ulcer in gums. 

8. Mouth. — Dryness in mouth. — Putrid exhalation from mouth.— 
Reddish or white saliva, which becomes frothy when speaking. — ^Tongue 
loaded with a white or brownish coating. 

9. Throat. — Sore throat during deglutition, as from a foreign body or 
an internal swelling in gullet, with pressure and choking. — Dull lancinations 
in throat. — Dryness in throat with drawing pain. 

10 . Appetite. — Taste in mouth and throat as from an inveterate coryza. 
— Mawkish, fat, or bloody taste in mouth. — Bitter taste in mouth and bitter 
taste of food, esp. of milk and coffee. — Desire for acids, esp. for lemonade. — 
Acidity in stomach after a meal. — Poor appetite. 

11. Stomach. — Empty risings (and heartburn). — Nausea with fulness in 
stomach. — Vomiting of bile or of (undigested) food eaten the previous day.— 
Fulness and inflation of region of stomach. — Stomachache. — Lancinations 
from pit of stomach across back. 

12. Abdomen. — Aching in hepatic region. — Tympanitic distension of 
abdomen. — Quivering in abdomen as if something alive were there ; resem- 
bling foetal movements. — Contractive pains in abdomen. — Pressive pinchings 
in abdomen as from a chill or diarrhoea. — Labour-like pains in abdomen to 
groins ; with sensation as if vomiting would come on, without nausea. — Press- 
ing down towards genitals. — Inflammation of intestines. — ^Pain as" from a 
bruise in abdominal muscles in bed in evening. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Evacuations at first soft, then hard. — Loose, 

soft faeces, with noise, and abundant expulsion of flatus. — Discharge of san- 
guineous mucus from anus. — Discharge of blood from anus after a hard 
evacuation. — Bleeding haemorrhoids ; excessive discharge of bright red blood 
or blood and mucus. — Painful haemorrhoidal pimples in anus. — Tingling in 
anus. ^ 

14. Urinary Organs. — Retention of urine, with emission drop by drop, 
and burning sensation and pain in vesical region. — Vesical irritability with 
gouty diathesis. — Nephritis with retention ; ardor urinae. — Urgent want to 
urinate, with scanty emission. — Frequent violent urging to urinate, with pro- 
fuse discharge. — Profuse emission of urine, even at night. — Painful inflamma- 
tion of urethra, with discharge of pus, as in gonorrhoea. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Inflammatory gonorrhoea, with discharge 
of pus. — Sycotic excrescences with burning soreness. — Burning sore pain in 
glans, — Hard (cartilaginous) swelling on dorsum of penis, — Shootings in glans. 
— Deep redness of glans. — Painful sensibility of prepuce, with difficulty in 



SABINA 


1053 


retracting it.— Fraenum swollen and tight.— Pain in condyloma as from 
excoriation.— Increased sexual desire, with violent and prolonged erections. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — ^Almost insatiable desire for coition 
with corresponding gratification. — Sexual desire greatly increased (almost 
amounting to nymphomania). — Contractive pain in region of uterus. — Stitches 
deep in vagina. — Sanguineous congestion in uterus. — Haemorrhages of partly 
pale red, partly clotted, or of very thin, discoloured, offensive-smelling blood ; 
< on least motion ; has to lie perfectly quiet to avoid a profuse discharge 
aftet miscarriage. — Metrorrhagia with discharge of clotted or bright-red 
blood, and pains resembling labour pains in the sacrum and in the groins. — 
Metrorrhagia, bright blood, < at night. — Catamenia too early and too copious. 

’• — Menses continue too long. — Menstrual discharge partly fluid, partly clotted 
and offensive ; it may be either bright red or dark and coagulated ; flow^s 
mostly in paroxysms, which are brought on by slightest motion ; or flow ceases 
when walking about (menses only when lying down). — Suppressed catamenia 
with very offensive-smelling leucorrhoea (like meat washings). — Miscarriage 
(esp. in the third month). — Perceptible swelling of mammae. — Tingling in 
mammae. — Leucorrhcea, itching, yellowish, fetid, and thick, like starch. — In- 
flammation of the uterus after parturition. — Retained placenta. — After-pains 
with sensitiveness of abdomen. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Dry cough, excited by a tickling, or 
followed at a later period by expectoration of mucus streaked with blood. — 
Dry, hacking cough, and tickling in the trachea. — Haemoptysis. — Tensive, 
pressive pain in sternum, not affected by respiration. 

18. Chest. — Pressure on chest. — Pressive, spasmodic tension in chest, 
principally in middle of sternum. — Stitches in 1. nipple. — Shooting and pain 
as from excoriation in xiphoid cartilage, < on taking a full inspiration and on 
touching the part. — Trembling in the lungs, with dull rattling and crackling. — 
Lancination (intermittent) in the outside of chest and in clavicles. 

ig. Heart. — Augmented and extended beating of the heart. — Throbbing 
in all the blood-vessels. — Pulse unequal; generally quick, strong, and hard. 

20. *Neck and Back. — Contusive pain in the muscles or vertebrae of 
neck. — Pressive drawing (labour-like pains) in loins, as far as the inguinal 
region and down thighs, tollow'ed by a bloody, slimy discharge from the 
vagina. — Paralytic pain in small of back, > (or <) bending backward. — 
Drawing pains in small of back, extending into pubic region. — Pressive tear- 
ing and shootings in spine. — Pain in back obliging him to bend inward. — 
Paralytic pain in back. 

21. Limbs. — Drawing, tearing pains, esp, at night ; most in wrist-joints 
and toes, with red, shiny swelling ; < from motion a^d touch. — Stitches in 
elbows ; in heels, extending outward. — Limbs convulsed. — Cracking in joints. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Wrenching pain in the joints of the shoulder and 
hands. — Pain as if sprained in r. shoulder- joint, even during rest. — Paralytic 
tearing along* r. upper arm as far as hand. — Sticking pains on outer condyles 
of both elbows. — Aching in r. radius, < motion or touch. — Pressive teanngs 
and shootings in arms, forearms, and fingers. — Arthritic rigidity and swelling 
in joint of wrist, with tearing and shootings; made almost insupportable when 
tlie hand hangs down. — Drawing and tearing in bones of hands. — Weakness 
of hands (when writing). — Distortion of fingers. 



1054 


SABINA 


23. Lower Limbs.— Furunculus with shooting pain in buttock.— 
Shooting pains in coxo-femoral articulations when resting on the foot — 
Stinging pains in hip-joints in morning and when breathing. — Pressure and 
drawing in thighs and knees.— -Middle of anterior surface of thighs feel 
bruised and painful ; only when walking on the level or stepping down, not 
when stepping up. — Tearing tension in thighs, with sensation when squatting 
as if the muscles were too short. — Purulent and lard-like ulcer on tibia.— 
Intermittent aching on 1 . heel, lower part where it joins the sole. — Sharp 
stitches from within out on r. and 1 . heel. — Pressive tearing in bones of fWt. 
—Red and shining swelling of great toe (gout), with bocing and lancinating 
pain. 

24. Generalities.— [A marked characteristic is a pain which is felt all • 
the way between the sacrum and pubis, from one bone to the other — not 
particularly in front or behind, but right along from the sacrum to the pubis ; 
this pain may be found in labour pains, after-pains, occurring in dysmenor- 
rhcea, &c. ; in haemorrhage (particularly uteiine) where the blood is in fluid 
and clots together — as, the liquid blood would flow, then will come a clot, 
and the blood may be flowing rapidly. — Bleeding from the nose, blood being 
pale. — Bleeding from inner parts in general.— Menstruation too early ; too 
profuse ; blood of light colour ; bright-red colour ; disosiarge of blood before 
the proper period. — Affects particularly the uterus; lower part of chest; 
wrist ; heel ; toes ; arthritic pain in joints. — Cough with expectoration of pale 
blood. — In threatened abortion.— < On inspiration ; taking a deep breath ; 
affections in general during pregnancy ; in a room ; in a warm room ; on 
getting warm in bed; women in childbed; after parturition. — > In open 
air ; while breathing out, exhaling. — H. N. G.]— Chronic ailments of women. 
— Twitching pulsation in the blood-vessels. — Shooting and tearing, arthritic 
pains, esp. in joints, and sometimes with red and shining swelling of the parts 
affected. — Gouty nodosities. — Lancinating drawing in hollow bones, — Burn- 
ing, pressive sensation in periosteum, which is swollen. — Haemorrhage.--*- 
Jerking throbbing in all the arteries. — Great weakness and weariness in all 
limbs, with despondency. — General uneasiness, as from long watching. — 
Heaviness and indolence of body, obliging him to lie down. 

25. Skin. — Itching in skin, with excoriation and ulceration, or scabby 
places after scratching. — Burning sensation in parts affected when they are 
touched. — Black pores in skin. 

26. Sleep.— Sleeplessness and restlessness after midnight. — Disturbed 
sleep with frequent waking, ebullition of blood, heat, and perspiration. — 
Anxious dreams. — Continued dreams, full 0# fanciful images, and intellectual 
efforts. — ^Talking and loud snoring during sleep.- Tendency to lie on 1 . side 
when sleeping. 

27. Fever. — Shuddering and shivqring, with cutis anserina and cloudi- 
ness of sight (followed by sleepiness). — Chill in the evening, with attacks of 
chilliness. — Great chilliness through the day. — Burning heat over the whole 
body, with great agitation,— Sensation of coldness in whole r. leg.— Heat in 
face, with icy coldness of feet and hands. — Fever in evening ; first shivering, 
then heat, and lastly perspiration. — Perspiration every night. 



SACCHARUM LACTIS 


1055 


Saccharum Lactis. 

Milk-sugar. Lactose. C,3H„0„. 

Clinical. — Amblyopia. Angina pectoris. Body-odour, offensive. Diabetes. 
Dyspepsia. Earache. Gout. Headache. Hysteria. Labia, soreness of. Nervous- 
ness. Neuralgia. Ovaries, affections of. Over-exertion. Ptosis. Sciatica. Sigh- 
ingj Stye. Umbilicus, inflammation of. 

CharaoteristiQB. — Hahnemann chose globules of Saccharum lactis 
as the chief vehicle of his remedies, because he considered it the most 
. inert substance he could find. But his method of attenuating reme- 
dies had shown that no substance is inert in attenuations, and 
experience shows that no substance is absolutely inert in any form. 
H. A. Hare says of Sac. /. : Scientific and clinical studies have 
shown it to be possessed of very great diuretic powers when given 
in full doses.” He says further, that its direct action on the kidneys 
and its slight action elsewhere indicate it in renal dropsy and renal 
inactivity ; that it acts best in cases where albuminuria is absent, 
and that it causes profuse diuresis in infants fed on it. I have fre- 
quently met with patients who could not take Sac. L either unmedi- 
cated or as a vehicle without inconvenience. One patient when taking 
pilules of Sac. 1. three times a day complained that they made his 
‘‘eyes ache and feel weak.” One of Swanks provers had this 
symptom : Sight fails ; eyes tire very easily.” Swan is the autho- 
rity for Sac. 1. as a homceopathic remedy. He has published {Materia 
Medico) a full pathogenesis of Sac, proved in the potencies from 
30th upward, together with confirmed and cured symptoms. Eleven 
provers and observers contributed. I have bracketed the cured 
symptoms in my Schema. Sac. /. causes sensations of both coldness 
and heat. One of the cold sensations is this : Sensation of extreme 
cold passing in a fine line from centre of pubes to a point two or 
three inches above.” Swan regards cold pains as a keynote, and 
records this case : Mr. S. had an excessively cold neuralgic pain in 
cartilage of both ears, the right being the worst, with tingling as if 
frost-bitten ; rubbing with difficulty restored the warmth. Lanci- 
nating, neuralgic pains in forehead ; in occiput ; extending from 
region above ears down through ears into muscles of neck ; in both 
eyes ; < by least breath of air ; skin sensitive to touch as in inflam- 
matory rheumatism. These pains were icy cold, as if produced by an 
extremely fine ice-cold needle. As Sac. 1. has fine cold pains ” and 
pains passing in all directions, Sac. /. im was gtven, and relieved all 
the pains within an hour. {Sac. 0^. has cold expectoration.”) The 
symptoms are < before a storm ; in damp room or basement ; morn- 
ing and evening ; by blue and yellow colours ; exertion ; mental 
excitement. > By warmth of fire ; by red colour ; after 4 p.m. 

Relations. — Camph. < effects of Sac. 1. Compare: Sac. off., the 
Lacs. Right cheek bone, Mg. c. Roof of mouth, Mang. Ball sensa- 
hon in rectum, Sep. < From sound of running water, Hdfb. 
Radiating pains, K. oi. Kidney ache, Santal, Sac. off. Fatigue, Pic. 



1056 


SACCHARUM LACTfS 


ac., Mg. c. Heat in heart, Lacbn. > Lying left side, Lil. t. < 

From damp, Dulc. vSensitiveness, K. iod., Mg. c. 

Causation. — Mental excitement. Over-fatigue. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Sensation as if it were only by a great effort that she kept 
together. — Loses her way in well-known streets. — Imagines ; that there is a 
large hole in her back just above sacrum ; that her mother wants to kill IJer ; 
that some one is behind her. — Extremely nervous, jumps from her seat at 
least unusual noise, — ^Was taken suddenly with fear and trembling of whole 
body, as from fright. — Longing and melancholy as if homesick, with , 
oppressed breathing. — Her heart aches as if it would burst, yet she cannot 
weep. — Great fear of death during paroxysm of pain in heart at night. — 
Inclined to be sarcastic and fault-finding. — Cross and fault-finding, could not 
speak a pleasant word to any one. — Hysteria in evening, laughing and crying, 
jumping up and lying down, but could not stand, fell to r. side. — Laziness. 

2 . Head. — Pain about middle of r. lambdoidal suture, through to same 
point on 1 . side. — Sharp jumping pains behind r. ear. — Burning like lire, and 
a thick feeling in a lengthwise strip of two fingers’ breadth extending from r. 
frontal eminence to r. side of vertex for fifteen minutes. — L. side of head felt 
all drawn up. — Pain in 1 . eyebrow. — Pain passing from front of 1 . ear deep 
into brain. — L. temple sore to touch. — Sensation as of pressure on frontal 
bone at inner canthi of 1 . eye ; felt very sore. — Sharp darting pain on 1 , side 
of head from temple to occiput. — Forehead feels very heavy, with a tendency 
to fall forward. — Sharp pain in forehead passing back and forth from oiie 
temple to the other. — Head aches all over top and feels drawn up. — Head 
feels large, and as though all the blood in the body had gone into the head. — 
Head feels confused, and as if it were tossing on a rough sea. 

3. Eyes. — Pain through r. eye inwards. — Severe pains in both canthi of 
r. eye. — Dryness of eyeball so that the lid would stick to it as if it wanted 
lubricating, preventing opening and shutting of eye or winking. — Swelling of 
r. upper lid, which increased to a large stye, the lid and all round eye being 
swollen and red ; on third day it broke in two places and discharged 
copiously. — Washing eyes in cold water causes a sensation as if needles were 
sticking into them. — Eyelids feel swollen, which is not the case. — Can ohly 
elevate upper lids half way. — Looking at bright light dazzles and makes her 
close eyes ; no pain. — Sight fails ; eyes tire very easily. 

4. Ears. — Pain in r. car and undernefith it, — Painfulness of r. external 
car (concha), with burning like an ulcer, also when touched. — Pain passing 
from r. ear to shoulder. — Pain from r. car to lower part of inferior maxillary 
bone. — Pain in 1 . ear and sensation as if there were a gathering. — Shooting 
pains in and behind ears and all over face. — Pains in external ears and behind 
them. — Sharp pain inside both ears. — Reverberation of voice when speaking. 
— Buzzing sound in r. ear. — Sensation as if she could not hear, but she could. 

5. Nose. — Pain in r. (and 1.) side of nose. — Pain in end of nose. — Ridge 
of nose extremely sore ; it feels sore to touch or from the least movement of 
facial muscles ; the 1. side is the worst and somewhat swollen. 

6. Face. — Pain passing from corner of mouth to forepart of r. axilla.— 



SACCHARUM LACTIS 


1057 


Face feels as if there were one large pain that covered the whole of it.— -Burn- 
ing in cheek-bones towards temples and lower jaw. — Pain all over face, then 
centring in r. ear.— (Darting, shooting pain, centred in about middle of r. 
cheek, extending thence up to eye, esp. r. inner canthus, to ear, and up into 
r. temple, most severe at centre of cheek, considerably decreasing the further 
it extends from the centre.) — (Swelling of face with pain in head extending 
down neck and back to feet.) — Wretched appearance, sad expression of face ; 
eyes look as from weeping, though she has not wept. — Great pallor of face 
with dark places under eyes. — Corners of mouth smart and burn. — Symphysis 
menti smarts. • 

8* Mouth. — Sore on 1 . side of tongue. — Tongue coated : yellow on 
-each side, but none on middle or edges ; white ; yellow. — Lips feel very sore 
and raw.—Lips dry, with great thirst. — Taste : putrid in mouth after eating ; 
fine spicy taste ; like fresh nuts. — Thick bitter mucus in mouth during morn- 
ing ; food tastes fresh, as if there were no salt in it. — Burning in whole mouth. 
— Roof of mouth sore. — Soreness like blisters in mouth and on tongue. — 
(Sensation of coolness as of ice in mouth and throat.) 

9. Throat. — Sensation when swallowing as of a fish-bone in throat. — 
Spasmodic stricture in oesophagus. — Globus hystericus after lunch at noon, 
with dull, sick headache. — Throat very sensitive to external pressure; the 
least pressure causes a feeling as if she were choking. 

10. Appetite. — Hungry all the time. — Desire for dainties. — When first 
getting out of bed feels faint for something to eat. — After eating : feeling of 
distension. — Great thirst ; wanted large quantities of very cold water. 

11. Stomach. — Nausea like sea-sickness. — Nausea does not affect 
appetite. — Violent sickness, going on all day (agg. — R. T. C.). — Dyspepsia after 
eating hot pie-crust. — Pressure in stomach as if she had eaten something 
indigestible. — Heartburn, with sweet taste coming from stomach, without 
waterbrash. 

12. Abdomen. — Feeling as if ulcerated anteriorly over r. short ribs, < 
from touch and when stooping ; slight swelling there ; also all next day till 
towards 'evening. — Pain about length of finger above 1 . hip, which would 
come when leaning back, lasted two days, followed by severe pain in fore- 
head. — Sharp pain passing across bowels just above navel and all round body. 
—Inflammation and soreness of lower half of navel, passing off by morning, 
with greenish yellow discharge, staining the clothes. — Abdomen sore to touch, 
painful from the jar caused by walking. — Pain commencing at waist and 
passing to top of r. breast. — Pain in 1 . hypochondrium passing under 1 . breast. 

13* Stool and Anus. — Severe pain passing through abdomen during 
stool; felt very sore inside. — Stool preceded by shooting pains across 
abdomen, which are > by stool. — Before stool pains in breasts and upper 
abdomen. — Before stool hands and whple body exhaled a faecal odour, which 
passed away ajFter stool. — Urgent inclination to stool ; felt as thougli there 
were a great ball in rectum, much straining, and some flatulence, but no stool 
and no > from the flatulence. — Stools smell like rotten eggs. — Great soreness 
round anus, extending three inches up rectum inside. — Constant pressure and 
soreness at anus, waking her at night, — Creeping, itching, and crawling round 
anus, extending three inches inside rectum, > for a short time by rubbing,— 
Shooting pains in rectum. 

VOL. IL 


68 



1058 SACCHARUM LACTIS 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urination followed by a thick yellow discharge. 
— Soreness of urethra during urination. — ^Very severe pain in r. side of 
abdomen before urination, and sometimes, but not often, lasting during 
urination, ceasing with it.— Constant and urgent inclination to urinate, with 
cutting pain streaking up urethra after each passage. — Frequent and violent 
urging to urinate, with passage of a large quantity each time. — Urine causes 
intense pain when coming in contact with the labia, which are very sensitive. 
— Sound of running water produced urination ; no power to restrain it. — 
Urinates very frequently large quantities. — (Involuntary urination in large 
quantities several times during night.) — (Delay of urination for some time, 
though desire and opportunity occur.) — Urine stains a dark yellow. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses commenced too early ; no pain. 
— Menses very dark. — Profuse greenish -yellow leucorrhoea. — At times bloody 
leucorrhoea. — Pain in region of r. ovary. — L. (and r.) ovarian region very 
weak and painful when walking. — Dragging-down sensation in pelvic region. 
— Lobulated growths on each side of vagina, nearly filling it ; extremely sore 
and sensitive to touch, or from the pressure caused by sitting ; coming on 
gradually and lasting more than three months. — Itching of labia. — Extreme 
soreness and rawness of labia and entrance to vagina, with profuse greenish- 
yellow leucorrhoea. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Sharp pain passing into upper r. breast, 
about an inch deep ; very sore to touch after the pain. — Pain in r. breast. — 
Constant pain under 1. breast, < when bending forward. — Lancinating pains 
under 1. breast, which took away the breath. — Severe pains under 1. breast at 
every inspiration. 

19, Heart and Pulse. — Sensation in heart as if a fire were there, with 
a feeling as if heart would burst, or at times as if a heavy weight were lying 
on it, all of which spreads from this region over whole inner and outer chest. 
— Awoke at midnight with severe pains about heart, which seemed as if it 
had almost stopped beating, with a numb pain about heart, lips, and tongue ; 
great fear of death ; when the pains passed off they left great soreness round 
heart ; tingling in lips and tongue ; could not lie on 1. side ; felt numb and 
strange all over ; pulse intermittent. 

20 . Neck and Back. — Pain passing up and down along r. side of neck. 
— Hot flashes all over back of neck and shoulders. — Pain with soreness at 
upper vertebral border of r. scapula. — Pain in r. side of back between^scapula 
and sacrum. — Pain in 1. side of back from scapula to sacrum. — Pain in sacrum. 
— Pain each side of sacrum. — Pain in sacral region, < when taking a long 
breath. — Pain in back from sacrum to scapulae. — Pain passing up back from 
sacrum. — Pain passing up and down from tip of coccyx to r. shoulder. — 
Sharp pain passing from middle of scapula down outside of arm to end of 
middle finger, and sometimes to end of httle finger. — Pain below 1. scapula.— 
Severe pain under 1. scapula. — Pain running up back from waist, 1. side. — 
Constant pain all day in region of 1. kidney. — Pain in back part of waist, 
passing from r. to 1. — Pain in lumbar region. — Pain or aching in small of back 
< by leaning backward, for three or four days. — Pain passing from lumbar 
vertebrae to half way up dorsal, and then shooting off into both scapulae.-r 
Dull ache all over back and in r. arm ; cannot bend body far forward as it 
causes intense pain in coccyx ; when stooping, as in picking anything from 



SACCHARUM LACTIS 1059 

floor, has to incline body to one side or other. — Back aches the whole length 
of spine. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Swelling in r. arm below elbow, sore to touch, and 
pains when she moves arms in certain directions.— Pain in forepart of r. 
upper arm. — Pain from top of r. shoulder to nape of neck. — Pain from r. 
shoulder passing down to waist. — Pain in r. shoulder passing a short distance 
down back. — Pain in top of r. shoulder passing to back and upper part of 
neck. — Pain passing from r. shoulder to elbow.— Pain in back of r. shoulder. 
— Pain from r. shoulder to 1. breast. — Pain in axillas. — Sharp pain in all r. 
fingers except little fiSiger. — Pain in both hands passing to ends of fingers. — 
Skin under nails looks dirty, it cannot be washed or scraped off for two 
Hays. — Pain in dorsal surface of r. hand. — Pain in palm of r. hand. — Itching 
in palm of r. hand. — Pains all through r. hand. — Grasping anything with r. 
hand causes pains to pa^s from all the Angers into palm. — Violent itching 
of a liver spot on r. hand. — Pains in hands passing in all directions. — Pain 
in palmar surface of r. wrist passing into thumb. — Pain passing from tip of r. 
little finger to elbow. — Pain in r. wrist. — Pain passing from r. wrist to elbow, 
— Pains in both wrists, encircling them. — Pain with slight stiffness in both 
wrists. 

23. Lower Limbs. — (Inflammation and awful pain extending down 
whole trunk of r. sciatic nerve.) — Pains in thighs and hips. — Soreness of 
gluteal muscles on pressure. — Soreness in streaks, extending from anus down 
back of legs to heels ; can feel a rigidity (not raised) where the soreness is. — 
Hot flashes in lower limbs. — Pain from forepart of r. knee to anterior-superior 
spine of r. ilium and passing back to middle of sacrum. — Pain in r. instep 
when bending foot. — (Pain like gout in r. toe, sometimes slight pains upwards 
in r. limb ; toe will not bear contact of any shoe ; pain always the same 
standing, walking, or lying down ; continued exercise < it.) — Balls of feet 
covered with little corns, which arc very painful when walking. — All her corns 
become painfully sensitive. 

24. Generalities. — Sensitive in every part of body. — Small shooting 
pains all over her in morning. — Throbbing in various parts of body. — (Short 
flying, darting stitches in different parts of body, quite painful, but bearable, 
appearing in head, ears, and face, as well as in extremities, not confined to 
any especial locality.) —(Great physical exhaustion, caused by overwork, com- 
pletely relieved ; repeatedly verified by Swan and others.) — The pains 
during the proving were < by a coming storm, the approach of which was 
felt some twelve hours previously. — Pains were < in damp room or basement, 
but > if there was a fire. — All symf)toms > after 4 p.m. — Pains were generally 
< morning and evening. — Symptoms < by blue and yellow colours ; > by 
red.- -Prostration from mental excitement (Rushmore). 

25. Skin. — Very restless at night irom itching all over body as soon as 
she is covered in bed. — Itching of both shoulders. 

26. Sleep. — Continual yawning all day. — Sleeplessness after midnight. — 
Cannot sleep on r. side. — Cannot go to sleep without putting arms over head. 
•^Impossible to lie straight in bed, finds herself continually lying diagonally 
^cross bed. — Has to lie on 1. side as she is comfortable in no other position. — 
Awoke with the impression that she had dreamed of dreadful pains in chest ; 

oes not know whether it was a dream or a reality. — Fatiguing dreams all 



io6o SACCHARUM LAC.— SACCH ARUM OFF. 


27. Fever. — Great coldness as if a chill were coming on ; hands, par- 
ticularly fingers, feet, toes, icy cold ; could not keep warm in bed covered 
with clothes, and during day sat near a stove but could not get warm. — Hot 
flashes inside body pressing from below upward. — Strange restlessness at 
night, feeling of great heat all over, body covered with a light perspiration, 
just enough to feel uncomfortable. 


Saccharum Officinale. 

Sugar. (Including Saccharum album, White Sugar.) Saccharose, 
CxaHaaOxi. Trituratiou. Solution. 

Clinical.—Ascites. Cataract. Chlorosis. Cornea, opacity of. Diabetes. 
Dropsy. Dyspepsia. Hair, rapid growth of. Headache, periodic. Hoarseness. 
Liver, affections of. Ranula. Rheumatism. Rickets. Scurvy. Spleen, affections 
of. Tabes mesenterica. 

GharacteriBtics. — Like so many other articles of diet, Sugar may 
be a poison and a medicine as well as a food. Sugar preserves food, 
as salt does ; and both sugar and salt have produced scurvy. Cases 
of scurvy-rickets in bottle-fed children have been traced to excess of 
sugar in their food ; and the exclusion of sugar from the dietary of 
the gouty, rheumatic, and the diabetic, shows the pathogenetic power 
it is credited with among practitioners of the present day. Acidity of 
the stomach and itching at the anus are common effects of taking too 
much Sugar. Lippe published ‘‘ Fragmentary provings and clinical 
observations obtained principally from S. Boenninghausen and S. E. 
Bate, who proved the 30th potency on himself (Allen). To these 
symptoms have been added others obseived by Swan on a patient 
who accidentally discovered, after twenty-five years of suffering, that 
the cause of his trouble was Sugar, All the symptoms disappeared 
when he abstained from sugar in food or drink, and only reappeared 
when he took it again by way of experiment. Then, from two to four 
days after taking sugar, the same train of symptoms invariably 
occurred in this order : (i) A burning at pit of stomach. (2) A white 
coat on tongue, so thick as to cause stiffness of it. (3) Sharp burning 
pains run up from kidneys to shoulders, passing under scapulae. (4) 
Pains in bones from head to foot, causing a rigidity of the muscles so 
that it was impossible to rise from bed till he had been rubbed. (5) 
Chill commencing in small of back and spreading up and down. 
Severe headache and occasional vomiting with the chill. Fever 
followed with headache, morbid ‘hunger, and a hectic flush. (6) 
Increased urine, strong odour, white sediment. (7) Great pain in 
kidneys. (8) Constipation. (9) Sleeplessness. (10) CEdema of feet 
and ankles, (ii) Weakness of legs, as if paralysed, causing stagger- 
ing. (12) Painful jactitation of feet and legs during the burning in 
the stomach. (13) Oppression, slight cough, profuse cream-like 
expectoration, very offensive, cold. Sac. a. lom and 5m cured him of 
some remaining symptoms, and the 41m enabled him to eat sugar 



SACCHARUM OFFICINALE 1061 

with impunity. Swan also reports (O/g. iii, 342) this case : Miss L. 
was continually eating candies, of which she was very fond, till her 
digestive organs were affected. A few doses of Sac. a. 30m changed 
her taste so that she ate no more, and could not even bear the sight 
of them. This case was also cured with Sac. off, : Vomiting bile, < 
in night and at i a,m. ; old-standing dyspepsia, milk, eggs, and bread 
being the only food tolerated ; great longing for sugar, which > the 
symptoms.” Farrington traces a great similarity between Sac. off. and 
Call. Sac. off. is indicated, he says, in children who are large-limbed, 
fat, and bloated, whh a tendency to dropsy. It has produced opacity 
of the cornea, and ought to cure it. The children are dainty and 
capricious ; care nothing for substantial food, but want little “ nick- 
nacks ” always cross and whining, and, if old enough, are insolent, 
and do not care to occupy themselves in any way. Everything too 
much trouble. H. C. Allen relates {H. P., x. 478) a case of opacity of 
cornea cured wuth Sac. a. ; and with the same remedy in 2m potency 
he cured swelling round the ankles following rheumatism. According 
to Lippe, black-and-tan terrier dogs that eat sugar go blind. The 
cataract and amblyopia of diabetics are well knowm. Here, again, Salt 
and Sugar meet : Burnett has shown in his Supersalinity of the Blood 
that excess of salt in food has been an important factor in the produc- 
tion of cataract. The symptoms are < in early morning. < From 
anger. > In erect position (dyspnoea). 

Relations. — Compare : Sacch. 1 . In rickets, acidity, fat children. 
Calc. Craving for sweets, Arg. n., Sul. Rickets, Sil. Diabetes ; 
swelled ankles, Arg. n. Kidney-ache, Santal. 

Causation.— Anger. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Violent temper ; irritable ; quarrelsome. — Bilious, san- 
guineous temperament. — Increased modesty of women. — Melancholic mood 
with the chilliness. — Dainty, capricious ; cross and whining ; indolent. — Low- 
spirited, hypochondriacal mood ; peevish. — Indifference ; as from home- 
sickness. — Disinclined to talk ; want of interest. — Stupid. 

2. Head.— Giddiness from indigestion.— Severe headache with the chill. 
— Headache every week the same day. — Hair grc'ws rapidly. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes closed by swelling (and inflammation) of lids. — Varicose 
distension of vessels of eyes. — Ophthalmia. — Sight dim. — Cataract. 

4. Ears. — Discharge of pus ffom ears. 

5. Nose. — Sneezing ; dry coryza. 

6. Face.— Changed expression.— Face : pale ; deathlike ; bloated ; 
oedematous. — Twitching of muscles oi r. cheek over malar bone. 

8. Mouth. — Dulness of teeth (with sour vomiting).— A white coat on 
tongue, so thick as to cause stiffness in it. — Rhagades, cracks on the tongue. 
— Ranula. — Inflammation of salivary glands of lining membrane of mouth. — 
Aphthae of children. 

. 9. Throat. — Ulcers in throat. 

II. Stomach. — Morbid hunger with the fever. — Nausea early in morn- 
ing. — ^Violent retching. — Vomiting of white, viscid, tough mucus. — Periodical 



io 62 


SACCHARUM OFFICINALE 


vomiting. — Vomiting ; of blood ; acid, making teeth dull ; occasional, with 
the chill. — Stomach bloated. — Stomach overloaded with sour mucus. — Dis- 
ordered stomach.-— Digestion : impaired ; weak, with acidity. — Burning at 
pit of stomach.— Heat in stomach. — Coldness of stomach.— Pressure in 
stomach, morning, fasting. — Painful constriction of stomach. — Painful sensi- 
tiveness of pit of stomach. — Pain in stomach with hypochondriacal persons. 

12. Abdomen. — Liver : swollen ; indurated. — Bile increased. — Spleen 

swollen.— Pain in liver and spleen. — Abdomen : swollen ; dropsical ; hard as 
a stone (in children). — Tabes mescnterica. — Swelling and induration of 
mesenteric glands. * 

13. Stool and Anus. — Congested and painful hasmorrhoids. — Itching 
at the anus. — Diarrhoea, stools watery and debilitating ; of mucus and bloody’ 
bilious, — Constipation alternating with mucous diarrhoea. — Constipation ; 
stools difficult. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Sharp burning pains run from kidneys to 
shoulders, passing under scapulae. — Great pains in kidneys. — Increased 
urination ; strong odour ; while sediment. — Urine diminished. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Enormous swelling of scrotum ; r. genitals. 
— Increased desire.— Frequent involuntary emissions. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Menses diminished.— Menstrual blood 
pale. — Suppressed leucorrhoea. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Irritation of larynx, causing a slight hack- 
ing cough, with yellow, saltish sputa, which floats on water.— Dry rawness in 
larynx.— Hoarse, catarrhal voice. — Hoarseness from reading a short time. — 
Dry cough.— Cough with children. — Expectoration very offensive.— Breathing 
oppressed, cold expectoration.— Suffocative attacks, must be bolstered up. 

18. Chest. — Chest muscles wasted. — Pneumonia. — Swelling of lower 
part of sternum.— Fulness > by expectorating.— Stitches in 1. chest. 

19. Heart.— Rheumatic pain in heart region.— Pulse weak and irregular. 

21. Limbs.— Tingling in limbs.— Emaciation of hands and thighs. 

22. Upper Limbs. — CEdema of arms. 

23. Lower Limbs. — (Edema of lower limbs ; hard as stones.— Paralytic 
weakness of legs. — Painful jactitation of legs during burning in stomach. — 
Cramps in calves. 

24. Generalities. — Emaciation with great appetite. — Chlorosis : with 
dropsy ; after anger. — Plethora. — Fainting attacks. — Scurvy rickets in chil- 
dren.— Pains in bones from head to foot. 

25. Skin.— Dry skin ; perspiration suppressed.— Scurvy.— Pale and red 
blotches over body. — Panaritium, — Proud flesh in the ulcers. — Old herpes. 

26. Sleep. — Sleeplessness. — Starts in sleep. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness from 10 a.m. till evening with melancholic mood. 
— Chill commencing in small of backy*spreading up and down ; severe head- 
ache and occasional vomiting ; fever, followed by headache, morbid hunger, 
and hectic flush in cheeks ; no sweats except when weakened by repeated 
attacks; before and during the paroxysm burning in stomach and back was 
simply intolerable ; no thirst. — Chilliness alternates with perspiration. — Cold 
in the head. — Intermittent fever every one, two, or three days, irregular in .its 
type.— Chill followed by profuse sweat,— Sweat on head (neck and shoulders). 



SALICINUM 1063 


Salicinum. 

Saliciii. C,3H,807. Trituration and Solution. 

CUnioal* — Deafness. Influenza. Meniere’s disease. Tinnitus. 

Charaoteristics. — Sain, is an active principle (glucoside ?) ob- 
tained from different species of Willow. It has been used largely 
in the treatment of rheumatism in ordinary practice. It has had 
some fragmentary provings, and Ringer experimented with it on three 
boys. The characteristics of the Sabcylic acid compounds were pro- 
minent — giddiness, confusion of the head, flickering before the eyes, 
and tinnitus. The stomach was disordered, vomiting occurred. There 
was also great instability of temperature. Chilliness, high tempera- 
ture, and low temperature were induced. Sain, has been commended 
in influenza by Stephen Mackenzie as less irritating than the Sali- 
cylates and more effective. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Dulness, does not seem to understand questions. — Dulness 
and heaviness. 

2. Head.T-Giddincss. — Confusion of the head. — Headache. 

3. Eyes. — Flickering; fog and sparks before eyes. — Slight congestion 
of conjunctiva. 

4. Ears. — Tingling in r. ear. — Persistent ringing in ears. — Deafness. 

6. Face. — Face flushed ; and dull. — Slight tremor of lips on speaking. 

II. Stomach. — Vomited twice. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Salicin. is excreted in the urine in the form of 
Salicylic hydridCt which sinks to the bottom of the urine as a fine crystalline 
cloud. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Thick, husky voice. — Breathing rather 
laboured. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Slight spasmodic movements of upper limbs. — 
Trembling of hands when held out. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Slight jerks of lower limbs when they are raised 
from the bed. 

24. Generalities. — Muscular twitches. — Much irritability of the muscles 

on percussion. — Muscular weakness ; grasping poyer diminished. 1 

27. Fever. — Malaise and chilliness evening ; returned 10 a.m. next day 
with headache, fugitive pains and fever (101° F.).— -Lowered temperature.-— 
Temperature rises from 9 a.m. to i*p.m., and falls from 4 p.m. to midnight. 



1064 


SALICYLICUM ACIDUM 


Salicylicum Acidum. 

Salicylic acid. C6H^(0H).C0.0H. Found in Spiraea blossoms, 
Gaultheria, &c. Artificially prepared from Phenol. Trituration. 

ClinioaL — Bone, caries of. Climacteric. Coryza. Diarrhoea. Diphtheria. 
Dyspepsia, flatulent. Flatulence. Flushes. Foot-sweat ; suppression of. Gastritis. 
Intestines, ulceration of. Iritis. Necrosis. Pharyngitis, herpetic. Puerperal fever. 
Rheumatism. Rheumatoid arthritis. Scarlatina, anginosa. •Sciatica. Stomatitis. 
Tapeworm. Throat, sore. 

Charaoteristios. — Salicylic acid is found in nature in the leaves and 
barks of Willows, in Oil of Wintergreen {Gaultheria)^ which is one of 
the chief sources of its supply, and is obtained synthetically from 
Carbolic acid. Like Carhol. ac. it has been largely used as a disinfec- 
tant, and as it is supposed to be non-poisonous it is used for mixing 
with and so preserving foods. MacLagan, of London, and Senator, 
of Berlin, introduced it into medicine as a remedy for rheumatism. 
Over-dosings led to the discovery of its power to set up the phenomena 
of Meniere^s disease (auditory nerve vertigo), gastric disturbances and 
delirium, and these form the nucleus of the homoeopathic Schema, 
which has been filled out by fragmentary provings and clinical use. 
Among the uses of SaL ac. recommended in the general text-books 
are these : Sal. ac. dissolved in Collodion flexile (gr. xxx to 5i) is 
very useful for corns and warts ; also to hasten the peeling of palms 
ana soles after scarlet fever (Brunton). A mixture of 2 parts with 
100 of tallow, applied directly to the feet, not to the stockings, has 
been found most useful in preventing sweating and soreness of the 
feet in soldiers after a long march (Brunton). The property of pre- 
venting foot-sweat is by no means an unmixed boon, ana serious 
illness has resulted from it. Consequently in homoeopathic practice 
Sal. ac. has been found an excellent remedy for affections following 
suppression of foot-sweat. Sal. ac. has a specific relation to rheu- 
matism, but the massive doses given in ordinary practice have been 
attended with so many unpleasant symptoms — vital depression, faint- 
ing, flatulent dyspepsia, delirium, &c. — that the ingenuity of chemists 
has been devoted for years past to finding a compound which shall 
be innocent as well as effective. Aspirin (Acetyl-salicylic acid), 
Salophen (Acetyl-para-aniidophenol salicylate), and Salol (Phenol 
salicylate), are supposed to fulfil these dbnditions more or less com- 
pletely. Salol has had an accidental proving which has led to some 
homoeopathic uses. It is the unpleasant symptoms which so many 
practitioners wish to avoid, which are of especial value to homoeo- 
paths. Like Carbolic acid and other disinfectants, Sal. ac. produces 
fermentative dyspepsia, and diarrhoea with putrid-smelling stools, and 
it meets dynamically blood-poisoning conditions, such as puerperal 
fever and septicemia. Bering says : “ Pieces of spongy bone become 
soft as leather in a few days when placed in a J per cent, solution, 
while compact bone tissues are very slowly softened ; enamel of teeth 
is very slightly affected by it, but the dentine, when it is exposed by 



SALICYLICUM ACIDUM 1065 

caries, is rapidly destroyed. The increased amount of the salts of 
lime in the urine soon after SaL ac. has been taken shows that the 
acid deprives living as well as dead bone of its lime salts/^ He adds 
that it causes necrosis, especially of the tibia. The symptoms are < 
by touch. < By motion. < At night. < By cold air or touch of 
anything cold. > By hot applications, especially by dry heat. 

Relations. — Compare : Salicin., Nat. sal., Salol. In rheumatism 
and subsequent weakness, Colch. Piercing in temples ; throat ; diar- 
rhoea ; ulcers ; antiseptic properties, Kre. Antiseptic properties, 
dyspepsia, fever, urine, Carbol. ac. Tinnitus, Nat. sal., Chi., Chi. s., 
Carb. s. Bones, Pho., (and throat), Lact. ac. As if blood forced 
• through contracted vessel, Coc. cact. Foot-sweat and suppressed 
foot-sweat, Sul., Sil. Loquacity, Lach. 

Causation. — Suppression (foot-sweat) . 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Anxiety ; worrying, restless, yet mild. — Melancholic, wants 
to be quiet ; feels faint. — Excited mood. — Delirium ; stupid, can hardly 
collect his ideas, then laughed without cause, talked incessantly and discon- 
nectedly, frequently looked about him with apparent hallucinations (lasted 
24 h. ; from 1 1 grains). 

2. Head. — Dulness of head ; stupefaction. — Vertigo ; inclines to fall to 
1 ., surrounding objects seem to fall to r. — Meniere's disease. — Rush of blood 
to head. — Severe headache, piercing in both temples. — Headache commencing 
on top or back of head, running down sterno-mastoid (more r. side), which is 
tender to touch. — Buzzing sensation in interior of brain as if blood were 
forced violently through a contracted vessel. 

3. Eyes. — Diminished acuteness of vision. — (Plastic iritis following 
acute rheumatism ; pain temporarily > by hot applications.) 

4. Ears.— Hearing diminished. — Nervous deafness. — Deafness with 
noises (i*baring) in ears. — Roaring in ears and difficult hearing ; hears music ; 
swarm of bees or buzzing of flies ; rush of blood to head, excited mood. — 
Tinnitus dependent on hyperaemia. — ^Auditory nerve vertigo (Meniere’s dis- 
ease) ; a troublesome nausea accompanying the head symptoms. 

5. Nose. — Wants to sneeze. — Sneezing. — Incipient catarrh; patients, 
esp. children, sneeze all day. 

6. Face. — Dull, heavy aspect ; face flushes quickly on slight excite- 
ment. ) 

8. Mouth.— Burning in mouth and epigastric region. — Burning and 
scraping in mouth and throat. — Redness of mouth and fauces. — Stomatitis, 
mouth hot and dry, tongue covered with burning vesicles. — Foul breath and 
offensive expectoration. — Mouth dotted with white patches, burning, scalded 
feeling ; ulcers on tip of tongue. — Canker-sores with burning soreness and 
fetid breath.— Taste : extremely disgusting ; as of something burnt ; bitter ; 
bitter bilious, that cannot be got rid of ; food has no taste. 

g. Throat. — Burning in throat. — Scraping in throat causing cough. — 
Haemorrhagic pharyngitis with difficulty of swallowing. — Tonsils red, swollen, 
studded white. — Violent efforts to swallow, with difficulty in swallowing, 



io66 


SALICYLICUM ACIDUM 


woke him from sleep ; the pain and difficulty became confined to r. side, 
with sticking along Eustachian tube into ear ; swelling of r. tonsil, noticeable 
externally, with sensitiveness to touch and increased temperature in vicinity ; 
mucous membrane of throat and posterior fauces red, swollen, with ulcers 
size of head of a pin, after a while a small lump of cheesy matter of strong 
odour was expectorated. 

11. Stomach. — Nausea, gagging, waterbrash. — Frequent vomiting. — 
Ecchymoses. — Erosions and ulcers in stomach and bowels. — Burning in 
epigastric region. — Weak, nervous sensation in stomach. — Flatulent and 
fermentative dyspepsia ; putrid belchings. 

12. Abdomen. — Abdominal distension. — Ulceration of bowels. — ^Violent, 
constant pressure in abdomen, with feeling of incarcerated flatus ; associated- 
with constipation. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Diarrhoea : stools green ; flushes easily as in 
hectic ; acid, sour, or putrid smelling. — Costive : stool dry, hard ; then diar- 
rhoea, watery, sour, yellow, with great weakness. — Cholera infantum with 
peculiarly putrid eructations. — Caused expulsion of taenia. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Diabetes mellitus. — Albuminuria, rheumatic 
diathesis. — Urine : scanty, clear, brown ; three hours after passage has a green 
tinge, and a feathery deposit of crystal of Salicylunc acid; if these are 
removed the urine at once becomes putrid ,* if left, urine remains fresh for a 
week. 


16. Female Sexual Organs. — Leuco-phlegmatic woman, frequent hot 
flushes, irritability, forgetfulness, dull, heavy pain in cerebellum. — Septic 
puerperal fever. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Respiration hurried, sometimes deepened, 
sometimes shallow or sighing and almost panting, as if laboured, but no com- 
plaint of difficulty of breathing. — Dry cough of a hard, racking, spasmodic 
character, < at night in old people. 

18. Chest. — Spasmodic, flatulent asthma ; fetid bronchitis ; gangrene of 

lungs.*— Firmly seated pressure at side of sternum as large as the hand, with 
feeling as if the bone was sore. * 

19. Heart. — Pulse small, rapid, weak. 

21. Limbs.— Heat, redness, soreness, and swelling about joints ; < in 

knees, with acute, piercing pains ; < on motion ; > from dry heat. — Soreness 
and pain in r. deltoid and r. gastrocnemius, changing next day to 1, wrist and 
forearm ; < touch and movement. , * 

22 . Upper Limbs. — Rheumatic pain or rheumatoid arthritis, occurring 
in some women during climaxis ; the pain^ disappeared, the engorgements of 
fingers subsided, and the hands could again be d.sed. 

23. Lower Limbs, — After suppressed foo^sweat, rheumatic pains ; < 

at night ; after an hour’s sleep forced to get up /.pain in course of 1. sciatic 
nerve, drawing burning ; as if foot were in an aiit-hill " ; as if it would like 
to perspire. — Necrosis of tibia. — Copious foul-smetling foot-sweats. — (Applied 
locally it brings away corns.) » 

♦ 24. Generalities. — Weakness, faintness. — D/eprives bone of its lime 
salts. I 

25* Skin. — Skin red, points like flea-bites.- 4 skin red and sensitive.-^ 
Urticaria, ^ 



SALIX NIGRA 1067 

26. Sleep. — ^Yawning. — Frequently waked from sleep thinking he heard 
music 

27. Fever. — Slight chill, crawling in spine ; yawning ; chill in finger-tips. 
— Fever continuous, burning, then sweat with relief ; fever again till exacer- 
bation of symptoms. — Weak, faint after fever and sweat. — Flushes easily as in 
hectic. — Profuse sweat ; as sweat increased strength declined. 


‘Salix Mollissima. 

Salix mollissima. N. 0 , Salicaceae. Tincture of fresh leaves and 

young shoots. 

Clinical. — Rheumatism. Sciatica. 

ChaPaoteristios. — Cooper has used Sal. niollts. with success in 
rheumatic affections, especially in sciatic neuritis in nervous subjects, 
in whom the capillary cutaneous circulation showed up visibly, and 
there was some tenderness and swelling of the limb. 


Salix Nigra. 

Salix nigra. Black Willow. N. 0 . Salicaceae. Tincture of fresh 

bark. 

Clinical. — Diarrhoea. Emissions. Fevers. Gonorrhoea. Impotence. Mas- 
turbation. Night-sweats. Nymphomania. Prostatitis. Satyriasis. Spermator- 
rhoea. 

Xlharaoteristios. — The Black Willow of North America has a 
reputation as a purgative and febrifuge. A proving by E. D. Wright, 
who took half an ounce of the tincture in a day, is given in Alienas 
Appendix. It developed soreness of muscles ; a tired, sleepy state ; 
loose bowels, sore gums, and fever. Sal. «. has been largely used by 
eclectics in a great variety of affections ci the genito-urinary system. 
W. B. McCoy {Horn. NewSy xxviii. 72) relates a number of cases illus- 
trating this action, (i) Man, 35, lost control of his sexual appetite, 
and the more he indulged the worse the craving became, and indul- 
gence made him a physical wreck. Sal. n. in teaspoonful doses 
thrice daily, cured in five weeks. (2^ Youth, 23, had masturbated 
since he was a boy. Sal. n. p^gtt xx,, four times a day, was given 
for a fortnight, the quantity being gradually diminished, until in a fe^v 
weeks the young man was quite cured. (3) A teacher, 21, five years 
before had a spell of fever which left him with a tendency to seminal 
emissions, which had become very frequent, and had reduced him to 
a very low condition : Extremely thin, sallow, nervous ; cold hands 
and feet even in heat of summer. Extremely cross and irritable. 
SaL n. 0, gtt. lx., four times a day, was given, with speedy improve- 



1068 SALIX NIGRA— SALIX PURPUREA 


meat. Later on the dose was reduced to thirty drops. The losses 
ceased, and in three months the patient had gained 41 pounds in 
weight. (4) A negro, 53, had sexual desire but without ability ; yet 
during the night he would have emissions without erections. SaL n. 0, 
gtt. xlv., four times a day, cured in three weeks. McCoy also used 
SaL n, successfully in gonorrhoea, but other remedies were given as 
well. A decoction of the fresh bark has proved {H. /?., xii. 447) a 
specific for excessive night-sweats in pulmonary cases. 

Relations. — Compare : Con., Agn., Pic. ac. In gonorrhoea, Salol, 
Petrosel. » 


SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Skin on temples sore to touch. 

8. Mouth. — Gums sore. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Looseness of bowels. 

24. Generalities. — Muscles sore and lame. — Disposition to lie down 
and sleep. 

27. Fever. — Fever ( 2 nd d.). 


Salix Purpurea. 

Salix purpurea. Red or Purple Willow. N, 0 . Salicaceae. Tincture 
or infusion of fresh bark. 

Clinioal.— Diarrhoea. Fever. Parotitis. Vertigo. 

Gharaoteristios. — ^T. C. Duncan and his wife proved Sal, purp,^ 
taking drachm doses of the infusion of the bark. The chief symptoms 
produced were : Giddiness ; loose stools ; fever ; swelling of the right 
parotid gland. The fever was marked by heat preceding chill and 
perspiration. Duncan chewed the bark on one occasion, and this 
caused the astringent effect on the mucous membrane of the mouth. 
The only rheumatic symptom was aching in right acetabulum. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1, Mind.— Very nervous, irritable, and despondent all day, — Dulness of 
intellect. 

2. Head. — In a few minutes dizzy feeling commencing just in front of 
ears and passing up to vertex, like a wave ; compelled to sit down. 

6. Face. — Swelling of r. parotid gland. 

8 . Mouth. — Peculiar astringent taste, puckering mucous, membrane 
and closing Stcno's duct. — Taste of undigested food. 

12. Abdomen. — Flatulence. — Pain in abdomen. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Bowels loose ; two stools in one day ; with 
griping. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine slightly acid ; excess of triple and earthy 
phosphates and epithelium ; less uric acid crystals (?). 



SALOL 


1069 


19. Heart. — Pulse feeble ; circulation torpid. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Aching in r. acetabulum. 

26. Sleep. — Rested poorly ; waked often ; first too hot, then too chilly. 

27. Fever, — First too hot, then chill}^ and at last, towards morning, in a 
profuse perspiration. 


Salol. 

• / OH 

Salicylate of Phenol. | cqoCsH Trituration. 

Clinical. — Diarrhoea. Dysentery. Fever, Gonorrhoea. Headache. Influenza. 
Neuralgia. Rheumatism. Small-pox. 

Characteristics. — Salol was primarily used as an anti-rheu- 
matic, especially in the treatment of acute cases. It was given as an 
antipyretic, in 30 to 45 grain doses, in powders or tablets. It is 
soluble in ether and petroleum spirit j very sparingly, if at all, in 
water. It does not disturb digestion because it passes through the 
stomach unaltered, being decomposed in the duodenum, by the fer- 
ments of the pancreas, into Salicylic aetd and Phenol (it contains 38 
per cent, of Phenol). These are excreted by the kidneys, and the con- 
dition of intestinal digestion has been estimated by the length of time 
required, after the ingestion of Saloly for them to appear in the urine. 
Upon this property also has been based the use of the remedy in 
acute diarrhoea, dysentery, cholera, and other diseases where intes- 
tinal asepsis is indicated, and also in affections of the bladder and 
urethra as a substitute for ordinary mechanical irrigations and injec- 
tions. Its internal use in gonorrhoea (in 5-gr. doses three times a day) 
has met with much success (Helbing). The only proving of Salol 
(published by me, H. xxxiii. 118) was made incidentally on a 
chemist from making up powders of Salol, He experienced very 
severe symptoms from inhaling the odour, and possibly also some of 
the powder. The experience was repeated on more than one 
occasion, and I have confirmed most of the symptoms in prac- 
tice, using the 12th attenuation chiefly. Rheumatic pains in joints 
with soreness and stiffness were marked, especially pain and soreness 
in the buttocks, knees, and wrists. The prover was subject to head- 
aches, but he never had so violent a headache as that produced by 
Salolj and conversely, after thfc proving, Salol 1,2 immediately relieved 
him when threatened with one of his usual headaches. The first 
symptom he noted was that his urine smelt of violets ; and it was 
bnly when this passed off that the other symptoms came on. The 
joints felt stiff, as if they wanted oiling.’^ C. Begg {B. M. J.y January 
12, 1901) refers to the use of Salol in small-pox, and other skin affec- 
tions attended with burning and itching. The relief of itching in 
small-pox was, he says, a constant and most satisfactory result. When 
administered early it prevented maturation. The symptoms were < 
walking. < Raising eyes. < Sitting on hard stool (pain in buttocks). 
< By touch. < Evening. < Ascending stairs. 



1070 


SALOLt-SALVIA 


Relations. — Antidoted by : Bry. Compare : Sal. ac., Sain., Nat. 
sal., Carbl. ac. Wrist rheumatism, Act. sp., Led., Viol. od. Urine 
smells of violets, Tereb. Gonorrhoea, Naphth., Petrosel. Small-pox, 
Carbl. ac. Sarr. Variol. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Dreadful headache, esp, over eyes, could hardly walk or 
hold head up for pain (relieved hy Bry on, (p, three drops, and a wet compress). 
■—Dull aching in head and all over body ; headache continued two days but 
was < at intervals. ^ 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine smelt strongly of violets ; after this 
passed off the rest of the symptoms came on. 

21. Limbs. — Feeling of stiffness in joints as though they want oiling. — 
Extremities sensitive to touch.— Rheumatic pains in 1 . knee-joint, thighs, and 
arms, the pain being on the inner side of the joints. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pain in shoulder. — Pain in r. arm in evening. — 
Slight pain in 1 . arm. — Pain in wrists. — Cramp in hand on writing. — Hurts 
even to carry a book in liand. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Buttocks sore. — Pain in 1 . buttock, esp. on walking. 

24. Generalities. — Dull aching in head and all over body. — Can hardly 
go up stairs, and it is dreadfully painful to sit on a hard stool. — During the 
whole time of the proving the hands shrunk when cold, and he could not 
straighten the little fingers without much pain. 

25. Skin. — (Burning and itching eruption. — Small-po.\.) 


Salufer, Natrum Silicolluoricum. 


Salvia. 


Salvia officinalis. Common Sage. N, O. Labiate. Tincture of 
fresh leaves jlnd blossom-tips. 

Clinical* — Cough, tickling Phthisis. Nigtjt-sweats. 

Characteristios.— //. R. (xii. 408) translates from Lcip, Pop, Z, /. 
H., August, 1897, an article on the use of Salvia as a gargle in sore 
throat, and as a mouth wash in affections of the gums, but more' 
especially in affections of the respiratory organs. The tickling cough 
of consumptives and the night-sweats were entirely relieved by doses 
of 20 to 40 drops in a tablespoonful of water. The H, R, translator 
adds this case : Mrs. X. had had for three weeks an irritating cough 
following an attack of pneumonia. The irritation being particularly, 
great, he gave her, fresh from the garden, some Sage to chew, and the 
irritation was instantly relieved* 



SAMBUCUS CANADENSIS 


1071 


Sambacus Canadensis. 

Sambucus canadensis. S. humilis. S. glauca. S. nigra (Marsh). 
Elder-bush. N. O, Caprifoliaceae. Tincture of buds, flowers, 
tender shoots, and leaves. 

(Ilinical. — Albuminuria. Angina pectoris. Asthma. Blotches. Larynx, dry. 
Lumbago. 

> 

CharaoteristicB* — ^The indigenous North American Elder grows 
• in rich alluvial soils, flowers in July, and fruits in September. The 
species, says Millspaugh, is not sufiiciently distinct from the European 
Elder {Samb, nigrUy Linn.), differing only “ in being less woody, and 
having more loose cymes, larger flowers, and more compound leaves.” 
It has, however, been proved separately by A. Uebelacker, whose 
symptoms are given in the Schema. The severe chest symptoms and 
blotched face recall symptoms of Samb. nig., \yith which it is probably 
identical in action. The chief Conditions were : < Lying down. > 
Getting out of bed. > By sweat. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1, Mind. — Depression and dread of undefined danger. 

2. Head. — Severe drawing in head with fulness ; motion = sensation 
as if water were undulating in it. — Head heavy, confused, with drawing and 
darting pains. 

6. Face. — Face flushed and broken out in blotches ; he looks ill. 

8. Mouth. — Mouth parched, dry ; desire for drink. 

9. Throat. — Pharynx and larynx felt dry and swollen, impeding free 
respiration. 

14. * Urinary Organs. — Pressure in kidney region, followed by profuse 
flow of clear urine. — Frequent urination. — Urine albuminous. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Breathing laboured, asthmatic ; wheezing. 
— Had to sit up in bed to get breath. 

18. Chest. — Heaviness and constriction in chest, as from a heavy load ; 

palpitation. — Aroused from sleep by a terrible constriction of chest and 
heart ; had to jump out of bed to get breath ; could not lie down for fear of 
choking. « 

19. Heart.— Sharp pain in heart (region of valves) with palpitation, at 
times visible through the clothes. — Constriction of chest and heart; must 
jump out of bed, lying down = chokmg. — Heart labours heavily. — Pulse rose 
to 100, but became normal at end of perspiration. 

20. Back. — Back felt sprained. — Pain (pressing) in lumbar region. 

21. Limbs.— Sharp, darting rheumatic pains in hands and feet. 

24. Generalities. — Exhaustion. — Uneasiness; unrest. — Recurrence of 
symptoms. — All symptoms > by sweat. 

27. Fever. — Sweat, soon becoming profuse, which gradually > all other 
symptoms (except exhaustion).— Head perspired less than rest of body. 



1072 


SAMBUCUS NIGRA 


Sambacus Nigra. 

Sambucus nigra (Linn.). Elder. N. 0. Caprifoliaceae. Tincture 
of fresh leaves and flowers. 

Clinical.— Angina pectoris. Asthma. Chesty oppression of» Coryza, dry. Cou§h, 
Croup* Emaciation. Headaches, catarrhal. Hoarseness. Hydrocele. Ileus. 
Laryngismus. Perspirations. Phthisis. Scurf. “Snuffles.” Starting, Whooping- 
cough. c 

Charaoteristios. — ^The leaves of Samb* n. have an unpleasant 
odour when bruised, which is supposed to be offensive to mosf 
insects, and a decoction of them is sometimes used by gardeners to 
keep off caterpillars from delicate plants. By village herbalists the 
inner bark as well as the leaves are employed for making an ointment, 
and the flowers serve for fomentations, or are made into a medicinal 
tea ; while the berries are the principal ingredient in Elderberry 
wine (Treas, of BoL), If sheep that have the rot can get at the 
bark and young leaves they will soon cure themselves (Green). 
Millspaugh says of Samb, canad, that a decoction or ointment of the 
flowers and leaves was used as an application to large wounds to 
prevent deleterious consequences from flies. He also says that the 
bark contains Viburnic acid^ which is identical with Valerianic acid. 
This no doubt accounts for the odour, and suggests a relationship in 
action between SambucuSy Valerian^ and the Viburnums, Spasm 
will be found common to all. In Samb. the spasm affects mainly the 
respiratory system — larynx, chest, and nasal passages. Samb. n. was 
proved by Hahnemann, and appears in M. M, P, One of the chief 
notes of the remedy is oedema : dropsical swellings in various parts of 
the body, especially legs, instep, and feet. This oedema, when it 
affects the nose, may give rise to obstruction, as in the “ snuffles of 
infants with dry coryza, preventing breathing and nursing. When it 
occurs lower down in the tract it causes dyspnoea : the cfflld awakens 
suddenly nearly suffocated, face livid, blue, sits up in bed ; turns blue, 
gasps for breath, which it finally gets ; attack passes off but is again 
repeated ; child inspires but cannot expire ; sleeps into the attack. 
The breathing is rattling. Croup, whooping-cough, asthma, may all 
manifest this group of symptoms. Nash once relieved with the 
200th a very bad case of asthma, having attacks of suffocation of 
the above kind. The patient was af* old lady. The relief was 
accompanied by a profuse flow of urine, which carried off a large 
amount of dropsical effusion in her legs and abdomen. — It was 
mentioned above that the croupy attack passes off but is again 
repeated.^^ This tendency of attacks to recur is another note of 
the remedy. Another grand characteristic is ; Profuse sweat during 
waking hours ; dry heat when asleep. This feature marks Samb. as 
the remedy in some phthisical cases and many febrile conditions. Other 
fever peculiarities are : Deep, dry cough precedes the fever paroxysm 
fever without thirst ; dreads uncovering. The Sensations of Samb. are : 
As if head were filled with water. Skull as if stretched. As if suffo- 



SAMBUCUS NIGRA 


1073 


eating. The symptoms are > by pressure and being tightly bound. 
Leaning against a hard edge = painful pressure in abdomen with 
nausea. Contusions = dark red swelling. Rest <. < Lying down ; 

in bed ; on left side. Head low < ; must sit up to regain breath. 
Motion < generally. Motion of head = tension and dizziness. 
Sleep <. < About midnight ; after midnight ; 2 to 3 a.m. (roused 

with sense of stoppage of air tubes). < Uncovering. < Dry, cold 
air. < Cold drink while overheated. < From fright or mental 
emotion. Fright = suffocative attack. Samb. is suited to diseases of 
scrofulous childreg which affect the air passages especially ; to 
persons previously robust and fleshy suddenly become emaciated. 
Effects of mental emotion, anxiety, grief, excessive sexual indulgence. 

Relations. — (Sanib. c. may be regarded as practically identical 
with Samb. n.) Antidoted by : Ars., Camph. Antidote to : Ars. (relieves 
ailments from abuse of Arsen.). Compatible : Bell., Con., Nux, Pho., 
Rhus, Sep. Follows well : Op. (effects of fright). Compare : In Millar’s 
asthma, Ar. dracont. Dyspnoea ; inspires, cannot expire, Chlorum, 
Meph. Sleeps into the attack, Lach. Peculiarities of sweating, Chi. 
and Con. (sweats as soon as he closes his eyes to sleep — opp. of 
Samb.), Thuj. (sweats on uncovered parts). Puls, (one-sided sweats). 
Dreads uncovering, Nux (must be covered in every stage). Fat people 
emaciate suddenly, Iod.,Tub. Effects of excessive sexual indulgence, 
Pho. ac., K. ph. Tenacious mucus in larynx, K. bi. Sleepy but can- 
not sleep. Bell. Effects of cold drink when over-heated, Bels. (Bels. 
SB acne ; Samb. ss phthisis). Effects of dry cold, Aco. Snuffles, 
Am. c., Nux. Plants containing Valerianic or Viburnic acid, Valer., 
Vib. o., Vib. t. 

Causation. — Fright. Grief. Anxiety. Injury (hydrocele). Ex- 
cessive sexual indulgence. 


SYMPTOMS. 

!.• Mind. — Great tendency to take fright (trembling, anxiety, and rest- 
lessness). — Fright followed by suffocative attacks, with bluish, bloated face. — 
Peevishness (constant fretfulness), during which everything makes a disagree- 
able impression. — Periodical delirium, with frightful visions (and hallucina- 
tions). 

2. Head.-'^Dizziness and confusion in the head, esp. during movement ; 
on rising. — Headache as from intoxication. — Tension in head during move- 
ment as if it contained water. — pressure and expansion in head. — Pressive, 
tearing headaches in forehead and temples. — Sudden shocks in the brain. — 
Sudden jerks through head. — Digging pain in vertex. — Tearing stitch through 
1. half of occiput, frequently returning and lasting a long time, with a dull 
sensation in the intervals. — ^The head* is bent backwards. — Erysipelas 1 . side 
of head, ear itiuch swollen. — Scurf on head with intolerable itching. — Skull 
feels as if stretched. 

3. Eyes.-~Pupils at first contracted, then greatly dilated. 

4. Ears. — Sharp stitches in (r.) inner ear with cramp pain in it— Itch- 
Ihg creeping in ears and in throat. 

5. Nose. — Sensation of numbness in nose, with itching on bridge.— 

VOL. II. 69 



1074 


SAMBUCUS NIGRA 


Sanguineous congestion in nose, with sensation of heaviness in point of nose. 
— Obstruction of nose, with accumulation of thick and viscid mucus in 
nostrils. — Snuffles of children. — Dry coryza of children. — Child starts up 
suddenly as if suffocating. 

6 . Face. — Face bluish (or dark blue) and bloated or pale and earthy. — 
Circumscribed redness on cheeks. — Sensation of numbness and tension, in 
cheeks, as from being swollen. — Red, burning spots on cheeks and nose. — 
Gnawing pressure in bones of upper jaw. — Great heat of face. — Heat and 
perspiration in face. 

7. Teeth. — Odontalgia with tearing and lancinations in all the teeth, 
and with a sensation as if cheeks were swollen. 

8. Mouth. — Dryness of the mouth and throat, with thirstlessness. 

9. Throat. — Itching tingling in throat. 

10. Appetite. — Thirst without relishing the drinks. 

11. Stomach.— Vomiting in morning, first of milk (or food), that has 
been taken, and of mucus, afterwards of bile. — Pressure in stomach. — Acute 
lancinations under the stomach, < by pressing upon it. 

12. Abdomen. — Pinchings (colic pain) in abdomen as from a chill, with 
(much flatulence and) expulsion of flatus. — Shootings in the 1. side of hypo- 
gastrium. — Pain in abdomen as from a bruise. — Spasmodic tearings, shoot- 
ings, and pinchings in abdominal muscles. — Pressive pain in abdomen, with 
nausea, when resting it against a hard (edge or) body. 

13. Anus. — (Irritable anus with pilCvS. — R. T. C.) 

14. Urinary Organs. — Frequent want to urinate, with copious emis- 
sion, also at night. — Deposits a heavy sediment. — Urine of deep yellow. — 
Emission of urine in too small a stream. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Swelling of scrotum. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Catamenia too profuse, like metror- 
rhagia. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness from accumulation of viscid 
mucus in larynx. — Inflammation of larynx and trachea ; croup ; accumulation 
of mucus in larynx. — Whooping-cough ; suffocative, hollow, deep rcough 
caused by a spasm in chest, with expectoration only during the day of 
small quantities of tough mucus. — The cough is < at or soon after midnight, 
during rest, when lying in bed, or with the head loW, from dry, cold air. — 
Deep, hoarse, hollow cough, with agitation and thirst. — Continued cough with 
abundant expectoration of a salt taste, or of sweetish mucus. — Attack of 
suffocating cough, with cries, in children. — Cough with cries, as from a pain 
in the gullet. — Wheezing and quick respiration. — Obstructed respiration when 
lying down. — Spasmodic paroxysm of suffocation at night, with tears, great 
agitation, and tossing of the hands (when waking after midnight out of a 
slumber, with half-open eyes and mouth, with bloated blue hands and face, 
and heat without thirst).— Great difflchlty in breathing. — Quick, wheezing, 
crowing breathing. 

18. Chest. — Oppression at the chest, with lancinations in (1.) side (below 
nipple) ; or with aching under sternum. — Pressure on sternum, with a 
counter-pressure from spine to sternum. — ^Oppression of chest, with pressure 
in stomach, nausea, and weakness. — Pressive pain in chest. — Sudden sensation 
of contraction in sides of chest. 



SAMBUCUS NIGRA 


1075 


19. Heart. — ^Orgasm in whole body. — Occasional omission of heart-beat. 
— ^Angina pectoris where pressure proceeds from spine in individuals formerly 
fat and robust, now emaciated from mental emotions, sexual excesses, or 
seminal losses. — Pulse generally very frequent and small ; sometimes slow, 
full, sometimes intermitting. 

20. Neck and Back. — Pressive heaviness in nape. — Deep, incisive 
lancinations in muscles of neck. — Sweat on throat and neck with children. — 
Pains in loins with drawing pressure. — Incisive blows in loins. — Aching in 
middle of spine during repose and movement. — Lancinations in scapulae. 

21. Limbs. — H^nds and feet bloated and blue. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Drawing in forearms and bones of hands. — Dark 
.blue bloatedncss of the forearms and hands. — Paralytic heaviness in elbow- 
joint. — Lancinations in wrists. — Trembling of hands (when writing). — Tear- 
ings in joints of fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Spasmodic drawings and shootings in thighs. — 
Tension in tendons of ham as if they were too short. — Acute (deep) lancina- 
tions in tibia. — Sensation of coldness, numbness, and dcadness in the middle 
of (r.) tibia. — OCdematous swelling of feet as far as knees. — ^Tearing in legs 
and ankles. — Icy-cold feet with warmth of the body. 

24. Generalities. — We arc often led to this remedy when we find a 
great deal of perspiration, occurring with any other trouble, which may last 
all the time, or it may come and go in paroxysms ; it is sometimes found in 
phthisis ; perspiration with disinclination to undress or be uncovered ; heat 
with inclination to be covered (H. N. G.). — Asthma with suffocative attacks 
of breathing ; patient may be well enough while awake, but sleeps into the 
trouble ; loud respiration with no mucous rattle. — Babies with snuffles ; can’t 
breathe well through nose. — Asthma Millari (H. N. G.). — Symptoms < 
uncovering ; while lying down ; while resting. — > From moving ; on rising ; 
while walking ; from wrapping up w'armly. — General ebullition of blood in 
evening after lying down, with sensation of trembling. — Sudden drawing over 
whole surface of body, frequently recurring when seated. — The majority of 
the syfliptoms manifest themselves during repose and arc dispersed by move- 
ment. — Dropsical swelling*of whole body. — Great emaciation. 

25. Skin. — Bloatedness and dark red swelling, with tension after contu- 
sions. — (Edema ; anasarca. — Blotches on face.— Red spots on cheeks here 
and there with burning sensation. — Tingling itching of skin. — Sudden painful 
drawing in all points over surface while sitting. 

26. Sleep. — Disposition to sleep without being able to sleep. — During 
sleep dry heat, after awakening, profuse perspiration. — (Sleeps with arms 
above head.) — Frequent waking with a start, with anguish, trembling, and 
obstructed respiration, amounting almost to suffocation. — Incomplete sleep, 
with mouth and eyes half open. — Lascivious dreams. 

27. Fever. — Shuddering, with shivering, icy coldness of hands and feet, 
and pricking tingling in skin. — Shivering and .shaking before going to sleep. 
— Insupportable heat without thirst, with dread to be uncovered — Fever with 
excessive perspiration, esp. at night. — Profuse perspiration day and night, but 
only when awake ; first breaking out in the face. — Very debilitating perspira- 
tion. — Night-sweats, except on head, < towards morning. — Continued perspi- 
ration while awake, changing into dry heat as soon as one goes to sleep. — 



1076 SAMBUCUS NIGRA-^SANGUINARIA 


Intermittent fever : chills over whole body, with cold hands and feet ; 
followed by intolerably dry heat, without any thirst, accompanied by dread 
of being uncovered, afterwards copious sweat, without any thirst ; the sweat 
even continues during the apyrexia. — Pulse generally small and very quick, at 
times intermitting. 


Sanguinaria. 

Sanguinaria canadensis. Blood-root. Puccoon. N. 0 , Papaveraceae. 

Tincture of fresh root. (The resin, leaves, seeds, seed-vessels,* 

powdered root, and expressed juice have also been used.) 

Acetum. ' 

Clinical. — Alcoholism. Aphonia. Asthma. tumour of. BroncJiifts. 

Cancer. Catarrh. Chest, fains tti. Climaxis. C j Croup. Deafness. Diph- 
theria. Dysmenorrhoea. Dyspepsia. Ear, polypus ^'lushes, climacteric. Gleet. 
Granular lids. Haemoptysis. Headache. Inftucuzi^f^^^drAiiih. Liver-cough. Men- 
stmation, breasts painful durinf^. Nails, ulcer^in9h of. Neuralgia. CEdema 
glottidis. Ophthalmia. Pharyngitis. Phthisis floHda. Physometra. Pneumonia, 
acute. Polypus. Pregnancy, affections during. Pyrosis. Quinsy. Rheumatism. 
Rhus poisoning. Shoulder, rheumatism of. Smell, illusions of; loss of. Stomach, 
neurosis of. Syphilis. Tinnitus. Tumours. Vomiting. Whitlow. Whooping- 
cough. 

Characteristios. — The Blood-root, or Puccoon, commonly found 
throughout the United States and Canada, is the sole representative 
of the genus Sanguinarta of the Papaveraceie. It is herbaceous, has 
a thick, branching root stock, which creeps along underground ; 
and in early spring sends up from the ends ot the little side branches 
a single long-stalked leaf, and another stalk bearing a solitary flower. 
The leaf is wrapped round the flower-bud when it rises from the 
ground, and is bluntly five to nine-lobed, roundish at first, but after- 
wards kidney-shaped. The American Indians formerly used the 
orange-coloured juice of the root for smearing their bodies, and for 
staining various domestic articles. The plant has also been success- 
fully used by American and French dyers (Treas. of BoL). Hale says 
of the root : “It is succulent, and when cut or broken emits from 
numerous points on the transverse surface a light orange, or rather 
dark vermilion-coloured juice, which has a bitterish, acrid but 
peculiar taste, which remains long in. the mouth and leaves a per- 
sistent burning in the throat. The juice of the stem is between a red 
colour and a yellow, as that from the stem of Chel. maj. is pure 
yellow, and that from Papaver somnif. [Opiuui] is white.’^ It is well 
to bear in mind the parallelism • observable between these three 
Poppies, no less in their medicinal than in their physical proper- 
ties, The time for collecting the root is early spring or late 
autumn. An alkaloid, Sangmnarin (identical with Chelerythrin of 
Chelidonium majus), has been isolated, and the Nitrate of this has 
been studied separately. Hale refers to a paper by Dr. Tully, pub- 
lished in 1813, in which Sang, is described as being analogous in its 
action to Squills^ Senega^ Digttahsy Guaiacumy and Ammonia^ which 



SANGUINARIA 


1077 


shows an accurate conception of its range. In doses of from eight to 
twenty grains of the powdered root, Sang, is an active poison pro- 
ducing : Nausea ; burning in stomach ; tormenting thirst ; faintness ; 
vertigo ; indistinct vision ; violent, spasmodic efforts of the stomach, 
free vomiting, followed by alarming prostration. S. L. Mitchell has 
recorded fatal poisoning of four workmen who drank the tincture in 
mistake for brandy. They were all soon seized with severe racking 
and burning pains in the stomach and bowels with intense thirst. 
“ Burning is one of the leading notes of the remedy, and is found in 
many different pa^ts. Winterburn has published (//. M., vii. 532) two 
cases illustrating this indication in the region of the stomach : (i) 
Mr. F., 48, of sanguino-bilious temperament, energetic, refined, had 
been ill with pains in the stomach several months. A clairvoyant had 
recomitiended a decoction of blood-root and bone-set in tablespoon- 
ful doses.” Each dose produced intense burning pains in the 
stomach lasting for hours,” and it had to be discontinued. Several 
weeks later Winterburn was consulted, and this is the condition he 
found : Burning in epigastrium, with pressure, < at night, but coming 
on soon after lying down and compelling patient to arise. Eructa- 
tions gave no >. Appetite great ; bowels torpid, an unsatisfactory 
relief each morning, leaving a sense of discomfort. Peculiar drawing 
pain in shoulders and arms during sleep, so that when she woke the 
fists were tightly clenched and Hexed on the sternal end of clavicle ; 
lameness and weariness of the muscles followed. Sang, 200, chosen 
after careful comparison with iVw.r, Graph. ^ and others, was given 
every night at bedtime. After the first dose the symptoms dis- 
appeared “ like magic,” and the patient was soon well. (2) Mrs. S., 
30, a chronic inebriate, had been drinking steadily for three weeks 
when sickness and diarrhoea set in, Nux i x aggravated the nausea. 
Ars, 6 checked the diarrhoea and relieved the intense thirst, but did 
nothing to allay the vomiting. Patient was irritable, angry. Every- 
thing she took, even water, was instantly ejected. About every 
twenty minutes she had a spasm or cramp of the stomach, with 
gagging and coughing, bringing up some frothy mucus. The strain- 
ing caused great pain in chest and abdomen. There was, besides, 
the most intense burning, extending from the stomach up the oeso- 
phagus to pharynx, which felt swollen and dry. The only tolerable 
position was lying slightly turned on her left side. Lying on right 
side was impossible. Rising from lying = vertigo. Cheeks and 
hands livid. She believed sh^ would soon die, and was unwilling to 
be left alone. Sang. 200 was given every two hours. By evening the 
nausea had ceased, but the burning pain remained as before. The 
smallest particle of food gave great agony ; it seemed as if a spot the 
size of a florin was ulcerated, an*d any contact with this was excru- 
ciating. She slept better, but awakened next morning in a fright. 
Next afternoon she was able to take a little solid food, and from 
that time recovery was rapid. Burning is a leading note of Sang, 
Burning of eyes ; of ears* Tongue and throat feel as if they 
had been burnt or scalded. Burning palms and soles. Burning 
in chest ; between breasts, streaming from breasts to abdomen. 
Leonard \{Min, H. Mag,^ ii. 295) says ** a circumscribed burning in 



1078 


SANGUINARIA 


the chest, commonly followed by heat through abdomen and diar- 
rhoea, a strong indication for Sang, in pneumonic conditions. 
Sang, has also the circumscribed hectic flush on the cheeks, as 
in phthisis, in which it is frequently indicated. {Sang, has also the 
hopefulness ” of phthisical patients.) The flushed face, at times 
dark red or livid, is also a prominent feature of Sang,y as it is of 
Op, Sang, affects the whole respiratory tract, irritates the nasal 
mucous membrane, and causes coryza, with pain at root of nose, lost 
or perverted sense of smell, and sensitiveness to the odour of flowers. 
Influenza, hay-fever, ozaena, and polypus have aU come within its 
range. Laryngitis and membranous croup have been cured by it ; 
and I have found it meet a greater proportion of the tracheal and 
bronchial coughs of epidemic influenza than any other remedy. The 
chief features are : Violent, dry cough ; wheezing, whistling, metallic ; 
sputa almost impossible to raise. I have seen several cases of this 
kind rescued from apparently imminent death by Sang,, the relief 
comes by the expectoration of a thick plug of mucus which was 
causing suffocation, and which the patient was too weak to dislodge. 
Like CheLj Sang, is a right-side medicine, and affects especially the 
right lung ; and is suited to pulmonary affections with liver involve- 
ment. After influenza children often get a cough scarcely distinguish- 
able from whooping-cough. I have tound Sang, the chief remedy for 
this. It is also the remedy for severe cough ajfter whooping-cough — 
the cough returns witli every fresh cold. Sang, also acts powerfully 
on the outer chest, sternum, and mammee. Like CheL^ it has a repu- 
tation for curing cancer, polypi, and new growths. I have seen 
breast tumours diminish under its action. Offensiveness and acridity 
characterise the discharges of Sang, ; and the breath and flatus are 
also offensive. Menses offensive, flow bright red ; later blood darker 
and less offensive. Before menses itching of axillae. Eruption on the 
face of young women, especially during scanty menses. Climacteric 
disorders ; flashes of heat ; leucorrhoea ; painful enlargement of 
breasts. The headaches of Sang, are of great intensity, and have 
some striking characteristics. They are (i) periodic — every seventh 
day ; (2) begin in the morning, increase to noon, and then diminish ; 
(3) are bursting, or as if the eyes would be pressed out ; (4) begin at 
occiput, spread upwards and forwards, and settle over right eye ; (5) 
like a flash of lightning in occiput ; (6) > by sleep ; (7) return at 
climacteric. Hering described the headache of Sang, as the 
American sick-headache — rush of Jblood causing faintness and 
nausea, pains lancinating or throbbing. Can neither bear light nor 
odours nor least jar, as any one stepping across the floor ; at height 
of headache yoniiting of food and bile ; pain so violent patient goes 
out of her mind or seeks relief by’pressing head against pillow or 
with the hands. Cooper gives as a keynote : “ If he goes without 
food, gets bilious headaches."' Sang, has also neuralgia of the face 
> by kneeling down and pressing head firmly against the floor ; 
pain extends in all directions from the upper jaw. The ears are 
strongly affected by Sang, Cooper gives me this case : Girl, 19, had 
her throat bad three years from scarlatina, and lately increasing 
deafness ; noises all over head, and vertigo and sudden flushings in 



SANGUINARIA 


1079 


daytime ; menses too frequent, and profuse leucorrhoea ; it pains her 
to walk from backache ; had to give up teaching from this ; appetite 
poor from the headaches and tinnitus ; often has pain behind angles of 
lower jaw and swellings of gland. All disappeared after a single dose 
of Sang. though at first the leucorrhcea was increased. Fulness 
and tenderness behind angle of jaws is, according to Cooper, 
a keynote. Sang, causes many symptoms of rheumatism, but the 
most characteristic is a rheumatic pain in right arm and shoulder ; 
cannot raise the arm, < at night. Pains in places where the bones 
are least covered.^ Peculiar Sensations are : As if paralysed. As if 
forehead would burst. As of a band across forehead. As if head 
were drawn forward. As if electric current shooting through 
head. As if temples and scalp were alive with irrepressible pulsa- 
tion. As if eyes would be pressed out. As if hairs were in eyes. 
As if she was in a railway car which was moving and jarring her, and 
as if all about her moved rapidly and confusedly. Pain like drawing 
a rope on a windlass as tight as possible. Tongue as if burnt. Tip 
of tongue as if scalded. Tongue as if in contact with something hot. 
Throat as if swollen. Throat so dry it seems as if it would crack. 
Pharynx as if burnt or. scalded. As if some hard substance in 
stomach. Constriction in pit of stomach as if suffocating. As of a 
mass in lower part of rectum. As if upper part of chest were too full 
of blood. Larynx as if swollen. F. Nichol in giving Hale his expe- 
rience with Sang, in croup, says he used (following Paine, eclectic) 
a solution of Sangmnarin in vinegar, and he found that the most effec- 
tive preparation. The symptoms are < by touch. [A painful sensi- 
tiveness is very characteristic of Sang. : Temporal veins painfully 
sensitive ; head and eye very painful ; nipples sore.] Hard pressure 
> ; (must kneel down and press head hard to floor in neuralgia). 
Slightest jar <. Lifting = lumbago. Lying down > rheumatism and 
headache ; but < cough and most other complaints. Cough <. Lying 
with head low < cough. Lying on left side >. < Lying on right 

side.* Sitting up and passing flatus > cough. Motion ; turning head 
quickly ; turning in bed ; stooping ; coughing ; exercise <. Cannot 
raise arm from side but can swing it to and fro (in rheumatism). 
Eating <. Going without food = headache. > Eructations (mind 
confused). Swallowing <. Vomiting > (nausea ; headache). Smok- 
ing =s hiccough. < At night. > After sleep. Headache < by 
day, sunrise to sunset. Cold open air >. Cold room < cough. 
Damp weather <. The right side is more affected than the left. 
Symptoms go from right to feft. Periodicity is very marked. 

Relations. — It antidotes : Opium. Compatible : Bell, (scarlatina). 
Compare : Botan., Chel., Op. In rheumatism of right deltoid, Mg. c. 
(of left, Fer., Nx. m.). Headache extending forward from occiput 
and settling over (right) eye, Spi. (left eye), Sil., Sep. (both eyes) ; 
extending forward, Gels., Lac c. ; (backward, Anac., Bry., Chi. s., Naj., 
Nux). Headache > by hard pressure, Chi., Indg., Mg. m. Paroxysms 
of headache ending in profuse urination, Ign., Gels., Ver. Menstrual 
headache, Sep. (Sep. scanty flow ; Sang, profuse). Offensive breath 
with cough, Caps. Faint from odours, Pho., Ig., Val., Nux. Right- 
side, throbbing, congestive headache, < light and noise. Bell. (Bell. 



io8o 


SANGUINARIA 


has cold feet, hot head,” and is > sitting propped up ; Sang, head- 
ache has more of the gastric form, and is > lying down), Meli. 
Periodic sick headaches, Ir. v. (Ir. v. every eighth day ; every seventh, 
Saba., Sang., Sil., Sul.). Pneumonia, Ver. v. (more marked arterial 
excitement), Pho., Ant. t. (face livid, blood carbonised, rattling cough), 
Sul. (resolution imperfect) — (Sang, has sputa very offensive, even to 
patient). Rheumatism of right ankle, Chel. > Lying left side, Lil. t. 
Painfulness to touch of parts where pain has been, Lcprs. Sensitive 
to sudden sounds, Brx. Jerking or jumping as from something alive 
in stomach, Croc. Physometra, Lyc.,Bov. Liver-^ough (Scil. spleen- 
cough). Pain in bones covered only with skin, Rh. ven. Laryngeal 
and nasal polypi. Sang, n., Pso., Teuc. Eruption on face of young, 
women during scanty menses, Bels., Calc., Jamb., Pso. Right-side 
complaints ; right to left, Lyc., Chel. > By sleep, Pho. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Angry irritabilit}^ ; moroseness. — Anxiety and dread pre- 
ceding the vomiting. — Mind confused, > by eructations. — Mental torpor, 
stupor, heaviness, sleepiness, — Hopefulness, sanguine of recovery. — Disgust- 
ing ideas. — Dreamy state with eyes open. 

2. Head. — Vertigo : terrible ; when moving head rapidly and looking 
upward ; with nausea, fainting, and headache ; with ringing in ears ; on rising 
from a sitting or stooping position ; on quickly turning the head ; with dim 
vision ; with dull, heavy feeling in stomach as if caused by some hard sub- 
stance there ; in cold weather ; during sleep ; at climaxis. — Head swims 
on lying down suddenly ; gets pain 1. side of back near waist, as from spleen ; 
bowels confined ; complexion spotty (cured in woman, 32. — R. T. C.). — Sensa- 
tion of heaviness in head. — Determination of blood to head, with whizzing in 
cars ; flushes of heat ; accumulation of water in mouth. — Headache over whole 
head from 5 p.m. to midnight ; then free ; and then sickness (vomiting) from 
5 p.m. to midnight (agg. — R. T. C.). — Headache, with rheumatic pain^i and 
stiffness of limbs and neck. — Periodical sick headache ; with vomiting 
of bile ; begins in morning, < during day, lasts till evening ; < from 
motion, stooping, noise, and light ; only endurable when lying still, and > by 
sleep or after vomiting; esp. severe over r. eye. — Headache returns periodi- 
cally. — Heaviness in head from vertex to centre of forehead, with pressing in 
glabella and buzzing in head ; eyes dull. — ^Terrific headache as if caused by 
approaching coryza which does not come, ip forehead and middle of vertex, 
with pressure in eyes, which burn and are moved with difficulty. — Terrific 
headache during the fever.— Dull, pressive frontal headache. — Headache as 
if forehead would burst, with chill and burning in stomach. — Frontal head- 
ache extending into cheek-bones. — Headache or neuralgia over r. eye. — 
Headache as if it must burst, or as if eyes would be pressed ouf ; > walking 
in open air. — Headache with shuddering. — Headache begins in occiput, 
spreads upward, and settles over r. eye. — Pain in head in rays drawing 
upwards from neck. — Headache with nausea and chilliness, followed by 
flushes of heat, extending from head to stomach. — Headache with flushed 
face. — Pains in head in spots. — Pains in head, which pass rapidly from one 



K 


SANGUINARIA 1081 

place to another, like electric shocks. — Pulsations in head (throbbing head- 
ache), with bitter vomiting, < from motion. — Headache rising up from neck. 
— Feelfng as if head were drawn forward. — Distension of veins on head, esp. 
on temples, perceptible to the touch and sore. — Sensation of mobility in the 
scalp. — Head very painful to touch ; where pain has been. — Distension of 
veins in temples ; sore when touched. 

3. Eyes. — Neuralgia in and over 1 . eye. — Burning and watering of r. 
eye, which is painful to the touch, followed by coryza. — Acute conjunctivitis 
with ecchymoses, tending to trachoma. — Blepharitis. — Burning dryness in 
eyes ; followed by cyipious lachrymation. — Retinal congestion with flushed 
face and congestive headache. — Yellow sclerotica, jaundice. — Catarrhal oph- 
.thalmia, gianular lids. — Redness of eyes in morning. — Hard swelling like 
scirrhus over eyebrows. — Dim eyes, with sensation as it hairs were in them. — 
Pain in eyeballs on moving them. — Balls sore, with darting through them and 
dim vision. — Violent twittering before eyes. — Vapour or cloud before eyes. 

4. Ears. — Burning of ears, with redness of cheeks. — Earache, with 
headache, with singing in ears and vertigo. — Humming and roaring in ears 
with painful sensitiveness to sudden sounds in women at climaxis. — Cracking 
in r. ear while stroking cheek. — Every stroke of a hammer heard near a 
blacksmith’s shop is painful to r. ear. — Vein on r. temple swells up in 
woman, 50, subject to neuralgia and old vascular deafness ; after Sang. 0, 
one dose, hearing improves for six days strikingly, and then reverts 
(R. T. C.). — Throat affections causing deafness and earache. — Acts strongly 
on 1 . Eustachian tube (Hydrast. on r.) ; acts on ethmoid cells specially 
(R. T. C,), — Increased redness of external ear, with humming and roaring 
in ears from increased circulation of blood through aural structures. — Burning 
ears, cheeks red. — Aural polypus. 

5. Nose. — Fluent coryza with frequent sneezing ; < r. side. — Heat in 
nose ; coryza, rawness in throat, pain in breast, cough, and finally diarrhoea. 
— Coryza, watery, acrid ; with tingling ; with heavy pain at root of nose and 
stinging in nose. — Dry coryza, as from a sudden cold. — Alternately fluent and 
dry coryza. — Smell in nose like roasted onion. — Rose-cold, with subsequent 
asthma ; sick and faint from odour of flowers. — Loss of smell and taste. — Dis- 
like to odour of syrup. — Nasal polypus. 

6. Face. — Circumscribed redness of one or both cheeks, — Paleness of 
face, with disposition to vomit. — Pain in cheek. —Stitches 1 . side of face with 
pains in forehead. — Neuralgia in upper jaw, extending to nose, eye, ear, neck, 
and side of head ; shooting, burning pains ; must kneel down and hold head 
tightly to the floor. — Face bloattyl, with sensation of rigidity and fulness. — 
Veins distended, feel stiff and sore to touch. — Twitching of cheeks toward 
eyes. — Stiffness of articulation of jaws. — Fulness and tenderness behind 
angles of jaw (a keynote. — R. T. C.). — Red cheeks: with burning ears; 
with cough. — Lips feel dry. — Under lip burns, is swollen, hard, and blistered; 
blisters dry up and form crusts which fall off. 

7. Teeth. — Pain in hollow teeth, esp. when touched by food. — ^Tooth- 
ache from picking teeth. — Pain in carious teeth after cold drinking. — Loose- 
ness of teeth (with salivation). — Bleeding, spongy, fungoid gums. 

8. Mouth. — Pricking on the point of the tongue. — Tongue feels as if 
burned or as if sore ; is coated white.-~White coated tongue with slimy, fatty 



io 82 


SANGUINARIA 


taste. — Red streak through middle of tongue. — Tip of tongue burns as if 
scalded. — Pricking in tip of tongue. — Stitches in 1. side of tongue. — Crawling 
on tip of tongue followed by astringent sensation of whole tongue, on Vaking. 
— Dry, acrid sensations, beginning r. side and extending over whole tongue. — 
Prickling on tongue and hard palate as after chewing Sweet 

things taste bitter, followed by burning in fauces. — Loss of smell and taste ; 
with a burnt feeling on tongue. — Sore on gums and roof of mouth, — Fetid 
breath, clammy mouth, sticky teeth. — ^White patches on mucous membrane. 

g. Throat. — Ulcerated sore throat, as if raw and denuded. — Feeling of 
swelling in throat on swallowing, < on r. side. — Throatrfeels swollen as if to 
suffocation, aphonia. — Tonsillitis, promotes suppuration. — Throat so dry, seems 
as if it would crack. — Feeling of dryness in throat (with tickling cough), not 
> by drinking. — Sensation in pharynx as if scalded by hot drink. — Uvula 
sore and burning. — Burning pharynx and oesophagus. — Heat in throat > by 
drawing in cold air. — Inflammation in throat. — Warming sensation in fauces, 
esp. soft palate. — Burning in fauces extending to centre of sternal region. 

10. Appetite. — Craving for he knows not what, with loss of appetite ; 
wants piquant, spiced things. — Loss of appetite with great weakness of diges- 
tion. — Aversion to butter, which leaves a sweetish taste. — Sugar tastes bitter 
and 2 = burning. — Tormenting thirst. — Sweet things <, =: burning. — Soon 
after eating : feels empty ; difficult breathing, nausea, waterbrash, lassitude 
almost to fainting, cold sweat to 12 p.m., after a little food. — If goes without 
food, gets bilious headaches (keynote. — R. T. C.). 

11. Stomach. — Burning in stomach, with headache. — Inflammation of 
stomach. — Sensation of emptiness in stomach soon after eating (faint, feverish 
feeling). — Soreness and pressure in epigastrium ; < after eating. — Hiccough 
whilst smoking. — Spasmodic eructation of flatus. — Frequent fetid eructations 
with disposition to vomit and pale face. — Pyrosis. — Nausea, which is not > 
by vomiting. — Extreme nausea with great salivation and constant spitting. — 
Nausea with headache, and with chill and heat. — Vomiting preceded by 
anxiety. — ^Vomiting: of bitter water; of sour, acrid fluids; of ingesta; of 
worms; with craving to eat in order to quiet the nausea. — ^Vomiting and 
diarrhoea. — Sudden attacks of constriction in pit of stomach as if suffocating. 
— Goneness with sick headache. — Jerking or jumping in stomach as if from 
something alive. — Neurosis of stomach. — Pain in stomach-pit extending down 
into bowels, causing rumbling. 

12. Abdomen. — Hot streaming from breast towards liver. — Sensation 
as if hot water poured itself from breast into abdomen, followed by diarrhoea. 
— Dull burning in r. hypochondrium and eldest. — Awoke with severe pain in 
region of spleen. — Violent stitches in spleen. — Pain in 1. hypochondrium ; < 
by coughing, > by pressure and lying on 1. side. — Jaundice. — Liver-cough. — 
Colic, with torpor of liver. — Beating and spasms in abdomen.— (Flatus, cough 
and sneezing. — R. T. C.). — Flatulent distension of abdomen, evening, with 
escape of flatus from vagina (the os uteri being dilated). — Beating in 
abdomen.— Indurations in abdomen. — Cutting bellyache from r. to 1. of iliac 
fossa, thence to rectum. — Throbbing in abdomen. — Shooting pains through 
bowels extending to lower limbs, afternoon. — Knife-thrusts in abdomen 
followed by watery stools. — Cramp extending from place to place. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Ineffectual urging to stool, then vomiting. — 



SANGUINARIA 


1083 


Urging to stool, afternoon, but only discharges of iiatus. — Distressing, cutting, 
spasmodic sensation in rectum in evening ; recurred several days. — Ineffectual 
desire with sensation of thick mass in anus; repeated several times in the 
day without stool. — Diarrhoeic stools with much flatulence. — Copious apple- 
green stools with flatus (offensive) and sudden urging (agg. — R. T. C.). — 
Frequent discharges of very offensive flatus. — Colic followed by diarrhoea. — 
Diarrhoea with disappearance of coryza, catarrh, or pains in chest and cough. 
— Stools undigested. — Dysentery. — Alternate diarrhoea and constipation. — 
Coitstipation ; stools in hard lumps. — Haemorrhoids. 

14. Urinary OA*gans.— Dull, heavy pain across kidneys. — Pain from 
kidneys penetrates r. iliac fossa, then shoots through sigmoid flexure to 
rectum. — Frequent and copious nocturnal urination, urine as clear as water. — 
(Retention of urine consequent on gravel and calculus.) — Urine is thick and 
white next day (agg. from 200 th. — R. T. C.). — Copious urination goes on all 
night with much > to chest symptoms (in a lady. — R. T. C.). — Very copious 
urine at night, with pain in 1. hypochondrium ; < from coughing ; > from 
pressure and lying on 1. side. — Urine : dark yellow ; high-coloured, red 
sediment. — Ardor urinae, 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Burning in glans. — Emissions two nights 

succession; aftei which he felt very well. — Gleet ; old cases. — Cheesy 

sev;^etions from glans (syphilis). 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Climacteric disorders, esp. flushes of 
heat and corrosive, fetid leucorrhoea. — Hurning of palms and soles at clirnaxis 
compelling to throw off clothes. — Painful enlargement of breasts at chmaxis. 
— ^Abdominal pains as if menses would appear. — [Delaying menses, chilliness 
followed by flushes of heat and occasional palpitation, faintness, vertigo, 
nausea, and violent vomiting, burning in oesophagus, neuralgia in r. temple, 
in 1. chest (mamma) and lower extremities, occasional hacking cough and 
gastralgia. — Carmichael.] — Menstruation too early, with a discharge of black 
blood. — Menses : more profuse than usual ; with headache r. side ; at night 
time, very offensive, putrid, bright red, clotting, becoming darker towards 
end and less offensive. — Amenorrhoea. — Metrorrhagia. — Dysmenorrhoea of 
feeble, torpid subjects, with tendency to congestion of lungs, liver, or head. 
— Burning pain between breasts in afternoon, < on r. side. — Shootings in 
bosom and pain in mammje as from excoriation. — The nipples are sore and 
painful. — Stitches in nipples, esp. r. — Sharp, piercing pain in r. breast, just 
beneath nipple ; < deep breath, some dyspnoea. — Pain in r. breast extends to 
shoulder, can hardly place hand on head. — ^Threatened abortiqn, pains in loins 
extending through epigastric and| iliac regions and down thighs. — Hydrops 
uteri. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Dryness in throat and sensation of swelling 
in larynx ; with expectoration of tlyck mucus. — Aphonia with swelling in 
throat. — CEdei?ia of larynx. — Tickling in throat, evening, after lying down, 
with dry, hacking cough and headache. — Crawling sensation extending down 
behind sternum. — Tracheal irritation secondary to heart disease. — Croup : 
hoarse, muffled cough ; complete aphonia ; spasmodic cough, painful crow- 
itig, stridulous breathing. — Cough dry, tickling in throat-pit. — Distressing, 
spasmodic, exhaustive cough.— Dry cough, awakens him from sleep, which 
did not cease until he sat upright in bed, and flatus was discharged both 



1 084 


SANGUINARIA 


upwards and downwards. — Continual severe cough, with circumscribed red- 
ness lof cheeks, with pain in chest ; with coryza, then diarrhoea. — Coughs in 
old men with 1. earache, and pains going from 1. throat to ear. — Expectora- 
tion : tough ; difficult ; rust-coloured ; extreme dyspnoea ; hepatisation. — 
Breath and sputa smell badly even to patient. — Pulmonary consumption, 
expectoration and breath exceedingly offensive. — Whooping-cough. — Severe 
cough after whooping-cough ; the cough returns every time patient takes 
cold. — ^Asthma ; excessive dyspnoea ; esp. after rose-cold/’ < from odours, 

18. Chest. — Hydrothorax. — Haemoptysis. — Pneumonia ; catarrhal ; 
chronic ; r. side ; 1. side, with heart disease. — Typhoid pneumonia, with very 
difficult respiration, cheeks and hands livid, pulse full, soft, vibrating, and 
easily compressed. — Severe dyspnoea and constriction of chest, with inclina* 
tion to take deep inspirations. — Sharp stitches in r. chest. — Stitches in lower 
part of 1. breast to shoulder. — Pain in breast with periodic cough. — A shoot- 
ing, sticking pain beneath sternum. — Persistent pain beneath sternum and in 
r, breast. — Intense burning between breasts, < r. side. — Sharp, piercing, 
neuralgic pain half-way between sternum and nipple. — Hot, burning stream- 
ing from r. chest to liver. — Pain under I. clavicle on w^aking. — Constriction 
across both breasts. — ^Violent stitches under short ribs. — Burning and pressing 
in breast, followed by heat through abdomen and diarrhoea. — Pain in r. chest 
to shoulder ; can only with difficulty place hand to head. 

19. Heart. — Painful stitches or pressive pain beneath praecordial region. 
Surging of blood and racing palpitation, with dry and burning skin. — ^Weak 
feeling about heart. — Metastasis of rheumatism (or gout) to heart from out- 
ward applications. — Palpitation of heart. — Irregularity of heart's action and 
of the pulse, with coldness, insensibility, &c. — Pulse slow, irregular, feeble. 

20. Neck and Back. — Soreness of nape on being touched. — Rheumatic 
pain in nape, shoulders, and arms. — Pain in r. side of neck as if strained ; in 
1. side. — Soreness down muscles of back ; pains shifting about ; feels pain 
more when drawing long breath. — Pain in inner border of r. shoulder-blade. 
— Pain in sacrum from lifting ; the pain in sacrum is > on bending forward. 
— Pain in sacrum and bowels. 

21. Limbs.— Rheumatic pain in limbs, esp. in shoulders, arms, and 
thighs, and < at night. — Burning in hands and feet < night. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Itching in axillae before menses. — Rheumatic pain 
in r. arm and shoulder, < at night in bed ; cannot raise arm ; motion (turn- 
ing in bed) much < it. — Pain in top of r. shoulder. — Pain in r. deltoid. — R. 
arm hung helpless. — Coldness in body and r. arm. — Burning of palms. — Stiff- 
ness of finger- joints. — Aching in ball of r. thumb. — Fungoid growth between 
second and third metacarpal bones, protruding about a quarter of an inch out 
of palm. — Ulceration at roots of nails on all the lingers of both hands. — 
Panaritium, first r. then 1. finger. — Shoqting pains from r. thumb to symphysis 
menti. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Rheumatic pain in 1. hip. — Rheumatic pain inside 
of r. thigh. — Bruise-like pain in thigh, alternating with burning and pressure 
in chest. — Stiffness of knees, — Burning of solps, < at night. — Rheumatic 
pains in limbs ; pain in those places where the bones are least covered with 
flesh, but not in the joints ; on touching the painful part the pain immediately 
vanished and appeared in some other part. — (Have seen ulcers connected 



SANGUINARINUM 1085 


with carious ankles and shins change almost visibly after Sang.— Gutteridge). 
—Sharp pain in r. ankle and great toc-joint— Cold feet, afternoon. 

24. Generalities. — Great debility and weakness in limbs (esp. in morn- 
ing on waking), whilst walking in the open air. — Paralysis of r. side. — General 
torpor and languor. — An uncomfortable, prickling sensation of warmth 
spreading over whole body. — Weakness and palpitation of heart ; fainting 
weakness. — Convulsive rigidity of limbs. — We find this very useful where 
there is a pain rising from the back of the neck over the top of the head, 
rurfning down into the forehead ; this symptom may occur alone, or in con- 
nection with some other trouble (H. N. G.). — Often useful for troubles occur- 
ring in females at the climacteric period of life— such as flashes of heat, &c. 
<H. N. G.). 

25. Skin. — Heat and dryness of skin. — Itching and nettle-rash before the 
nausea. — Old, indolent ulcers, with callous borders and ichorous discharge. — 
Nasal polypi ; fungus excrescences.— Jaundice. — Eruption on face of young 
women with menstrual troubles, esp. deficiency. — Scaly eruptions, carbuncles. 
— Rhus poisoning. 

26. Sleep. — Drowsiness causing mental and bodily indolence. — Sleep- 
lessness at night ; awakens in a fright as if he would fall. — Can’t sleep 
without brandy. — Slightest noise disturbs, yet is sleepy and dreamy. 
(R. T. C.). — Dreams : of sea voyages, with sensation of being rocked ; of 
business matters ; frightful. 

27. Fever. — Pulse too frequent and full. — Coldness of feet in afternoon, 
with painful, sore tongue ; stiffness of knee and finger- joints. — Chill and 
shivering in back, evening, in bed. — Shaking chill. — Chill with nausea, head- 
ache. — Heat flying from head to stomach. — Fever heat and delirium. — Burn- 
ing heat rapidly alternating with chill and shivering. — Intermittent fevers ; 
marsh fevers ; nervous fever. — Fever from pulmonary, hepatic, or gastric 
inflammation. — Copious sweat ; cold sweat. 


Sanguinarinum. 

Sanguinarinum. C,9Hi7N04. Trituration. Solution in vinegar. 

Clinical. — Croup. 

ChapaoteristiOB. — Sauguinarin, is a pearly white substance. In 
smallest physiological doses itiacts as expectorant,” in large it causes 
nausea, and still larger vomiting. In repeated doses it lowers the 
pulse rate (Thomas, quoted C. D. P.). T. Nichol gives in Hale’s work 
his experience with a solution ojf one grain of Sanguinann, in two 
ounces of vipegar in cases of pseudo-membranous croup. (He does 
not say how much of this he gave or how frequently he repeated : 
probably the dose was a few drops in water given frequently.) He 
relates this case : W. G., 5, had been ill some days. Nichol found 
him with a hoarse, muffled cough, complete aphonia, pulse 132. Soft 
palate and fauces covered with pearly, fibrinous exudation ; a hissing 
sound was heard on auscultating larynx. Great dyspnoea. The 



io86 SANGUINARINUM— SANG. NIT. 


child stretched back his head and grasped his throat in agony. 
Features swollen and dark. Sgn. out, was given, and in fifteen hours 
there was notable improvement. In forty-eight hours the boy was 
out of danger. 


Sanguinarinum Nitricum. 

Nitrate of Sanguinarin. CX9HX7NO4HNO3. Trituration. 

Clinical. — Adenoids. Asthma. Borborygmus. Bronchitis. Catarrh. Coryza*. 
Deafness. Eustachian catarrh. Hay-fever. Headache. Influenza. Laryngitis. 
Polypus. Post-nasal catarrh. Quinsy. Stiff-neck. Throat, sore. Tinnitus. 

Gharaoteristics* — Sang, niL is a very fine brownish-red powder, 
pungent, acid, bitter, and inodorous. It is soluble in alcohol, ether, 
water, and oils, but not in the same proportion in all. Pure San- 
guinann, is a pearly-white substance, but when combined with any of 
the acids the result is a salt of some shade of red, crimson or scarlet. 
The colour of the blood-root may thus be due to the presence of 
some native salt of Sanguinarin, (Hale). Sng, n. was proved in 3X 
trituration by Professor Owens (C. D, P.), of Pulte Medical College, 
and some very striking symptoms wpre elicited. The catarrhal 
symptoms of Sang, appear in great intensity — nose, eyes, throat, and 
bronchi being affected. Lachrymation, pains in eyes and head, sore 
scalp, obstructed nose, and burning pains throughout all regions were 
experienced. A sense of obstruction is very characteristic : Sensation 
of obstruction and fulness in the head ; accumulation of mucus 
obstructing nose ; awakes frequently with dry mouth, the nose being 
obstructed. Accumulation of mucus behind centre of sternum ; sense 
of suffocation ; feeling as if air-passages lined with thick, stiff mucus 
or pus. Heat and tension behind sternum is characteristic ; and, so is 
expectoration of quantities of sweet- tasting mucus. There is also 
expectoration of thin, frothy, very tenacious mucus. The symptoms 
of iniluenza are very completely depicted, even to the loss or perver- 
sion of taste. Sng, n, appears to have the nasal symptoms of Sang, in 
an enhanced degree. Sensation arising to nostrils as if he had eaten 
strong horseradish,” is present. Hale gives tffese verifications, (i) 
Mr. B., 40, dark, had for eight years, in spite of continuous 
old-school treatment, chronic post-n^^sal catarrh, bronchitis, and 
laryngitis. Voice altered, deep, hoarse ; speech with effort, as if 
from chest. Severe pressure from behind sternum. Mucous mem- 
brane dry, raised only a few balls of grey mucus. He spent two 
winters on the St. John^s River, Florida, and was > there, but < 
again on his return north. Sng, n, 6 trit. was given every two hours. 
In one week he was better ; there was more moisture in his throat 
than there had been for iwo years. Voice markedly better. Sng, n, 
was now given every four hours. In ten weeks he had regained six 

S ounds of his lost weight, and strength in proportion. The voice not 
aving improved in the same degree, Caust, 6, and afterwards Dros» 3, 



SANGUINARINUM NITRICUM 1087 

^ were given, and in sixteen weeks he was perfectly well. (2) Mrs. S., 
city missionary, 49, had constant hacking cough, raw, sore feeling in 
throat, sore aching and pressing behind sternum. She was much 
exposed to cold winds of winter, which set up coryza and irritation. 
Sng. n. 6. trit. gr. i., every two hours, enabled her to follow her occupa- 
tion without suffering, and in ten weeks she was completely cured. 
(3) O. W., 55, subject to frequent attacks of cold in head, throat, and 
chest. After a long drive in open trap contracted a severe cold in 
head, throat, lungs. Sore and lame all over ; frequent sneezing, 
lac^rymation. Next day sore throat very marked, constant tickling 
in throat-pit, excitifJg cough, at first short and hacking, but in two 
days it became violent and convulsive. BelL and Dros. did little good. 
Pressure behind sternum became very severe. Sng. n. 6 was given 
every two hours. In four hours copious perspiration came on with 
frequent sneezing. Next day sore throat appeared after waking from 
a troubled and restless sleep ; constriction of throat with difficult 
swallowing ; tension across chest radiating from behind sternum. 
Sng. 11, every hour. In one hour free discharge from nose set in ; in 
three hours moisture and relaxation of constriction across chest. The 
discharge was yellow and sweetish -tasting, continued itil day. Slept 
well and woke next morning feeling quite free. But little cough or 
coryza during the day. The following morning he was quite well. — 
Hering gives this case cured with Sng. n. 2 trit. : Troublesome cough 
for number of years ; excited by an irritation in region of bifurcation 
of bronchi ; coughs a long time to raise a little whitish-yellow phlegm, 
sometimes streaked with blood, after which she feels great > ; cough 
day and night ; is greatly emaciated. Owens (M. A., xvii. 31) relates 
these cases : (i) Mrs. B., 55, widow, fair, catarrhal constitution. 
Chronic cough many years. Asthmatic on taking cold, great accumu- 
lation during attacks, occasionally raising frothy, viscid mucus tinged 
with blood. Gastric catarrh. Great epigastric tenderness. On 
October 26, 1883, seized with severe catarrhal symptoms, sneezing, 
burnkig in nostrils, lliient, w’atery, mucous discharge from nose, 
aching in forehead. Cough dry, hollow. Sng. n. 3X, gtt. xx., in 
six ounces of water, two teaspoonfuls every hour. Complete relief in 
four hours ; usually took three days. (2) Dr. G. had hay-fever, at its 
height on August 21st. Sensation of cobwebs across nose ten days 
before attack is fully established. Nose feels large, tingles, trickling 
water ; mucous membrane very sensitive to cold air, causing frequent 
sneezing. < Light. < Rising in morning. Eyes itch, could almost 
rub them out. Sng. n. relieved this attack somewhat. Next year he 
commenced taking it in June, and passed through the season without 
any attack. C. Wesselhoeft regards Sng. n. as the simillimum 
for New England colds.” Adenoids and polypi have been cured 
with it. There is great craving for air. Bathing with warm water > 
heat in forehead. Touch <. Pressure < soreness of eyes. Head- 
ache is > by discharge of much mucus from nose. < At night. 

Belations. — Compare : Sang. Burning in nostrils, Ar. t. Tena- 
cious mucus, K. bi. Hay-fever, Pso. Sweet expectoration, Stan. 

Causation. — Driving in cold wind. Winter weather. Exposure. 



io88 SANGUINARINUM NITRICUM 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Restless from feverish and irritable condition. 

2 . Head. — Slight dizziness all through the proving ; with discliarge of 
mucus from nose and air passages. — Uncomfortable feeling about the head 
all day ; decidedly < at night. — Pain in supra-orbital region, proceeding 
from pain in r. eyeball, of a sore, aching character ; soon extended across 
forehead and seemed deep in above root of nose. — Burning pain in forehead 
and root of nose, with aching and soreness in eyeballs < on pressure ; • the 
pain became < on 1. side of head, through 1. temple.-»'Heat in forehead > 
bathing with warm water. — Pain in 1. side of head extended to parietal ridge 
and back to mastoid process, with stiffness in muscles of 1. side of neck and 
top of 1. shoulder as from a draught. — Sensation of obstruction and fulness in 
head, > by discharge of a large quantity of thick, yellow, sweet-tasting 
mucus. — Slight aching sensation with soreness all over head and scalp. 

3. Eyes. — Sore, aching pain in r. eyeball, extending to supra-orbital 
region. — Pain in 1. eyeball extending over orbit and 1. side of head. — Redness 
and soreness of inner canthi, they feel swollen. — Severe heat and burning of 
eyes. — Burning, pressing aching, and sore pains in eyes. — Profuse lachryma- 
tion ; tears gush out. — Redness of lids and conjunctiva. — Sight dim, as if 
looking through gauze, or as if film of mucus spread over sight. 

4. Ears. — Obstruction of Eustachian tube. — Difficulty in distinguishing 
sounds. — Roaring in r. ear. 

5. Nose. — Water trickles from r. nostril (15 m. after first dose). — 
Watery mucus from both nostrils, sneezing every few minutes, profuse 
lachrymation. — Sensation rising to nostrils as if he had taken strong horse- 
radish. — Burning pains in both nostrils. — ^Accumulation of mucus obstructing 
nose and bronchi. — Dry, sore, raw feeling in nostrils. — Free discharge from 
posterior nares (esp. 1.), tinged with blood. 

8 . Mouth. — Slight acrid, burning sensation on tongue. — Roughness and 
dryness in mouth and throat. — Heat in mouth as if pepper had been taken. — 
Awoke frequently with dry mouth and throat from breathing with mouth 
open, nose being obstructed. — Increased flow of mucus and saliva with 
sneezing and burning in forehead. 

9. Throat, — Roughness and dryness in mouth and throat with sense of 
constriction in throat. — Soreness, roughness, and rawness on r. tonsil, painful, 
with difficulty in swallowing ; red, irritable spot seen on inspection. — In 
morning raised great quantities of thick, yellow, sweet-tasting mucus ; this 
continued all day. — Great accumulation of mucus in throat and bronchi. 

10. Appetite. — Bitter taste extending back to root of tongue. — Every- 
thing tastes dry like chips. — Coffee did not taste natural ; wanted something 
succulent — not pungent-— but soothing to mouth and throat, which was hot, 
dry, parched, and raw.— Little appetite' 

11. Stomach. — Sensation of burning in stomach and ' oesophagus.— : 
Belching up of putrid-smelling gas though she had eaten nothing since 
morning. 

12. Abdomen. — Borborygmus and pains in abdomen, as if diarrhoea 
would set in, with sharp, cutting pains. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Passed urine every hour during the night (28 oz. 



SANGUINARINUM TARTARICUM 1089 

by weight), depositing a white sediment.— Urine had bright yellow sedi- 
ment. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Short, hacking cough arising from sensa- 
tion of tightness in chest. — The cough became harsh, leaving soreness and 
rawness in throat and chest, with scraping, raw sensation in pharynx. — As 
soon as she began to move in morning coughed up large quantities of thick, 
yellow, sweet-tasting mucus during the day. — Cough became deeper and 
rattling, the pressure extended to both lungs, greatly increasing the sense of 
suffocation. — Feeling as if air passages lined with thick, stiff mucus or pus. — 
Raises thin, frothy mu«us, which is very tenacious. 

18. Chest. — Tightness in chest. — Heat and tension behind centre of 
.sternum. — Tension, burning, and accumulation of mucus behind centre of 
sternum. — Strong desire for fresh air. — Pressure in chest extending to both 
lungs, increasing the sense of suffocation. 

20. Neck. — Stiffness in muscles of 1. neck and shoulder. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Stiffness in muscles of 1. shoulder and neck. 

26. Sleep. — Sleep poor ; restless from feverish and irritable condition. 


Sanguinarinum Tartaricum. 

Tartrate or Sanguinarin. CipHi^NO^C^HgOe. Trituration. 

Glinioal. — Exophthalmos. Mydriasis. Stool, bilious. Vision, dim. 

Characteristics. — Tully and Terry (C. D, P.) experimented with 
Sng, tarL in considerable doses. Tully says he has repeatedly wit- 
nessed “ all the effects of Sanguinaria root, save the neuralgic pains 
and the convulsive affections,’^ from the use of Sng, tart. The most 
peculiar of the symptoms he mentions are : Staring, and protrusion of 
the eyes ; extreme mydriasis ; haggard expression, and cold surface 
and cqjd sweats. 


SYMPTOMS. 


2. Head. — Vertigo. 

3. Eyes. — Pupils dilated. — Mydriasis very great ; strongest sunlight 
fails to contract. — Cloud before sight. — Eyes protruded, staring. 

6 . Face. — Haggard expression. 

II. Stomach. — Nausea. — Epi,<fastric uneasiness. 

13. Stool. — Very large quantity of bright yellow bile passed in stool 
(20 h. after dose). 

19. Heart. — Pulse rate diminished ; irregular. — Pulse preternaturally 
^full, flowing, without bounding, hardness, or sign of irritation. 

27. Fever. — ^Cold surface, esp. of extremities. — Cold sweat. 


VOL. 11. 


70 



iOpo 


SANICULA 


Sanguisuga. 

Hirudo or Sanguisuga officinalis. The Leech. N. 0 , Hirudine^. 

Tincture of the living animal. 

Clinical.--^ nnSj bleeding from. Hjeniorrhages. 

Characteristics. — Burnett was the first to use Sanguisuga as a 
homoeopathic medicine. Dangerous haemorrhages have not unfre- 
quently followed the application of leeches, and'^it has been ascer- 
tained that the leech does not merely bite, it poisons the bitten part 
in such a way as to render the blood in it watery. Having a case of 
persistent bleeding from the rectum, the blood being watery^ and all 
the usual haemorrhagic remedies having failed to arrest it, Burnett 
thought that Sanguisuga might prove the simillimum. He had a 
tincture made and attenuated, gave the 5th attenuation, and made a 
brilliant cure. I have had frequent opportunity of confirming the 
value of Sngs. in cases of the kind. 


Sanicula. 

Sanicula aqua. A Mineral Spring Water of Ottawa, 111 ., U.S.A. 
(Containing, approximately, in grams per gallon — Nat. m. 93, 
Calc. m. 23^, Mag. m. 23I, Calc, bicarb 14J, Calc. suL 9^, K. 
sill. 5, Nat. bicarb, i, Nat. bro. Fe. bicarb. Nat. iod. 

Sil. i, Alumina and traces ot Lith. bicarb., Nat. ph., Borax.) 
Dilutions of the spring water. Triturations of the evaporated 
salt. [This remedy has sometimes been confounded with the 
pJani Sanicula Marylandica, Black Snake-root.] 

Clinical. — .Vinciu »i duLa. Aiitcnui u*ui al neuralgia. Asthma. HcC'Sting^. 
Boils ; bluul. Borboivgmus. Coccyx, soreness of Conclylomata. Conjunctivihs. 
Consliptition ; ot childicn C'oinea, ulceration t)f. Coryza. Cough, Dandriff. 
Debility. Diabetes Diarrhtea. Digestion slow Dropsy; during pregnancy. 
Eczema. Einaciaiion. Enuicsis. Excoriations. Fool-sweat. Gastritis. Gum- 
boil. Headache. Indigestion. Influenza. Intenniltents. fJntcstinal sand.) Itch , 
suppressed. Itching. Leucorrlitea. Liver, soreness ui. Lumbago. Melancholy. 
Milk, thin. Mouth, s(»rc. Ncuialgia. Neurasthenia. Night terrors. Nose, crusts 
in. Ophthalmia; t<iT'i. Os uteri, dilated O.sification, too early. Ozaena. Per- 
spiration, excessive, ]^)t-belhed children. Pregnanc>, sickness of ; dropsy of. 
Rectum, cramp in. Kheumatisni Rickets. Scurvy. Sea-sickness. Shouldeis, 
rheumatism of. Thioat, stuc. Tongue, ringworm of; burning. Toothache. 
Uterus, prolapse of ; soieness of , (tumour of). Vomiting, of milk ; of water. Wrist, 
boils on. 

Gharaoteristics. — The water of Sanicula spring is without odour 
or colour, and has an agreeable and slightly alkaline taste. It was 
proved by J. G. Gundlach, who, with his family, drank it for more 
than a year. Writing in H. F., September, 1890, Gundlach says : 
Though some five years since the proving was made, we all (that is, 



SANICULA 


1091 


my family) still suffer from the effects, and I fear never will fully get 
over them, as nearly all the symptoms still recur/^ Sherbino proved 
Sank, in the potencies, and a large number of the symptoms of both 
provings have been confirmed. We have in Sank, one of the best- 
proved remedies of the materia medica, a polychrest and antipsoric 
of wide range. My Schema is taken from the arrangement of Frank 
W. Patch in Med. Adv.j xxviii. x6i. Brackets indicate cured symp- 
toms. The cachexia of Sank, is its most pronounced feature — 
weakness, emaciation, itching, ill-nourished skin, pimply face, dirty, 
greaTsy, and brownish ” appearance of body, scrofulous ophthalmia 
and scrofulous eruptions, cold, clammy hands and feet, foul-smelling 
foot-sweat, profuse sweat of back of head and neck, hair dry and 
•lustreless, thick dandriff on scalp and eyebrows, slow digestion, con- 
stipation,, or else diarrhoea, stools turning green, pot-bcllicd, rickety 
children. On the other hand, when taken by a pregnant woman, 
Sank, has caused premature closing of sutures and fontanelles prior 
to birth. The mental state of the Sank, cachexia is characterised by 
lack of energy, with no stability of purpose ; jumping from one work 
to another, never finishing anything. There is also much depression, 
with sense of impending misfortune. Children are stubborn, wilful, 
get angry and throw themselves backward. Digestion is slow. Chil- 
dren vomit milk or thick curds soon after nursing. The menses are 
irregular, delayed, scanty, and attended with pain. Nervous sensi- 
bility is exaggerated, and there is general and local intolerance of least 
jar. This has led to its successful use in train-sickness and sea-sick- 
ness. The low vitality of Same, is evidenced in the cold clamminess 
of other parts besides hands and feet. Sherbino [y. of Hcs. (Hitch- 
cock’s), ii. 147J relates this case : Mr. F. had neuralgia of coccyx, 
sacrum, and lumbar region, < by any movement, turning in bed, 
rising from chair, stooping ; > keeping still. Parts sore to touch. 
Cold sensation in lumbar and sacral regions as if there were a cold cloth 
there. Feet cold and clammy. Same. lom cured after other remedies 
failed.^ The foot-sweat occurs between the toes, making them sore, 
as well as on the soles, which are as if one had stepped in cold water 
On the other hand, there may be “ burning of the soles, must uncover 
or put them in a cool place,” and child kicks off clothing even in 
coldest weather.” The odours of Same, are characteristic. The stool 
has an odour of rotten cheese, and no amount of washing will get rid 
of it. The flatus has the same odour. Vaginal discharges and con- 
dylomata of penis have an odour of fish brine. This has led to a 
number of cures. The digestive? tract is greatly disordered by Same. 
Food has a long after-taste ; turns sour. Children vomit milk looking 
like Schmierkiise.” Appetite is increased — hungry before meals — 
or disordered. Craves salt ; craveij fat bacon, which <. Eating = 
desire for s-tool ; must leave the table. Great thirst ; drinks little and 
* often ; vomits as soon as it reaches the stomach. Incontinence of 
urine and faeces. Urging from iiatiis, must cross legs to prevent 
faeces escaping. Sank, is as great a remedy in constipation as in 
diarrhoea. There is no desire for stool till a long accumulation has 
occurred. After great straining stool partially expelled recedes. 
Large evacuation of small, dry, grey balls, which have to be removed 



1092 


SANICULA 


mechanically. Stool square, as if carved with a knife. The diarrhoea 
is changeable in character and colour ; Like scrambled eggs ; frothy, 
grass-green ; turns green on standing ; like scum of frog-pond. There 
is excoriation of skin about anus, perinaeum, and genitals. As well as 
weakness of rectum and bladder, there is uterine weakness and bear- 
ing down as if contents of pelvis w’ould escape ; must place hand to 
vulva to prevent it. Walking, misstep, or jar < this, and also sore- 
ness of the uterus. Sherbino (il/. A.f xxvi. 133) relates the case of 
Mrs. X., who had been in poor health a number of years. Tall, 
anaemic. Has to urinate too often and too prqfusely, rises several 
times in night. Urine clear, pale. Has leucorrhoea, profuse, change- 
able in colour, at times milky, then yellow, < during stool. Weak 
and prostrated, rumbling in bowels before meals, > after eating and 
when stomach is full. Hands cold, clammy ; also feet, < in cold 
weather ; stockings always damp. Two doses of Sanic.^ lom and 
then 50m, cured all the trouble. H. C. Morrow regards Sanic. as the 
chronic of Cham. {H. P., ix. 253). He records the case of a baby who 
had been ill through a summer with diarrhoea. Morrow cured it with 
Sanic. 50m (F.), a peculiar symptom in the case being that the boy 
wanted to lie on something hard^ thin as he was. Morrow had himself 
suffered since a boy from effects of suppressed itch. Among his 
symptoms were — “ felt as if he had on cold, damp stockings,^^ and 
“ sweat about the head and neck when asleep, wetting the pillow far 
around.*^ Calc, gave no relief. Sherbino advised Samc.^ and after taking 
it Morrow was in better health than he had been for twenty years. 
Morrow also relates these cases (M. A.^ xxiv. 47) : (i) A lady was con- 
stipated a year. Had to s/m/« very hard to expel the stool ; at times 
faeces so large, hard, and dry, she was compelled to pick it out with 
the fingers. Sanic. relieved. (2) A lig-wart on glans penis, with a 
discharge from its surface which smelled like fish brine. Sanic. cured. 
Gundlach relates (il/. A.j xxvi. 97) these cases : (i) Mrs. K. felt an 
attack of fever impending. Sad and despondent. Had fever the 
previous night with headache, but no thirst. Mouth dry, tongue 
coated, bad breath ; inside lips and cheeks many little aphthous 
ulcers ; no appetite ; bowels constipated ; tired, numb, lame feeling 
in all limbs ; chilly, craves warmth, yet head feels better in open air. 
Sanic. 10m, every three hours, cured. (2) Mr. C. complained that the 
roof of his mouth felt scalded, < taking anything warm in mouth, 
especially hot drink. Smokers have this kind of sore mouth, but 
patient was not a smoker. Gundlach remembered his own similar 
symptoms of the proving, and Sanic. lom, which promptly 

removed the condition. (Same, causes a burning of the tongue so 
intense that it must be put out to cool : here again is the “ < by 
warmth of the mouth). (3) Gunillach^s horse was out of health, 
would not eat, bowels constipated, stools dark and scant. Tired, 
rubbed his tail at every opportunity till nearly all the hair was rubbed 
off. A Veterinarian diagnosed “ lampers,” and said the gums would be 
found swollen and sore, and would need scarifying. The gums were 
found sore and swollen, mouth slimy, tongue coated. Sanic. lom was 
given thrice daily, and no scarifying was needed. He was well in a 
few days. Sherbino (M. A., xxvi. 135) removed with Sanic. lom and 



SANICULA 


1093 


5oni these symptoms in a man suffering from the after-effects of 
influenza and much drugging : Soreness through stomach and liver 
region. Liver enlarged, great tenderness to pressure or jar. Could 
not laugh without supporting stomach and bowels. > When stomach 
full, < when it was empty. G. M. Chase (M. A,, xxiv. 336) relates a 
case of acute gastric catarrh. Patient had had repeated "attacks last- 
ing three to seven days. Two doses of Same, cured. The mental 
symptoms were the chief guides : Irritable, least word or action 
would upset ” her. Misconstrues everything. Melancholy, sad, 
depressed, no energy. Fever but no thirst. Headache, cannot bear 
light or noise. Offensive breath, but not from teeth. Rheumatic pains 
in shoulders^ < left, extending to chest. Only > from heat ; patient 
sat with back to the tire. Gundlach {M. A., xxiii. 381) relates this 
similar case : Mrs. W., 55, after a violent cold two days before, had 
great pain in muscles of neck, shoulders, and upper back, pain con- 
stant, but made sharp by attempts to put her hands to her head or 
behind her. Could not look round without turning whole body. < 
From cold or motion ; > from warmth and rest until she gets tired 
of holding head and body in one position, when she would have to 
move it. Same. 30 made a rapid cure. C. M. Boger (M. Conns., xvi. 
265) relates the case of a light-haired carpenter, 35, who had hacking 
cough from trachea after rising in morning, also in evening. Sneezing 
occasionally during day. Crusty sores in right nostril. Dull pain in 
frontal sinuses, < stooping. Aching in muscles of whole back, 
stitches upward, < from motion. Foot-sweat, making feet sore, 
stiffens stockings, destroys shoes. Itching eruption over sternum. 
Itching pimples on coccyx. Same. lom (F. C.) cured. Gundlach 
(il/. A.^ xxiii. 382) relates these two cases of constipation, (i) Mr. A., 
always accustomed to take pills. No stool, nor desire, for five days. 
Dull frontal headache with vertigo ; stooping or getting up suddenly 
=s vertigo. When walking gets blind and dizzy, has to stand still till 
it passes off. Poor appetite ; tongue large and flabby, coated 
yellowish. Bad taste in morning ; at times stomach full and 
oppressed after eating ; accumulation of gas. Stool scanty and 
requires great effort to expel. “Not done sensation after stool. 
Sank. 10m cured promptly and completely. (2) Miss R., 20, consti- 
pated all her life. Goes a week without desire. Great effort required 
to expel stool, which would at times slip back. Sank. 30 helped at 
once. W. J. Guernsey (M. A., xxiii. 382) relates several cases of 
bowel disorder in children, (i,) R., aged one month, has sore mouth. 
Jumps on waking from sleep. Stool difficult with straining. Sank. 
lom cured in a few days. Three months later same child had swell- 
ing about eyes. Discharge of water from nose. Rubs nose constantly, 
looking frightened. Sank, lom cured in five doses. (2) B., four 
months, stools loose, green. Restless at night. Losing flesh. Eyes 
look very heavy. Has had sore mouth removed by the mother with 
Borax wash. Sanic. lom, 50m, and cm, gradually cured. (3) S., 
aged seven months, stool loose and copious. Stool becomes pale on 
standing. Urinates much. Vomits large chunks of milk. Wakens 
screaming in fright. Sank. lom. All symptoms disappeared, but a large 
carbuncle appeared on right buttock, which, however, was less painful 



1094 


SANICULA 


than its size would indicate, opened in live openings and discharged 
within a week, rapid recovery following. Guernsey chose Sanic. on ' 
the italicised s5^mptoni, being the direct opposite of the special Sanic, 
condition, and as it is noted under no other remedy. Opposites as 
well as similars may serve as indications. Gundlach (H, P., xiii. 158) 
reports these cases : (i) Printer, 40, suffering for some weeks from 
results of overwork. Dull pam in forehead over eyes ; feels as if eyes 
being driven back into head ; < in warm, close room ; by application 
of mind ; > in open air. Mind wanders when tr^^ingto apply it. Can- 
not keep at any one thing. No appetite. Bad*" taste, tongue coated 
white, < morning. Dry mouth, no thirst. Fears he will lose his 
reason. Same, lom cured. (2) Mrs. H., 45, constantly chilly mingled* 
with flushes of heat. Chills < moving, even turning in bed ; > by 
external warmth. Chills at irregular times ; spread from below up. 
During chill w'ants to be covered ; during heat wants covers off. Pains 
and aching in limbs, feels sore and bruised, both flesh and bones ; 
can’t put hands to head or behind for pain in shoulders. Head dull, 
heavy. Warmth > pains, but < head. Bad taste ; wants sour 
things ; some thirst with fever ; urine daik, scanty. Sanic. lom cured. 

J. V. Allen {H. P., ix. 380) observed that in the eye cases of Sank, 
there is marked photophobia without much inflammation. The cases 
he cured had these symptoms : Must close eyes continually ; with this 
an awful discharge of thick, yellowish, greenish matter, excoriating 
any part it touches. In one child there was as well greenish nasal 
discharge, excoriating nostrils and lips. Peculiar Sensations are : Head 
as if open and wind went through it. Of cold cloth round brain. Of 
scalp all drawn up to vertex. Coldness in throat. Throat as if too 
large. Back as if in two pieces. Lumbar vertebne as if gliding past 
each other, especially when rocking in a chair. Feeling of distrac- 
tion. There is great fear of the dark ; constant desire to look behind 
her. Dreams of robbers. “ Stool full of jagged particles ” suggests 
the condition known as intestinal sand.” Square stool is also-'pecu- 
liar. The symptoms are < by touch. Child cannot bear to be 
approached. In bed one cannot bear to lie near or touch another. 
Cannot bear to have one part touch another ; sweat where parts (as 
crossed thighs) touch. Part lain on sweats. Must loosen clothing. 
Slight pressure < more than hard. < From strain ; from riding in 
cars. < Descending. < Motion ; raising arms ; putting arms 
behind back ; working. < Misstep, walking, jar. Cough = bursting 
in vertex. > Rest. < Leaning head forward ; > leaning it back. 
Awakes at night with arms under head. On waking child rubs eyes 
and nose with fist. Light and noise <. Eating < ; urging to stool 
whilst eating. Also < before eating (hunger) ; and > after break- 
fast ; and when stomach full. Swallowing <. > Vomiting. < At . 

noon. > In open air. < Warm room (head and skin symptoms 
chiefly). > Warmth ; wraps up head in cold weather. < Becoming 
cool after running (pain in jaw). < From draught of air, especially 
cold air. Cannot bear cold wind on back of head or neck. .< 
Change, especially to damp weather. Periodicity, chills every other 
day. Symptoms of the proving recurred repeatedly during five years. 
Smoking < eructations, > nausea. Pains go right to left ; front to 
back ; and back to front ; shift much. 



SANICULA 


1095 

Ciuernsey considers Same, the chronic o{ 
Cham. Compare : The constituents of the water, especially Nat. m. 
and Calc. Dread of downward motion, Brx. Head sweat, Calc., Sil. 
Soreness behind ears, viscid discharge, Graph., Pso. Ringworm on 
tongue, Nat. m.. Ran. sc., Tarax. Drinks little and often, vomits as 
soon as it reaches stomach, Ars. Symptoms change constantly. Lac c., 
Puls. Sphincter not under control, Alo. Stool recedes, Sil., Thu. ; 
must be removed mechanically, Sel. ; crumbling at anus, Mg. m. 
ddour of stool follows despite bathing, Sul. Excoriation about anus, 
Sul., Lyc., Cham. * Places hand on vulva for support, Lil. t., Murex. 
Offensive foot-sweat, Graph., Pso., Sil. Burning soles, Lach., Med., 

* Sang., Sul., Calc. Kicks off clothing 111 coldest weather, Hep., Sul, 
Skin of neck wrinkled, hangs in folds, Abrot., lod., Nat. m., Sars. 
Vomits Schmierkase ; falls asleep after vomiting, ^thus. Fish- 
brine odour, Calc, (rectum), Graph, (scab of ulcer), Med. (moisture 
from anus), Tell, (ear discharge), (Trimcth.). Stool when eating, Fer., 
Trombid. Cough from laughing or talking, Pho , Arg. n. Sweet 
expectoration, Sang., Stan, < Lifting arms, Bar. c., Con., Cup., Fer., 
Led. Symptoms increase to noon and decrease after. Sang., Spig. 
Dreams of robbers, Nat. m. Cries before urinating, Lyc. Fears 
darkness, Grindel., Stram. Fears touch, Cin., Ant. t., Arn. Seasick- 
ness and train-sickness, Arn., Cocc., Tab. Headache from nape to 
eyes, Sil., Sang. Wraps up head, Mg. m., Sil., Pso. Mental restless- 
ness when reading, Dros. Depression with feeling of impending 
misfortune. Calc. Irritability, Chain., Con. Child rubs nose and eyes 
on waking, Scil. Hair lustreless, Aim., K. ca. Clinkers, K. bi. 

Causation. — Strains. J arring. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Instability of purpose. — Constantly changing his occupation. 
— W^int of energy. — Forgetful. — Dopresbion ; mind wanders from one subject 
to another, even when conversing. — Nervous irritability. — Misconstrues 
actions of others. — Child headstrong and ob.stinate, crying and kicking, esp. 
9 p.m. to 12. — Headstrong crossness quickly alternating with laughter and 
playfulness in children. — Intense depression ; feels no one admires her, every 
one hates her, wants nothing to do with any one, most trifling cares unbear- 
able. — Fear of impending misfortune. — Restless desire to go from place to 
place ; great aversion to darkness. — Constant irresistible desire to look behind 
her. — Feels like cursing (intern)ittent fever). — (Child wants to be in constant 
motion night and day.) — Averse to be touched. — Restless ; no > from 
moving. — Easily upset by slight word or act . —Forgets common details of 
recent occupation. — Dreads work on account of weakness and exhaustion.) 

2 . Head. -Queer, mad, crazy feeling in head.— Vertigo : on rising 
from stooping ; while sitting at table or desk ; after eating ; with nausea, 
must lean liead against something to keep from falling. — Giddy w^hilc knead- 
ing with rush of blood to head and desire for cool air.— rFaint, smothering 

' sensation with great desire for open air. — Seasick sensation after riding on 
horseback in the dark. — Nervous, drunken sensation. — (Blindness and dizzi- 
ness when walking. — Downward motion of elevator =5 feeling of everything 



1096 


SANICULA 


giving way under her, and as if top of head would fly off.) — Dull, heavy 
feeling in head ; rising from nape and extending to forehead and eyes ; on 
waking. — Sensation on waking in morning as having lain on a hard board.— 
Dull frontal headache with sharp, shooting pain from r. side of occiput to r. 
forehead and eye, ending in a sensation that the eye was clutched and pulled 
back for a moment. — Dull frontal headache, < leaning head forward (reading 
or writing), or in warm, close room ; > leaning head back and in cool, open 
air.— Headache changes r. to 1. — Pain in head < from draught of air, esp. if 
cold.— Sensation that the head was open and the wind went through it. — 
Sometimes wraps head up, even in summer, to protect it from wind. — Head- 
ache < lying down ; > riding in open air. — Dull, constant ache in frontal 
bone, < over 1. eye. — Pain shifts from forehead to back of head. — Cold: 
feeling in brain. — Sensation of cold cloth round brain. — (Headache every 
week, lasts two or three days, with nausea and vomiting. — Headache from 
vertex down to occiput. — Pain from upper portion of spine around under 
jaws to throat, with contracted feeling, < r. side and from swallowing. — 
Neuralgic pains about head and face after exposure to warm or cold winds. — 
Pain from back of head to face, at times from as far down as shoulders, < r. 
side. — Headache < from light or noise. — Neuralgic pains over r. eye.) — Scalp 
feels contracted from back and forepart to vertex ; skin of forehead con- 
tracted, frowning, causing desire to raise eyebrows and lean head back ; < 
towards noon, > evening ; < motion, leaning head forward, noise, jar, mis- 
step ; > rest, lying down, sleep. — Occiput sensitive to pressure. — Great 
accumulation of dandriff on top of head, with itching on getting head warm ; 
cannot endure cold wind about back of head or neck. — Child sweats pro- 
fusely about back of head and neck during sleep, wetting pillow all around. — 
Hair thin, scanty, dry, lustreless. — Hair electric, crackling when combed. — 
(Falling out of hair. — Small boils on head that do not mature.) 

3. Eyes. — Sight dim, sometimes sees double, or letters run together. — 
Sensation as though a white cloud passed over eyes, with loss of sight and 
faintness. — Eyes feel weak and sore on waking in morning, light painful at 
first. — Eyes burn, exuding a sticky fluid, which in a few hours dries oh‘the 
margins of the lids, forming white scales. — Burning and smarting of canthi. — 
Lids red and inflamed. — Small reddish ulcers on r. lower lid, which burn after 
removal of the yellow scabs. — Ulceration of margins of lids, also extending 
over half r. upper lid, with photophobia, itching, and burning. — Awakes with 
dryness of whole eye and sensation that eyeball is sticking to lid. — Catarrhal 
ophthalmia, with profuse yellow discharge ; first 1. eye, then r. — Lids aggluti- 
nated in morning. — Eyes sore on motion. — Cornea ulcerated. — Photophobia. 
— Eyes < at night. — Catarrhal conjunctivifis, lids swollen, eyeballs red. — 
(Chronic sore eyes. — Scrofulous ophthalmia. — Eye symptoms > morning, < 
noon, still < as day advances. — Lachrymation in the wind, in cool air, or 
from cool application. — Great swelling oi lids, great effort required to keep 
them open.) 

4. Ears. — Eustachian catarrh. — Stuffed feeling in 1. ear. — (Soreness 
behind ears with discharge of white, gluey, sticky substance.) 

5. Nose. — Nose sore and stuffed with yellow scabs. — Discharge : thin,, 
acrid drops ; thick, yellowish, green, profuse ; thick, honey-like scabs ; white, 
tenacious, stringy ; clots of black blood ; bloody ichor ; copious, yellow ; < 



SANICULA 


1097 


indoors and after eating.— Sneezing and itching of nose.— Soreness, tender- 
ness, or ulceration of alas. — Squeaking from before backward after blowing 
nose. 

6. Face.— Small red pimples, mostly on 1 . cheek.— Constant dull pain 
along superior maxillary bone, extending to 1. temple, > from warmth, < 
from cold. — Dull ache in upper r. jaw on becoming cool after running. — Con- 
stant dull pain on side of face and temple ; drawing of muscles. — Faceache, 
r. side, in upper jaw and teeth, extending to temple, < cold or hot drinks, 
and least wind about head or face. — Acne about eye and cheek. — Excoriation 
of upper lip. — (ProfuJe, scaly dandriff on eyebrows ; and beard. — Large scabs 
on upper lip, constantly picking them till they bleed.) — Itching eruptions in 
beard, esp. under chin ; < when warm. — Vesicular eruption on lips and chin. 

7. Teeth. — Teeth sensitive to cold air, as if they were very thin. — 
Gums sore and painful ; < from eating. — Gumboils. — (Teeth feel too long. — 
Pain in r. dental nerve extending to head and neck ; feels that if she could 
pick the teeth out and cause bleeding they would improve : < at night and 
from lying down ; must get up and walk about ; momentary > clenching 
jaws.) 

8 . Mouth. — On awaking, dark brown streak down centre of tongue, 
which is furred and dry like leather. — Sides of tongue turn up. — Tongue 
adheres to roof of mouth. — ^'fhick yellow coating on back of tongue. — Dis- 
agreeable pappy taste in mouth in morning. — Under surface of tongue a mass 
of painful ulcers. — Bread tastes dry and flat. — Tongue large, flabby. — (Burn- 
ing of tongue, must protrude it to keep it cool. — Ringworm on tongue.) — Roof 
of mouth feels raw ; < from warm or hot drinks, food, &c. — Large, painful 
ulcers on centre of roof of mouth. — Mouth and inside of lips a mass of painful 
ulcers ; child can take no food. — Great dryness of mouth and throat, without 
thirst. — Swelling of sublingual glands, with occasional discharge of a tea- 
spoonful of salt liquid. — Breath offensive. — (White aphthie on lips and in 
mouth, which can be scraped off with finger. — Scurvy with profuse salivation 
in daytime ; < night. — Profuse flow of white, clear, transparent, stringy 
salivTa when cutting teeth ; < when awake and in day ; > when asleep and 
in night. — Burning in mouth ; better from cold w^ater or drawing in cool air. 
— Sore mouth of children, with atrophy, w'hite appearance like curdled milk.) 

9. Throat. — Ulcers with yellowish base on tonsils. — Soreness on both 
sides of uvula, passing up posterior nares, with pains on swallowing. — Throat 
and posterior wall of pharynx of a purple colour. —Grey exudate on posterior 
wall of pharynx. — Coughing out of large clinkers in morning that had clogged 
posterior nares for forty-eight hours ; tough, like boiled cartilage streaked 
with blood. — Fluent catarrh from posterior nares during day, dry at night. — 
Greyish catarrhal secretion, < in morning after eating, must leave table to 
clear throat. — Cold sensation in throajt, as though a piece of ice had been held 
there. — Throat feels too large. — Hoarseness following sore throat ; must clear 
throat before speaking. — Dryness of throat ; > swallowing saliva or water. — 
Dryness and roughness after sleeping in a draught. — Constant desire to 
moisten the parts, but cannot, — Can swallow solid belter than fluid. — (Sensa- 
tion in pharynx and uvula as though he had inhaled peppermint. — Choking 
sensation in throat as from a breadcrumb.) 

10. Appetite, — Great longing for the spring water.— Child wants to 



1098 


SANICULA 


nurse all the time, yet loses flesh. — Child craves meat, fat bacon, &c., which 
<. — Craving for salt. — Loss of desire for bread, unless fresh baked. — Splendid 
appetite ; gets very hungry before mealtime. — No appetite for breakfast. — 
Child frantic when it sees the glass of water ; drinks large quantities greedily. 
— ^(Thirst for small quantity very often, which is vomited almost as soon as it 
reaches stomach. — Loss of appetite, no desire for anything but water.) — Feels 
better after eating. 

11. Stomach. — Bloating of stomach on beginning to eat. — Feels terribly 
stuffed after a meal. — Shortly after nursing food all cpmes up with a gush, 
and child drops into a stupid sleep. — Fulness and bloating of stomach soon 
after eating, esp. supper, or after taking acids ; must loosen clothing. — Cannpt 
taste food for hours after eating. — Food turns sour and rancid, with burning 
desire for water, which > for short time only, then <. — Eructations, sour, 
rancid, burning, < after smoking, of tasteless gas, which gives some relief. — 
Nausea after eating with sick feeling, > from smoking. — Sudden nausea while 
eating, vomits all tlie food taken. — Vomiting >. — Child vomits milk looking 
like “ Schmierkase ” ; falls asleep after vomiting. — Vomiting of large, tough 
curds, like the white of a hard-boiled egg. — Vomiting of milk soon after 
nursing. — Child vomits after drinking cold water. — (Nausea and vomiting 
from riding in cars or close carriage, with desire for open air. — Seasickness.) 
— Nausea and cramp in stomach on awaking at night or m morning, or after 
rising in morning, like morning sickness ; > after breakfast. — Bloating of 
stomach on beginning to eat. — Sensation of a lump in stomach. — (Soreness 
through stomach, sensitive to pressure and jar, cannot laugh without holding 
lus stomach and bowels, < when stomach is empty.) 

12. Abdomen. — Cnirgling in 1 . hypochondrium, passing down descend- 
ing colon ; < before meals. — Sore, sensitive pain beginning at 1 . of umbilicus, 
going around to spine in three days ; < from touch ; at point where pain 
ceased, appearance of a vesicular eruption which gradually worked back to 
umbilicus, with burning and stinging. — Soreness through hepatic region. — 
Enlargement of liver, sensitive to pressure and jar. — Rumbling in I si/le of 
abdomen at 9 p.m. — Gurgling like distant thunder along course of large 
intestine. — Bowels bloated as if they would burst. — Sore pains in groins 
beneath Poupart’s ligaments, after walking.— (Rumbling in bowels before 
meals ; > after eating. — Pot-bellied children, abdomen is the largest part of 
them.) 

13. Stool and Anus. — No desire for stool for three or four days, — 
After intense straining the stool, which was nearly evacuated, recedes. — Even 
soft stool requires great effort to expel. — Lsfc'ge evacuation of small, dry, grey 
balls; must be removed by fingers lest it rupture the sphincter. — Great 
pain in perinaeum while at stool as though it would burst ; whole perinaeum 
sore and burning for some hours after stool. -Slim, yellow stool at least ten 
inches long, not requiring much effort.— Stool feels full of jagged particles, 
very painful, lacerating anus and causing soreness and bleeding. — Stools 
small and infrequent, first part hard and dry, latter part soft. — Constipation 
with ineffectual urging. — Impossible to evacuate the stool, which is of greyish- 
white balls, like burnt lime, hard and crumbling, with odour of rotten cheese ; 
it must be removed mechanically. — Yellow, soft, wedge-shaped stool, like an 
almond nut, without power to expel.— Stool of large lumps of undigestible 



SANICULA 


1099 


caseiiie, ragged or shaggy, smelling like rotten or limburgcr cheese. — Stool 
resembling scrambled eggs.— Thin portion of stool frothy and of a grass-green 
colour ; whole mass turns green after standing. — Stools green, frothy, watery, 
like the scum of a frog pond. — (Child's stools changeable ; watery, yellow, 
green.) — At 9.30 p.m. copious diarrhcea with urging and haste ; stool yellow 
and fetid as after eating onions. — Soft, sticky, mushy stool twice each day. — 
Stools as often as food is taken, must hurry from table after each meal. — 
Cramping pain in colon and rectum.— Urging from flatus, must cross legs to 
prevent stool from escaping. — (Persistent odour somewhat resembling that of 
decaying cheese about the child, not removed by bathing ; diarrhoea. — Pain 
before stool, some > after it. — Pain during stool. — “Not done" sensation 
after stools. — Stool becomes pale on standing.) — Stool square, as if carved 
with a knife. — (Excoriation of skin about anus, extending out on each side of 
nates, genital organs, and groins ; skin very raw, like beef, with watery dis- 
chaige. — No control over sphincter, often soils himself while standing, 
running, at pla}’, or even at night. — Stool escapes when passing flatus.) 

14. Urinary Organs. — Frequent desire for urination with profuse 
discharge, comes suddenly with sensation that urine was at meatus. — Great 
effort necessary to retain urine, at times impossible, yet if the desire is 
resisted the urging ceases. — Cramp-like pain along course of 1. ureter, when 
trying to retain urine, compelling him to stand, although he cannot stand 
erect on account of the pains. — Sensation that a hard body like a lead pencil 
were being forced upward and backward from bladder to kidney ; it 
gradually passes away some liftecn minutes after urination. — Voids large 
quantities of pale urine of low specific gravity. — Urgent calls to urinate as if 
bladder would burst. — Child strains to urinate while at stool. — Urine of child 
scanty, voided at long intervals. — Child cries before urinating. — Urine stains 
diaper red. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Increased sexual desire at first, then much 
decreased. — Discharge of semen too early with little sensation. — A few hours 
after intercourse an odour of fish brine about the glans, sometimes lasting a 
day or two. — Child's parts smell of fish brine even after bathing. — Scrotum 
relaxed, clammy sweat about parts. — (Fig- wart on glans penis, sycosis, with 
discharge from its surface smelling like fish brine. — Copper-coloured, 
syphilitic sores.) 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — A few hours after intercourse appear- 
ance of a slight watery discharge from vagina with odour of fish brine, lasting 
about twenty-four hours ; not removed by bathing. — Leucorrhcea with strong 
odour of fish brine. — Menses •♦irregular. — Menses always late, come on with 
grinding or dilating pain in low'er abdomen, with soreness of womb ; pain in 
back > when flow established ; tumour size of hen’s egg, 1. side of w'omb 
just above cervix, come on since tlic passing. — Menstrual blood first pale red 
thin, and watery, then dark and clotted. — Cramp-like pains like “ after-pains ' 
in uterine region before menses, ceasing after flow. — Pain just above sacrum 
< before the flow and from motion ; > from rest. — Weakness in lower part 
of abdomen with bearing down as if contents would escape ; < from walk- 
ing, motion, misstep, or jar ; > from rest and lying down. — Womb sensitive 
to jar. — Desire to support the relaxed parts by placing the hand against 
vulva. — (Shoots : from 1 . side of pelvis across pelvic region, also to under 1 . 



IIOO 


SANICULA 


breast.)— Soreness of womb,-— Menses suppressed with morning sickness.— 
Vagina feels large. — Cannot stop menstruation. — (Leucorrhoea profuse 
changeable in colour ; milky, yellow, &c., < during stool.) — During preg- 
nancy : swelling of lower limbs at third month, < evening ; swelling and 
stiffness of hands and feet, particularly of 1. side during pregnancy ; feet pit 
on pressure ; sad, tearful disposition ; after standing, sensation that the os 
uteri is opening or dilating, with drawing at inside of thighs. — Os uteri 
dilated to size of half dollar three weeks before labour. — Child’s head hard 
and compact when born, with no sign of suture or posterior fontanelle. — Milk 
thin, watery, acid reaction. * 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Larynx sensitive to pressure, esp. 1. side, 
with dry, tickling cough, — Stuffed feeling on awaking in morning ; unable to* 
speak for a time. — Hoarseness. — (Complete aphonia, must speak in a whisper 
— Raw feeling in trachea, < after expectoration of large clumps of mucus. — 
Sensation in trachea on swallowing as though a hard substance were present, 
like a stone.) — Cough : deep, hollow cough, with loud rattling, caused by 
tickling under sternum. — Tickling on lying down at night and on awaking. — 
Irritation to cough felt worst at r. of middle chest. — Rattling cough, child 
gags and vomits a mouthful of tough, stringy matter. — Cough from laughing 
or talking ; < in warm room ; in morning ; > in open air. — Cough s= 
bursting feeling in vertex. — Expectoration : yellow ; sw’eet ; of large cheesy 
masses that sink in water ; profuse in morning and after meals ; of shaggy 
lumps ; loose and lasting all day. 

18. Chest. — Asthmatic breathing, < after supper. — Wheezing, rattling 
under sternum, < during or after eating. — Tickling under sternum. — Great 
soreness of upper chest, when coughing must hold it with hands. — (Burning 
from throat to lungs.) — Sudden attack of a terrible sensation of a burden on 
chest ; for a few moments it seems as if she would burst, gradually followed 
by an intense depression of spirits. — Eruption on chest over the ensiform 
appendix, size of a shilling, with intense itching. 

20. Neck and Back. — Small, painful boil on 1. side of back of neck, 
not inclined to suppurate. — Neck so weak and emaciated that child cannot 
hold its head up. — Muscles of back of neck seem too short ; weakness and 
all-gone sensation in small of back. — Skin about neck wrinkles and hangs in 
folds. — Dull, aching pains between scapula? on awaking in morning, as if he 
had lain in a cramped position all night. — Deep-seated pain in muscles of 
spine, esp. toward 1. side. — Soreness and stiffness in back, which is not 
affected by breathing ; > from motion. — Rheumatic pains in shoulders, esp 
1., the only > is from heat, patient sits wi^h back to fire. — Pain < from 
moving shoulders or lifting arms up ; cannot place arms on head or behind 
body. — Sharp pain from least turning ; must hold himself stiff and turn whole 
body in order to look around. — Inclines hjpad forward to ease pain in muscles 
at back of neck. — Sharp pain at inner angle of 1. scapula on putting head 
back. — L. scapular region very sore. — Weak, tired, broken sensation in lumbar 
region, coming on just after rising in morning, and gradually increasing till 
noon, then decreasing till its disappearance, about 6 or 7 p.m.— Sensation in 
lower lumbar region that the vertebrae were gliding past each other, felt esp. 
when rocking in a chair. — dislocated sensation in last lumbar vertebra. — 
Backache, with burning sensation across lumbar and sacral regions ; > from 



SANICULA 


I lOI 


gentle exercise or lying flat on back *, < when sitting. — ^Region oi coccyx 
sorC) as U excoriated. — Coldness along spine ; < on going into cool air or 
when sitting still ; > from external warmth and motion. — Back very painful 
at noon. — Sensation that the back is in two pieces. — Back becomes tired and 
weak from walking over snow.— After a strain, lameness and stiffness of back 
in morning ; > after moving about. — Catch in back on reaching or straining. 
— ^Gooseflesh on back. — Small boils on back that do not mature. 

21 . Limbs. — Restlessness with pains in joints. — Stiffness and pain in 
limbs when rising in morning ; < on first beginning to move. — (Numb feeling 
jn limbs). — Cold, clairjmy sweat on limbs. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Constant pain in r. shoulder-joint ; < from motion. 
r-Constant dull pain in r. arm and shoulder, with a sense of coldness from 
elbow up. — Sore, bruised feeling on outer side of 1 . forearm and hand ; < by 
slight pressure more than by hard. — Drawing pain on outside of upper arm to 
elbow on lifting arm ; < on rising in morning and from a change to damp 
weather. — Cannot raise arm or put it behind him on account of sharp pains.— 
Large oval spot on ulnar side of 1. atm, of dusky colour, attended with itching; 
it turns red after scratching. — Gooseflesh on arms. — Boils on wrist that do not 
mature, hard and painful, but not very red ; pain extends to axilla. — Profuse 
sweat in axilla. — Excoriation in axilla. — Hands sw^ollen and stiff on awaking 
in morning. — Cracks on hands exuding blood and watery fluid and forming 
crusts. — Eruption on hands of small vesicles exuding a watery, sticky fluid. — 
Itching eruption on hands. — Eczematous eruption appearing on outside of 
first joint of thumb on 1. hand, spreading by new pustules over ball of thumb, 
back of hand and wrist, also to back of r. hand. — Burning, smarting soreness, 
with deep, angry, ragged cracks of hands ; < cold weather. — Hands as cold 
as though handling ice. — Burning of palms. — On putting hands together they 
sweat until it drops troiii them. — Knuckles of fingers crack and leak. — (Hang- 
nails.) 

23. Lower Limbs. — Rheumatic pains in 1 . hip-joint ; < from motion 
and cold, yet not > by rest, — Reddish pimples on inside of thighs with itch- 
ing,, particularly the 1 . ; < on undressing at night. — Sore, bruised sensation m 
front of r. thigh, < from light pressure. — Tingling .sensation in one or the 
other lower limb, like an electric current, ending with a twitch, < on first 
going to bed. — Sore pain whole length of lower limbs ; esp. in upper portion. 
— Tired, dull, heavy feeling in lower limbs, with inclination to change posi- 
tion, no position is comfortable. — Child's legs emaciated. — Child cannot walk 
or stand alone at sixteen months of age. — After walking pain begins under 
Poupart’s ligament on r. side, extends along course of anterior crural nerve to 
the inside of joint, then to froift, causing limping ; > from rest. — Bruised 
pain in 1 . ischium. — Rheumatic pains in knee-joints. — Sharp pains in 1 . knee- 
joint come on suddenly, causing him to cry out. — Tiredness of knees, — Sore, 
bruised feeling on inside of both kndcs ; < from light pressure.— Severe pain 
in hollow of r. foot ; foot swollen, causing restless wakefulness. — Sore, 
sprained feeling in 1 . foot ; < from bending. — Burning of feet, esp. soles, 
wants to put them in cool place, in water, or uncover them. — Cold, clammy 
feet, — Cramp in feet in bed at night, they are so cold. — Sweat on soles as 
though he had stepped in cold water. — Stockings feel sticky. — Sweat between 
toes, making them sore, with foul odour. 



1 102 


SANICULA—SANTALUM 


24. Generalities. — Dread of usual work on account of weakness and 
exhaustion, with irresistible desire to lie down.— Restlessness ; hard to remain 
long in one position ; > from motion. — No rest day or night ; always < from 
9 p.m. till after midnight. — Child kicks off clothing even in coldest weather. — 
Wants to lie on something hard. — Great soreness. — Stiffness and lameness of 
parts.— (Child looks old, dirty, greasy, and brownish.)— Progressive emacia- 
tion. 

25. Skin. — Skin dry and flabby. — Itching < by scratching. — Pimples on 
face. — Boils on wrist. — Eczema exuding sticky fluid : behind ears ; on wrists ; 
lingers, toes. — Cracks on fingers.— Skin covered with fine rash all over. — Body 
attended with severe itching at night. — (Copper-colourecf syphilitic sores). 

26. Sleep. — Awakes at night with arms under head. — Frequent waking 
at night. — Restless, uneasy sleep; awakens at 3.30 a.m. — Awakes soon after* 
going to sleep with a start and twitch. — Child is restless during sleep and 
awakes cross and crying. — She awakens her companion to search for a tramp 
in her room, gets up and looks under the bed for him. — On waking child rubs 
eyes and nose with its fist. — Cannot bear any one to lie close to or touch him. 
— Lascivious dreams. — Dreams of robbers and cannot sleep till the whole 
house is searched. — Dreams of murder and remorse. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness all day ; < in warm room. — The cold air chills 
him. — Sensation that chills arc coming on. — Chill every day at same time. — 
Chill begins in lower extremities. — Chill every night lasting an hour, begin- 
ning between shoulder. s, thence extending to arms, finger. s, and whole body : 
(intermittent, three weeks after labour.) — Thirst during chill, none during 
heat or sweat. — (Chill at 8.30 a.m. — Chill at 5 p.m. — Chill postponing two 
hours. — Chill every other day ; fever lasting all night. — Drinks before chill.) 
— Whole body feels too hot at night. — Sweat most where limbs cross each 
other or touch the bed. — Begins to sweat as soon as covered. — Sweats on first 
falling asleep, mostly about neck, wetting clothing through. — Cold, clammy 
sweat on occiput and neck, those parts feel like a wet stone.— Sweat from 
above downward over w'hole body. — High fever every night w^ith sleepless- 
ness. — Whole body feels too hot at night. — (Wants to move to a cool part of 
bed.) — Sweats on side lain on. — Hungry during sweat ; water tastes bitter. 


Santalum. 

Santalum album (India) ; and S. Freycin/^tianiun and S. paniculatum 
(Sandwich Islands). Sandal Wood. A^ 0 , Santalaceae. The 
oil distilled from the wood. Dilutions with alcohol. 

Cliilical.“-GonoiThoea. Kidiiey-aehe. ’ 

Charactaristics. — The word Santalum is of Persian origin. 
Sandal-wood oil is obtained from several species of Santalum^ S. album 
being the chief. Its chief use in old-school practice is in gonorrhoea. 
Shirtliff {H, W,, xxxi. 456) observed in a man taking the oil for gonor- 
rhoea, soon after each dose, an acute aching pain felt in the kidney 



SANTONINUM no? 

region, so severe that if he was standing he was obliged to sit, which 
gave some >. On this hint Shirtliff gave it in this case : An elderly 
man, looking worn and haggard, complained of pain in region of left 
kidney from ribs to crista ilii, brought on by walking, > leaning for* 
ward, completely > by lying down. > Pressing clenched fist into 
back. The pain had lasted six months, and was very acute when on. 
S/i/., Bcrb.^ and Bry. gave no relief. Santal. (oil), one drop every four 
hours, soon gave great relief, and entirely removed the pain in two 
months. 


Santoninum. 

Santonine. A neutral active principle obtained from Cina (so-called 
“Semen Cinai^’). C15H18O3. (Colourless, lustrous, right 
rhombic prisms, odourless, and of a bitter taste. Become 
yellow by exposure to sunlight. Almost insoluble in cold, 
somewhat soluble in boiling water ; fairly soluble in chloro- 
form, boiling rectified spirit, and in strong acetic acid, volatile 
oils, warm olive oil.) Trituration. 

Clinical.— ft/ vo/)/ <7 Cataract. Convulsion^. Cou^h. Cystitis, cliionic. 
Diarrhtea. Dysiiria. Eycr>, paralysis of. Enteralgia. Enteritis. Enuresis. Epi- 
lepsy. Epislaxis. Gastro-enteritis. Giant urticaria. Hi'emoglobinurui. Hemi- 
plegia (1.). Intantilc remittents. Strangury. Tetanus. Urination, frequent. 
Urticaria, Vision, yellow. Vomiting Worms. 

Characteristics. — Santonin, is the favourite anthelmintic of the 
old school, and it is chiefiy against lumbrici that it has been given. 
From 2 to 5 grains are the ordinary doses, but these have caused 
severe and, in one or two in.stances, fatal poisoning — convulsions, left- 
side paralysis, delirium, vomiting, and purging have resulted. A case 
recorded by Demme was quoted in Bnt. Med. 7 ^.. March 26, 1892 : A 
boy^ 3, was given by his mother during three days fifteen tablets, each 
containing gr. of Santonin. 'The symptoms produced were : Vomit- 
ing, dilatation of llic pupils, collapse, cyanosis, dyspncea, and finally 
convulsions. After a warm bath with cold affusions to head and 
spine, consciousness returned. The temperature was i03'5"’, epistaxis 
and hainioglobinuna occurred, and a scarlatiiia-like eruption was 
noticed. The child ultimately recovered. After a dose of 7 centi- 
grammes, a child, 2, was seized with prostation, convulsions, cramps, 
and icterus, followed on the third day by salivation and ulceration 
of the gum {Bull. Thcr. Jaii. 30, 1872). Less serious but very 
characteristic are the effects 011 the senses, especially the sense of 
sight. Visions of figures have been produced, and coloured vision is a 
frequent phenomenon, even when the lower triturations have been 
used. Yellow is the predominant colour, but green and violet vision 
are also marked. The urine also is yellow coloured and stains yellow, 
and is passed with much urging and painful burning. A kind of 
giant urticaria occurred in one case. Hale records that Sant, has 
cured cases of “ neiwous blindness.*’ It was given to an old man, 



1104 


SANTONINUM 


quite blind, for worms, and his sight partially returned. This led to 
further trials. It was given in nine cases of cataract, and, according 
to Hale, four were cured, the rest not benefited. Hale mentions 
enuresis, strangury, chronic cystitis, as having been cured by it. It 
has made some “ brilliant cures of chronic catarrh of the bladder. 
Infantile remittents, with or without worms, have been cured by it. 
In one prover there was sensitiveness of the abdomen,” which may 
be a keynote. 

ReiationB. — Compare : Cina. Coloured vision, Cycl. Amaurosis, 
Benz, dinit., Carb. sul. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Delirium. — Excited, laughs and sings. — Hysterical. — Rest- 
less, irritable ; wants everything, satisfied with nothing. — Profound and 
unusual depression, with irresolution and want of confidence, unfitting him 
for work of any kind ; melancholia like that produced by jaundice. — Coma. 

2 . Head. — Vertigo. — Giddiness and intense headaches, every object 
looks bright green. — Head turning and twisting, restless. — Dulness of head. 
— Pain in forehead. 

3. Eyes. — Blue rings round eyes. — Eyes : rolled convulsively ; dis- 
torted ; staring. — Pressure in supra-oi bital region. — Pressure in eyes. — Pupils 
enormously dilated ; and insensible. — Photophobia and lachrymation. — 
Flickering before eyes. — Objects seem to totter and dance ; visions of figures, 
cherries, animals, &c. — Coloured vision : yellow soup looks red ; blue evening 
.sky looks green; objects look green; white looks yellows objects as if in 
yellow haze or yellow light ; violet. 

5. Nose. — Hallucinations of smell. — Things smell peculiar. — Epistaxis. 

6. Face. — Convulsive movements of muscles of face, esp. lips and lids. 
— Face pinched, drawing in of lips over teeth wuth pinched expression of 
mouth and nose. — Red, hot face, staring eyes. — Face pale. — Pale round mouth, 
< afternoon. — One cheek white, the other ( 1 .) red (remains red several days). 
— Swelling beginning under chin, spreads each way, esp. towards 1 . parotid 
gland. — Lips swollen to enormous size, glistening with the distension. 

7. Teeth.— Grating teeth during sleep. — Teeth clenched. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue : deep red ; dry. — Frothing from raoutli. — Burn- 
ing pains apparently torment her, as she forces everything into her mouth. — 
Hallucinations of taste. 

g. Throat. — The glands of neck, parotid and submaxillary, commenced 
swelling in about five days, and continued to''mcreasc till the throat was so 
filled as nearly to prevent swallowing (fatal effect of gr. vi. in a child of 
three). 

11. Stomach. — Deficient appetite.— Thirst : intense; continual for ice- 
cold water, which she swallowed greedily. — Frequent eructations. — Nausea ; 
and vomiting. — Vomiting : and purging with severe abdominal pains ; 
yellowish, slimy mucus from ii p.m. till next forenoon. — One night, after 
eating a teaspoonful of nourishment, he choked and threw up a teacupful of 
blood and pus and died without a struggle. — Dull pain in pit of stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Abdomen : bruised but soft ; hot, full ; rumbling in ; 



SAPONINUM 


T105 


very sensitive. Severe abdominal pains with vomiting an d purging. — Every 

night pain in bowels before stool. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Well-marked tenesmus. — Purging of watery, 
flaky, foul-smelling stools, followed by vomiting in a few hours. — Stools 
copious, greyish, putrid-smelling. 

14. Urinary Organs. — F'requent efforts to urinate ; only passes a few 
drops at a time. — Micturition painful from burning in urethra, constant desire, 
evacuation of only a few drops that colour linen yellow.— Urine : deep saffron 
yellow ; thick, sulphur yellow ; greenish. — Hacmoglobinuria. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Coughed incessantly all night from tickling 
in larynx and trachea. — Breath : rapid, sighing ; quick and catchy; rattling. 

. 18. Chest. — Paralysis of lungs; artificial respiration had to be re- 
sorted to. 

19. Heart. — Pulse : quick and full ; rapid ; lowered ; 1 . absent, r. soft 
and steady. 

21. Limbs. — Spasms of limbs. — ^Twitching of hands and feet. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Convulsive jerking of upper limbs. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Gait unsteady and tottering ; staggered. 

24. Generalities. — Most violent convulsions, unconscious, head hot, 
face flushed, purplish. — Spasm begins in face and spreads to extremities.— 
Partial paralysis of one ( 1 .) side. — Great restlessness ; prostration. 

25. Skin. — Urticaria ; with oedema of nose, lips, and eyelids ; over almost 
entire lids, with vomiting. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepy, tired. — Sleep restless. — Sleep disturbed, woke unre- 
freshed with sickness, frontal headache, and deficient appetite. 

27. Fever. — Whole body icy cold ; lips and ears blue, face white as 
snow, — Limbs cold, very clammy coldness crept upward in spite of wraps. — 
Violent fever, very rapid pulse, burning heat of skin, face puffy, eyes brilliant, 
fixed. — Heat about head, < every afternoon and evening. — Cold sweats. — 
Hot sweat in occiput, more clammy in front. 


Saponinum. 

Saponin. (A glucoside obtained from Saponaria officinalis. Gypso- 
phila, Struthium, Senega, Quillaja, &c.) C32H5^0i8. Tritura- 
tion. Solution. (Watery solutions speedily decompose.) 

ClinioaL — Boils. Constipatioif. Diarrhoea. Dysincnia. Enuresis, when 
walking. Exophthalmos. Fever. Headache. Leucoirhoea. Rheumatism. Sleep- 
lessness. Spleen, pains in. Strabismus. Temperature lowered. Tongue, straw- 
berry. t 

Characteristics. — Saponin, has had a somewhat extensive proving 
(in potencies ranging from i x to 30th), conducted by A. J. Hills. 
One prover, who took the 30th, for many years a sufferer from 
articular rheumatism, had none of his usual pains during the proving, 
and a great enlargement of the left knee was entirely removed. Two 
female provers had marked disturbance of the menstrual functions, 
VOL n. 7* 



1 io6 


SAPONINUM 


especially pain and sufferings before the flow. A miliary eruption, 
and colic and leucorrhoea before the menses, pain better but not 
removed when the flow was established. Severe sore throat, < right 
side, was experienced by several provers, and Hills had so much 
swelling of the tonsils that he was obliged to abandon the proving. 
Nausea and vomiting, colic and diarrhoea, were among the symptoms, 
and a particular one was nausea more in oesophagus and throat, < 
in a warm room.^^ This < by warmth was met with in relation to 
many symptoms, and is probably a keynote. At the same time there 
w'as much chilliness, and lowered temperature is a characteristiq 
feature. One of the provers who took the 12th had had his tem- 
perature reduced to 96° on the second day. Allen (Appendix) records 
an experiment which bears on this : 0*1 gramme of Saponin, was 
injected into the left thigh of a man. The immediate effect was to 
produce intense local inflammation resembling erysipelas, but much 
more painful ; the pain extended to knee and hip, and the glands of 
the groin swelled. For the first three hours there was rapid increase 
of temperature, which fell to normal in twenty-four hours. The next 
two days there was a little fever, evidently kept up by the local irrita- 
tion, but by the fifth day the temperature had fallen to 93° and the 
pulse to 65, (The intense local irritation bears on the skin symptoms 
of the proving, large numbers of boils being produced.) The other 
symptoms of this experiment were marked bodily and mental depres- 
sion ; and exophthalmos and strabismus of the left eye (the side 
injected). Among the Peculiar Symptoms of Sap, are : Involuntary 
emission of urine when walking. Roughness of mucous membrane 
of mouth, with raised papillae on palate and tongue. Strawberry 
tongue. The symptoms were markedly < by moving ; even motion 
of the eyes < mental labour. < By warmth. > By cold ; by cold 
bathing ; while sitting. < Swallowing. Desire to vomit and defecate, 
< when quiet. > By stool ; by onset of menses. 

Relations. — Compare : Tough mucus, K. bi. > Onset of menses, 
Lach. Spleen pain, Cean. Kidney pain, Santal. < By movement ; 
moving eyes, Bry. Sleepy but cannot sleep. Bell. Early waking, 
Bels., Nux. < In warm room. Puls. As if damp stockings on. Calc., 
Sanic. Strawberry tongue, Frag., Bac. Involuntary emission of 
urine when walking, Fer., Caust. Compare also, Seneg, 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Marked bodily and mental depression. — Irritable ; cross ; 
wants to be let alone. — Disinclined to study. — Inability to fix mind ; to recall 
names. 

2 . Head. — Dizziness and nausea en stooping. — Dizziness followed the 
vomiting. — Dull, heavy headache, with depression ; < 4-6 p.m. — After 
moving about in morning, dull, heavy sensation in head, mostly forehead, 
esp. over 1. orbit, < stooping ; eyeball sore and aches ; later pain spreads to 
occiput ; heat in forehead > pressure and cold, much < bending over. — 
Headache < by least mental labour or motion. — Severe pain in head, with 
throbbing carotids; < 1 . side. — Head exceedingly irritable, cannot turn it or 



SAPONINUM 1107 

even move eyes without causing nausea. — Headache in temples; sensation as 
if both temples were pressed out. — Sharp pain in 1. temple. 

3. Eyes. — Could not turn eyes up or around they felt so sore ; moving 
them = pain to dart back to occiput. — Sensation of fulness in eyes, evening. 
— Conjunctiva yellow and a little congested. — ^Vision dull. — Pain, exoph- 
thalmos and strabismus of 1. eye (from a subcutaneous injection into 1. thigh). 

5. Nose. — Dry coryza and frequent sneezing.— R. nostril plugged in 
morning, with headache. — Dull pain at root of nose and in temples. — Nose 
cold and pale. 

6. Face. — Miliary eruption on face, neck, and head before menses. — 
Face pale.— Lips dry and burning. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue coated yellowish white on back ; red on tip and 
edges; raised papillae (strawberry tongue), esp. on tip. — Tongue brown in 
centre, deep yellow on edges. — Hard palate rough. — Salivation. — Taste : 
sweet, sickish ; flat ; acrid. 

9. Throat. — Tough, tenacious mucus on posterior narcs, extending to 
larynx. — Throat sore, < r. side, feeling of constriction, hardly able to swallow. 
— Throat : smarting, scraping, raw, rough. — Irritation as from dust. — Tonsils 
much swollen, bright red. 

11. Stomach. — No appetite. — Loathing of food for two days till nausea 
set in. — Thirst not > by drinking. — Nausea, retching, vomiting of greenish- 
yellow fluid ; with agonising pain in both temples, which disappeared as 
desire to vomit was >. — On returning home one cold night from place of 
amusement nausea in oesophagus and throat as soon as she got comfortably 
warm ; as nausea increased cold feeling began at tips of fingers and toes and 
slowly spread to abdomen, where they met, giving an elcctric-like shock ; 
then followed griping pain and diarrhoea and vomiting. — Sinking at pit of 
stomach without appetite ; with fulness and heat in forehead. 

12. Abdomen. — Dull pain in 1. hypochondrium, changing to epigas- 
trium, very severe, then shooting up under 1. scapula, < motion, > sitting. — 
Painful stitches in 1. hypochondrium. — Dull pain in umbilical region after 
each stool. — Colic 3 a.m, on waking. — For twenty-four hours preceding 
menses, colic, cramps, and profuse watery leucorrhcea, > when menses 
established. — Sudden colic, > immediately by stool. — Pain in 1. inguinal 
region. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Intense itching in rectum, afternoon and night. 

— Burning in rectum. — Smarting in anus, with constipation.— Constant 
urging, stool insufficient, rather white. — Desire for stool in evening as well as 
morning. — Diarrhoea with tenesmys. — Stool : profuse diarrhoeic, painless but 
urgent ; with colic ; first hard, then liquid, becomes involuntary ; brownish, 
slimy ; desire to defecate or vomit as soon as there is a little ease, both < by 
warmth. • 

14. Urinary Organs. — Kidneys torpid ; sharp pain in region of r. 
kidney. — Burning during micturition. — Waked early to pass water, which 
left brickdust sediment. — Involuntary emission of water on walking. — Urine 
more profuse and high-coloured. 

• 16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses delayed and diminished. — 
Menses : a week early ; profuse, < on motion ; blood dark red ; paralysed 
bearing down all through period (unusual) ; before menses, shuddering all 



I io8 


SAPONINUM 


over body, intolerable aching in back and lower limbs ; wants to be let alone. 
— Colic with menses. — For twenty-four hours preceding menses, colic, cramps, 
and profuse watery leucorrhoea ; when menses established pain was less, but 
persisted through the four days of the period, leaving her weak and depressed. 
— Fine miliary eruption on face, neck, and head before menses. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — At 4 p.m. peculiar cough, which is excited 
at every forced inspiration through nose, only one cough at a time. 

18. Chest. — Formication deep in tissue of lung. — Repeated sharp stab- 
bing in r. lung ; middle lobe ; dull aching in 1. lung.-^Dull pains through 
thorax. — At time of chill constriction in 1. chest. * 

19. Heart. — Dull pain in region of heart. — Pulse : accelerated ; weak, 
hardly perceptible. 

20. Back. — Back and limbs tired walking, boots feel extremely heavy. — 
Dull throbbing in 1. scapula, running up. — Severe dull pain in small of back, 
and sense of weight as if all clothes hanging from back ; this sense of support- 
ing a heavy weight extended to hips and knees, < from jar of riding in horse 
cars. — Dull aching in lumbo-sacral region, extending down thighs, with 
increased tingling in soles. — Lancinating pains in loins, < walking. 

21. Limbs. — Exhausted, weary feeling in limbs, with slight inclination 
to nausea, — Weakness in hands and feet. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Sudden pain in 1. arm, apparently muscular, in 
region of insertion of deltoid ; arms weak, muscles exhausted, as after lifting 
heavy weights. — Pain m bones of 1. forearm. — Numbness and tingling in 1. 
third and little fingers (ulnar nerve). 

23. Lower Limbs. — Dull aching in lower limbs ; and 1. loin ; muscular 
pains.— Dull pain in 1. lower limb.— Aching in calves.— Soles sore, swollen, 
tender, numb, and tingling. 

24. Generalities. — Restlessness. — Muscular weakness. — Exhaustion. — 
Faintness : and prostration ; with the chill. 

25. Skin. — Miliary eruption before menses. — Angry-looking pustules on 
chest.— Boils, single or in crops.— Itching and crawling tingling in various 
parts. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepy. — Sleepy but cannot sleep. — Cannot sleep well after 
4 or 5 a.m.— Waking early, 5.30 a.m. (a very unusual symptom with the 
prover),— Sleep disturbed by dreams ; dreamed of urinating. 

27. Fever. — Slight chill accompanied by faintness. — Severe chill over 
back on going into warm room,— As nausea increased an icy feeling crept up 
extremities, commencing at very tip of fingers and toes, gradual in ascent and 
descent, when the two currents met in abdomen it was as if electricity had 
been applied to them, giving a shock which almost made me jump.— During 
day great coldness of limbs, hands and feet feel as if damp stockings on.— 
Temperature lowered. — Temperature fose steadily for three hours (after sub- 
cutaneous injection of o’l grm. into inner 1. thigh), then gradually fell to 
normal, which it reached in twenty-four hours ; for the next two days there ' 
was some fever, but on .the fifth day the temperature was far below the 
normal, reaching the collapse point of 93® ; the pulse, which was somewhat 
elevated at first, fell to 65 on the fifth day.— Feverish and weak.— Head hot, 
skin dry. — A sensation of spreading heat, commencing in chest and spreading 
both ways, esp. to head. 



SARRACENIA 


1 109 


Sarracenia. 

Sarracenia purpurea. Pitcher Plant. (Grows in boggy places from 
Canada southwards.) N, O. Sarraceniaceae. Tincture of fresh 
plant. Tincture of root. 

Glinioah—Back, pains in. Bones, pains in. Borborygmus. Constipation. 
Coxalgia. Diarrhcesr. Eruptions, scrofulous. Femur, pains in. Herpes. In- 
fluen/,a. Lumbago. Pt^oriasis. Small-pox. Vision, disordered. 

Characteristios. — The use of the Pitcher Plant in small-pox is a 
discovery of the Indians of North America, the spotted appearance 
of the plant probably suggesting a resemblance to the disease. 
Hale has collected much conlirmatory evidence of its power to 
antidote the small-pox poison. A proving by T. C. Duncan, 
Thomas, and others brought out symptoms of fever, backache, 
headache, and gastric disturbance. Hering quotes these instances 
of its action : (1) A woman far advanced in pregnancy was cured 
of small -pox with Sarn 3, 6, and 9, delivery being happily accom- 
plished during her convalescence, the infant bearing on its body 
numerous red blotches, indicating that it had been affected 
with the disease. (2) An infant a few months old was attacked 
with a grave form of small-pox, with variolous angina so severe 
that it was with difficulty it could take the breast ; the mother took 
Sam 3, 6, and 9, and continued to nurse the infant, which promptly 
recovered, the mother not taking the disease. (3) In an epidemic 
occurring in the environs of Wavre, Sam was given to two thousand 
persons living in the very middle of the disease and coming in con- 
stant intercourse with it, but all who took Sam escaped ; during the 
same epidemic two hundred cases were treated with Sam without a 
death. Bilden, who used the i x tincture in an epidemic with success, 
concludes that Sam is to small-pox what Gels, is to bilious fever. 
Hale quotes Surgeon-Major C. G. Logie’s (allopath) account of his 
experience with Sarr. (decoction probaby) in small-pox : ** Four of 
the cases in my hospital have been severe continent cases. They 
have throughout the disease all been perfectly sensible, have had 
excellent appetites, been free from pain, and have never felt weak. 
The effects of this medicine, which I have carefully watched, seemed 
to arrest the development of the pustules, killing, as it were, the virus 
from within, thereby changing the character of the disease and doing 
away with pitting.’’ A number of eye symptoms appeared in the 
provings, and Sam has cured disordered vision. A case of “ phlyc- 
tenoid herpes ” has also been reported cured by it. Extreme lassitude 
and pains in. the bones were prominent in the provings. The right 
side was more affected than the left. Sensations were : Light feeling 
in head. As if he received a knock on the head. As if head were 
split. Left eye as if congested. Heat in face as if on fire. Swelling 
in womb as it from a tumour or dropsy. Uterus swollen as if full of 
cysts. As if bones of leg were too thick. Sam has the empty, 
hungry, sinking sensation of the antipsorics. Dryness of mouth and 



mo 


SARRACENIA 


throat. Weak feeling in the arms. Very sensitive to cold air. Faint 
after stool. There is vesical and rectal tenesmus. Stool smells of musk. 
The symptoms were < about midnight and at 3 p.m. < Morning. 
< Rising from lying. < Trying to walk. < In stormy weather. 
Open air = chilliness, hands and feet cold ; = head to be hot and 
sore, and feel full. Cold air = to feel chilly and < bone pains. 
Symptoms generally > in fresh air ; and > out of bed. 

Relations. — Aniidoied by : Podoph. Compare : In small-pox, 
Ant. t., Merc., Vaccin., VarioL, Maland. In bone pains, Eup. perf. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Melancholia, anxious about everything. — Great depression 
of spirits with frontal headache. — Brain clearer, buoyant spirits. — Dulness of 
head, loss of memory, insensibility of r. side ; paralysis of hearing and smell. 
— Want of memory with the headache. — Difficult to concentrate attention, 
forgetful ; feels dull and heavy ; sweats freely. — Alternate apathy and intel- 
lectual activity. 

2. Head. — Head feels dull and heavy. — Feels light-headed. — Vertigo : 
with cramps in neck, spreading to forehead ; < night ; sensation as if he had 
received a knock on the head, stupor and staggering gait ; obliged to support 
himself or lie down ; with drowsiness in head and contractions in spinal 
column. — Frontal headache, low-spirited. — Headache : dull at cranial region ; 
severe in afternoon; with chills, nausea, vomiting, dim sight, surring in 
ears. — Pulsations and burning heat of head, with sensation as if it would split. 
— Head hot and aches. — Head and body warm. — Frontal bone sore. — Pruritus 
and heat of scalp. 

3. Eyes. — Kyes weak, — Dim sight, headache. — Gas flame seems a 
brilliant yellow ring ; secs black objects moving with the eye. — Great photo- 
phobia. — Soreness of r. optic nerve, just behind eyeball. — Pain in 1 . eye as if 
congested, on waking. — Eyes feel swollen and sore. — Eyes and lids inflamed. 
— Increased mucous secretion. — Cutting, penetrating pains in orbits. 

4. Ears. — Surring in ears. — Sticking pains deep in r. ear ; transient, but 
recurring often ; same in 1 . ear. — Intense earache ; fears he will lose his 
senses. — Swelling of parotids. 

5. Nose.— Fetid smell, — Epistaxis nearly producing tainting. — Fluent 
coryza with cold chills and loss of smell. — Foul-smelling, green, yellowish, or 
bloody discharges. — Nose swollen, red, with pressure and pulsation at root. 

6. Face. — Face flushed. — Heat and redness of face. — Face pale, with 
heat and chill alternating.— Erysipelatous swelling of face. — Miliary eruption 
on face, with heat as if it were on fire. — Scaly herpes on face and forehead. — 
Intense neuralgic pains from temples to jaws. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue : dry ; coated brownish white. — Mouth dry ; lips 
and mouth parched. — Toothache at night in bed ; from least contact, and 
cold air. 

9. Throat. — Throat dry, not > by tea or water ; borborygmi. 

10. Appetite. — Hungry all the time, even after a meal. — Appetite un- 
usually active, but there was a sense of pain about the stomach like that after 
inflammation or of overtaxed muscle.— Little appetite, but what is eateii 
agrees. — Great desire to sleep during eating. 



SARRACENIA 


II I I 


11. Stomach.— Empty, hungry feeling ; for he can keep nothing in his 
stomach. — Burning pains in stomach with palpitations and contraction. — 
Pinching pain in stomach, it feels distended and torn. 

12 . Abdomen. — After going to bed whole abdominal region was in 
commotion, extending along ascending, and descending colon, all in a kind 
of rolling motion ; epigastrium sensitive to pressure. — Transient pains in 
bowels. — Bloated about navel. — Borborygmi and some pain in bowels with 
constipation ; dry throat. 

,I3« Stool and Anus. — Much flatus. — First part of stool natural, last 
diarrhoeic. — Much tepesmus ; dysenteric diarrhoea. — Stool at first costive, 
thin, dark, offensive, soluble. — Costive ; stools very hard, covered with mucus, 
and dark. — Stool copious, dark, fetid, evacuated with great straining, morning. 
— Rectum and anus swollen and inflamed. — Morning diarrhoea ; faint after 
stool, which is dark, often mixed with blood, foul smelling, or smelling of 
musk ; bloatedness with colic. 

14. Urinary Organs. — ^Awoke 3 a.m. with urging to urinate ; bladder 
so full it overcame resistance of sphincter and dribbled away. — Voided 
27 ounces of urine of sp. gr. 1024 ; vesical tenesmus. — Urine phosphatic. — 
Urine scanty, limpid. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Watery or milky leucorrhoea, foul- 
smelling, with spasmodic pains in uterus ; pulsative pains in womb with 
swelling as if from a tumour or dropsy ; uterus swollen as if full of cysts, esp. 
r. side ; cervix swollen, hot ; miliary eruption and heat in vulva ; bloody 
discharge at other times than menstrual period, as during climaxis. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Phthisis pulmonalis and bronchial affec- 
tions, joined to or depending on a psoric state ; haemoptysis, thick cough ; 
continual tickling in larynx and bronchi ; cough with desire to vomit, and 
vomiting, paroxysms of suffocation and epistaxis ; hard cough, shaking chest 
and bowels, and stopping only after expectorating a quantity of compact 
mucus, tenacious, filamentary, with a bitter, putrid, oily taste, 

18. Chest. — Pains in third and fourth ribs, with great apprehension of 
hea/t disease. — Pain in angle of ribs. — Soreness of pectoralis major. 

19. Heart. — Feeling of congestion about head, with irregularity of 
heart’s action. — Congestion to chest, heavy feeling about heart. — Slight pal- 
pitation in morning. — Pulse : full and strong ; 68, general malaise ; small ; quick. 

20. Neck and Back. — A pain up r. trapezius muscle with wave-like 
motion. — Warm sensation passed up back into head. — Weak between and 
below shoulders. — Back weak, wants to lean on something. — Arms and back 
tired and sore all over. — Deep-seated pain in back. — Fixed pains in small of 
back. — Heat in whole r. lumbar, region. — Pain in cervical and lumbar ver- 
tebrae. — Pain and soreness in sacrum. 

21. Limbs. — Limbs cold when still, as from deficient circulation. — 
Limbs easily benumbed. — Weakness 'of limbs with paralytic debility. — Pains 
and soreness in diaphyses of all long bones ; < humerus, esp. 1. — Pain in 1. 
carpus and tarsus. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Paroxysms of pain in r. shoulder-joint, pain in 1. 
carpus and tarsus; face flushed. — Arms feel weak. — Bruised feeling from 
shoulders to hands. — Aching, sore pain in 1. humerus. — Bones in both arms 
pain. 



1112 


SARRACENIA— SARSAPARILLA 


23. Lower Limbs.— Pain in hip-joints < rising to feet from a lying 
posture.— Paro\, sms of weakness in coxo-femoral joint, with pains of luxation 
and fear of falling when beginning to walk. — Strange lameness in femur, 
lower third, < in inner condyle. — Pain in condyles of femur. — ^Wave-like 
motion in muscles of femur. — Sensation of fatigue in bones of leg as if they 
were too thick. — Bruised and luxated feeling in joints. — Pain in r. patella and 
metatarsal bones. — Knees feel weak. — Bruised pain in knees as after a fall ; 
he falls easily on his knees. — Bone pains in tibia and fibula ; intermittent, but 
bones continually sore. — Bones of feet inflamed ; nodes as in gout. 

24. Generalities. — Debility ; heavy, languid. — Di^ll, heavy, sore feeling 
in all bones. — Phlegmonous swelling, with a rosy tint on various parts. — 
Unrefreshed though slept soundly. 

25. Skin. — Phlyctenoid herpes. — Psoriasis. — Scrofulous eruptions. — 
Variola ; (the decoction taken when eruption is out and beginning to pustulate 
aborts secondary fever and prevents pitting). — Eruption out, pustules dissi- 
pate, first on face, fever lessens, urine though scanty and dark becomes 
abundant and pale, strength returns. — Eruptions similar to crusta lactea ; on 
forehead and hands papular eruptions, changing to vesicular, with the de- 
pression as in small-pox lasting from seven to eight days. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepy in daytime ; sleep disturbed by strange and frightful 
dreams. — Awakes early : 3, 4, or 5 ; in a friglit ; with urging to urinate. 

27. Fever. — Feverish and shaking chills, < morning. — General chills 
between shoulder-blades. — Chills, heat, and sweat, 5 p.m. — At 2 p.m. very 
chilly in open air. — Skin hot and dry. — Hands hot, warm all over. — Head and 
body warm. — Perspires freely (5lh, 8th, 9th d.) ; although weather still warm, 
and actively employed, sweat not as free as while taking the drug (nth d.). 


Sarsaparilla. 

Wild Liquorice. The rhizome of several species of Smilax. (The 
Officinal Sarsae radix is imported from Jamaica.) N, O, Smilaceae 
(by some classed as a sub-order of the Liliaceae). Triturations 
and tincture of the dried rhizome. 

Clinical. — Asthma. Bladder, affections of. Bones, affections of. Breast, 
scirrhus of. Bright’s disease. Calculi. Climaxis. Constipation. Dysmenia. Dys- 
pepsia. Dysuria. Enuresis. Eruptions. Eyes, affections of. Faintness. Glands, 
enlarged. Gonorrheea. Gout. Gravel. Hands, chapped. Headache. Hernia. 
Herpes; of prepuce. Hiccough. Intermitftents. Marasmus. Masturbation, 
effects of. Melancholia. Mercury, abuse of. Mycosis. Nipples, retracted. 
Plica polonica. Renal colic. Rhagades. Rheumatism ; gonorrhoeal. Seborrheea. 
Spermatic cords, swelling of. Spermatorrhoea. Strangury. Syphilis. Ulcers. 
Warts. 

OhaFacteristios. — The dried root or rhizome of Sarsaparilla, as 
imported, is of the thickness of a goose quill, many feet in length, 
reddish brown, scentless, mucilaginous in taste, feebly bitterish, 
faintly acrid. According to Milne it is diaphoretic, tonic, alterativct 
. . . It is given in scrofula and secondary syphilis ; and the concomi- 



SARSAPARILLA 


1113 

tants of these diseases, such as ulcers, cutaneous eruptions, nodes, 
indurated glands, caries, necroses, articular swellings, and rheumatism, 
often improve un,der a protracted course of it.’' Some, he adds, 

“ think it a kind of restorative after an exhausting course of Mercury:^ 
This well summarises the ancient reputation of Sars, as a “blood 
purifier,!' which Hahnemann’s proving has amplified and put on a 
fixed scientific basis. Sars. meets the sycotic as well as the psoric 
(scrofulous) and syphilitic constitution ; and it is “ restorative after 
over-dosing with Merc, because it is a homoeopathic antidote to Merc, 
The chief localities ^of the action of Sars, are : The urinary organs ; 
genitals ; rectum ; *skin and bones ; right lower extremity ; right 
lower side ; inner semilateral head. In the urinary sphere there are 
symptoms which are very severe and also peculiar : There is great 
pain at end of micturition, just as the urine ceases io flow ; inability to 
pass water freely except in the standing position, when sitting it only 
dribbles ; excessive pain in urethra which may run back into abdomen ; 
passage of gravel which looks like grey sand. Many cases of renal 
colic and dysuria in infants with passage of sand have been cured 
with Sars. Gonorrhoea and the effect of suppressed gonorrhoea have 
also been cured with it ; herpes preputialis ; spermatorrhoea, with 
swollen cords. In the female generative sphere it has many symptoms 
of painful and disordered menstruation. A peculiar symptom is 
** moist eruption in right groin before menses." There are moist 
eruptions also on scrotum and thighs of the male, and offensive 
odours about genitals in both sexes. The semen may be bloody. In 
all cases if the other symptoms are associated with the peculiar 
urinary symptoms of Sars., this will be a strong corroborative indica- 
tion. The skin is severely affected by Sars, One of its popular uses 
is for “ clearing the complexion." When it succeeds it is by virtue of 
its homoeopathicity, for I have seen a very extensive crop of blotches 
produced by it in a young lady. Sars. produces herpetic eruptions in 
all parts, and tettery eruptions, moist and dry. Rhagades. Itch-like 
eruptions prone to appear in spring. Itching eruption on forehead 
during menses. It causes great emaciation, causing the skin to be 
shrivelled and lie in folds. It is smted io children with faces like old 
people and enlarged abdomens ; to dark-haired persons of lithic or 
sycotic diathesis. Farrington gives these indications : (i) Sycotic 
eruption, little spots scarcely raised above the skin, often scaling a 
little, but looking like the roseola of syphilis and itching intolerably, 
< in spring. (2) Moist eruption on scalp, the pus from which causes 
inflammation of any part it tpuches. (3) Sycotic headache, beginning 
at back of head, coming forward and settling at root of nose, with 
swelling of nose. (4) Moist eruption about genitals or between 
scrotum and thighs. — Sars. has many symptoms relative to the female 
breast, and scirrhus of the breast has been cured with it. The nipples 
are soft, unexcitable ; they are retracted and cannot be made to come 
out. Retraction of the nipples is a suspicious sign even when there is 
no appearance of tumour ; and Sars, should be helpful in patients of 
cancerous history when this condition is present. This shrivelling of 
^e nipples is part of the shrivelling, withering, wrinkling, and hang- 
ing in folds which characterises the skin generally. Burnett {H, IF., 



1 1 14 


SARSAPARILLA 


XV. 62) records the case of Miss X., 3^ , whom he found ill in bed and 
in great pain. There was vomiting of bitter matter, diarrhoea, and 
fainting, the initial stage of a painful period. Co/ijunctivas yellow, 
and apparently a sharp upset of the liver. Card. m. 0 removed the 
pains and vomiting ; Chel. i relieved tenderness of the liver which 
remained. The patient had had painful menses for twenty years, that 
is, continuously from the commencement, except one year when at 
school at Tunbridge Wells. She used to begin, generally early in the 
morning, with bitter vomiting ; diarrhoea and fainting fits, with 
exceedingly cold perspiration ; the pain in bacl^ thighs, and hypo- 
gastrium she described as dreadful. She had to lie down the first 
day, the second day the pain continued still veiy bad, and went off on 
the third. The left nipple was considerably retracted^ arising from a fall 
when patient was a little child, and in addition to the above-named 
symptoms she had severe pain in left breast extending down left arm, 
and the breast was so tender that she would often hold her hand in 
front of it to ward off any contact. Twenty-four powders, each con- 
taining Sars. 30 gtt. i., were ordered, one at bedtim*^ The next flow" 
was painless ; but the breast was as painful as Twelve doses 

of Sul. 30 were given in as many days, and then S 30 again. The 
painful menstruation remained cured, but the br ^ ^ was unchanged. 
Twenty-four powders were now ordered, the ’""first, twelfth, and 
eighteenth containing each ten globules of Sars. 100, the rest unniedi- 
cated. Patient reported : The first two or three weeks she thought 
she had taken a severe cold, as she had such a peculiar pain between 
the shoulders as if the flesh were taken hold of and twisted round. 
After a few days it got better, and there has been scarcely any pain 
in the part since.^’ The retraction of the nipple seemed to Burnett a 
little less. With the same remedy Skinner {ibid.) cured many cases 
of retraction or flattening of the nipple in nursing women. Qn two 
occasions with high potencies of Sars. he enabled a lady to nurse her 
child when it was utterly hopeless without the simillimum. Peculiar 
Sensations are : As if in a dream. As of a great weight in head. 
Buzzing as if a large bell had been struck in head. As if he had been 
hit with a hammer on top of head. As if something pressing on head. 
As if gauze spread over left eye. As if a grain of sand in eye. As of a 
needle pricking point of nose. Face as if bruised. Jaw as if being 
broken. As if he had eaten nothing. [Snrs. has the sinking sen- 
sation of the great antipsorics.] As if diarrhoea would come on. As 
if bowels were pressed out. As if bound down to bed by a sort of 
suction. As if breath were stopped by a spasm. Breast-bone as if 
bruised. As if chest were too short. As if tips of fingers ulcerated, 
or as if salt were put on a wound. Limbs as if paralysed. There is 
general sensitiveness. Pains shoot rin different directions. Anxiety 
accompanies the pains of Sars. ; and the pains ss depression. The 
symptoms are < by touch, pressure, tight clothes, scratching. Scratch- 
ing s= itching to begin in another place ; =s eruption on forehead to 
become humid. Rest >, motion <. Lying down < asthmatic 
breathing. Sitting <. Standing > (difficult micturition). Stooping 
ss pains from occiput to forehead. Walking <. < Going up (or 

down) stairs. Many symptoms are < on moving. < In spring. 



SARSAPARILLA 


1115 


Warmth >. Warm diet <. Cold diet >. Warm room < vertigo. 
Entering cold air from warm room sss rash. Cold air > pain in 
molars. Cold, wet weather <. Washing <. Chilliness <. Seminal 
emission < dim sight. Bread <. Yawning <. 

Relations.— by: Bell, Merc. It antidotes: Merc. 
Compatible : Cep., Hep., Pho., Rhus, Sep., Sul. Complementary : 
Merc., Sep. Compare : In sycosis ; warts, Thuj., Nit. ac. Herpes, 
Nat. m., Petr. Gone ” feeling, Sep. Emaciation, Abrot, lod., Nat., 
Sanic. Dry, flabby skin, Bar. c., Op. Pain at end of urination, Berb., 
Equis., Med., Thuj. Urine passed without sensation (unknown to 
patient), Caust. Siuid on diaper ; child screams before and whilst 
urinating, Brx., Lyc. Excruciating pains from right kidney down- 
wards, Lyc., Ocim. Nipples withered, unexcitable, Sil. Itching 
eruption: on forehead during menses, Eug. j., Sang., Pso. Bloody 
emissions, Led., Merc. < Going up or down stairs ; > on level, 
Can. s. (Brx. < going down stairs). Faintness during or connected 
with stool, Ap., Nx. m.. Pul, Spi., Ver. (with scanty stool, Crot. t, 
Dulc., Ox. ac., Pet., Sul). Swelling of spermatic cords from unre- 
quited sexual excitement, Mag. mur. Antidotes to Merc., Bell, 
Camph., Carb. v., Chi., Dulc., Electric., Hep., Hyo. (loss of voice), 
Lach., Lyc., Op., Mez., Nit. ac., Sep., Sil, Sul. Stench on genitals, 
Merc., Sanic. (Sanic. of fish brine). Plica polonica ; right side ; dis- 
tension after eating a little, Lyc. > Cold diet, Pho. > Loosening 
cravat, Lach. Flickering before eyes with headache, Ir. v., K. bi. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Anxiety, with trembling of the feet.— The mental depression 
i.s caused by the pains ; anxiety also occurs after seminal emissions. — Think- 
ing about the food he has eaten =: nausea.— Despondency, gloominess, 
amounting to despair. — Moroseness and ill-huinour, with inclination to work, 
but unfitness for exertion. — Irascibility and susceptibility. — Fickleness (change- 
able disposition). — Impatient ; thinks she cannot bear the headache ; child 
cannot bear the itching. 

2. Head. — Vertigo after gazing fixedly on an object for some time. — 
Vertigo, with nausea and sour risings. — Heaviness in head. — Dull, stupid 
feeling, cannot keep mind fixed on study. — Staggers, falls forward in open 
air. — Headache with nausea and sour vomiting. — Lancinating or pressive 
headache, or else pressive and lancinating at same time. — Pressing and 
stitching pains in 1. side of head.*— Semilateral spasmodic pains in head, as if 
head were squeezed in a vice, with cloudiness of eyes or flickering, necessity 
to lie down, and vibration in brain at every word that is uttered. — Inner semi- 
lateral head, either side ; old neuralgic headaches. — Neuralgic headache, r. 
side, throbbing, stitching, starting from occiput. — (Headache which ss jerk- 
ing of head to one side and screaming. — Griggs.) — Sensation as of tight band 
around head and forehead, which is very painful ; as if the hat were too tight, 
has to remove it often and involuntarily, but without relief.— Sound in the 
head as if a bell were striking, when talking. — Throbbing pains in head. — 
Noise and buzzing in head. — Pressive and incisive, or pressive, lancinating 



1 1 16 


SARSAPARILLA 


drawing and tearing pains in exterior of head, < by touch and by walking,— 
Seborrhoea cured by decoction (R, T. C.).— Sensibility of scalp. — Falling off of 
hair. — Plica polonica. 

3. Eyes. — Pains in eyes, caused by daylight. — Aching in eyes, esp. in 
evening when reading by candle-light. — Shootings in eyes.— Burning sensation 
in eyes and lids. — Stinging in eyes on closing lids, violent pain when closed 
eyes are pressed on. — Quivering of r. upper lid. — Itch-like eruption on lids. — 
Agglutination of lids in morning. — Red stripe from cornea to outer canthus. — 
Internal canthi blue and swollen. — Cloudiness before eyes, like a fog ; < 
after emissions. — A red colour is reflected from white paper in evening.—: 
Flickering before eyes with headache. — Halo round candle. 

4. Ears. — Shootings in ears. — Shooting pains from 1 . ear to root of nose, 
— Contraction and pressure in cars. — Burning, itching scabs on lobes of ear. 
— Tinkling and ringing in ears. 

5. Nose. — Epistaxis. — Scabious eruption upon, under, and in nose. — 
Dry coryza and obstruction of nose. — ^Very thick mucus in nose. — Base of 
nose and eyes swollen.— R. nostril stopped up and scabby — Pain in nose, 
inflamed spots on septum. 

6. Face. — Face yellow, wrinkled, old-looking. — Pimples. — Facial erup- 
tion. — Itching eruption on forehead, with burning sensation, and oozing after 
having scratched. — Rough, pale-red spots on forehead. — Thick scabs on the 
face (like milk crust). — Rigidity and tension in masseters and maxillary joints. 
— Herpes on upper lip. — Purulent and itching vesicles on chin. 

7. Teeth. — ^I'oothache, with drawing tearings, from a cold current of 
air or from cold drinks. — Upper teeth sensitive, set on edge.— Tearing in 
gums. — Gums swollen, with pain as from excoriation. 

8. Mouth. — Dryness of mouth. — Aphthae on tongue and palate. — 
Offensive breath. 

9. Throat.— Sore throat (r. side), with shooting pain during deglutition. ' 
— Spasmodic pressure at throat, like strangulation, with obstructed respira- 
tion ; must loosen cravat. — Dryness and roughness in throat, esp. in morning. 
— Accumulation of viscid mucus in throat. — Trichotomous ulcers after sup- 
pression of plica polonica. 

10. Appetite. — Want of appetite. — Bitter, or acid and clammy, or else 
sweetish, metallic, and herbaceous taste. — Bread has a bitter taste.— Insipidity 
of food. — After a meal sensation of emptiness in stomach, as while fasting, or 
else disgust when merely thinking of what has been eaten. — After eating 
stomach has no sensation, feels as if he had eaten nothing. — After eating a 
little, distended as if he had eaten much. — < From w^arm diet, > from cold. 
— Drinking water =s vomiting.— Thirst, esp. for water, also in morning. 

11. Stomach. — Risings and regurgitations, esp. during and after a meal, 
generally bitter or sour. — Belching; with diarrhoea.— Hiccough 6 p.m. — 
Frequent or continued nausea, with fruitless inclination to vomit. — Sour 
vomitings. — Constrictive pains in stomach. — Aching at pit of stomach. — Heat 
and burning sensation in stomach, esp. after eating bread. 

12. Abdomen. — Conlusive pain in the 1. hypochondrium. — Shootings in 
the 1. hypochondrium. — Great sensibility of the abdomen to external pressure. 
— Constrictive and spasmodic pains in the intestines. — Cutting pains, esp. in 
the umbilical region.— Shootings in sides of abdomen, esp. in L side,— Severe 



SARSAPARILLA 


1117 


tension in r. groin.— Pinching in 1. groin.— Hernia.— Soreness in bend of r, 
groin on appearance of menses. — Sensation of coldness, or heat and burning 
sensation in abdomen. — Sensation of emptiness and borbor3^gmi in abdomen. 
— Rumbling and fermenting in abdomen ; expulsion of much fetid flatus. — 
Inertia of intestines. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Hard, retarded, and scanty faeces, often with 
urgent want to evacuate. — Painful, difficult evacuations, with contractive pains 
in the abdomen and violent downward pressure. — Obstinate constipation, with 
frequent want to urinate. — Pitchy, sticky, adhesive stools.-— Blood with stool. 
— Loose, acrid, corrosive evacuations, with pains in abdomen. — Fainting 
during an evacuation. — Pain as from excoriation, and burning itching in anus. 
•^Wakened in night with sore pain in anus, which changes into a (burning) 
itching which lasts all day. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Diminished secretion of urine. — Frequent dis- 
charge of pale, copious urine. — Tenesmus, with pressure on bladder, and 
discharge of a white and turbid matter, mixed with mucus. — Frequent and 
ineffectual want to urinate, or with scanty emission. — Frequent urination 
with hard stool. — Burning while urine passes with discharge of elongated 
flakes. — Frequent and profuse emission of pale urine, day and night, often 
without any sensation in urinary organs. — Turbid urine, like clay water. — ^ 
Fier^, scanty, red urine. — Thread-like flakes in urine. — Blood in urine 
towards the end of an emission (after which the pain, when urinating, abates). 
— Urine charged with gravel or small pebbles. — (Nephritic calculi.) — Where 
the patient has gravel, and there is considerable deposit in the urine which 
looks like grey sand ; also pus in urine. — Great pain just as the urine ceases to 
flow; excessive pain in urethra which may run back into abdomen. — The 
infant cries before and during micturition, passes large quantities of sand. — 
Can pass urine only when standing ; when he sits it dribbles. — Burning sensa- 
tion in urethra during every urination. — (Burning in urethra with incontinence 
of urine, < in daytime, < when urine is high-coloured, and < after drinking 
beer. — Much scalding up urethra while urinating, urine high-coloured with 
liHiates, enuresis day and night. — R. T. C.) — Cramps in bladder, with 
contractive pain. — Slones in the bladder. — Discharge of pus from the urethra, 
as in igonorrhoea. — Jerking sensation along male urethra. — Pain at meatus 
urinarius with women. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Fetid exhalation from genital organs.— 
Inflammation and redness of glans. — (Blennorrhoea). — Herpes on the prepuce. 
— Desire for coition, with frequent and painful pollutions. — Bloody pollutions ; 
spermatic cords swollen, sexual excitement makes them ache and sensitive. — 
Swelling of cords from unrequited sexual excitement. — Bad effects from 
gonorrhoea suppressed by Mercury, — Old dry sjxotic warts remaining after 
mercurial treatment for gouty pains. 

16. Feniale Sexual Organs? — Catamenia retarded, scanty, and acrid ; 
very copious,* even to hsemorrhage (in an old maid). — During menses, want to 
urinate, excoriation between thighs, pinchings in abdomen, and squeezing, as 
if by a claw, in loins and pit of stomach. — Dysmenorrhoea, began in morning, 
with bitter vomiting, diarrhoea, and fainting fits, with exceedingly cold sweats ; 
1. breast so tender held her hand in front of it do avoid contact. — Mucous 
leucorrhoea. — Leucorrhoea : on walking ; pain at meatus urinarius after 



iii8 


SARSAPARILLA 


urinating.— Climaxis : asthma < lying down ; back pains < by pressure. 
— Suppuration of breasts. — Nipples retracted; shrivelled^ insensitive, not 
irritable. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Violent cough from a tickling sensation of 
ulceration in gullet, or from a roughness in throat. — Short and obstructed 
respiration. — Violent dyspnoea and choking from a sensation of constriction 
in throat, and which forces thoemoval of all clothing from throat and chest. 

18. Chest. — Spasmodic oppression of chest. — Frequent recurrence of 
deep respiration. — Sensation as if a foreign body had stopped in the back On 
taking a full inspiration. — Pressure on chest, often with Shortness of breath. — 
Pressive pain on sternum, < by touching it. — Shooting in sides of chest, 
which often forces patient to bend double. — Tensive pain in exterior of chest; 
as from contraction, on rising up. 

19. Heart. — Palpitation of the heart. 

20. Neck and Back. — Painful pressure and tension in back and nape 
of neck, with lancinations on least movement of trunk or head. — Lancinations 
between shoulder-blades and in muscles of neck. — Stitches in back through 
into chest on least motion. — Swelling on one side of neck, painful to touch, — 
Contusive pain in loins, esp. while stooping, and afterwards. — Pains from 
‘small of back down spermatic cords ; < at night and from motion ; after 
emissions. — ^I'ingling in loins. — Tensive pain from loins to hips on least 
movement. 

21. Limbs. — Paralytic tearing in all joints and limbs, often accompanied 
by trembling of hands and feet, painful tearings in head, and pinchings in 
abdomen. — Rigidity and immobility of limbs.— Lassitude in the hands and 
feet. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Tearings and pressive shootings in arms, forearms, 
and joints of hands and fingers (principally on motion). — Sweating of hands. 
— Herpes on hands. — Numbness of fingers. — Pain in tips of fingers (bruised 
and sore), as from subcutaneous ulceration. — Purulent vesicles on fingers. — 
Deep rhagades in skin of fingers (with burning pains). 

23. Lower Limbs. — Affections of any kind in general, appearing in’‘r. 
lower extremity ; r. lower side (H. N. G.). — Pressive tearing and shooting in 
thighs, knees, and legs. — Lassitude in thighs and knee-joints. — Swelling and 
stiffness of knees, with shootings. — Red, herpetic spots on calves. — Rigidity 
of legs, as from contraction, — Cramps in legs and calves of the legs. — Draw- 
ing tearing in r. big toe. — Painful pressive throbbing and throbbing-shooting 
inner side r. sole, later on whole sole when sitting. — Painful sensibility of 
soles. — Tension and swelling of feet, with heat and redness. — Coldness of feet, 
esp. before going to bed. 

24. Generalities. — Shooting, tearing, pressive pains. — Darting, pricking 
sensation in bones. — Paralytic tearing in all joints and limbs, often accom- 
panied by trembling of hands and fcet,pamful tearings in head ^nd pinchings 
in abdomen. — Arthritic pains (after taking cold in the water ; from suppressed 
gonorrhoea), with diminished secretion of urine. — Rigidity and immobility of 
the limbs. — Hot and dense swellings. — Great lassitude, esp. in lower limbs. — 
Lassitude in the hands and feet. — Emaciation. — The pains cause depression 
of spirits. 

25. Skin. — Itching, sometimes over whole body, esp. in evening, in bed, 



SCAMMONIUM 


1 1 19 


and in morning when rising.— Red and dry pimples, which itch only when 
body is warm. — Miliary eruption on going into fresh air from a warm room. 
— Nettle-rash. — Fine rash on skin of forehead. — Exanthema lik^ milk crust. — 
Purulent vesicles. — Ulcers after abuse of Mercury. — Skin slow to heal. — 
Herpes on almost all parts of body (esp. on prepuce).— Warts.— Many little 
warts. — (Horses lose hair with eruptions.) — Shrivelled skin. — Great emaciation, 
the skin becomes shrivelled or it lies in folds. — Deep, burning, painful rhagades 
(on fingers). 

.26. Sleep. — Complaints concomitant to yawning. — < When yawning. — 
Sleep early in evening. — Nocturnal sleeplessness and frequent waking. — 
Frightful dreams with frequent starts. 

. 27. Fever.— Shiverings night and day.— Chilliness predominating, day 
and night). — Coldness, even near the fire, over whole body, except face and 
chest, but principally in feet. — Rigor, mostly in forenoon, running from feet 
upwards. — Heat in the evening, with ebullition of blood, palpitation of heart, 
and perspiration (only) on forehead. 


Scammonium. 

Convolvulus scammonia. Scammony. N. 0. Convolvulaceae. Tritu- 
rations of the dried milky juice of the root. 

Clinical. — Diarrhosa. Gastro-enteritis. 

Characteristics. — Scam, is a drastic cathartic, producing copious 
watery evacuations, and griping a good deal. Sprengel records a case 
of fatal poisoning in an infant whose mother took a large quantity of 
Scam. ^•a.nd herself suffered no effects. Scam, must be compared with 
Jalap, f another purging convolvulus. 

SYMPTOMS. 

II, 12. Stomach and Abdomen. — Sudden vomiting and copious green 
stools, distension and sensitiveness of abdomen and death (in an infant whose 
nursing mother took a large dose of Scam, and lierself experienced no symp- 
toms). — Slight pain in stomach with evacuation of faeces. — Violent pain and 
rapid succession of stools, leaving inactivity of lower intestines for several 
days. — Inflammation of mucous membrane attended with loss of appetite and 
headache. 

13. Stool.— Loose evacuation of freces with slight pain in stomach.- 
Green stools. — Rapid succession of Stools. 



I 120 


SCILLA MARITIMA 


Schinus. 

Schinus molle. N. 0. Anacardiacex. Tincture of the berries. 

Tincture of leaves and berries. 

Clinical* — Dianhoea. Liver, griping pain in. (Esophagus, dryness of. Spinal 
cord, drawing in. Vomiting. 

Gharacteristios. — Allen says Schinus is an evergreen shrub, native 
of Mexico and South America, and frequently cultivated in Southern 
California under the names Pepper tree ” and Chili pepper.’^ The 
symptoms were observed by Dr. P. W. Poulson on a young lady who 
ate a few berries after dinner, and on himself. Poulson ate leaves as 
well as berries, and he had heartburn, griping in liver, and a kind 
of drawing sensation as in the spinal cord and cerebellum.’^ 

Relations. — Compare : Anac., Rhus, Comoc. 

SYMPTOMS. 

11. Stomach. — Long-continued vomiting, “as if all the bowels would 
be emptied out " ; vomiting very painful, as the vomiting subsided diarrheea 
came on, the diarrhosa being painless. — Heartburn, dryness of oesophagus. 

12. Abdomen. — Rolling and flatulence in the bowels, and a griping 
sensation in the liver. 

13. Stool. — Painless diarrhoea following painful vomiting. — Profuse 
diarrhoea continuing all night. 

20. Back. — Drawing sensation as in the spinal cord and cerebellum. 


Scilla Maritima. 

Scilla maritima. Squill. Sea Onion. (Red variety.) JV. 0. Liliaceae. 

Tincture of fresh bulb. Acetum. 

Clinical. — Angina pectoris. Asthma; dry; splenic. Bright’s disease. Bron- 
chitis. Conjunctivitis, phlyctenular. Coryza. Cottgh^ catarrhal. Diabetes / in- 
sipidus. Dropsy ; splenic. Eyes, affections of ; watering of. Fidgets. Heart, 
palpitation of . Hydrothorax. Measles. Pleurisy. Pneumonia. Spleen, affections 
of. Spleen-cough. Toothache. Urmc^ cxcesstif. Whooping-cough. Worms. 

Charaoteristics. — The genus Scilla is distinguished from Allium 
by having the flowers inserted one above the other on the scape, and 
from Omithogalum by having the pfetals deciduous. Scilla maritima 
grows on%e shores of the Mediterranean Sea, and has* had a place 
in medicine from the most ancient times. If much handled it 
irritates the skin ; and in large doses excites nausea, strangury, 
bloody urine and haemorrhoids ; fatal inflammation, gangrene of 
stomach and bowels ; in small doses, promotes expectoration and 
urine ; in large doses, vomiting and purging (Meyrick in Green’s 



SCILLA MARITIMA 


I I2I 


Herbal). Its cardiac action is exactly the same as that of Digitalis 
(Mitchell Bruce). An old rule runs : Put squills in every cough- 
mixture/’ The continuous use of squills seems to cause teeth and 
gums to ache (R. T. C.). “ Diuretic, expectorant, emetic, cathartic, 
and a narcotico-acrid poison ; in large doses it produces inflamma- 
tion of the alimentary and urinary canals, and a dose of gr. xxiv 
has proved fatal’' (Milne). According to Hamilton (Flora Horn,) 
Aricenna employed Soil, “ in complaints of the gums, in inveterate 
coughs, in diseases of the spieetiy in dropsy and jaundice, and forbids 
its use in ulceration of the viscera,” the last caution also being men- 
tioned by Celsus. The reputation of Scil. as a splenic was revived 
by Rademacher, whom Burnett quotes (Dis, of Spleen^ p. 89) : I have 
found it quickly and surely helpful in painful spleen diseases — ^affec- 
tions painful and beyond any doubt in and of the spleen. In those 
dull pains on the border of the left hypochondriac and epigastric 
regions, there being no signs of any liver affection, 1 have used SciL 
as a remedy with advantage.” Rademacher also mentions as cured 
by Scil. — (a) those so-called “ stomach pains ” that are made much 
better by lying on the left side, and probably in reality splenic ; (6) 
one case of continuous asthma from a splenic affection, with nocturnal 
exacerbation ; (c) (possibly) splenic dropsy. Burnett has improved 
on Rademacher’s teachings, and applied Soil, successfully in cases of 
spleen-cough. Hahnemann’s proving brought out many symptoms, 
apparently arising from the spleen, notably stitches under ithe free 
ribs of the left side. Burnett used the Acelum sctllcv ; and I gave this 
(five drops of p in water three times a day) with excellent effect 
in the case of an elderly lady, very gouty, who had a distressing 
paroxysmal cough, with a pain extending from splenic region into the 
throat. The cough caused the eyes to pour with tears. Besides 
relieving the cough, Scil. made the motions, which had been very 
light, darker and more natural in colour. The gushing of tears with 
the cough is another Scil. indication : The cough causes sneezing, 
flow of tears, spurting of urine, and even involuntary stools. The 
kidneys are powerfully acted on by 5c/7., and many of the traditional 
uses of the drug have been with the idea of eliminating dropsical 
effusions by producing a great flow of urine. Hahnemann pointed 
out that the excessive flow of urine accompanying dropsy and other 
complaints was one of the best indications for its use. Boger (H. i?., 
XV. 33) adds the heart to the organs primarily affected by Scil. 
He gives these cases : (i) Mr. B. suffered from angina pectoris ; 
forcible cardiac contractions, urine^ much loose mucus in 

throat and trachea, heart pain indefinite but very severe. Scil. 30 
relieved in a few hours, and kept him free from an attack for three 
months. (2) Miss L., pleuro -pneumonia, pulse 132, temperature 103®, 
respiration 30 ; must sit erect in bed ; stitching pains in left chest ; 
constant hacking cough ; frequent^ hot, scanty urine ; great weakness 
and anorexia. Scil. cm cured. (3) Boy, 7, hay-fever for third year 
in succession. Teeth show black marks; constantly rubs eyes and sneezes, 
bloated about eyes and face, loose cough. Under Scil. there was 
complete relief in two days, and no further trouble that season. The 
italicised symptoms in this case are very characteristic, Boger men- 
VOL. H. 72 



I 122 


SCILLA MARITIMA 


tions that Lippe notes Black teeth as a symptom of SciL Boger 
adds that the nails become brittle and split, and that veterinarians use 
Scil, for cracked hoof in horses. The use of SciL as an expec- 
torant ” depends on its power of producing free secretion from the 
respiratory mucous membranes : in homoeopathy this free secretion is 
one of the leading indications. Hering says Scil. is suited to the 
pleurisy and pneumonia that follow blood-letting. H. P. Holmes (i 4 . /f., 
xxi. 176) has an excellent article on SaLj to which I am indebted for 
many comparisons in the Relations section. Sherbino (M. A.^ xxii. 
398) gives this verification of a Salla symptom ; Miss H., 15, fleshy, 
light complexioned, blue eyed, large for her age. Her left eye wcis 
much smaller^ and lids not so wide open as those of right eye. Scil. im 
(Jen.) was given in May, and repeated each month for three months. 
Improvement began in the first month. On December 28th Scil. 45m 
(Fincke) was given, and soon after that the restoration was complete ; 
the eyes were a perfect match. Peculiar Sensations are : Eyes as if 
swimming in cold water. Nostrils as if sore. As if diarrhoea would 
set in. As if chest too tight. Tickling creeping in chest. As if 
intestines would burst through abdomen. Stitches are very pro- 
minent : in teeth ; in chest ; m head. The symptoms are : < In 
morning ; by inspiration ; by motion ; by uncovering. > By rest ; 
lying down in bed ; wrapping warmly. Drinking cold water = 
cough. < Exertion ; ascending ; cold air. > Sitting up. > Ex- 
pectorating even a small quantity. < Coughing. 

Relations. — Antidoled by : Camph. Compatible after : Bry. Com- 
pare : Headache ; < motion ; chest symptoms, Bry. (Br5^ cough is 
< change to warm, Scil. cough < change to cold air). Stitches ; 
swollen upper eyelids, K. ca. Cold drink = or < cough, Lyc., Sil. 
(> cough, Caust.). Expectoration sweetish and offensive, Calc., 
Stan. Spurting of urine when coughing, Caust., Aim., Con., Nat. m.. 
Puls. Involuntary stool when coughing, Pho. ; when sheezing, Sul. ; 
when urinating. Ail., Alo., Mur. ac., Sul. Convulsive twitching of 
limbs, fidgets,’^ Meny., Pso., Rhus, Caust., Zn. Icy-cold feet, rest of 
body warm, Meny. Sweat only on toes, Scil. — under toes, Tarax. 
Averse to uncover in fever, Nux. Furious, exhausting cough, Coral., 
Cup., Stan. Cough < in cold air, Carb. v., Pho., Rx. c., Ver. Tick- 
ling in chest, Ver. Sensation of cold water in eyes, Lach. (cold tears), 
Berb., Euphr., Aim., Con., Lyc., Plat., and Med. (cold feeling), Thuj. 
(as if cold air blowing out through eyes). Bloated round eyes in 
morning, Elaps. Coryza, Agrap. n., Cep., Ars., Phos., Chlor., Ar. t. 
Anxiety and fear of death, Aco., Ars. , Irritable, angry about trifles, 
Cham. Rubs face and eyes, Scil. — Con. rubs and picks nose ; Ar. t. 
picks nose, lips, and fingers till they bleed ; Sanic. rubs eyes and 
nose on waking. Splenics, Cean.^ Querc. Sweetish taste of food, 
Lyc., Merc., Pul. 

CauBation.— Blood-letting. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I, Mind, — Great anxiety of the mind, with fear of death, — ^Angry over 
trifles, — Aversion to mental and bodily labour. 



SCILLA MARITIMA 


2 . Head. — ^Vertigo ; in morning ; with nausea ; as if he would fall 
sideways on rising from bed. — Cloudy dizziness. — Headache in morning on 
waking, with pressing pains. — Some slow stitches extending into r. side of 
forehead. — Painful sensitiveness of vertex every morning. — Pulsation in head 
when raising it. — Stinging headache. — Quickly passing pain in occiput, 1. to r. 
— Affections of brain : child rubs face and eyes mucli, esp. eyes, as if to 
relieve itching ; profuse or scanty urination. 

3. Eyes. — Staring look, with eyes wdde open.—L. eye looks smaller than 
r. ; i. upper lid swollen. — Contraction of pupils. — Eyes feel as if swimming in 
cold water. — Phlyctentflar conjunctivitis. — Lachrymation and sneezing. 

4. Ears. — Tearing behind 1. ear. — (Tearing pains in both ears.) 

• 5. Nose. — Violent, constant sneezing and fluent coryza. — Sneezes 
during cough ; eyes water, rubs eyes and nose. — Acrid, corrosive, fluent 
coryza in morning ; a regular general snizzle ; mucous cough with spurting 
of urine and even of watery stools. — Coryza with ulcerated nostrils. — Nostrils 
painful as if sore, with violent coryza (in morning). — Humid eruptions under 
nose, with stinging itching. 

6. Face. — Changeable expression and colour of face. — During the heat 
redness of face, followed by paleness, without coldness. — Distorted counte- 
nance, with red cheeks, and without thirst. — Humid, spreading eruption on 
upper lip. — Black, cracked lips and black teeth. — Lips twitch and are covered 
with yellow crusts. 

8. Mouth. — Stitches darting upward in both upper canine teeth as if a 
sharp, cold air penetrated the teeth, when eating cold or warm things. — Teeth 
show black marks. — Open, dry mouth. — Accumulation of much viscid mucus in 
mouth. — Increased saliva. — Scraping, burning on palate. — Vesicles on tongue. 

9. Throat. — Burning in mouth and throat. — Irritation in throat with 
heat and tickling, causing constant cough. — Dryness in throat. — Pain in sub- 
maxillary glands. 

10. Appetite. — Insatiable appetite.— Longing for acids. — Thirst for cold 
water, but the dyspnoea compels her to take but a sip at a time. — The food 
tastes bitter, esp. bread ; or it tastes sweet, esp. soup and meat. — Tastelessness 
of tobacco when smoked. 

11. Stomach. — Constant nausea in pit of stomach, alternating wnth 
pain, as for diarrhoea in abdomen. — Prc'^sure in stomach as from a stone. — 
Nausea during the morning cough. — Stomach pains” > lying on 1. side 
(Rademacher). 

12. Abdomen. — Cutting pain in abdomen. — Pain in side of abdomen as 
if intestines forcing through when coughing and walking. — Pressive stinging 
pain in abdominal muscles of 1. sfde. — Bubbling sensation in muscles of r. 
side. — Pain in spleen. — Cough seeming to originate in spleen. — Splenic 
asthma. — Dull pains on border of 1. liYPOchondriac and epigastric regions. — 

, Painful sensitiveness of abdomen and region of bladder. — Frequent discharge 
of very fetid flatulence. — Increased warmth of abdomen. — Griping and incar- 
ceration of flatus in hypogastrium. — Rumbling and gurgling in paroxysms 
above pubic region, > by eating. 

. 13. Stool and Anus. — Painless constipation. — Diarrhoea ; stool very 
offensive ; watery (during the measles) or looking black. — Passes threadworms 
and white fibres with tenesmus,— Stitches in anus when walking. — Itching in 
anus. 



I T 24 


SCILLA MARITIMA 


14. Urinary Organs.—Sticking in orifice of urethra and somewhat 
further back. — Frequent urging to urinate, with profuse discharge of pale 
urine (these may occur separately or together). — Continuous, painful pressure 
on bladder. — Involuntary micturition ; esp. when coughing. — Enuresis noc- 
turna. — ^When urinating faeces escape.— Cannot retain the urine because the 
quantity is so great. — Dropsy ; dropsy of outer parts, dropsy of chest, all with 
profuse urination. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Dull stitches in glans causing anxiety. — 
Compressive pain in testicles. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Atony of cervik uteri. — Haemorrhage 
from uterus. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— -Moaning breathing, with the mouth open. 
— Wheezing breathing. — Frequently obliged to take a deep breath, which = 
cough. — Shortness of breath from every exertion, esp. when ascending. — 
Whooping-cough, when accompanied with sneezing, watering of eyes and 
nose, and the child rubs eyes with the hands ; in all catarrhal affections and 
coughs, also troubles of the lungs with the above symptoms ; profuse nasal 
secretion. — Cough with expectoration in the morning and none in the evening. 
— Difficulty of breathing, with stitches in chest when breathing and coughing. 
— Cough in the morning, with copious expectoration of thin, frequently 
reddish-coloured mucus. — Dry cough morning and night. — ^Violent dry cough 
which = shattering pain in abdomen and dryness in the throat. — Internal 
tickling in region of thyroid cartilage that provokes cough, which, however, 
< the tickling. — Short, dry cough in four or five shocks, from tickling beneath 
thyroid cartilage. — Fits of spasmodic cough with pains in splenic region. — 
Cough, with a stagnant watery condition of the blood, and enlarged spleen 
(Burnett). — Sputa : white or reddish mucus ; sweetish or empyrcumatic or 
offensive in odour ; in small round balls, very difficult to expectorate. — 
Rattling precedes the cough, disappears after. — Cough caused by tickling, 
creeping senbation in chest ; from drinking something cold ; from every 
exertion. — Cough with stitches in sides of chest ; pain in abdomen ; sensation 
of internal heat ; dyspnoea ; headache ; pressure in the bladder and" in- 
voluntary spurting of urine. — The loose morning cough is much more severe 
and causes more suffering than the dry evening cough. 

18. Chest. — Stitches : in chest, esp. when inhaling and coughing ; sharp 
in scapular end of clavicle during inspiration and expiration ; severe near 
sternum, extending downward ; in middle of ensiform cartilage ; recurrent in 
side ; broad, pressive beneath ribs of both sides ; jerking in r. and 1. side of 
chest near sternum ; broad, blunt in last rib of 1. side, in morning in bed, 
waking him. — Contracting stitch in 1. side,*just beneath last ribs, caused by 
rapid walking. 

ig. Heart. — Palpitation of heart.— Pulse : small and slow ; slightly hard. 

20. Neck and Back. — Stiffness : of nape of neck ; of 1. cervical muscles. 
— Painful jerking above 1. scapula. — Painless drawing in 1. scapula. — Bubbling 
sensation beneath scapulae, in back of 1. upper arm. — Perspiration in armpit. 

21 . Limbs. — Convulsive twitchings and motions of the limbs ; convul- 
sions. — Frequent falling asleep of hands when resting head upon them, and 
in lower limbs when crossing the legs, during the day. — (Nails become brittle 
and split. — Cracked hoof in horses. — Boger.) 

22. Upper timbs.—Convulsive twitching of arms ; cold hands.— 



SCIRRHINUM 


1125 


Stretching of upper limbs, with yawning without sleepiness.— Acute stitches 
in joints of both hands even when not moving them. — Jerking pain through 
wrists. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Convulsive twitching of legs. — Soreness between 
limbs.— Burning pain in ball of r. foot, as after freezing it. — Icy-cold feet. — 
Cold foot-sweat. — Perspiration only on toes. 

24. Generalities. — Weariness. — Spasmodic movements. — Pains over 
whole body. — Dull rheumatic pains ; < when exercising, > when at rest. — 
Deficiency of blood. — Heat, with aversion to undress or uncover. — Respiration 
•anxious. — Sweetish taste. — Symptoms generally appearing in 1. upper ex- 
tremity ; on 1. side generally ; in lower belly ; lower part of chest. — < In 
morning ; during inspiration ; from undressing. — > While lying in bed ; 
after lying down ; from wrapping up warmly. 

25. Skin. — Soreness in the bends of the joints. — Skin of neck painfully 
sensitive to slightest rubbing of neckband, with red, almost denuded spots. — 
Handling the fresh squills caused blisters. — Eruptions like itch, with burning- 
itching. — Gangrene. — H ard swellings. 

26. Sleep. — Frequent yawning without sleepiness. — Restless sleep, with 
much tossing about. — Dreamed that his body was excessively swollen ; dream 
so vivid, on waking felt himself to see if it was so. 

27. Fever. — Pulse small and slow, slightly hard. — Chill internally at 
night, with external heat. — Chilliness towards evening when walking, not 
while sitting. — Heat, dry, burning, internally predominates. — Great sensation 
of heat in body, afternoon and evening, generally with cold feet. — Whenever 
he uncovers himself during the heat he suffers from chilliness and pain. — 
Perspiration wanting, even during the violent burning heat. 


Scirrhinum. 

. Carcinominum. The nosode of Scirrhous Cancer. Trituration. 

Clinical. — Breast, cancer of. Cancer. Cancerous diathesis. Glands, enlarged 
Haemorrhages. Varicosis. Worun. 

Charaoteristios. — Burnett is my authority for this nosode. He 
proved it on himself, and produced a tremendous sinking at the 
navel, which he regarded as a keynote for its use. Scirrh. has aided 
the cure of many cases of breast tumour in Burnett’s hands. With 
it he cured a man of hard glands which appeared on the left side 
of the neck after other glar/ds had been removed by the patient’s 
brother, a surgeon. Haemorrhages and varicosis of legs and feet, 
with purple points,’ have also been cured by Burnett with Sarrh. A 
patient to whom Burnett had giVen Scirrh, mentioned to him that it 
had caused the passage of an enormous number of threadworms. On 
this hint Burnett gave it with great success in many cases of this 
troublesome complaint ; and I have verified this experience. In 
inveterate cases where Cina and Teucr, have given little relief, Scirrh, 
has wrought a great change for the better. The time of < of Scirrh, 
is from 5 to 6 p.m., and irregularly on through the night. 



1126 SCIRRHINUM— SCORPIO 

Relations. — Compare: Other nosodes. In helminthiasis, Cin., 
Teuc., Sul., Saba. Sinking sensation, Sul., Sep., Helleb., Hydrast. 
Cancer, Con., Hydrast., Phyt, Sang., Cund., Ars. 


Scolopendra. 

Scolopendra morsitans (and other species). Centipede. N, 0 , Chilo- 

poda (sub-ord. Scolopendridcc). Tincture ofjiving animals. 

Clinical* — Angina pectoris. Convulsions. Malignant pustule. 

Gharacteristios. — The effects of Centipede bites have been 
observed on several persons. Swelling, pain, inflammation, and 
gangrene of the bitten part, with appearance like malignant pustule 
in one case, were constant symptoms. Vomiting and prascordial 
anxiety occurred, and in one fatal case the paroxysms of vomiting 
increased in intensity till the child in a convulsive struggle ceased to 
breathe. A symptom worth noting is No perspiration of the right 
arm for three months.” 

SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Vertigo. — Headache. 

II. Stomach. — Nausea. — ^Vomiting of a pale yellow, glairy matter, 
continued at short intervals with increasing violence, till the child in a con- 
vulsive struggle ceased to breathe. 

ig. Heart. — Praecordial anxiety. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Arm greatly swollen ; erysipelatous blush extend- 
ing half over arm ; black dotted impression in two rows three-quarters of an 
inch apart, raised in dark lines extending from dot to dot, 5^ inches long, 
thus showing the entrance of every foot ; pain deep and dull ; no perspira- 
tion on r. (bitten ?) arm for three months. 

24. Generalities. — Instant complaint which grew rapidly worse, which 
was described by the child as being all over (from S. heros, — The child, a girl 
of four, died in 8 h.). 

25. Skin. — A large red spot, becoming black, in the middle of which an 
eschar forms as large as a five-franc piece. — The whole affection resembled a 
malignant pustule, and was associated with swelling of lymphatic glands. — 
Violent itching, followed by violent pain in bitten part. 

27. Fever. — No perspiration of r. arm for three months. 


Scorpio. 

Scorpio (several species). Scorpion. N. 0 , Scorpionida. (Class, 
Arachnida.) Tincture of living animals. 

Clintoal. — Salivation. Strabismus. Tetanus. 

Gharacteristios* — Scorpion stings are attended with a certain 
amount of danger, especially to children. The symptoms of the 



SCROPHULARIA 


1127 


Schema are from effects of stings. Scorp. has not been proved in the 
attenuations. Pain and swelling of the injured part are first expe- 
rienced, and constitutional symptoms follow. These include sleepi- 
ness, prostration, and possibly tetanus. Strabismus has been observed 
in some cases ; and the pupils are dilated. 

Relations. — Compare : Vespa., Scol., Tarent., Apis. 


SYMPTOMS. 

3. Eyes. — Pupils dilated. — Slight strabismus. 

5. Nose. — Frequent sneezing. 

6. Face. — Trismus. 

8. Mouth. — Saliva abundant. 

12. Abdomen. — Meteorism. 

24. Generalities. — Bitten part much swollen, with violent pains lasting 
from one to three days. — Heat and pain at bitten spot, sleepiness, sneezing, 
restlessness ; later, abundant saliva, meteorism ; later, trismus or tetanus. — 
Complete prostration. — Always acute pains in and diminished temperature of 
the part bitten. 


Scrophularia. 

Scrophularia nodosa (and S. Marilandica, the American variety intro- 
duced from Europe and Asia). Fig-wort. V. 0 , Scrophu- 
lariaceze. Tincture of whole fresh plant. 

Clinical. — Appendicitis. Breast, tumours of. Colic. Deafness. Dyspepsia. 
Enuresis. Eyes, scrofulous affections of. Glands, enlarged. Liver, pains in. 
Palms, cramp in. Pemphigus. Rheumatism. Sigmoid flexure, pain in. Sleepiness. 
Stiff-neck. Ureter, pain in. 

Charaoteristios. — The plants of the genus Scrophularia have 
generally an unpleasant smell. The generic name is derived from 
the property which the roots were supposed to have of curing 
scrofula. A decoction of one of the common British species, 
S. nodosa y is sometimes used by farmers to cure the scab in swine 
(Treas. of BoL), Serph. was proved by Franz, and later in America by 
W. H. Blakeley, who took from 10 to 60 drops of the tincture several 
times a day. Pareira gives the analysis of the drug, which shows 
it to be very complex. It Contains much oxalate and carbonate of 
lime, as well as Magnesia and Silica. The most remarkable of Franz’s 
symptoms were : Excessive drowsiness ; in forenoon, in afternoon, 
and before and after eating ; vertigo when in upright position ; accu- 
mulation of sweetish water in several parts of the tongue ; sensation of 
a soft body in the gullet ; constriction of chest ; oppression of chest 
with trembling as after much weeping. Most of these symptoms 
.were confirmed by Blakeley. The chief clinical authority for Setph. 
is Cooper, who has used it 011 some old indications. Gerarde mentions 
‘‘ hard kernels and painful and swollen piles as indicating it. 



1128 


SCROPHULARIA 


Cooper gave it to a patient who had been poisoned by an Indian 
arrow-poison which produced inflammation and suppuration of the 
glands ; Scrph, relieved a most painful condition of the rectum and 
purulent discharge that had kept up years afterwards. Cooper has 
reduced strumous glands with it ; and cured deafness in a ** bull- 
necked patient ; and also cured a case of sycosis menti, using Scrph. 
externally as well as giving it internally. Nodosities in the breast 
is another indication of Cooper’s. It has produced, according to 
Cooper, a sickly, giddy feeling, with a sense of weakness and sinking 
at pit of chest, too weak to speak ; along with pairn from forehead to- 
back of head. The provings brought out several symptoms in the 
lower abdomen. Cooper has seen Saph, in the form of a poultice 
relieve peritonitis affecting the lower abdomen. Colic froin slight 
vexation occurred in Franz’s proving. Blakeley had pain in sigmoid 
flexure. Both had pains in the liver. The symptoms are : < In 
morning ; by study ; in cold air; breathing cold air ; deep breathing ; 
lying on right side ; by rest ; after food ; by pressure. > In warm 
room. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Bry. (chest symptoms). Followed well 
by : Dig. (in enlarged glands. — R. T. C.). Compare : Botan., Dig., 
Euphr., Grat. Pains in joints < by rest, > in warm room, Rhus. 
Sleepiness, Nux m., Op., Lup. 

Cau8ation.~Vexation. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Despondency, much troubled about the past, and very 
apprehensive about the future ; passed off in a few days, leaving intellect 
clear. — Miserable and sluggish feeling in mind when moving about. 

2. Head. — ^Vertigo : in top of head when standing ; even with severe 

aching in supra-orbital region. — Dizziness, fulness, and pressure in vertex. — 
Heaviness and distress in head, as after eating too much. — On rising tKe 
second morning an indescribable pain and fulness in whole head, followed by 
epistaxis, esp. occiput and vertex, causing congestion of conjunctiva with 
puffiness. — Darting pain at exit of r. facial nerve from hylo-mastoid foramen, 
darting to r. eye. —Headache above eyebrows while walking. — Severe head- 
ache through temples, appearing every morning, extending to vortex and 
occiput. — Severe lancinating pain in vertex, forcliead, and temples ; dull and 
throbbing, returning periodically ; < resting ; < in open air ; < leaning 
forward; < by study. • 

3. Eyes. — Severe cutting pains in eyes, unable to move them, passed 
off with profuse sweat. — Pulsating stitches in r. eyebrow. — Soreness of eye- 
balls. — Black spots or film before eyes. — On closing eyes visions. of objects. — 
(Scrofulous photophobia ; rivals Con. in this. — Blepharospasm. — Scrofulous 
keratitis. — Tinea ciliaris with minute pustulation. — R. T. C.) 

4. Ears. — Ringing in ears and sudden loss of hearing. — (Deafness in 
bull-necked boys. — Deafness before and after menses, improving during the 
flow.--Eczema behind r. ear and round navel. — R. T. C.) 

5. Nose. — Dry coryza with sternutation. 



SCROPHULARIA 


1129 

6. Face.— Pleasant warmth in cheeks.— (Recurrent periostitis o£ lower 
jaw in a syphilitic.— R. T. C.) 

8 . Mouth. — Teeth feel as if loose, pain in carious teeth, < upper jaw, 
— Gums bleed very freely, — First great increase of saliva, then mouth dry. — 
Accumulation of sweetish water in several parts of tongue.— Qualmish, stick* 
ing taste just above pit of throat, frequently lasting an hour, with sensation as 
if a soft substance (a plug of mucus) were lodged there.-— Bitter taste in 
mouth. 

• 9. Throat. — Thick, tenacious, offensive mucus in throat, in forenoon. — 
Rancid taste in throat,* with great weakness and stiffness in hollo'ws of knees. 
— Irritation of oesophagus. 

11. Stomach. — Appetite greatly inci eased at first; later nausea with 
weakness, and oppression at epigastrium. — Feeling as if he had missed his 
regular meal. — (Dyspepsia removed by the proving.) 

12. Abdomen. — Pain in r. hypochondrium, < deep inspiration or lying 
r. side. — Cutting in liver on pressure. — Twisting-pinching pain in umbilicus 
( 1 . side). — Colic just below navel and some griping in the side in afternoon. — 
Griping below navel, 7 a.ni. (after a slight vexation). — Pain in sigmoid flexure. 
— Dull, heavy, periodic pain < when abdomen compressed, legs extended. — 
(Appendicitis as a local remedy. — R.T.C.) 

13. Stool and Anus. — Several stools daily with tenesmus. — Protruding 
piles which bleed and pain (R. T. C.). 

14. Urinary Organs.— Pinching and tearing as if in ureter, extending 
from anterior superior spine of ilium down to pubis. — Increased secretion of 
urine with burning in urethra. — Frequent scanty emission of urine in 
afternoon. — Enuresis somni (R. T. C.). 

16. Female Sexual Organs, — Recurring metritis with painful piles : 
irritation, soreness and burning in vagina and anus went away, as well as 
headadic, that prevented her standing up (from local application. — R. T. C.). 

17. Respiratory Organs. — On turning on either side, violent dyspnoea 
< on r. than 1., with cutting in liver on pressure. 

*18. Chest. — Oppression of chcvsl with tremulous movement as from 
much weeping. — Pain in whole i. lung, on taking a deep inspiration, which 
ss cough without expectoration. — Cutting in upper 1 . lung, < breathing cold 
air. — Constricted feeling in chest, which =s uneasiness. — Cramp-like pain 
transversely across lower chest, as after much weeping, — Pain about bifurca- 
tion of trachea. — Stitches in r. chest, about 6th rib, with shivering, — Violent 
pinching stitches near r. last true ribs, while walking, during rest, seeming to 
be in liver. 

19. Heart. — Anguish in pra5*cordia, < after food. — Indescribable sensa- 
tion in heart, with severe audible palpitation.— Pulse full, regular. 

20. Neck and Back. — Stiff neck with pain and contraction of r. ster no- 
mastoid muscle.— Pain in whole spinal column, with slight opisthotonos. 

21. Limbs. — Drawing rheumatic pain in all flexors of arms and legs. — 
Tingling in extremities as from a blow on a nerve. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Deep-seated cutting pain in all muscles of arms.— 
Tingling or buzzing in arms and hands. — Sticking and drawing in r. palm, 
from joints of fingers to middle of hand as far as carpal bones (muscular cramp 
of palms). 



1130 


SCROPHULARIA— SCUTELLARIA 


24. Generalities.— Weakness ; languor ; wants to lie down.— Cutting 
pains in articulations, like those of Rhus, but more intense and longer-lasting, 
< by rest and in open air, > in warm room ; darting from knee to ankle- 
joints, which feel stiff. — (Threatened abscesses that show no sign of disap- 
pearing. — R. T. C.) 

25. Skin. — Sallow skin. — Burning of surface when rubbed. — Prickling 

itching all over, < back of hand, inside wrists and between fingers. — Falling 
off of hair stopped by lotion of Scroph. (R. T. C.). — Pemphigus gangrenosus 
and its allies. — Irritating vesicles on inside of lip, loaded with spindle-celled 
epithelium (goes from local application. — R. T. C.). ^ 

26. Sleep. — Strong disposition to sleep : in morning with weariness and 
fulness in whole body ; irresistible before and after a meal, with prolonged 
afternoon sleep. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness : on moving about in cool air ; after rising in 
morning, for several hours, passing off with profuse sweat, which was followed 
by stupor and absence of all the symptoms. — Whole body after first day feels 
very dry and hot, with burning sensation, followed by profuse sweat. 


Scutellaria. 

Scutellaria laterifolia. Mad-dog Skull-cap. N, 0 . Labiatae. 

Tincture of fresh plant. 

ClinioaL — Ardor urinae. Brain, irritatit^n of. Chorea. Delirium tremens. 
Dentition. Exophthalmos, Flatulence. Headache, nervous. Hiccough. Hydro- 
phobia. Hysteria. Night-terrors. Sleeplessness. Tobacco-heart. 

Gharaoteristios. — Scuiel.j says Hale, who introduced it into 
homoeopathy, is in the domestic practice of North America what 
Valerian is in that of Europe. Its calming effects on the nervous 
system have been known ever since the settlement of New England.^’ 
Provings by G. W. Gordon {Allen) and G. H. Royal (New, Old, and 
Forgotten Remedies) give the homoeopathic data. Royal (^ 4 . H,, xxiii. 
269) had this indication for Sail, given him by a friend : Nervo- 
bilious headache with the nervous symptoms uppermost, and nothing 
the matter with her.^' He relates this case : Miss M., 32, head of a 
large school, complained of being used up ; unable to sleep or think. 
Pain in head almost constant, sometimes frontal, mostly at base of 
brain. Whenever called upon to overdo herself cannot sleep that 
night, and then there is either a nervous explosion the following day 
or a nervous sick headache, either being followed by complete 
collapse. This was in May. Pic, a(.,, and later Phos, ac,, gave relief, 
and in September patient resumed work. Late in December there 
was another breakdown, and StycK pho, was given. A week later, after 
a very long and fatiguing day’s work. Royal was summoned at 2 a.m. 
He found the patient screaming. Every few minutes she had to 
urinate, and passed only a few drops. Stools frequent, loose, watery. 
Pulse irregular. ScuL ^ was given, ten drops every half-hour. 
Patient was better after the second dose, slept after the fourth. 



SCUTELLARIA 


1131 


Since then she has kept the medicine by her, has only taken it when 
overworked, and has never had a nerve explosion or a headache 
since. In this case there was “ nothing the matter with her”— i.e., 
no organic defect to which the sufferings could be attributed. 
RoyaFs provers took 3X and 30X. Gordon took repeated doses of 10 
to 50 drops of 0. Hale quotes many eclectic writers who give these 
indications : (i) Depression of nervous and vital powers after long 
sickness, over-exercise, over-study, long-continued and exhausting 
labours. It controls nervous agitation (King). [It was Burnett’s 
chief remedy in the nervous debility after influenza.] (2) Scudder 
mentions chorea ; delirium tremens ; and hydrophobia (as its popular 
name suggests). Rafinesque cites cases of prevention of hydrophobia ; 
and Hale observed it produce in a patient taking i x, after each dose 
— Spasmodic or constrictive closing of jaws, and a tightness of the 
muscles of the face.” [A writer, quoted N, 7 . Med, Times^ xxiv. 318, 
says ScuL in delirium tremens has the remarkable effect of calming 
feari] (3) Paine adds these indications : Subsultus tendmum following 
fevers, in delirium tremens, epilepsy, catalepsy, hysteria. (4) Coe (who 
uses Scuiellariity the concentrated preparation) mentions sunstroke ; 
tenesmus ; tetanus ; cramps. Hale has used it with success in sleep- 
lessness, night-terrors, hysteria, nervous agitation from pain or excit- 
ing emotions, cerebral irritation of children from dentition or intestinal 
irritation. Like its relation, Ly copus, ^ it caused weak and irregular 
action of the heart and protrusion of the eyes. It has been found 
useful in weak heart resulting from cigarette smoking {M, Cent., iii. 
463). Churton {B. M, y., quoted H. /?., i. 78) gave 60 drops of the 
tincture every two hours in a case of severe and rapid hiccough ” 
which Chloroform, Morphia, and Pilocarpine had failed to relieve per- 
manently. After the eighth dose the patient slept, and the spasms 
gradually diminished, and stopped for good by the fourth day. The 
heinicrania is > moving about in open air. (But there is also head- 
ache < from motion.) All symptoms are > by sleep. < By over- 
work or over-exertion. 

Relations. — Compare : Heart, Grave’s disease, and botan., Lepus. 
Nervous exhaustion, Cypr. (Cypr., according to Hale, acts more on 
brain, Scut, on spinal cord). Trismus, Nux. Hydrophobia, Agar., 
Fagus, Lach., Bell., Hdfb. ‘‘Overworked women,” Mag. c. 

Causation. — Excitement. Influenza, Overwork (mental or 

physical). Tobacco (heart). Pain (causes nervous agitation). 


SYMPTOMS. 

# 

X. Mind. — Mind confused on attempting to study ; cannot concentrate 
attention. — Feeling of stupor on rising. — Apathy. — Irritability. — (Fear.) 

3* Head. — ^Vertigo; soon after breakfast; with photophobia. — Dull, 
oppressive headache; on rising; < by study.— -Full, throbbing sensation in 
head. — Sensation as if cranial contents were confined in too small a space.— 
Before rising, hemicrania, most severe over r. eye ; > moving about in open 
air.— Pain in occiput.— Headache < by eating ; > by motion. 



1 132 SCUTELLARIA— SECALE CORNUTUM 

3. Eyes.— Eyes feel as if protruding ; as if pressed from within out- 
wards. — Aching in eyeballs. — Eyeballs painful to touch. 

6. Face.- - Face flushed towards evening. — Spasmodic, constrictive 
closing of jaws and tightness of muscles of face (Hale, from ix). 

8. Mouth.-~-Taste : bad ; sour ; bitter. 

9. Throat. — Sensation of lump in throat which could not be swallowed. 

11. Stomach. — Poor appetite. — Sour eructation. — Nausea. — Vomiting of 
sour ingesta, hiccoughs, pain and distress in stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Gas in bowels ; fulness and distension. — Colic. — Un- 
easiness, * 

13. Stool. — Bowels regular with white stools. — Diarrhoea, light-coloured ; 
stools preceded by colic. 

14. Urinary Organs. — On attempting to urinate, slight difficulty, as if 
muscles of urethra partially paralysed. — Urine rather scanty. — Bile in urine. 
— Frequent micturition but quantity small. 

18. Chest. — Oppression ; sticking in heart region. — Dull pain vertically 
beneath sternum. 

19. Heart. — Sticking in heart region. — Sensation of throbbing about 
heart, evening. — Pulse : very variable in force ; intermitting. 

20. Back. — Sharp pains occasionally felt in lumbar region, proceeding 
mostly from 1. kidney region. 

21. Limbs. — Occasional twitchings in muscles of arms and legs. 

24. Generalities. — Languor on rising in morning. — Tremulousness and 
twitching of muscles. — Restless uneasiness ; must move about. — Sticking in 
various parts. 

26. Sleep. — Frightful dreams. — Sudden wakefulness. — Sleeps late in 
morning and wakes with severe headache. — Frequent sudden starting from 
sleep. 

27. Fever. — Slight chilliness, esp. on getting up. 


Secale Gornutum. 

Secale cornutum. Spurred Rye. Ergot of Rye. [The black, horn- 
like spur into which the grains of Rye (Secale cereale, N, 0- 
Gramineae) are changed by the fungus Claviceps purpurea.] 
N, 0, Fungi. Tincture of the fresh spurs collected just before 
harvest. * 

Clinieal.-— Abortion, threatened. After-pains. Albuminuria. Anus, incon- 
tinence of ; open. Asthenopia. Bladder^ paralysis of. Boils. Carbuncles. 
Cataract. Chilblains. Cholera; infantum. Chorea. Convulsions. Cramps. 
Diabetes. Diaphragm, cramp in. Diarrhoea. Distortions. Dysphagia. Epilepsy. 
Epistaxis. Feet, cramps in ; burning of; coldness of. Fibroma. Gangrene. Gas- 
tritis. Glands, swelling of ; suppuration of. Goitre. Haematuria. Haemor- 
rhages. Haemorrhagic diathesis. Heart, palpitation of. Hiccough. Hysteria. 
Impotence. Liver, enlargement of. Lochia, fetid. Lumbago. Menstruation, 
excessive. Metrorrhagia. Milk, suppressed. Miscarriage. Morvan*s disease. 
Myelitis; diffusa. Nails, degeneraiton of Neuralgia. Night-sweats. Numbness. 
CEsophagitis. Ovaries, tumours of Paralysis; post-diphtheritic; spastic. 



SECALE CORNUTUM 


”33 


Placenta, retained. Post-partuni haemorrhage. Pregnancy, false tains of. 
Purpura. Raynaud s disease. Small-pox, haemorrhagic. Spinal irritation. 
Stamm^ing. Stomach, cancer of. Strabismus. Stricture, spasmodic. Throm- 
bosis. Tongue, biting of. Typhoid. Ulcers. Uterus, inertia of ; neuralgia of : 
prolapse. 

ChftPactdristios. — Rye and grasses are apt to be affected with 
the Ergot disease in damp seasons, and when grown on damp, ill- 
drained lands. If breeding cows are turned on pastures where 
infected grasses grow they are very liable to drop their calves. Ergot 
has been known as a hastener of parturition from remote times. Its 
’other actions have been for the most part learned from the terrible 
epidemics of “ Ergotism which have occasionally devastated dis- 
tricts in which Rye infected with Ergot has been ground into flour 
and eaten by the population. Death takes place in convulsions ; or 
else from gangrene and consequent exhaustion ; or from exhausting 
haemorrhages or discharges, as diarrhcea. Many who escape imme- 
diate death are reduced to a cachectic state, from which they never 
recover ; are paralysed, have limbs distorted and senses impaired. 
In general the sufferer retains a clear intellect and a good, even 
abnormally good, appetite to the last. The nervous symptoms of Sec, 
are convulsive. The body is at times rigid ; at times rigidity alter- 
nates with relaxation. This is especially seen in the hands, which are 
either clenched or have the fingers spread widely apart (a keynote 
symptom). The muscles of the face and abdomen twitch. There is 
incontinence or retention of urine. Spasmodic retching, the stomach 
is violently contracted. Through the like action on the vaso-motor 
nerves there is first contraction and then dilatation of blood-vessels ; 
the fingers turn bluish black. This stagnation leads to dry gangrene 
of the parts. Sec, shrivels up the skin, makes it dry and harsh ; sallow 
complexion. It is therefore suited to — thin, scrawny women, feeble 
and of cachectic appearance ; women of irritable, nervous tempera- 
ment ; of pale, sunken countenance. To very old, decrepit persons. 
On the other hand, it is also suited to : I/ritable, plethoric subjects. 
Women of very lax muscular fibre ; everything seems loose and open ; 
no action, vessels flabby : passive haimorrhages, copious flow of thin, 
black, watery blood. For Sec, lessens the coagulating power of the 
blood, and produces a haemorrhagic diathesis ; persistent, offensive 
bleeding. Small wounds bleed persistently. Purpura comes within 
this category. One grand characteristic of Sec.^ which will determine 
its selection in many cases, is : “ < By external heat.’' This applies 
to cholera, purpura, gangrene, and any condition which may present 
symptoms of Sec, In cholerh cases calling for Sec, the patient is cold, 
almost pulseless ; there are spasmodic twitchings of muscles in various 
parts (especially spreading of fingers), eyes sunk, features pinched ; 
surface harsh, shrivelled, dry, as though no moisture were left in the 
body. Though cold to the touchy cannot bear to be covered. In spite of 
this coldness. Sec, has burning among its characteristic sensations : 
burning in all parts of the body as if sparks were falling on the patient. 
Another characteristic sensation is numbness ; tingling as if ants 
crawling all over, > from rubbing. This may accompany haemor- 
rhages, loss of other fluids, debility, or skin affections. In the later 



1134 SFXALE CORNUTUM 

stages of ergotism there is anaesthesia. The discharges are exhaust- 
ing and offensive. Diarrhoea is peculiar, involuntary ; with wide-open 
anus. The boils in which Sec, is indicated are small and painful, with 
green contents, mature very slowly, heal slowly, and are ve^ weaken- 
ing. The eyes are affected in various ways : Pustulous conjunctivitis ; 
suppuration of cornea ; dilated pupils, distortion, and strabismus ; 
ptosis ; suppressed tears. Catarrh has been caused in many in- 
stances. “ < From warmth will be the leading indication in many 
eye cases requiring Sec. Exophthalmic goitre has been cured with it ; 
the heart being acted on by Sec. as other hollow yiscera, and violent, 
palpitation induced. Sec. has a great affinity for the uterus, whether 
gravid or not. Though its use in ordinary doses in obstetric practice 
is attended with danger, it maybe used on its homoeopathic indications 
with perfect safety. It is indicated : (i) In threatened abortion, 
especially at the third month ; prolonged, bearing-down, forcing 
pains. (2) During labour when the pains are irregular, too weak, 
feeble, or ceasing ; everything seems loose and open, but there is no 
expulsive action ; fainting. (3) For after-pains when too long, too 
excessive ; or when there is hour-glass contraction of the uterus. 
(4) For suppression or non-appearance of the milk. The menses of 
Sec. are irregular ; copious, dark, fluid ; accompanied by labour-like 
pains in abdomen ; there may be a continuous watery discharge of 
blood during the whole time between the periods. Teste records 
this case : A lady, 50, fat, very soft flesh, liad flooding which nothing 
could stop. After several useless attempts. Teste gave large doses of 
Sec, with scarcely any effect. The patient asked for infinitesimal 
doses. At that time Teste had no faith at all in infinitesimals, but he 
yielded to the patient\s request, and gave one drop of the 6th. The 
flooding ceased immediately and permanently. Peculiar Sensations of 
Sec. are : As if intoxicated while undressing. As if eyes were spas- 
modically rotated. As of a solid plug in nose. As if tongue paralysed. 
As if there were some resistance to be overcome in speech. As of a 
heavy weight in stomach. Region of stomach as if contracted. Anus 
as if locked up. As if testes being drawn up to inguinal ring. Uterus 
as if burnt. As if contents of uterus would fall forward. As if soft 
air were creeping through back. As if sacrum would be forced out. 
As if something alive creeping under skin. As if fingers asleep. As 
if limbs had been a long time in hot w^ater. As if sparks of fire 
falling on different parts. As if mice creeping under skin. Fuzzy 
feeling in limbs. Sec. is indicated in Suppressions : tears ; lochia ; 
milk ; sw^eat. Thirst with dry mouth or .burning. Desires lemonade 
and sour things. Averse to fat and meat. The symptoms are : < 
By touch. > Lying doubled up in bed. Motion and any exertion 
<. Waling = giddiness. Many symptoms (cramps, twitchings) < 
night. Sinking spells 3 a.m. Open air >. Wants to be fanned. 
Warm ^plications <. Warm drink <. Wet bandages > labour 
pains. Cold applications >. < After eating. All symptoms < just 

before menses. The right side is predominantly affected. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Camph., Op. Compatible : Chi. (Teste 
classes Sec. with Chi. in his Ferrum group), Ars., Aco., Bell, Merc., 
Pul. Compare : In labour, Cinnamon In post-partum haemorrhage, 



SECALE CORNUTUM 


1^35 


Cinnamon increases labour-pains, controls profuse or dangerous 
flooding, is always safe, while Ergot is always dangerous.” — H. C. 
Allen). Labour-like pains, Pul, Sul., Bell., Calc., Caul., Gossyp., Lil. t., 
Sep., Vib. o. Cold skin, cannot bear to be covered, Camph. > 
Uncovering, Aco., Calc., Camph., Fer., lod., Lyc., Pul., Sul., Ver. 
Haemorrhages, Bovist (flow between periods ; menses flow mostly or 
only at night or early morning ; puffy condition of body ; parts feel 
enormously large), Mitchella (less passive, blood brighter, dysuria 
with the haemorrhage). Trill, p. (bright red and profuse, faint feeling, 
rapid, feeble pulse). Ham. (with hammering headache), Erig. (flow in 
fits and starts ; with dysuria), Ust. (flow bright red, partly clotted). 
Fer. ph., Chi. Hccmorrhagic diathesis, Lach., Phos. Cholera, 
shrivelled up, gangrene, burning sensation, Ars. (but Ars. is > by 
heat). Cholera collapse, Camph. (sudden), Ver. (cold sweat on fore- 
head). Follicular pharyngitis, K. bi. Cold surface, sunken, pale face, 
blue lips, tingling in limbs, speech stuttering, Lach. Action on blood- 
vessels, Bar. c. Diarrhoea discharged with great force, Samb., Grot. t. 
Anus wide open, Apis, Phos. Threatened abortion at third month, 
Sabi. Cholera morbus, Colcli. Diabetes, Plb. Burning feet, cramp 
in calves, Sul. Eyes < from warm applications (Asar. > cold wash- 
ing). Exophthalmic goitre, Lpus., Scut., Thyr. Spastic paralysis, 
Lath. Old persons. Con. Twitching, coldness, chilblains, cholera, 
also botan., Agar. Compare also : Ergotinum, which sometimes acts 
when Sec. is indicated and fails (see case under Ergotinum). 

Causation. — Lifting (:= abortion). Injury (=s gangrene). Sexual 
excess. 


SYMPTOMS. 

I. . Mind. — Discouragement and timidity. — Great anxiety. — Sadness and 
melancholy. — Great anguish. — Furor, with desire to jump into the water, — 
Madness and inclination to bile. — Fear of death. — Mania. — Weakness of the 
intellectual faculties (stupid, half-slecpy condition ; moaning). — Mental aliena- 
tion. — Delirium. — Loss of consciousness. — Consciousness seems to continue 
to the last breath ; and just before death it seems as though the patient would 
improve. 

2. Head. — Head confused and stupefied (unconsciousness with heavy 
sleep, preceded by tingling in head and limbs ; in haemorrhages from the 
uterus). — Sensation as from intoxication while undressing. — Vertigo as from 
intoxication. — Stupefaction, with tingling in head and pain in limbs, which 
are < from motion. — Dirninuti 9 n and loss of senses, sight, hearing, &c. — 
Peculiar feeling of lightness of head, esp. in occipui.. — Attacks of vertigo of 
different kinds, also chronic. — Headache with dull and painful confusion, esp. 
in occiput.— Semilatcral headache (l.^. — Hair falls out. — Scalp sore.— Twisting 
of head to and fro. 

3. Eyes. — Eyeballs sunk deep in the sockets ; and surrounded by blue 
margins. — Pupils spasmodically contracted or else dilated. — Convulsed eyes. 
— Squinting.— Pain in eyes, with feeling as if spasmodically rotated.— Fixed, 
wild look. — Cataract, hard or soft; with headache, vertigo, and roaring in 
ears. — Suppuration of cornea; < from warm applications. — Suppressed 



SECALE CORNUTUM 


1136 

secretion of tears.— Eyes yellow. — Complete blindness. — Double or triple 
vision.— Mist, spots and a veil before the sight.— Weakness of sight.— Spark- 
ling before the eyes and cloudiness of sight. — Exophthalmic goitre. 

4. Ears. — Humming and roaring in ears ; and hardness of hearing. — 
Undue sensitiveness of hearing, even slightest sound re-echoed in head and 
made her shudder.— Transient deafness. 

5. Nose. — Sneezing. — Nose feels stopped yet watery discharge runs 
from it. — Nose stopped 1. side as with a solid plug. — Nose-bleed : blood dark, 
runs continuously, with great prostration, small, thread-like pulse; in pld 
people or drunkards ; in young women ; from debility.^ 

6. Face. — Face discoloured, pale, yellow, wan, with eyes hollow and 
surrounded by a blue circle. — Distorted features. — Livid spots on face. — Face 
of a deep red. — Swelling of face. — ^Tingling in face. — Forehead hot. — Mus- 
cular twitchings, usually begin in face and then spread all over body, 
sometimes increasing to dancing and jumping. — Lips bluish or deathly 
pale. — Lips and mouth painfully contracted (spasmodic distortion ; risus 
sardonicus). 

7. Teeth. — Lockjaw. — Grinding of teeth. — Loosening and falling out 
of teeth. — Bleeding from gums. — Difficult dentition. 

8. Mouth. — Very offensive breath. — Increased secretion of saliva. — 
Dryness of mouth, with thirst. — Haemoptysis. — Sanguineous or yellow'i.sh 
green foam before mouth. — Tongue discoloured, brown or black; or else 
loaded with a thick coating (of mucus). — Painful tingling in tongue and throat. 
— Swelling of tongue. — Stammering, embarrassed, indistinct, weak speech ; as 
if the tongue were paralysed ; or there were resistance to be overcome, — 
Twitching of tongue. — Frequently bites tongue. 

9. Throat. — Dryness of throat. — Burning sensation or troublesome 
tingling or crawling in throat. — Follicular pharyngitis; hawks up little 
follicular exudation. — Paralysis of muscles of swallowing and speaking ; in 
danger of choking. — Inflammation of the oesophagus. 

10. Appetite. — Dulness of the taste. — Burning, insatiable thirst. — Un- 
natural appetite, even when dying from exhausting discharges from bowels. 
— Insatiable hunger, esp. for acid things. 

11. Stomach. — Frequent risings. — Disgust, esp. for meat and fatty 
things, and nausea. — Continuous nausea; < after eating. — Nausea and inclina- 
tion to vomit. — Hiccough. — Retching and vomiting of bilious, crude matter. 
— Easy vomiting. — Vomiting of food, with great debility. — Vomiting of lum- 
brici. — ^Vomiting of mucus. — ^Vomiting of black bile. — Vomiting of dark brown, 
coffee-grounds fluid ; of all food and drink. — Haemorrhage from stomach. — 
Stomachache. — Cramp in stomach. — Excessively painful sensibility, distress- 
ing oppression (as from a weight), and anguish in pit of stomach, with 
ineffectual want to vomit.— Burning sensation in scrobiculus and epigastrium. 
— Great anxiety and pressure in pit of stomach, with great sensibility to touch. 
— Inflammation and gangrene of stomach. — Inflammation ahd cancer in 
stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — ^Abdomen excessively inflated and tight. — Cuttings and 
tearing pains in abdomen. — Inflammation and gangrene of the liver. — Liver 
enlarged. — Burning (or coldness) in abdomen. — Fixed, burning pains in 
splenic and lumbar regions,— Pains in the loins as from false labour pains.— 



SECALE CORNUTUM 


1137 

Colic, with pains in sacrum and thighs, frequent risings, and vomitings.-- 
Painful colic, with convulsions. — Sensation of excessive coldness in abdomen 
and back.— Burning sensation in abdomen.— Strong pulsation in umbilical 
region. — Borborygmi. — Pains in hypogastric region. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation, with continued and ineffectual 
^nt to evacuate. — Loose, frequent evacuations, with serous, slimy, or else 
discoloured or brownish faeces.— Diarrhoea of a putrid smell. — Diarrhoea, with 
sudden prostration of strength. — Involuntary (very watery) evacuations. — 
Offensive, watery diarrhoea (in child-bed).— Cholera ; diarrhoea after the 
cholera. — Diarrhoea : fiequent brown discharges, dark-coloured ; very offen- 
sive ; thin, olive green ; very exhausting ; pernicious.— Haemorrhage from 
the bowels. — Expulsion of worms. — Paralysis of rectum and anus. — Anus 
wide open.^ 

14. Urinary Organs. — Suppressed secretion of urine. — Scanty, hot, 
burning urine. — Emission of urine, drop by drop, difficult, scanty, with con- 
tinued want to urinate. — White urine, clear like water. — Increased secretion 
of urine. — Urine retained. — Bladder paralysed. — Enuresis ; of old people ; 
pale, watery, or bloody urine. — Hcematuria ; bloody, albuminous urine ; thick 
black blood. — Urinary deposit like white cheese. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Numerous erections, even after coition. — 
After lightness in occiput, strong dragging in spermatic cord, so that testes 
seemed drawm up to inguinal ring. — After sexual excess palpitation of heart. 
— Weak memory after exhausting coition ; impotence.— Chronic spasmodic 
stricture of urethra. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Catamenia too profuse and of too long 
duration, sometimes with violent spasms. — Metrorrhagia of a black, liquid 
blood, flowing esp. during a slight movement, sometimes with tingling in legs 
and great debility, — Discharge of blood during pregnancy. — Labour ceases, 
and instead twitchings and convulsions. — Too long and too painful after- 
pains. — Suppression of milk. — Miscarriage (esp. in third month). — Defective 
contraction of uterus after miscarriage. — Swelling and warts on the cervix 
uteri, which is partially open. — Gangrene of vaginal mucous membrane, with 
a dark, slate colour. — ^Vagina hot or cool. — Sanguineous congestion in uterus. 
— Offensive discharge from uterus causing her to vomit (Ussher). — Lochia 
scanty and fetid, or of too long duration and sanguineous (followed by fever 
and inflammation of uterus).— Puerperal convulsions.— [Female genital organs 
in general ; pains like labour pains, which are protracted for a long time, skin 
cold and no wish to be covered, &c. ; labour pains ceasing ; labour pains too 
weak; abortion in the characteristic patients. — H. N. G.] — Cancer and gan- 
grene of uterus. — Prolapse of utcn>s. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Heavy, anxious breathing, with moaning. — 
Spitting of blood, with or without cough. — Feeble voice, inaudible, stammer- 
ing. — Expectoration of blood during violent efforts to breathe. — Voice hoarse 

’ and hollow. — Painless aphonia in morning, as the day goes on he gets hoarse 
(produced. — R. T. C.). — Anxious and obstructed respiration, with sighs 
and sobs. 

18. Chest. — Dyspnoea and oppression of chest. — Suffocating oppression 
of chest, with cramp in diaphragm. 

19* Heart. — Praecordial tenderness. — Painful sensation over heart. — 
VOL. 11. 73 



1138 


SECALE CORNUTUM 


Praecordial anxiety.— Violent spasmodic palpitation of heart. — Pulse small, 
very rapid, contracted ; frequently intermittent ; fluttering, slow, depressed. 

20. Neck and Back. — Stiffness of nape of the neck. — Profuse miliary 
eruption on nape of neck and chest. — Sensation of coldness in back. — Pain 
in back and small of back.— Tingling and insensibility in back (extending to 
tips of fingers and toes). — [Severe pain in (lower) back < when walking much 
or sitting long in same position, — R. T. C.]. — (Lumbago.) 

21 . Limbs. — Drawing, crawling, tearing, and tingling in limbs and 
joints. — Distortion of limbs. — ^Jerks and convulsive movements in limbs, 
which manifest themselves csp. at night, often also periodically, and which 
are > by stretching the parts violently. — Contraction of hands, feet, fingers, 
and toes. — Limbs become cold, pale, and wrinkled, as after being a long time 
in hot water. — Disagreeable sensation of sleep and formication in limbs. — 
Cramps in legs, calves, arms, hands, and toes.— Burning of hands and feet. — 
Fuzzy feeling in limbs. — Cold gangrene of the limbs ; the dead part separates 
at the joints and drops off. — Trembling of limbs. — Weakness, heaviness, and 
torpor of limbs. — Numbness, insensibility, and coldness of limbs, esp. tips of 
fingers and toes. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Spasmodic curvature of the arm, with drawing in 
the part. — Burning sensation in the hands. — Swelling of the hands, with black 
pustules. — OEdematous swelling in the wrist. — Distortion of the hands. — 
Tingling, crawling, with numbness and insensibility in finger-tips. — Contrac- 
tion, distortion, and turning back of the fingers. — Spasms with fingers spread 
apart. — Peculiar prickling in tips of fingers that are very sensitive to cold 
after awhile they began to suppurate, and later the nails separated from their 
matrix and fell off one after another, leaving an unhealthy granulating surface 
— Degeneration of pulp of nails, the nails are raised. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Lassitude and soreness in the legs. — Contraction 
of the legs and toes. — Distressing cramps in calves and soles, esp. at night. — 
Burning sensation in (swollen) feet. — Distortion of feet. — Swelling of feet, 
with black pustules. — Feet seem asleep and stiff. — Mortification of toes. — 
Gangrena senilis. — Tingling in toes. 

24. Generalities.— For female complaints chiefly, and esp. when occur- 
ring in thin, scrawny, wrinkled females or children. — Skin is cold, but the 
patient does not wish to be covered up. — Copious vomiting of a mixture of 
thick, black, pitchy, bilious, and slimy matter, — Dry gangrene, particularly on 
r. side, beginning in toes and running up the limb. — Amaurosis occurring in 
patients characteristic of this drug ; hard hearing ; blue colour around eyes. 
— < From drawing up limbs ; esp. in troubles of childbed. — > From stretch- 
ing out the limbs.— Drawing, tearing, and tingling in the limbs and joints. — 
Violent and wandering spasmodic pains. — Cramps in legs, arms, and chest. — 
Burning sensation in all parts of the body, as if caused by sparks. — Tonic 
spasms ; of all extensors. — Tetanus.— Epileptiform convqjsions. — General 
atrophy and emaciation. — Rapid emaciation of paralysed parts. — Unsteady 
gait ; unsteadiness of the whole body ; trembling ; rapid sinking of strength. 
— Collapse when the patient cannot bear covering. — Syncope. — Great 
lassitude and indolence. — Paralysis. — Complete mortification of some parts 
by sphacelus. — ^Affections in general of r. side ; crooked limbs ; sensation of 
deadness in any part. — Loss of sensation throughout the body. 



SELENIUM 


1139 


25. Skin.— Skin sallow, lead-coloured, flaccid, and shrivelled.— Skin 
rough and dry. — Torpor and insensibility of the skin, — Miliary eruption, esp. 
on chest and nape of neck. — Petechije. — Purpura haemorrhagica. — Ecchymo- 
sis. — Furunculi. — Swelling and pain without inflammation ; coldness, blue 
colour, gangrene. — Black, gangrenous pustules.— Blackness of outer parts ; 
crawling on the skin as of insects. — Subcutaneous tingling. — General desqua- 
mation of epidermis. — Ulcers that turn black ; skin withered and gangrenous. — 
Heat, with thirst and want of perspiration.— Sanguineous vesicles, which 
turn to gangrene, in the limbs. — Anthrax becoming gangrenous. 

26. Sleep. — Strong inclination to sleep and coma.— Deep, lethargic 
sleep, — Sleeplessness, with agitation and dry heal. — Coma with delirium, 
starts, and fright. 

27. Fever. — Violent shivering, followed by violent internal burning heat, 
with violent thirst. — Excessive coldness in back, abdomen, and limbs. — Cold- 
ness of surface of body ; esp. of extremities and face ; dryness. — Dry heat, 
with quick pulse, agitation, and sleeplessness. — Small, suppressed pulse 
(generally slow and contracted, sometimes intermittent, only slightly accele- 
rated during the heat). — Pulse unchanged, even with the most violent attacks. 
— Cold perspiration. — Cold, clammy sweat all over, esp. above waist-line. 


Selenium. 

Selenium. An Element. Se. (A.W, 79.5). Trituration. 

Olinical. — Alcoholism. Ankle, itching eruption about. Comedo, Constipation. 
Debility. Enuresis. Hair, falling out. Headache. Hoarseness. Impotence 
Laryngitis, scrofulous ; tubercular. Liver, affections of ; rash over region of. Pria- 
pism. , Prostatitis. Prostatorrhoea. Pb0^a^is palinaris. Reveries. Scabies. 
Scalp, eczema of. Skitif unhealthy. Spermatorrheva. Stammering. Sun, effects of. 
Syphilis. 

. Characteristics, — Selenium was discovered in 1818 by Berzelius, 
and was named by him after the moon ((re\y)vr)) because it is found 
associated with Tellurium (Telliis, the earth). It is also found asso- 
ciated with Sulphur. All three belong to the same group ot elements. 
“ When precipitated it appears as a red powder, which melts when 
heated, and on cooling forms a brittle mass, nearly black, but trans- 
mitting red light when in thin plates. When heated in air it takes 
fire, burns with a blue flame, giving a Oxide of Selenium 

has a most penetrating and characteristic odour of putrid horse-radish. 
ScL undergoes a remarkable change in electrical resistance under the 
action of light : hence the use of Selenium cells {Cent. Did.). Scl. 
was introduced and proved by; Hering. A leading feature of it is 
the weakness it causes, a weakness involving all parts of the body ; 
easy fatigue from any labour, night-watching, mental exertion, and 
especially from hot weather. The hotter his body the weaker he is : 
strength rises as the sun sinks. This debility causes sluggishness : 
wants to sleep from sheer exhaustion, and is < after. Cannot bear 
any nervous drain, hence < after coitus or seminal emissions. Impo- 
tence. Debility after fevers. When the patient begins to walk after 



1 140 


SELENIUM 


typhoid and feels great weakness in the spine and fears paralysis Seh 
is indicated. Irritability, headaches, and other troubles following or < 
by seminal emissions. The headaches are accompanied by profound 
melancholy, and may be caused by indulgence in alcoholics or in tea, 
by hot weather, by over-study, and they are < by strong odours, as of 
musk, roses, &c. The headaches may be periodical, and are frequently 
located above the left eye. Many chronic liver affections are met 
with Sc/., the guiding symptoms in such cases being : Enlargement 
of liver with loss of appetite in the morning ; sharp stitching pain < 
on any movement or pressure, sensitiveness of liver ; and, especially,. 

fine rash over liver region.^^ There is constipation from atony, with 
impacted faeces : and dribbling of semen after stool, and also after 
micturition. Sufferings after seminal emissions — mental confusion, 
headache, almost paralytic weakness of spine, involuntaiy^ escape of 
prostatic fluid. I have cured with SeL many cases of hoarseness, the 
special indications being — hoarseness of singers, appearing as soon 
as they begin to sing ; or after long use of the voice ; with frequent 
necessity to clear the throat from accumulation of clear, starchy 
mucus. Scrofulous and incipient tubercular laryngitis have been cured 
with Scl, The parallelism with Sulph. is seen all through the patho- 
genesis of Stf/., and perhaps more especially in the skin. Sel. causes 
itching in folds of skin, as between fingers and about joints, especially 
the ankle-joint. The itching may occur in small spots, and be accom- 
panied by tingling (showing involvement of the nervous system). 
The scalp is affected with an eczematous eruption which oozes thin 
fluid after scratching. Hair falls off scalp and all parts of body. I 
have frequently relieved “psoriasis palmaris with SeLj which shows 
that it has a relation to syphilis. Among the Peculiar Symptoms of SeL 
are : Very forgetful in business, but during sleep dreams of what he 
had forgotten. Coryza ending in diarrhoea. Hungry at night ; 
longing for spirituous liquors, an almost irresistible maniacal desire. 
Sensation as if a biting drop were forcing its way out of the urethra. 
Irresistible desire to lie down and sleep ; strength leaves him sud- 
denly, especially in hot weather. Very great aversion to a draught of 
air, either warm, cold, or damp. Aversion to salted food. Pulsa- 
tion in whole body, especially in abdomen after eating [which I have 
verified]. Great emaciation of face, hands, legs, feet, affected parts, 
and single parts. SeL is Suited to blondes and persons of light com- 
plexion. The symptoms are < by touch and pressure. < By 
motion. > By rest. < After sleep. < By mental exertion. < 
After seminal losses. < From draught* of air, even if warm. < In 
open air. < From tea ; sugar ; salt ; lemonade ; wine. < In hot 
weather. < By sun, and with the sun^s increase (< towards noon, 
> as sun declines). > Taking cold'air or cold water into mouth, < 
Every afternoon (headaches). 

RelatioilB. — Antidoted by : Ign., Puls. (Mur. ac. in a case of mine). 
Incompatible : Chi., Wine. Compatible after : Calad., Nat. c., Staph., 
Pho. ac. (in sexual weakness). Itch checked by Merc, or Sul. often 
requires Sel. Compare : Hunger at night, Cin., Pso., Ign., Lyc. Im- 
pacted stool, Alo., Calc., Sanic., Sep., Sel. Impotence (Chlor. sudden). 
Priapism, glans drawn up, Berb. ; (glans drawn down, Canth.). Aphonia 



SELENIUM 


1 141 


of singers, Caust., Arg. m., Stan., Ar. t., Graph. Prostatitis and 
urethritis, Lith. c., Dig., Cyc., Caust, Lyc., Cop. Hot weather 
fatigue, Lach., Camph., Nat. c., Nat m. Bad effects of mental 
exertion and loss of sleep, Sul. Impotence, Sul. (Sul. has more cold- 
ness and shrivelling of the organs ; Sel. more total relaxation, so that 
semen escapes involuntarily and dribbles). Exhaustion consequent 
on protracted diseases, Sul. (Sul. has flushes of heat on least motion ; 
and gone feeling in forenoon). Periodical headaches, Sul. (Sel. every 
afternoon, < from tea ; Sul. once a week, < from coffee). Head- 
aches of drunkardsi or debauchees, Sul. (Sul. < from all forms of 
alcohol ; Sel. headaches are sometimes > from brandy ; also its gastric 
symptoms). Cat-naps, Sul. (Sel. wakes precisely at same hour, before 
rising tiipe, at which all symptoms < ; Sul. has not the periodic hour 
for waking, and does not fall asleep again). Itching in folds of skin, 
Sul. (Sel. has also “ tingling in spots ”). Chronic enlargement of 
liver, Sul. Loss of appetite in morning, Sul. (Sul. has increase of 
thirst ; Sel. has not. Sel. has white tongue ; Sul. has not). Emacia- 
tion, Nat. m., Chi, Debility from loss of fluids, Chi. Twitching of 
face, Tell. Bores fingers in nose. Cm., Ar. t. Throbbing after meals, 
Nat. c. < From tea, Thuj., Fer. Pain in back with emissions. Cob. 
Fatigue, Pic. ac. Sun effects, Sol. Larynx, Nat. sel. 

Causation. — Alcohol. Tea. Sugar. Salt. Lemonade. De- 
bauchery. Walking. Exertion. Masturbation. Loss of fluids. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Reveries of a religious and melancholy character. — Great 
loquacity; fond of conversing; esp. in evening. — Excessive forgetfulness, 
esp, in matters of business. — Great forgetfulness when awake, with distinct 
recollection during half sleep. — A kind of stammering ; he uses syllables of 
words in wrong connections, therefore pronounces some words incorrectly. — 
Difficult comprehension.— Absolute incapacity to execute any business what- 
ever. — Mental labour fatigues him. — Dread of society. 

2. Head. — The head becomes affected by intellectual labour. — ^Vertigo : 
on lifting head, rising from a seat ; raising himself in bed ; moving about ; 
with nausea, vomiting, faintness ; < (an hour) after breakfast and dinner. — 
Headache every afternoon. — Headache after drinking lemonade, wine, or tea. 
— ^Violent attacks of lancinating pains in head above (1.) eye, with desire to lie 
down, sensibility in exterior of head, copious emission of urine, anorexia, and 
melancholy, excited by walking (in the sun) and by strong smells. — Headache 
of drunkards; headache after debauchery. — Falling off of the hair when 
combing it ; also of eyebrows, whiskers, and genitals, with tingling-itching 
on scalp in evening, oozing after scratching, and with tension and sensation 
of contraction of scalp, with emaciation of face and hands. — Pain in scalp, as 
if hair were pulled out. 

3. Eyes. — Pains deep in orbits.— Spasmodic twitching of 1. eyeball. — 
Itching vesicles on eyebrows and margins of lids.— Falling off of eyebrows. 

4. Ears.— Ear stopped.— Hardening of wax in (1.) deaf ear. 

5. Nose. — Itching in nose, in nostrils, and on margins of alae nasi. — 
Tendency to bore lingers into nose. — Complete obstruction of nose (chronic). 



1142 SELENIUM 

— Coryza ending in diarrhoea.— Fluent coryza in evening. — ^Yellow, thick, 
gelatinous mucus in nose. 

6. Face. — Greasy shining skin of face. — Twitching in muscles of face. 
— Great emaciation of face and hands. — Upper lip cracked. — Comedones. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache which compels use of toothpick till the blood 
comes.— Boring in molars. —Teeth covered with mucus.— Toothache from 
tea. — The teeth become free of mucus, hard, and smooth, and crack when 
rubbed. — Toothache with feeling of coldness, > taking cold water and cold 
air into mouth. 

8. Mouth. — Pain under root of tongue. — Tongucr loaded with a thick, 
white coating in morning. — Stammering speech; articulates with great 
difficulty. 

9. Throat. — Dryness in throat. — Hawking of lumps of transparent 
mucus every morning. 

10. Appetite. — Sweetish, disagreeable taste after smoking. — ^Anorexia in 
morning (with white-coated tongue). — Hunger at night. — Dislike to salt things. 
— Frequent desire for brandy. — Bad effects from : sugar ; salt food ; tea ; 
lemonade. 

11. Stomach. — Hiccough and risings after smoking before eating. — 
Inclination to vomit. — Feels very sick after sleep. — Cramp in stomach. — 
Pressure in stomach as if cramp would occur. 

12. Abdomen. — ^'Phrobbing of the arteries in the whole body, esp. in 
abdomen after a meal. — Pain in the liver, esp. on taking an inspiration, 
extending to the renal region, with sensibility to external pressure. — Red 
itching, miliary eruption in the hepatic region. — Pains in r. side, around under 
last ribs, esp. on inspiration, extending to region of kidneys. — ^Violent shoot- 
ings in spleen when walking. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation. — Hard evacuations, followed by 
a discharge of mucus or of blood when passing the last portion of it ; stool so 
hard and impacted that it has to be removed by mechanical aid. — Stools 
exceedingly difficult and threaten to tear anus from their immense size ; hours 
spent in effort ; stool can be seen through distended anus as an immense, 
dark, hard ball ; sufferings great, patient becomes wonderfully agitated. — 
Somewhat liquid faeces, with tenesmus. — Filaments, like hairs, in faeces. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine: scanty and red in evening; red sedi- 
ment, like coarse sand. — Involuntary dribbling of urine when walking. — 
Dribbling of urine after micturition and after stool. — Sensation in tip of 
urethra, as if a biting drop were forcing its way out. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Tickling and itching in genitals, esp. in 
scrotum. — Impotence ; with lascivious ideas. — Pollutions, with flaccidity of 
penis. — Discharge of semen, drop by drop, during sleep. — Lascivious dreams 
with emissions which waken him, followed by lameness and weakness in 
small of back. — Flow of prostatic fluid dhring evacuation and at other times. 
— Thin and scentless semen. — During coition, feeble erection, too prompt 
emission, and long-continued voluptuous thrill. — Priapism, glans drawn up. 
— Gonorrhoea (secondary) ; gleet. — Debility (weakness in loins) and peevish- 
ness after coition. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses copious and dark. — Menses 
delayed about eight days. 



SELENIUM 


IH3 


17. Respiratory Organs.— -Hoarseness on beginning to sing (or from 
singing ; talking or long reading ; voice hoarse and husky). — Hawking up of 
mucus and of small clots of blood. — Cough in morning, which fatigues whole 
chest, with expectoration of blood and small globules of mucus. — Difficulty of 
breathing when walking in open air. — Frequent efforts to breathe deeply, like 
sighing. — Respiration obstructed at night, when lying down, by pains in chest, 
side, and loins. 

20. Neck and Back. — Cramp in neck. — Pain through 1 . side of neck 
and down back of 1 . leg. — Pain in glands 1. side of neck. — Rigidity of muscles 
.of neck and nape, which hinders head being turned.— Hard swelling on back. 
— Paralytic pain in small of back, > lying on abdomen. — Sensation of paralysis 
in loins. — Pain as from lameness in small of back in morning. 

21. Limbs. — Pains in all the limbs, as if caused by a chill. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Miliaria in forearm. — Tearing in hands at night, 
with cracking in wrists. — Itching at wrist, in palms ; itching vesicles on and 
between lingers. — Dry, scaly eruption on palms, with itching, having syphilitic 
base. — Painful hang-nails. — Scabious pimples on hand. — Emaciation of hands. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Itching pimples on buttocks and thighs, near the 
scrotum. — Emaciation of legs. — Cramps in calves and soles. — Legs feel weak, 
with fear of paralysis after typhus. — The knees crack when they are bent (at 
night). — Flat ulcers on (lower) legs, — Itching in feet, esp. round ankles, in 
evening. — Blisters on toes. 

24. Generalities. — [Escape of seminal fluids, particularly when strain- 
ing at stool, which condition may be accompanied with headache, sleepless- 
ness, weakness, and troubles in general ; complaints after stool ; impotence 
of the male ; spermatorrhuea ; weakness of the sexual powers ; nocturnal 
pollutions. — Deep respiration. — Itch where the pustule comes between the 
fingers ; foul exanthema. — Perspires too easily ; on single parts ; on forepart 
of body. — < While drinking tea ; aftei stool ; while, or after talking ; can’t 
bear to have the hair touched ; walking in the open air. — H. N. G.]. — < After 
sleep, esp. on hot days, from lemonade, wine ; from very salt food ; in the 
sun. — Excessive emaciation, esp. of face, hands, and legs (thighs ). — Cinchona 
produces extraordinary sufferings, and < those which arc already in existence 
to an insupportable degree. — Throbbing in vessels of whole body, esp. felt in 
abdomen. — Strong inclination to lie down and to sleep, esp. during heat of 
day. — Symptoms < after sleep. — Inability to bear a draught of air, — Every 
draught of air, even warm, as pain in limbs, head, &c. 

25. Skin. — Frequent tingling in circumscribed parts of skin, with great 
provocation to scratch. — Miliary eruption. — Red rash on region of liver. — 
Prolonged oozing from parts which have been scratched. — Flat ulcers. — Itch- 
ing in folds of skin, between fingers and about joints, esp. ankle joint. — Hair 
falls off head, whiskers, and other parts. 

26. Sleep. — Disposition to slc«p early in evening, with imperfect sleep 
and frequent waking during night. — Retarded sleep in evening.— Jerks in 
body when going to sleep. — Light sleep at night, and waking with least noise. 
— ^Waking early in morning, and always at same hour. — Sleepless before 
midnight. — Symptoms < after a siesta ; on hot days. — Dreams of quarrels and 
unnatural cruelty. 

27. Fever. — Pulse very little accelerated. — Burning heat, extending over 



1144 SELENIUM— SEMPERVIVUM TECT. 

considerable portions of the skin (chest, abdomen, loins, and ribs),— Constant 
alternation of heat and cold.— Perspiration from least exertion.— Perspiration 
as soon as he sleeps, day or night. — Tendency to profuse perspiration when 
walking, or during an afternoon sleep. — Perspiration (on chest, genitals, and 
under axillae) which leaves yellow or white spots on linen and stiffens it. — 
External heat, with burning in skin, and only in single spots. 


SemperYivum Tectorum. 

Sempervivum tectorum. Houseleek. 0 . Crassulaceae. Tincture 

of fresh leaves. 

Clinical. — Climaxis. Menses, suppressed. Tongue, indurations of. 

Characteristics. — Kallenbach {H. R., x. 473) gives some expe- 
rience with Semp, /. In HufelaniVs Journal^ says Kallenbach, the 
fresh juice is recommended in chronic aphthae in grown persons in 
causal relation to haemorrhoids, as well as in scirrhous indurations of 
the tongue.” In many countries Semp. has a popular reputation for 
indurations and sores on the tongue. Reich el, of Staben, considers 
it curative in spasms of the uterus and in menstrual disturbances of all 
kinds, as well as in cases of too exalted vascular activity in the sexual 
sphere ; also in aural troubles consequent on hardened eai*-wax and 
in inflammatory exudations of the ear. Kallenbach was consulted — 
(i) By Mrs. S., 44, childless, of sickly looks, for an affection of the 
tongue. For the previous six months menses had appeared only 
every eight to ten weeks, and were accompanied with pains darting 
from small of back to uterus and vulva. During the six months she 
had stitching pain on right rim of tongue about f inch from the point, 
at which place, after a few weeks, a swelling formed, the size of a 
small bean, which bled at times, and at night caused a burning sensa- 
tion as of a small coal, disturbing sleep. Sour food = pain. The 
swelling is not hard on the surface, but contains two hard nodules, of 
size of lentils, one of which is denuded and bleeds on touch. Three 
enlarged veins cross the swelling and enter the tongue muscle behind 
it. After over a month of treatment with Atir,^ Ars,, Curb. z»., in vain, 
Kallenbach moistened the swelling with the fresh juice of Semp. thrice 
a day. Within three days it was smaller and folds appeared, the en- 
larged veins were contracted, formed thin, tense vessels crossing the 
swelling and seemingly tying it. During the next three days the patient 
applied the juice too energetically, and Kallenbach found the sur- 
roundings in inflammatory irritation and very sensitive. The applica- 
tion was stopped, and Semp. 2x given internally. After a week’s use 
the swelling had shrivelled to one-third, and ten days later the menses^ 
which had ceased altogether , reappeared^ and continued very profusely for 
five days. The swelling shrivelled to the size of a small pea, was 
firmer, harder, devoid of sensation, and gave no further trouble. The 
menses continued regular. (2) Mrs. X., 27, mother of a six months’ 
old healthy boy, formerly frequently afflicted with swelling of the 



SENECIO AUREUS 


1145 


glands, very sensitive to homoeopathic remedies, complained of a pain 
under her tongue of ten days^ duration, interfering with eating and 
speaking. There was a bluish red elevation on under side of tongue 
of size of split bean, hard, and along both sides there were enlarged 
veins. On one side a denuded spot exuded a whitish albuminous 
matter which could easily be wiped off : Semp, 6, one powder every 
forty-eight hours. On the second day the swelling was less sensitive, 
and in a week much smaller. Then the menses reappeared (first time 
since confinement), and in three weeks the whole swelling was gone, 
Jeaving only in its»place a somewhat engorged vein. Kallenbach 
treated with applications of i x a General v. B. who had nodules on 
left rim of his tongue with swollen veins, the nodules disappeared, and 
the sensitiveness was removed, and the patient was so well that he 
refused to stay for the completion of the cure, and failed to report. 
My own experience with Semp, was in domestic practice. For some 
childish affection of the eyes in my own case, rags moistened with 
Houseleek and cream (about equal parts of the juice and fresh 
cream) were applied, and my I'ecollection of it is that the appli- 
cation was exceedingly pleasant. 


Senecio Aureus. 

Seiiecio aureus (Variety, Gracilis). Golden Ragwort. Squaw-weed. 

(United States, North and West ; found in swamps.) N, 0 . 

Compositie. Tincture of fresh plant in ilower. 

Clinical. — Amenorrhuea. Ascites. Coryza. Cough. Dropsy. Dysmeiior- 
rheea. . Dysuria. Epistaxis. Fainting. Gleet. Gonorrluca. Haemorrhages. 
Home-sickness. Hysteria. Kidneys, inflammation of. Lumbago. Mania. Menor- 
rhagia. Menstruaiiotty delayed ; early, an<l profuse ; obstructed ; vicarious. Nails, 
brittle. Nervousness, Neurasthenia. Phthisis. Prostatitis. Puerperal mania. 
Renal colic. Sciatica. Spermatic cord, pain in. Wounds. 

Gharaoteristios. — The Golden Ragwort had a reputation in 
domestic and eclectic practice as a regulator of menstrual functions 
when Hale introduced it into homoeopathic practice. A. E. Small 
and others proved it, and clinical additions have filled out the picture. 
Like many other Compositaj, the Ragworts, or Groundsels, have 
power over haemorrhagic conditions, whether arising from disease or 
from wounds. The haemorrhagic function of menstruation comes 
particularly under the infliicnte of Senec, A \cry definite relation has 
been traced between the nose and the female sexual organs, and 
Senec* is indicated when cpistaxis or nasal catarrh takes the place of 
menses when suppressed from any cause. The menses may be pro- 
fuse and early, or they may be retarded or absent. Senec, may be 
required in a great variety of conditions traceable to non-appearing 
menses. C. M. Foss {A, H., xxii. 12) reports the case of Miss L., 18, 
who had seen no period for fifteen months. She was chlorotic, had a 
dry, hacking cough, with frequent pulse, made still more frequent by 
any excitement ; headache, poor sleep, constipation. The abdomen 



SENECIO AUREUS 


1 146 

had been gradually enlarging for six months, and tapping had been 
decided upon when Senec, i x was given. All symptoms rapidly 
cleared up, and the menses returned within a short time. Senec. i x 
also cured a girl, 21, who had suppression of urine in addition to 
chlorosis, ascites, and suppressed menses (M. xxiii. 77). S. H. 
Talcott (quoted A, il/., xxiv. 188) reports an important case bearing 
on the same point. Mrs. X., 26, mother of two children. Before 
conhnement the patient was haunted with the idea that her child 
would be stillborn. Nine days after its birth, strong and healthy, she 
was admitted to hospital in a state of violent acute, mania, which con-, 
tinned, with high temperature, for three months. With great physical 
activity, the mental state was that of a wild, violent, and almost 
uncontrollable person. There was severe pain in the head, great 
nervous irritability and sleeplessness and hysterical erethism. These 
symptoms, coupled with the fact (now lirst ascertained) that the 
lochia had ceased suddenly after confinement, and the menses had not 
come on, led to the choice of Sencc,^ which was given in drop doses of 
the 3X every two hours. Steady improvement resulted, and after a few 
weeks the patient was allowed out on parole. A relapse followed, 
and Bell, did no good. Senee, was again given with good effect, and 
complete recovery took place. Talcott regards Senec, as midway 
between the pugilistic state of Bell, and the tearful state of Puls. He 
remarks that recovery from puerperal mania seldom occurs unless 
menstruation is re-established. Hale notes that the country people 
call Senec, ** Wild Valerian,^^ and use it for nervousness, hysteria, low 
spirits, sleeplessness, especially in women ; and he refers to this 
“ globus symptom of the pathogenesis : About the middle of the 
afternoon, sensation as if a ball was in the stomach, rising up into the 
throat, lasting for about an hour ; sensation of tightness in the throat, 
with a disposition to attempt to relieve it by swallowing. Talcott^s 
case becomes more significant in the light of Cooper^s observation of 
the brain action of Sen. jacobeva. Small, who proved Senec., I'ecords 
this case : Woman, 30, had been ill six weeks, the symptoms steadily 
increasing till the following picture was presented : Face bloated, 
abdomen enlarged, feet oedematous ; urine alternately profuse and 
watery, or dark and scanty ; frequent desire to urinate day and night. 
Senec. gtt. x, three times a day, cured quickly. Small remarks that 
he has found Senec. useful in the dysuria of women and children when 
evidently of catarrhal origin ; and in dysuria with uterine displace- 
ment. Mucous sediment in the urine is^n indication. But the 
benefits of Senec. are not confined to the female sex. Small relates 
this case : Man, 50, nervo-sanguine, subject of renal inflammation 
affecting right kidney generally, causing intense pain , febrile disturb- 
ance, prostration. On one occasion the pain was particularly intense, 
and the bladder seemed implicated. Every time he passed water he 
cried out in agony. Urine reddish ; very hot and acrid. Bowels 
constipated. Dull headache ; mouth and throat dry ; chilly, fever, 
and perspiration. Senec. gtt. xx, in half a tumbler of water ; a ' 
dessertspoonful every hour. There was relief from the first dose, and 
the pain soon subsided entirely, leaving the patient freed from recur- 
rence of the attacks. Senec. has caused : ** Dull, heavy pain in left 



SENECIO AUREUS 


1147 


spermatic cord, moving along cord to testicle. Prostatic gland 
enlarged, feels hard and swelled to touch. Lascivious dreams, with 
pollutions.^^ Hale says he has found Senec, useful in advanced stages 
of gonorrhoea, and in prostatic disorders. Hale reports the following 
case of dysmenorrhoea : Mrs. X., mother of one child, had had an 
abortion three years before, and another (at the second month of 
pregnancy) four months before Hale saw her. Since the last abortion 
she had suffered from painful menstruation, which had not been the 
case previously. Menses every three weeks, profuse, lasting eight or 
nine days, accompanied b}'' much cutting pain in sacrum, hypogas- 
triiim, and groins. Pale, weak, nervous ; slight cough, generally at 
night. Scnec. 0, gtt. v, was given three times a day till the next 
period, which came on at the twenty-ninth day, and was perfectly 
normal in quantity and without pain. Senec. has a place in coughs 
and even in phthisis. It is especially serviceable in mucous coughs,^* 
says Hale. “ In chronic coughs, catarrhal affections, haemoptysis, 
incipient phthisis attended with troublesome cough, Ifie result of 
obstructed menstruation f it has a well-established reputation. Peculiar 
Sensations of Senec. are : As of a wave from occiput to sinciput. As if 
he would pitch forward. As of a ball rising from stomach to throat. 
Respiration as if greatly fatigued. Pains are radiating, shifting, lanci- 
nating. Symptoms alternate. Senec. is specially Suited to : women 
and little ^rls of nervous temperament. Lyman Watkins (quoted 
H. W.j xxxiv. 300) says, Females taking Senec. generally improve in 
health and strength, accumulate flesh, become light-hearted and 
cheerful. This may be due to some tonic influence.” The symptoms 
are < at night (cough ; sweat ; sleeplessness ; frequent micturition). 
< In afternoon (general). < In open air. Very sensitive to open 
air ; tendency to catarrhs. Colic is > bending forward ; and > by 
stool.' > At onset of menses. < Sitting ; must keep moving about 
(mind). 

Relations. — Compare ; Botanical, Sen. jac., Arii., Calend., Bels. 
Uterine, chest, and bladder symptoms. Puls., Helon. Vicarious men- 
struation, Bry. (Senec. especially bloody expectoration). Homesick- 
ness, Caps., Ph. ac. < 4 p.m., Lyc. Prostatitis and gonorrhoea, 
Sabal sen, Solidag., Puls., Pip. n.. Cop., Thuj. Nervousness, Coff., 
Cham., Val., Ambr. Fidgety feet, Caust., Zn. 

Causation. — Venesection. Suppressed menstruation. Wounds. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Very irritable, worried, undecided ; dissatisfied ; depressed, 
nervous ; < sitting .still ; must move about. — Low spirits alternating with 
cheerful mood ; sleepless ; sensation of a ball rising from stomach to throat. 
— Inability to fix mind on one subject for any length of time. — A feeling like 
homesickness. — (Puerperal mania, wild, violent ; with higli temperature, 
nervousness, sleeplessness, suddenly suppressed lochia, non-appearance of 
menses.) 

2, Head. — Dizzy feeling while walking in open air, like a wave from 
ocqiput to sinciput ; he feels as if he would pitch forward ; nausea. — Dull, 



SENECIO AUREUS 


1 148 

stupefying headache, with fulness of head, as from catarrh.— Sharp lanci- 
nating in 1. temple, upper part of 1. eye and inside of 1. lower jaw. — Dull 
occipital pain in morning. — Dull frontal pain extending to occiput. — Sharp 
shooting pains from within outward in forehead ; sharp shooting pains over 
and in eyes ; catarrh ; suppressed secretion.-— Headache preceding leucor- 
rhoea and irritation of bladder. — Forehead hot ; sweaty in evening. 

3. Eyes. — Dark rings round eyes. — Sharp pains from within outward, 
1. eye ; lachrymation in open air. — Catarrhal ophthalmia from suppressed 
secretions. — Eyes and lids burn.—Yellow streak from inner canthus to iris. * 

5 . Nose. — Coryza, at first dull headache, dryness 'of nose and sneezing; 
burning and fulness in nostrils, later secretion of copious mucus. — Coryza 
with nose-bleed. 

6 . Face. — Face pale, depressed appearance ; weary, wants to lie down. 
— Lancinating pain r. side of face, r. shoulder, 1. breast. — Lips pale ; dry, 
feverish. 

7 . Teeth. — Teeth tender and sensitive ; gums pale, dry, feverish. 

8 . Mouth. — Tongue slightly coated ; catarrhal fever. — Mouth and 
fauces dry, hot. 

g. Throat. — Throat and nose feel very dry ; later, tightness in throat, 
wants to swallow. — Fauces dry ; later, mucus fills throat. 

TO. Appetite.— Aversion to all food, esp. sweets and coffee (she is usually 
very fond of both). — Faint before meals (not hunger). — Full after eating very 
little. 

11. Stomach. — Eructations of sour gas and ingesta. — Nausea on rising ; 

‘ morning sickness of pregnancy.— Nausea from renal derangements. — Stitches 

in epigastrium. 

12. Abdomen. — Stitches in hypochondria ; sharp cutting in diaphragm. 
— Pains about navel, spreading thence in all directions ; > by stool ; griping 
pains > bending forward. — Rumbling of wind. — Catarrh of bowels, rurfibling 
and watery stools. — Abdomen much enlarged and very tense ; lower limbs 
cedematous ; urine scanty, high-coloured, not more than eight ounces a day ; 
pain in lumbar region and in ovaries ; constipation ; cervix uteri congested ; 
albuminous leucorrhoea ; sense of weight in uterine region (ascites). — About 
noon, before dinner, stitches running from one part to another in both 
inguinal regions, lower jaw, shoulders, &c. — Smarting pain in 1. groin. 

13. Stool and Rectum. — Stool thin, watery, bloody; with tenesmus 
and colic ; catarrhal dysentery ; evening. — Stool copious with great debility 
and prostration ; flatulence ; morning. — Stool in hard lumps mixed with 
yellow mucus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Slight pain in* region of kidneys. — Attacks of 
renal inflammation, attacking particularly r. kidney, causing intense pain, 
fever, and great prostration. — Severe renal inflammation with fever, chilliness, 
and pain in lumbar region, particularly in^l. kidney ; quantity of urine below 
normal ; urine red, depositing a brickdust sediment ; considerable arterial 
excitement ; skin hot and dry ; motion caused him to cry out with pain ; 
constipation. — Intense pain over r. kidney, severe pain during urination, 
urine red, hot, acrid ; bowels constipated.— Renal dropsy. — Inflammation of 
kidneys and ureters after passage of gravel. — ^Tenesmus of bladder ; smarting 
in urethra, dropsy. — Htematuria; renal pain with nausea, — Tenesmus of 



’ SENECIO AUREUS 1149 

bladder, with heat and urging.— Irritation of bladder in children, preceded 
by* heat and headache, — Renal colic with or without nausea. — Chronic 
inflammation of neck of bladder with bloody urine .and tenesmus of bladder. 
— Chronic inflammation of kidneys. — Dysuria : of women and children, 
evidently of catarrhal origin; mucous sediment in urine; with uterine 
displacement. — Smarting in fossa navicularis before urination. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Lascivious dreams, emissions. — Prostate 

gland enlarged, feels hard and swollen to touch. — Dull, heavy pain in sper- 
matic cord, moving along cord to testicle. — Gonorrhoea, gleet. — Chronic 
prostatitis. * 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Awakened early by great sexual irrita- 
tion, vagina full of mucus, labia swollen ; itching and burning exasperates, — 
Orgasm ip afternoon after feeling of irritation, and again after sleep. — Aching 
in both ovarian regions, knees, and ankles, and down front of thighs. — Profuse 
flow of mucus from vagina. — Menses two days early, very scant, less pain 
than usual, followed by excessive thirst and thin leucorrhoea streaked with 
blood, and with dull pelvic pains. — Menses every three weeks, very profuse, 
lasting eight or nine days, accompanied by severe cutting pains in region of 
sacrum, hypogastrium, and groins ; she was pale, weak, and nervous, and had 
a slight cough, generally at night ; after an abortion. — Menses premature and 
profuse or retarded and scanty. — Dysmenorrhoea with urinary symptoms ; 
cutting in sacral and hypogastric regions ; flow scanty or profuse or irregular ; 
pale, weak, anaemic ; strumous ; hacking cough at night. — Amenorrhoea : 
from a cold ; nervous irritability ; lassitude, dropsy ; wandering pains in back 
and shoulders ; sensation of a ball rising from stomach into throat ; costive ; 
in young girls with dropsical conditions.— -Symptoms as if menses would 
appear, but they fail ; nervous, excitable, sleepless ; loss of appetite. — Sup- 
pression of menses from a cold ; after venesection. — Menstrual irregularities 
in consumptive patients. — Itching of vulva, feels sore and chafed ; begins 
when sitting still, > when mind employed. — Leucorrhoea : preceded by 
headache, sleeplessness and irritable bladder; in little girls; preceded by 
headache and sleeplessness. — Chlorosis in scrofulous girls, with dropsy. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hawking of tough white mucus. — Respira- 
tion as if greatly fatigued. — Laboured breathing from mucous accumulation. 
— Hacking night cough. — Mucous rattling with suppressed cough. — Palliated 
cough and bloody sputa in a woman far gone with consumption, and brought 
back menses, which were absent four months. — Cough with bloody expec- 
toration. 

18. Chest. — ^Catarrh of lungs ; loose cough and copious mucous expec- 
toration. — Haemoptysis ; great emaciation ; dry, hacking cough ; hectic flush ; 
sleeplessness. — Haemoptysis after venesection or suppressed menstruation. — 
Phthisis with obstructed menstruation ; bloody or copious mucous sputa. — 
Sharp pain through either lung.— •Hot flashes of pain through lungs in 
morning. — Compression about chest. 

20. Back. — Pain in back and loins ; when sitting long or when lying 
down. — Sharp, lancinating pains in lumbar region. — Severe pain in small of 
back in morning. — Cutting pains in region of sacrum, hypogastrium, and 
groins, with too early or too profuse menses ; she is pale, weak, and nervous, 
and has a slight cough at night. — Wandering pains in back and shoulders; 
pain in joints. 



1150 SENECIO AUR.-SENECIO JAC. 

21. Limbs.— Sharp stitches here and there ; rheumatic pains in joints.— 
Skin dry and nails very brittle. 

22 . Upper Limbs.^ — Occasionally during the day sharp, lancinating 
pain in r. shoulder, 1. heel, and in r. side of face. -Sharp, sticking pain in 1. 
shoulder.— Hot pains through arms.— Hands cold and clammy; trembling 
from nervousness. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Lower limbs weary. — About 4 p.ni. sharp pain in 
neighbourhood of sciatic nerve, shooting down thigh. — Constant desire to 
keep feet in motion. — Feet cold. 

24. Generalities. — Nervousness, sleeplessness, ctnd hysterical mood.-^ 
Lassitude and nervousness. — Tired all morning. — Hysteria. — Wants to lie 
down ; pale. — Slight exertion s fainting. — Stitches in different parts of body. 

25. Skin. — Skin dry, nails brittle. 

26. Sleep. — Great sleeplessness, with vivid, unpleasant dreams. — Sleep- 
lessness of women suffering from uterine irritation, prolapsus, and its attend- 
ant nervousness (it is the Coffea of women) ; during climacteric period.— At 
night sleepless, nervous, hysterical ; by day drowsy, languid. — Dreams mostly 
of an intellectual character ; memory very active. — Sleep unrefreshing. 

27. Fever. — Chilly forenoon as after taking cold ; followed by heat and 
sweat in evening with moderate thirst. — Chilliness followed by urging to 
urinate. — Copious warm sweat towards morning; catarrh. — Hectic fever. — 
Heat of forehead. — Hot flushes day and night. — Sweat of forehead. — Disposi- 
tion to perspire. 


Senecio Jacoboea. 

Senecio jacoboea. St. James’ Wort. Staggerwort. Ragwort. “ N. 0 . 

Coinpositae. Tincture of fresh plant. 

Clinical. — Brain, affections of. Cerebro-spinal' irritation. Depression. Enuresis. 
Headache. Twitchings. 

Characteristics. — Cooper has published {H. W.^ xxxv. 154) 
observations with Sen, jac.j the common Ragwort, which, with its 
yellow flowers, is such a conspicuous feature of English roadsides and 
commons throughout the summer months. Cooper (i) gave a lady, 
57 (who had slight otorrhoea of left ear with deafness on that side), a 
single dose of Sen. jac. Immediately after, she began to leel 
depressed in mind and body ; it sepmed as if her brain would 
not work, for she talked incoherently. The bowels began acting in 
gushes, and a bladder weakness was aggravated, so that there was 
enuresis night and day for three d^s. (2) Another woman from a 
single dose of the same had exhaustion in the back of the head.’’ 
(3) A lady, 51, had had depression all her life, coming in fits. 

Memory and everything goes,” cannot talk coherently to herself, 
and dislikes conversation in others. On July i, 1900, she wrote : 

Have suffered agony from awful feeling of torpor of brain, which 
has made it an effort to put words together, memory seemed to go, 
felt altogether insensible ; bowels have been confined.” One dose of 



SENEGA 




Sen, jac. ^ was given, and removed the depression and relieved all the 
other symptoms ; it also produced this : Constant rigidity of muscles, 
chiefly of neck and shoulders, < at night ; it seems like a habit, *‘and 
I try to relax them but find it most difficult ; it seems to run back 
involuntarily, so that the weight of the head is somehow held in this 
way, and though touching the pillow does not rest on it. Sometimes 
in the day the upper part of the legs gets a sort of ague fit of shaking.^^ 
On this Cooper remarks : The exhaustion felt after a dose of Sen, jac, 
in the back of the head in case 2 , and the cropping up as a new symp- 
tom of this strange-^ooking rigidity of the muscles of the neck, at night 
chiefly, together with the shaking of the legs in the daytime, points to 
inco-ordinate muscular action due to deranged cerebral control/^ 
Cooper adds this case : A man, 68, many years apoplectically inclined, 
had constant twitchings at night with vascular deafness of right ear, 
loss of memory, pressure and heat of head : after a dose ‘of Sen, jac, 
0 he remained comfortable for three months and hearing improved. 
Sen, jac, has been used like Sen. aur. in cases of menstrual irregularity. 
Gerarde mentions “ green wounds and old filthy ulcers as benefited 
by it, also “ old aches and pains in the arms, hips, and legs/’ 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Depressed in body and mind ; it seemed as if her brain 
would not work, for she talks incoherently. 

2. Head. — Exhaustion felt in back of head ; after this felt lighter and 
better. 

13. Stool. — Bowels (before fairly regulai ) began acting in gushes, large 
stools occasionally, but in no way regular, 

14. Urinary Organs. — The bladder, which had been rather weak, 
bccarne more so, the enuresis continuing day and night for several days. 

20. Back. — Constant rigidity of muscles, chiefly of neck and shoulders, 
esp. at night ; seems like a habit, but finds it most difficult to relax them ; it 
sterns to return involuntarily, so that the weight of the head is somehow held 
in this way, and though touching the pillow docs not rest on it. 

23, Lower Limbs. — Sometimes in the day the upper part of the legs 
gets a sort of ague fit of shaking. 


Senega. 

Polygala senega. Seneca Snake-root, N, 0, Polygalacem. Tincture 
of powdered dried root. 

Clinical. — Amblyopia. Ascites. .Asthma. Bladder, irnUiblc ; catarrh of. 
Blepharitis cHiaris. Bronchitis. Constipation. Cornea, opacity of. Cough, 
Enuresis. Facial paralysis. Hay-fever. Hydrothorax. Hypopion. Influenza. 
Iritis. (Esophagus, strictuie of ; catarrh of. Phthisis mucosa. Pleurisy. 
Pneumonia. Snake-bites. Sneezing : fits of ; at end of cough. Styes. Throat, 
sore. Whooping-cough. 

Charaoteristics. — Senega was introduced to medical practice by 
Dr. Tennant, of Virginia, who was led to test its properties through 



SENEGA 


1152 

bearing that the Indians used it as an antidote to snake-bites. As it 
relieved the symptoms of snake venom, Tennant concluded that it might 
also relieve dyspnoea, cough, and haemoptysis arising from other causes, 
and gave it with success in cases of pneumonia, pleurisy, and hydro- 
thorax (Teste). Other old-school practitioners used it as an expec- 
torant in chronic respiratory catarrh, acute phthisis, rheumatic fever, 
dropsies, incipient cataract, croup. It is at present regarded as a 
stimulant, diaphoretic, and expectorant, especially in chronic bron- 
chitis.'* It is in affections of the chest, eyes, and bladder that 
homoeopaths have found it of most service, and th^. extensive provings 
have supplied excellent data for prescribing. Teste (who includes' 
Seneg. with Phos, ac,j Cham, and Canth. in his Conium group) considers it 
specially suited to “ females of slender and tall make, thin, but having 
retained a good deal of sprightliness and moral power." He cites 
this case in which it gave great relief : Lady, 45, had contusion, pres- 
sive, sometimes cramping, very old pains in chest, anterior wall of 
which was sensitive to contact (on both sides) ; pains at times <, at 
times > in open air ; respiratory mucus at apices feeble, without 
rhoncus ; dyspnoea when walking, and especially when going up 
stairs ; paroxysms of vesicular agitation in chest as if she would faint ; 
catarrhal cough, not very frequent, with ropy, not very profuse expec- 
toration ; spitting of red blood now and then ; paroxysms of palpita- 
tions, during which the rhythm of the heart chang^ to an almost 
im,jerceptible tremor, and which, in some instances, lasted all night, 
and even longer ; menses regular ; the palpitation generally took 
place after the period or in consequence of some moral emotion. 
This patient was apparently of the type Teste mentions, and the case 
shows that the correspondence of type must not be too closely con- 
sidered, for other observers, including myself, have found Seneg. more 
suited to plethoric, phlegmatic persons ; persons tending to obesity ; 
fat persons of lax fibre ; fat, chubby children ; and old persons. 
Senega is one of the sources of Saponin. It has a nauseous taste, and 
leaves a scraping sensation in the throat. Guernsey outlines its 
action thus : “ Where there is a great burning in the chest, either 
before or after coughing ; profuse secretion of mucus. Dryness of inner 
parts which are usually moist ; dry skin. General affections of the wind- 
pipe ; left side of chest particularly ; right eye ; lower eyelids." 
Nash (who has only obtained success with low attenuations of Seneg.) 
has cured many cases of cough with great accumulation of mucus, 
which seems to fill the chest, with much rattling, wheezing, and 
difficult breathing." It is especially valuable, he says, with old people, 
but works well with others. I have used Seneg. only in the 30th, and 
have found it answer to its indications exceedingly well. In the case 
of a very stout elderly lady, of phthisical family history, who had 
pneumonia of both bases, especially right, very violent '•paroxysmal 
cough, witli ropy, difficult expectoration tinged with blood, Seneg. 30 
quickly relieved a very dangerous condition when other remedies had 
failed. Leading indications for Seneg. in chest cases are : (i) Great 
accumulation of clear albuminous mucus, which is difficult to expel. 
(2) Great soreness of walls of chest. (3) Pressure on chest as though 
lungs were forced back to spine. Whooping-cough in fat, chubby 



SENEGA 


IIS3 


children, clear mucus like white of egg^ difficult to raise, cough < 
towards evening. The soreness of the chest walls makes Sencg. 
appropriate to cases of pleurodynia. There is hoarseness, and the 
throat is so dry and sensitive it hurts the patient to talk. Cough often 
ends in sneezing. Clinton Enos (quoted A, //., xxiv. 253) relates 
this case : A very fat girl, set. 10, with cold, damp feet and hands and 
ijweating about the head, had spells of sneezing foi two years, ever 
since whooping-cough. Several spells a day lasting about half an hour. 
Sharp pains in chest and" temples during the attacks. In nose a large 
quantity of mucus with stuffed-up feeling. One dose of Seneg. 200 
removed the whole trouble in a week. A. R. Macinichael {N. A, J. //., 
xl. 824) cured Mrs. B., 40, of acute catarrhal laryngitis which had 
lasted ten days with Seneg, i. There was hoarseness ; hawking of 
thick, tenacious mucus (profuse, a quart m twenty-four hours) from 
larynx, especially in morning, with burning sensation. Relief set in 
Within three hours from first dose. Seneg, acts on the eyes even more 
powerfully than on the nose, producing pains, inllammation both of 
the exterior and interior of the eye and lids, and much disorder of 
vision. The eye troubles are < when looking intently at an object ; 
and another modality brought out in the proving has taken the rank 
of a keynote : > Bending head backwards. The symptom in 
which it was first noticed was this : When walking towards the 
setting sun he seemed to see another smaller sun hover below 
the other, assuming a somewhat oval shape when looking down, 
disappearing on bending lltc head backwards^ and on closing the 
eyes.” The prover took from 40 to 60 drops of the tincture. “ < 
Bending head forward ” and < stooping ” are scarcely less charac- 
teristic. Eye symptoms as an accompaniment of head symptoms 
indicate Seneg, : “ Violent rush of blood to head when stooping, 
especi^illy to eyeballs, where a painful pressure is experienced.” 
Extreme tenderness is another note oj Seneg. : “A sort of aching 
pain in head, in sinciput, and occiput, not < by pressure ; < sitting 
in.warm room ; accompanied with pressure in eyes, which did not bear 
touchy Pressure ; dulness ; heaviness are the leading head sensa- 
tions. There is painful sensitiveness of hearing. The digestive 
organs are disordered. Seneg. has been used as an emetic. The 
urinary organs are very prominently affected, irritability and catarrh 
being the leading effects. There is frequent urging, scalding in 
urethra before or after micturition, and the urine is loaded with 
mucous threads. Peculiar Sensations of Seneg. are : Eyes, as if they 
were pressed out ; as if eyebajls were being expanded ; as if soap m 
eyes. As if red pepper throughout nostrils and air passages. As if 
chest too narrow. Dyspncea as from stagnation in lungs. As if lungs 
pushed back to spine. As if che§t would burst. Wrist as if sprained. 
. Joints as if lame. Seneg. has the gnawing hunger and empty feeling 
well marked. It is predominantly left-sided in its action. The 
symptoms are < by touch and pressure (but pressure on left side ». 
< Rubbing. Most symptoms < rest ; > walking in open air. Rest 
> dry cough. Lying down = tickling in larynx ; fear of suffocation. 
Wing on right side sss pain in chest. Motion = pain under sternum. 
Motion of arms =s soreness of walls of chest, < Going up stairs, 
VOL. n. 74 



1154 


SENEGA 


Stepping hard, walking fast, or running as pain through mediastinum ; 
piercing pain between scapulae. > Bending head back. < Stoop- 
ing ; bending forward. < Morning ; and night. Whooping cough 

< towards evening. < In warm air ; in warm room. Lachrymation, 
sore chest. Cough and chilliness < in open or cold air. Sweat >. 

< Looking intently at an object. 

Relations. — Aniidotcd by ; Bry. ; also Arn., Bell., Camph. 
Followed ivell by : Calc., Pho., Lyc., Sul. Compare : Saponin (a 
derivative of Senega root). In bronchial affections, Ammon. Fat, 
plethoric people disposed to catarrhs, Calc. Muscular asthenopia, 
loss of voice, paralysis (facial, &c.), Caust. Laryngeal and pulmonary 
catarrh, Pho. Bronchial catarrh, Spo. Whooping-cough, Coc. c., 
K. bi. (Seneg. clear phlegm, cough < towards evening ; Coc. c. clear 
phlegm < morning ; K. bi. yellow phlegm < morning). Pleurodynia, 
pleurisy, Bry. Mucous phthisis, Stn. 

Causation. — Bites, poisonous. Sprains. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Hypochondriacal melancholy, with great readiness to take 
offence. — Excessive anguish, often with accelerated and hasty respiration. — 
Liveliness, with irritability, and disposition to give way to paroxysms of rage 
and fury. 

2. Head. — Head bewildered, with dizziness. — I'eeling of confusion and 
emptiness in head, with aching of eyes (or pressure in them < by touch), and 
obscuration of sight. — Vertigo, with noise in cars. — Headache which also 
affects the eyes, is < by heat of a room, and > in open air, or in a cold tem- 
perature. — Pressive pain in forehead and orbits after dinner, esp. I. side of 
head, > in open air. — Drawing in sinciput and temples, extending to face. — 
Sanguineous congestion in head and eyes when stooping. — Pulsative cepha- 
lalgia, with aching of the eyes. — Shuddering and itching in scalp.— Eruption 
on head. 

3. Eyes. — Pain in eyes as if dilated and pushed out of orbits. — Aching 
of eyes in evening, esp. by candle-light and when stooping. — Congestion of 
blood in eyes when stooping. — Burning sensation in eyes when reading and 
writing (in evening). — Swelling of lids, with burning pressure and tingling. — 
Vesicles on tarsal edges. — Styes. — Dryness of eyes. — Lachrymation in open 
air, and when gazing intently at an object. — Accumulation of hardened dry 
humour on lids and lashes in morning. — Jerking and spasmodic drawing in 
lids ; in r. outer canthus. — Convulsive contraction of lower lids. — Fixedness 
of look. — Oculo-motor paralysis. — Opacity of cornea. — Double vision > by 
bending head backward. — When walking towards the setting sun he seemed 
to see another smaller sun hover below’ the other, assuming a somewhat oval 
shape when looking down, disappearing on bending the head**back wards and 
on closing the eyes. — Sensitiveness of eyes to light. — Confusion of the letters 
and dazzling of sight when reading. — Weakness of sight and flickering before 
the eyes when reading ; must wipe them often.— All objects appear as if in 
the shade. — Obscuration of sight, with glistening before eyes, < from rubbing 
them. — Brilliant spots before sight. — Photophobia. 



SENEGA 


1^55 

4. Ears.-— Aching in ears during mastication.— A cooling sensation 
frequently extends through 1 . ear. — Painful acuteness of hearing. 

5. Nose. — Itching in the interior of the nose. — Smell of pus, or as of a 
malignant ulcer, in nose.— Sneezing so often and so violently head grows 
dizzy ; followed by thin coryza ; with pain as of excoriation in chest.— 
Troublesome dryness of Schneiderian membrane. 

6. Face. — Sensation as if muscles of (1. half of) face were paralysed. — 
Heat in face. — Burning vesicles in commissures of lips, on upper lip (and in 
corners of mouth). 

7. Teeth. — Th» teeth are set on edge. — Digging in the teeth during 
inspiration (of damp and cold air). 

8. Mouth. — Dryness of the mouth, esp. in the morning. — Copious 
secretion of saliva. — Putrid breath. — ^Tongue : yellowish white or slimy in 
morning, with slimy, unpleasant taste ; loaded with a while coating. — Burning 
sensation in throat, mouth, tongue and palate, 

9. Throat. — Sore throat, as if it were excoriated and raw. — Scraping, 
burning sensation and dryness in throat, with irritation, which provokes 
coughing and embarrassed speech. — Accumulation of tough mucus in throat, 
which it is difficult to hawk up. — Sensation of constriction in the gullet. — 
Irritation and roughness in oesophagus ; burning sensation as if abraded ; 
followed by copious discharge of mucus. — Inflammatory swelling of palate, 
throat, and uvula. — Copious accumulation of viscid mucus in throat and 
palate, which is detached in small clots. 

10. Appetite. — Impaired taste. — Metallic taste in mouth, or taste of 
urine. — Clammy taste in mouth. — Anorexia, esp. in morning. — Gnawing 
hunger, wnth sensation of emptiness in stomach. — Violent, burning thirst. 

11. Stomach. — Risings. — Eructations ; which > the mucus and hawk- 
ing of mucus from the stomach. — Loathing and nausea, with inclination to 
vomit, .which seems to proceed from the stomach, with retching. — ^Vomiting, 
with diarriicea and great anguish. — Spasms (colic) in stomach, with pressivc 
pain, also at night. — Pressure below pit of stomacli. — Burning sensation in 
stomach. — Sensation of emptinc.ss in stomach. 

12. Abdomen.— Boring and digging pains in abdomen, esp. in epigas- 
trium and hypochondria. — Gnawing in (upper) abdomen. — Burning and 
squeezing (oppression) in epigastrium during an inspiration. — Drawing 
between the integuments of the abdomen, as by a foreign body. — Flatulent 
affections, with a sensation of a general bearing down towards hypogastriura. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Slow, hard, and scanty evacuation, with effort, 
and followed by pressure in anus and rectum. — Frequent, loose evacuations 
of consistence of pap, — Diarrhoea, with vomiting and great anxiety. — Watery 
stools spirting from anus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Diminished stxretion of urine.— Increased 
secretion of urine. — Wetting the bed at night. — Urine frothy, or mixed with 
slimy filaments, and becoming turbid and cloudy when it cools (or deposits a 
thick sediment, yellowish red, with upper stratum yellow and flocculent). — 
Reddish sediment, with flakes of mucus in urine. — Sensation of an obstruction 
in urethra when urinating. — Shootings and burning sensation in urethra after 
and during the emission of urine. — Urging and scalding before and after 
micturition. — Irritability of bladder ; subacute and chronic catarrh. 



1156 


SENEGA 


15. Male Sexual Organs. — Increased sexual desire, with painful erec- 
tions. — Slight burning in glans when urinating. — Paroxysmal cramp-like pein 
in region of glans. — Tickling of prepuce and glans. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Menses too soon ; has to press her 1 . 
side at tenth rib to relieve gnawing pain. — Slimy Icucorrhcea. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Great dryness of the larynx, esp. in morn- 
ing and forenoon. — Sudden hoarseness when reading aloud. — Hoarseness and 
roughness in throat. — Hacking cough from irritation in larynx. — Tickling and 
burning sensation in larynx, esp. when lying down, with danger of suffocation. 
— Abundant accumulation of mucus in larynx and ti aclica, with short respirar 
tion. — Tearing and stinging in larynx and trachea. — Dry and shaking cough, 
excited by a tickling in larynx, < in open air (and from walking fast). — 
Expectoration of transparent and yellow mucus when coughing. — Cough, 
with profuse expectoration of viscid mucus. — Shaking cough, like whooping- 
cough, from burning and tickling in larynx in morning, with copious expec- 
toration of tough, white mucus (like white of egg). — The cough is < in 
evening and at night, during rest, in warm room, when sitting, when lying on 
the (1.) side. 

18. Chest. — Dyspneea, with sensation of stagnation in lungs. — Shortness 
of breath when walking quickly and going up stairs. — Troublesome oppres- 
sion of chest, esp. in open air and on stooping, as if thorax too narrow. — 
Pressure in chest, esp. during repose, and in morning, or at night, on waking. 
— Great sensibility in interior coats of chest wlien touched. — Squeezing and 
spasmodic pains 111 chest, with agitation and anxiety, csp. when lying on side. 
— Certain movements cause pain, as if chest were too tight ; disposed to 
expand the chest ; this leaves soreness. — Burning, sore pain under sternum, 
csp. during motion and on deep inspiration. — Orgasms of blood ; oppression 
with flushes of heat ; oppression, esp. during rest. — Shootings in chest, esp. 
when coughing and taking an inspiration. — Burning, aching, and stitches in 
1. half of chest ; < lying on r. side. — Pleurisy r. side of chcvSt with thickening. 
— Pain as from excoriation in chest, < by external pressure, movement, 
coughing, and sneezing. — Soreness of walls of chest on moving arms, esp>. 1. 
— Great soreness in walls of chest and great accumulation of clear albuminous 
mucus which is difficult to expectorate ; pressure on chest as if lungs were 
pushed back to spine. — Accumulation of mucus in chest, larynx, and trachea. 
— Phthisis mucosa: liydrotJioi ax. — Profuse secretion of mucus in lungs of 
old people. — Drawing and Inirning sensation in the chest. — Tingling in the 
chest. — Violent congestion of blood in chest, with pulsation and ebullition, 
leading even to syncope. — ^^fhe majority of symptoms are most violent 
during repose, but do not obstruct respiftition. 

19. Heart. — Aching, burning pain in chest becomes seated in region of 
heart, whence it radiates to 1. axilla. — Aching and pressure in heart region ; 
during deep inspiration. — Violent shaking palpitation of heart, 

20. Back. — Aching and drawing in back and shoulder-blades, as well as 
between and under shoulder-blades. — Pain under r. shoulder-blade, as if 
chest should burst, when coughing or drawing a long breath. — Burning 
sensation and subcutaneous itching over whole back. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Paralytic drawing in forearms as far as fingers. — 
Anxious starting and jerking in upper arm during siesta. — Pain as if sprained 
in wrists. — Sticking, crawling, prickling in palms. 



SENNA 


^ ^S7 


23. Lower Limbs. — Sensation of excessive lassitude in legs, and of 
paralysis in joints, — Wrenching pain in hip-joint. — Trembling in legs. — Great 
weakness of feet, esp. in forenoon. 

24. Generalities.— -Where there is great burning in chest, either before 
or after coughing ; profuse secretion of mucus. — Dryness of inner parts which 
are usually moist : dry skin. — Diseases of mucous membranes. — Dropsy of 
internal organs (esp. after inflammation). — Inflammation of internal organs. — 
General affections of windpipe ; 1. side of chest particularly ; r. eye ; lower 
eyelids ; < from looking fixedly at any object for a long time. — Sensation of 
great general lassitude, with trembling, esp. in lower limbs. — Great moral and 
physical depression, with stretching of limbs, heaviness, emptiness, and throb- 
bing in head. — Great weakness, which seems to proceed from the chest. — 
Fainting,' when walking in open air. — Several symptoms, esp. those of chest, 
are < by repose, and > by walking in open air. 

25. Skin. — Bites of poisonous animals or animals when in a state of rage. 

26. Sleep. — Great disposition to sleep in evening, and deep, lethargic 
sleep soon after going to bed. — Sleep, tow'ards morning, disturbed by affec- 
tions of chest, or else by cramps in stomach. — In the morning one frequently 
wakens from dyspnoea. 

27. Fever. — Pulse hard and frequent. — Frequent shivering, proceeding 
from lassitude in limbs. — Shuddering in back, with heat in face, burning sen- 
sation in the eyes, dyspnoea, shootings in the chest, and throbbings in the 
head. — Chilliness and chill almO‘»t only in the open air, with weakness in legs 
and dyspnoea. — Shudders over the back, with heat in face and chest symp- 
toms. — Sudden flushes of heat, — Skin becomes warmer and moister. — Feeling 
of warmth in I. half of face. — Profuse perspiration commenced and the 
disagreeable symptoms were quite removed. — Profuse diaphoresis. — Per- 
spiration wanting. 


Senna. 

The leaflets of several species of Cassia : C. obovata, Alexandrian 
Senna, is the principal. N, 0, Leguminosic. Trituration or 
tincture of the dried leaves. 

Clinical . — Colic ; flatulent, of infants Exhaustion. Nitrogenous waste. 
Sleeplessness. Sneezing, with heat. 

Charaoteristios. — Used as a laxative in ordinary practice, Senna 
has proved an excellent remedy in the colic of infants, with incar- 
cerated flatulence and sleeplessi^ss. Infantile colic when the patient 
seems full of wind. The symptoms of the Schema are mostly derived 
from overdosings. A peculiar symptom is : “ Repeated sneezing, 
which caused heat (especially of hands), exhaustion, and panting 
breathing.^' Exhaustion is typical of Senna, Farrington says it is 
one of the best remedies in the materia medica for simple exhaustion 
with excess of nitrogenous waste.'' The exhaustion is exemplified in 
the sinking immediately after meals. The pods caused a nasty 



1158 SENNA— SEPIA 

unclean smell from the body of a woman taking them for constipatiQu 

(R. T. C,). 

Relations. — Compare : Infantile colic and sleeplessness, Jal. Ex- 
haustion, K. ca. Sinking after meals, Ars., Cin., Lyc», Sil, Stp., 
Ur. nit.. Calc., lod., Sep., Tab. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Heaviness of the head when stooping^ as if it were pressed 
down. 

5. Nose. — Repeated sneezing, which caused heat (esp. of hands), 
exhaustion, and panting breathing. 

6. Face. — Livid lips. — Commissune of lips covered with small burning 
vesicles. 

11. Stomach. — Anorexia. — Thirst. — Empty, or watery and fetid, risings. 
— Loathing and nausea, with inclination to vomit. — Sinking immediately after 
meals. 

12. Abdomen. — Colic, esp. in little children. — Painful colic from incar- 
cerated flatulence (particularly in young children). — Sensation of coldness in 
the abdomen, with emptiness and uneasiness in the stomach.— Accumulation 
of flatus, with grumbling and fermentation in the abdomen, and discharge of 
fetid flatus. 

13. Stool and Anus. — ^Two liquid stools with griping pains. — Loose 
evacuation, with tenesmus, and followed by a burning sensation in the anus. 
— Diarrhoea with straining and prolapsed rectum and sore anus (cured in 
children. — R. T. C.). 

24. Generalities. — Universal swelling. — Exhaustion. — Unclean body 
swell. 

26. Sleep. — Ebullition of blood, esp. at night, disturbing the sleep. — 
Sleeplessness, with cries and tossing, esp. in the case of infants. 

27. Fever. — Heat (esp. of hands). 


Sepia. 

Sepia officinalis. Cuttle Fish, N, 0. Cephalopoda. Trituration of 
dried liquid contained in the ink-bag. [I have found a prepara- 
tion made from the fresh ink-bag,, given to me by Dr. Swallow, 
of Ningpo, in every way superior to the official preparation, 
which I now rarely use. The provings and recorded cures 
were, however, made with the, dried ink preparations.] 

C^oal. —Alcohol, effects of. Amenorrhoea. Anus, pressure of. Apoplexy. 
Afpetitey depraved. Ascarides. Baldness. Bladder, irritable. Cancer. Change of 
life. Uhloasma. Chorea. Condylomata. Cystitis. Dandriff. Dysmenorrhcea. 
Dyspepsia. Eczema. Epistaxis. EyeSy affections of. EacCy yellow. Freckles. 
Gleet. Gonorrhoea. Gravel. Herpes ; circinatus. Hysteria. InitaHon. Jaun- 
dice. Leucorrhoea. Liver-spots. Liver, torpid. MenstmatioHy disordered. Mind, 
affections of. Nails, pains under. Neuralgia. Nose, inflamed ; swollen. Ozaena. 
Phimosis. Pityriasis versicolor. Pleurisy. Pregnancy, disorders of; vomiting of. 



SEPIA 


1159 


Pruritus. Psoriasis. Ptosis. Pylorus, induration of. Quinsy. Rectum, cancer of ; 
fisture of. Ringworm. Sacrum, pain in. Sciatica. Seborrhoea. Smell, sense 
of, too acute ; disordered. Spermatorrhcca. St^^e. Toothache. Unne, incontinence 
of. UternSf bearing clown in. Varicose veins. Warts. Whooping-cough. 

Charaoteristios. — ^The present use of Sepia in medicine is clue 
to Hahnemann. Some among the ancient physicians (Dioscorides, 
Plinius, and Marcellus, says Teste) used either the flesh, the eggs, or 
even the only bone which constitutes the skeleton of this animal, for 
** leucorrhoea, gonorrhoea, catarrh of the bladder, gravel, spasms of 
the bladder, baldness, freckles and certain kinds of tetters — which 
is sufficiently remarkable in the light of the provings. Sep, is one of 
the remedies of the Chronic Diseases^ and was proved by Goullon, 
von Gersdorff, Gross, Hartlaub, and Wahle. Sep. is predominantly, 
but by no means exclusively, a woman’s remedy. It affects the 
generative organs of both sexes, and a large number of the symptoms 
occurring in other organs have some relation thereto. Teste 
describes the type to where Sep. is suited as follows : Young people 
of both sexes, or, rather, persons between pubescence and the 
critical period of life ; of delicate constitutions, with pure white 
skins, or skins having a rosy tinge ; blonde or red hair ; nervous 
or lymphatico-nervous temperaments ; exceedingly excitable and 
anxious for emotions ; and, lastly, particularly such as are disposed 
to sexual excitement, or have been exhausted by sexual excesses. 
Hering gives these types : (i) Persons of dark hair, rigid fibre, but 
mild and easy disposition, (2) Women during pregnancy, in child- 
bed and while nursing. (3) Children who take cold leadily when 
the weather changes. (4) Scrofulous persons. (5) Men who have 
been addicted to drinking and sexual excesses. (6) Pot-bellied 
mothers, yellow saddle across nose, irritable, faint from least exertion, 
leuco-phlegmatic constitutions. Biihr gives : “ Sanguine, excitable 
temperaments inclined to congestions.” Farrington adds that the Sep. 
patient is sensitive to all impressions, and that the dark hair is not 
by any means a necessity. He gives a more complete description : 
Puffed, flabby persons (less frequently emaciated) with yellow or 
dirty yellow brown blotched skin ; inclined to sweat, especially about 
genitals, axillae, and back ; hot flushes ; headache in morning ; awaken 
stiff and tired ; subject to disease of sexual organs ; the general atti- 
tude is never one of strength and healthful ease, but of lax connec- 
tive tissue, languor, easily produced paresis. Sep. acts on the vital 
forces as well as on organic tissues. The sphincters are weakened 
and all non-striated muscles.# Sep. disturbs the circulation, causing 
flushes and other irregularities — throbbings all over ; hands hot and 
feet cold, or vice versa. The flushes run upward and end in sweat 
with faint, weak feeling. Epistexis may occur either from a blow, 
from being *in a warm room, or from suppressed menses. The 
upward direction of the Sep. symptoms is one of its keynotes. The 
pains of the head shoot upward ; and so do the pains in anus, rectum, 
and vagina. Also coldness as well as the flushes travels from below 
up. On the other hand night-sweat proceeds from above downward. 
The head pains proceed from within out. Sep. is one of the remedies 
which have the ball sensation in inner parts. There is vertigo 



ti6o 


SEPIA 


with sensation of something rolling round in the head. There is 
sensation of a ball in inner parts generally ; but the most notable 
one is sensation. of a ball in rectum. It may be described as an 
apple or a potato, and it is not relieved by stool. I have cured both 
constipation and diarrhoea when that symptom was present. The 
upward stitches in rectum and vagina, when present, are equally good 
indications for Sep. in cases of haemorrhoids, prolapse of rectum, and 
for prolapse or induration ot uterus and cervix. As with Murex 
the chief incidence of Sep. is on the female sexual organs, though wkh 
Sep. the menses are generally scanty, as with Murex they are the reverse. 
Sep. causes engorgement of the uterus going on to induration. There is 
either prolapse or retroversion. Yellowish green leucorrhoea some- 
what offensive. The bearing-down pains of Sep. are of great intensity. 
They are felt in abdomen and back ; and sometimes even seem to 
interfere with breathing. The bearing down is < standing or walking. 
The bearing down extends into thighs. There is a constant sense of 
pressing into vagina, which compels the patient to cross the limbs 
to prevent prolapse. Connected with the uterine symptoms are : 
hysteria, erethism, palpitation, orgasm of blood, faintness. The 
sensation of “ goneness and emptiness, which is one of the cha- 
racteristics of Sep.^ is sometimes connected with the pelvic bearing 
down. The empty sensation is felt in the epigastrium and through- 
out the abdomen. It is analogous to the great relaxing effect of 
Sep. on connective tissues. This sinking is common in pregnancy ; 
and Sep. corresponds to many of the troublesome affections of the 
pregnant state, as — “ morning sickness, vomiting of food and bile in 
morning ; of milky fluid ; strains so that blood comes up.^^ The 
thought of food sickens her ; with sense of great weight in anus.^^ 
Tendency to abortion is met by Sep . ; Hering is reported to have 
said : All women prone to abortion should take Sep. and Zinc.^* 
But Sep. meets many cases of dyspefisia not originating in uterine 
disorders. It has cured dyspepsia from injury by oveiiifting. Portal 
stasis is part of the Sep. action. There is fulness, soreness, and 
stitches in liver region ; as well as stitches in left hypochondrium. 
The whole urinary tract is irritated, and catarrh of bladder and 
urethra may be set up. There is frequent strong ur.ging to urinate. 
Stitches along the urethra. The relaxed sphincters of Sep. favour 
enuresis, and the type which it cures is well defined : “The bed is 
wet almost as soon as the child goes to sleep, always during the first 
sleep.” It meets the enuresis of light-complexioned boys and 
onanists. In cases of irritable bladder, although the desire is urgent, 
the discharge of urine may be difficult, and the patient may have to 
wait a long time. Gonorrhcea after the acute stage has subsided. 
Gleet and gonorrhoeal warts have been cured with it. Hering gives, 
“ condylomata completely surrounding head of penis.” 1 have cured 
a crop of small velvety warts completely encircling the mouth of the 
prepuce. Thuja had failed in the case. In reference to warts, I 
cured with Sep. 3X trit. a large horn-like wart on the abdomen of a 
woman. It was as large as a crown-piece but shaped like a bean, 
and raised a quarter of an inch from the surface. The skin 
symptoms of S^. are among its most characteristic features. The 



SEPIA 


I t6i 


skill is delicate, the least injury tends to ulceration. Itching which 
often changes to burning when scratched. Soreness of skin, humid 
places on bends of knees. Chloasma. Painful eruption on tip of 
nose. Herpetic eruption on lips and about mouth. Ringworm-like 
eruptions every spring on different parts of body. Ringworm on face. 
Herpes circinatus. Roundness and yellowness of the spots. The nettle- 
rash of Sep, appears on going into open air. It is > in warm room. The 
itching of Sep. may be desperate, especially wlien it affects the genitals 
and anus. The action of Sep, on connective tissues is again exempli- 
lied in the selection of the finger-joints as a seat of ulceration. The 
sweat is pungent in odour, offensive in axillae and soles of feet, causing 
soreness. The skin and the eyes are near akin, and Sep. causes all kinds 
of inflammation of eyes and lids, with impaired vision, black spots, 
green halo, fiery redness. The eye-symptoms are < by rubbing; 
< pressing lids together ; < morning and evening ; > bathing in 
cold water. Sep. is a chilly remedy from lack of vital heat, chills 
so easily ” ; this is especially the case in chronic diseases. Sep. is 
often required in chronic nasal catarrh. Nash had a case in which 
the discharge was thick, bland, and copious. Puls, relieved the 
catarrh but increased the menstrual flow too much. Sep. cured both. 
Sep, is also useful where colds inflame the tonsils and tend to cause 
suppuration. The characteristic sensations in the throat are : 
Dryness ; pressure as if neck-cloth too tight ; plug sensation ; stinging ; 
stitching pains on swallowing ; contraction of throat without 
swallowing ; sensation of plug when swallowing with feeling of 
constriction. There are some peculiarities about the mental state 
of Sep, which must be borne in mind : (i) Anxiety : with fear, flushes 
of heat over face and head ; about real or imaginary evils ; towards 
evening. (2) Great sadness and weeping ; dread of being alone, of 
men,* of meeting friends; with uterine troubles. (3) Indifferent: 
even to one’s family ; one^s occupation ; to one’s nearest and dearest. 
(4) Greedy, miserly. (5) Indolent. The Sep, patient weeps when 
a^ked about her symptoiUvS. She is very sensitive, and must not be 
found fault with. ^‘Faints easily” is a note of the Sep, weakness: 
after getting wet ; from extremes of heat and cold ; riding in a 
carriage ; kneeling at church, l/orbacher (quoted H, M,, xxxi. 142) 
refers to three important indications for Sep. not generally known : 
(i) Prodromal symptoms of apoplexy ; (2) whooping-cough that 
drags on interminably ; (3) hypostatic pleuritis. The symptoms of 
Sep, corresponding to the first are : Stiffness of back of neck ; 
staggering vertigo (< exercksmg in open air) ; anxiousness and a 
feeling of fear of severe sickness ; intermitting heart beats ; torpor 
and sleepiness. Lorbacher gives this case ; A thick-set farmer, 
50, inclined to hypochondriasis, troubled from time to time with 
piles, without being an habitual drinker was addicted to nips.” 
Gradually abdominal prominence developed ; stiffness of neck ; 
vertigo ; occasional throbbing headache ; slight transient loss of con- 
sciousness ; anxiety ; fear of apoplexy ; piles less pronounced and less 
frequently troublesome than usual. Venesection, performed several 
times, only partially relieved. Abstinence from alcohol had no 
decided influence. Sep, i2x w^as given, four drops twice daily at first, 



SEPIA 


1162 

then every other day, and later at increasing intervals. In two 
months the symptoms were reduced, and gradually passed away. 
The man lived eight years after this, and had no apoplexy, though he 
did not give up his “ nips.’* Sep, is indicated in whooping-cough 
when it has lasted eight weeks or longer, and the paroxysms, though 
reduced in number and virulence, do not disappear, and occur 
especially before midnight. The patients are reduced in strength, 
dyspeptic, irritable, tearful, easily angered or apathetic. Kunkel 
reports (quoted H. 3 /., xxix. 670) this case of pulmonary affection : 
A boy, 14, had been under treatment live weeks for cough and- 
hoarseness. Hoarseness < evening ; during the day cough with 
purulent sputa. Slept well but dreamed when he lay on left side. 
Emaciated. Phos, lox produced little change. It was now ascertained 
that there was remarkable lightness of the chest on breathing, 
with inclination to take a deep breath ; this was > in open air, 
on motion, while at work ; < while in the house and at rest. 
Though the weather was bad he had constant desire to be out of 
doors. Sep, 1 ox made a rapid cure. Boenninghausen recommended 
Sep. in cases of cough, either with or without expectoration, with 
bloody, blood -streaked, purulent, yellow greenish or stinking sputa, 
and especially in consumption. Nash mentions a case of cholera 
infantum which he cured with Sep. on the indication “always < after 
taking milk.” In moisture oozing from the anus he compares it 
with Ant. r., which has the first place. Sep.., says Bahr (i. 359), 
“ affords considerable help in a certain condition of the system which 
we have s© far only noticed in females. After the exacerbation of 
a chronic gastric catarrh has lasted a few days with intolerable burning 
pains, the renal region, more particularly the left side, becomes painful, 
a violent burning pain is felt in this region, and a quantity of saturated, 
highly-coloured urine is discharged, which deposits copious quantities 
of urates, or else a clear urine with copious sandy sediment, coated 
with unc acid. After the discharge the pains generally abate, and 
only return if the stomach has not been restored to its normal con- 
dition.” Peculiar Sensations of Sep. are : As if every object were in 
motion. As if suspended in air. Vertigo as if intoxicated. As if brain 
crushed. As if head would burst. As if waves of pain rolling up and 
beating against frontal bone. As if something rolling around in head, 
with vertigo. Stitches as from needles in head. As if roots of hair 
were sore ; as if cut short near roots. As if eyes would fall out. As 
of a weight over eyes. As if eyes were gone and a cool wind blew 
out of sockets. Eyes as if bruised. As if a grain of sand in eye. As 
if lids too heavy to open. Eyes as if balls of lire. As if lids too tight 
and did not cover eyeballs. Hollow molar tooth as if swollen and 
elongated. Gums, as if burned ; as if beginning to suppuraite. Tongue 
and cavity of mouth as if scalded. As of plug in throat. Throat as if 
raw. As if something twisting in stomach and rising to throat. As 
if viscera turning inside out. As if stomach sore internally. As if 
something remained lodged in stomach. As if stomach were being 
scraped. As if a strap as wide as her hand drawn tightly round her 
waist. Liver as if bursting. As if everything in abdomen turning 
around. As of a load in abdomen. As if intestines were drawn into 



SEPIA 


1163 

a lump. As of something adherent in abdomen. As of something 
alTve in abdomen. Weight or ball in anus. As if bladder full and 
contents would fall out over pubes. As if drops came out of 
bladder, As if bladder and urinary organs would be pressed out. 
As of everything would issue through vulva. As if everything would 
fall out of uterus. Uterus as if clutched. As if vulva enlarged. As 
if something heavy would force itself from vagina. As from a weight 
in sides. As if ribs were broken and sharp points were sticking in 
flesh. As if cough came from stomach and abdomen. Chest as if 
hollow ; as if sore. * Throat as if tilled with phlegm. As if breasts 
were enlarged. As if heart stood still. Back as if she could not turn 
or raise herself, or as if she had been in a wrong position, almost as 
if parts had gone to sleep. Sudden pain in back as if struck by 
a hammer. Pain in back as from subcutaneous ulceration. As if 
something were going to break in back. As if limbs would refuse to 
act. As if shoulder dislocated. Feet as if asleep. Right hip-joint 
as if bruised. Lower limbs as if beaten. As of a mouse running in 
lower limbs. As if bones of legs were decaying. As if she could 
feel every muscle and fibre of her right side from shoulder to feet. 
As of a ball in inner parts. As of an icy hand between scapulae. As 
if she would suffocate. As if feet stood in cold water up to ankles. 
As of hot water poured over one. ‘‘ Stiffness is a prominent feature 
of Sep. : stiffness of limbs < after sleep ; stiffness of uterine region. 
A peculiar symptom of Sep is : “ Involuntary jerking of head 
backward and forward, especially forenoons when sitting.’’ This may 
occur in hysteria. Open fontanelles in children is an indication for 
Sep, The symptoms are < by touch (except pain in back, which is 
> by touch). Pressure >. (Pressing eyelids together <.) Binding 
head tightly >. Loosening clothes >. Rubbing ; and scratching <. 

< Jaf ; mis-step ; slightest blow ; oveiiifting. Many symptoms 
arq both < and > by rest and motion. < Moving arms. Lying 
on side, and on right side >. Lying on left side <. Lying on back 

Sitting < many symptoms. Faint sitting erect or kneeling. 
(< Kneeling is characteristic.) Sitting with legs crossed >. Stoop- 
ing <. Standing <. Hard motion > headache. A short walk 
fatigues much. Going upstairs <. Dancing and running s= no 
shortness of breath. < Mental labour. < From sexual excesses. 

< Afternoon and evening. (“ Dyspnoea in evening ” is charac- 
teristic.) < From cold air or during east wind. < In sultry, moist 
weather. < Before a thunderstorm. < By laundry work. {Sep, is 
the washerwoman’s remecty.” — H C. Allen.) Stormy weather =s 
suffocating feeling. < After sleep (stiffness of legs). < On falling 
to sleep or in first sleep. > In open air. (Also — warmth of natural 
bodily heat ; very sensitive to* cold air.j Cold water > eyes and 
teeth. > Warmth of bed or hot applications. Cough < in church. 

< During and immediately after eating. Milk, fat food, acids <. 
While eating pulsation in pit of stomach, the more he eats the < it 
becomes. Empty feeling ceases at supper. < From coitus. I have 
confirmed the experience of Dr. Swallow, who found the fresh pre- 
paration of Sep, (which I prescribe as Sep, ft\) to possess a wider range 
than the ordinary preparation and to act as an “ organ remedy ” in a 



SEPIA 


1 164 


great variety ot uterine affections not detinitcly indicated by the 
pathogenesis. I have used it in attenuations from the 5th to 30th.] 
Relations. — Antidoied by : Smelling Nit. sp. cl, by Vegetable acids, 
Aco., Ant. c., Ant. t., Rhus. It antidotes: Calc., Chi., Merc., Nat m., 
Nat. ph., Pho., Sars., Sul. Incompatible: Lach. (but in one case in 
which Lach, in very high potency had caused intensely distressing 
rectal tenesmus with alternate inversion and eversion of the anus, Sep. 
high proved to be the antidote). Compleinentciiy : Nat. m. (the cuttle-fish 
is a salUisjaler animal), Nat. c., and other Natmm salts ; Sul. Followed 
well by: Nit. ac. Compare : Vesicular eruptions and ulcers about joints^ 
Brx., Mez. Psoriasis, Ars., Ars. i. Chloasma, Lyc., Nux, Sul, Curar. 
Ringworm, Bac., Calc., Tell. Sadness, Caust., Puls. Mild, easy dis- 
position, Puls. Weeps when asked about her symptoms (Puls., weeps 
when telling her symptoms). Diseases with sudden prostration and 
sinking faintness, Murex, Nux m. Washerwoman’s remedy, Pho. 
(Pho., headache after washing). Pains extend from other parts to 
back (Sabi, the reverse). Pains with shuddering (Puls., with chilliness). 
Lack of vital heat, especiall)’ in chronic cliseases {Led. in acute 
diseases). Coldness of vertex with headache, Vei . (heat of vertex, 
Calc., Graph., Sul.). Indifferent to his occupation, FI. ac., Ph. ac. 
Greedy, miserly, Lyc. Must loosen neckband, Lach. Sensation of 
ball in inner parts, Lach. Herpes circinatus in isolated spots (Tell, 
in intersecting rings). Empty feeling > eating, Chel, Pho. Consti- 
pation during pregnancy. Aim. Pain in rectum long after stool, Nit. ac., 
Sul. Urine so offensive must be removed from room (Induum, 
horribly offensive after standing). Bed wet almost as soon as child 
goes to sleep, Kre. Old-standing gleet, K. iod. Bearing down as if 
everything would protrude from pelvis, Agar., Bell, Lil. t., Murex, 
Sanic. Sight or thought of food sickens, Nux. Smell of cooking 
food nauseates, Ars., Colch. Itching turns to burning by scratching, 
Sul. wSpine pain < sitting than walking. Cob., Zn., Puls., Can. i. 
Indurated uterus ; vaginismus, Plat. Bearing down, Bell. (Bell. < 
lying down, Sep. > ; Bell > standing, Sep. <). Cannot expectorate, 
Caust., Dros., K. ca., Arn. Spurting of urine with cough, Caust., 
Nat. m., Fer. Eczema of backs of hands, Nat. c. Prolapsus uteri, Nux. 
(Sep. follows when Nux ceases to act). Ptosis, Gels. (Gels., sluggish 
mind ; suffused red face). Urticaria < in open air, Rx. c. Urticaria, 
Ast. fl., Nat. m.. Apis, Chloral, Urtica. Eye affections of tea- 
drinkers, Thuj. Dyspepsia with thick urine, Lyc. Indurated uterus, 
melancholy, Aur. Bearing down, sadness, K. fey. Bearing down, 
congestion, aching distress, prolapse, Us^., Sec., Vib. o., Vib. t., Inula., 
Hedeo, Ziz. Uncontrollable fits of laughter. Croc., Ign. Terrible 
sadness during menses, Lyc., Nat. m. Nit. ac. (Nat. m. is < or > 
10 a.m.) Irritable during menses (Nux, ,Cham., Mg. m. before and 
during ; Lyc. before). < Kneeling, Coccul, Mg. c. Anxious about 
health. Calc., Pho. Oziena, clinkers. Pul, Syph., Pso. Fetid urine, 
Calc, (Benz. ac. and Nit. ac., strong). Burning, shooting, stitching pains 
in cervix, Murex. Hot, burning eructations, Pet., K. ca.. Hep. Delay 
in passing water, Ars. (ineffectual desire, Nuxl Fear of ghosts, Pho,, 
Pul Phimosis, Can. s., Merc., Sul, Nit. ac., Thuj. With exhausted 
feeling in bowels after stool, Plat. Movements of head, Lyc. < From 



SEPIA 


1165 

coitus ; remedy for women, relaxation of tissue, K. ca. As if struck 
by a hammer in the back (Naj. in nape). Tongue and mouth as if 
scalded, Sang. Turning round in abdomen. Nit. ac. (as if machinery 
working in abdomen). Pain as of subcutaneous ulceration, Puls., 
lian. b. Badly healing skin, Hep. Eyes > bathing in cold water, 
Asar. Sensitiveness, Asar. Apoplexy, Ast. r. (a sea animal). < From 
milk, Homar. (a sea animal). Chest, Pho. 

CauSfttion. — Anger and vexation. Blows. Falls. Jar. Injury. 
Oyerlifting (dyspepsia). Snowy air. Tobacco (neuralgia). Laundry 
work. Wetting. ./\lcohol. Milk, boiled (diarrhoea). Fat Pork. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Sadness and dejection, with tears. — Mcl.incholy and morose- 
ness. — Anguish and inquietude, sometimes with flushes of heat, generally in 
evening (when walking in open air), and sometimes in bed. — Restlessness, 
fidgety. — Dread of being alone. — Excessively nervous; sensitive to least 
noise. — Great uneasiness respecting the health ; and about her domestic affairs. 
— Pensiveness. — Timorous disposition. — Discouragement, often to such an 
extent as to be disgusted with life. — Indifference to everything (to all sur- 
roundings), even to relations.— Repugnance to customary business. — Great 
disturbance caused by vexation. — Great excitability in company. — Suscep- 
tibility and peevishness, with great irascibility. — Quarrelsome and caustic 
disposition. — Weakness of memory. — Distraction. — Aptness to make mistakes 
in speaking and writing. — Unfitness for intellectual labour. — Slowness of con- 
ception. — Comprehension difticult ; heavy flow of ideas. — Language coming 
slowly. 

2. Head. — Confusion of the head, which disables him from performing 
any mental labour. — Fits of vertigo, esp. when walking in open air, or when 
writing, or even on least movement of arms. — Vertigo, during which all 
objects appear to be in motion, or with sensation as of something rolling round 
in head, — Vertigo in morning, on rising, or in afternoon. — Sensation of cold- 
ness on vertex ; < from moving head and stooping, > when at rest and in the 
open ail . — Fits of headache, with nausea, vomiting, and shooting or boring 
pains, which extort cries. — Headache every morning. — Headache, which does 
not permit the eyes to be opened. — Headache, with excessive desire for 
coition. — Headache, on shaking or moving head, and also at every step, as if 
brain were shaken about.— Semilatcral headache, sometimes in the evening, 
after lying down, preceded by hea\ incss of head. — F^aroxysins of hcmicrania, 
stinging pain as from within tq without, in one side of head (mostly 1.) with 
nausea (and vomiting) and contraction of eye ; < in room and when walking 
fast, > in open air and when lying on painful side. — Boring headache from 
within to without, from forenoon tjll evening < from motion and stooping, 
< by rest, when closing the eyes, from external pressure, and sleep. — Heavi- 
ness of head. — Pressive cephalalgia above eyes, in the clear daylight ; as if the 
head should burst and the eyes fall out, with nausea.— Expansive pressure in 
head, sometimes when stooping, as if it were about to burst. — Contraction in 
head. — Drawing and tearing in and on head, sometimes semilateral. — Lancin- 
ating cephalalgia, often semilateral or frontal.— -Shooting pains, esp. over 1. 



Ii66 


SEPIA 


eye, extorting cries. — Headache at menstrual nisus; with scanty flow. — Head- 
ache ill terrific shocks. — Involuntary jerking of head backward and forwai*d, 
esp. in forenoon and when sitting. — Fontanellcs remain open, with Jerking 
of the head, pale, bloated face ; stomacace, green diarrhoeic stools.— Perspira- 
tion on the head, smelling sour, with faintish weakness ; < in evening before 
going to sleep. — Rush of blood to the head. — Throbbing cephalalgia, esp. in 
occiput (beginning in the morning, < in evening, from least motion, when 
turning eyes, when lying on back, < when closing eyes and when at rest). — 
Violent congestion of blood in head, with heat, esp. when stooping. — Coldn,ess 
of exterior of head. — Disposition to take cold on hcqd from dry, cold wind, 
and if head gets wet. — Involuntary trembling, and shocks in head. — Mobility 
of scalp. — Scalp and roots of hair very sensitive to touch. — Itching on head 
(nose and eyes). — Eruptions on vertex and back part of head, dry, offensive, 
stinging, itching and tingling, with cracks, extending behind ears, feeling 
sore wlien scratching them. — Swelling on one side of head above the temple, 
with itching ; sensation of coldness and tearing in it ; < when touching it ; 
> when lying on it. or after rising from bed. — Humid scabs on the head. — 
(Bald spots on scalp, porrigo decalvans. — R. T. C.) — Falling off of the hair. — 
Small red pimples on forehead ; rough forehead. — Swelling of head, esp. 
forehead. 

3. Eyes. — Heaviness and depression of upper lids. — Pressure on eye- 
balls. — Itching and smarting in eyes and lids. — Pricking in eyes, by candle- 
light in evening. — Burning sensation in eyes, esp. in morning on waking. — 
Inflammation of eyes, with redness of sclerotica, and shooting pains. — In- 
llammation, redness, and swelling of eyelids, with styes. — Pustules in the 
cornea. — Scabs in eyebrows. — Glassy, watery eyes, in evening. — Fungus 
haematodcs in cornea. — Dry .scabs on lids, esp, on waking in morning. — 
Yellow colour of sclerotica. — Eyelids pain in morning when awaking as if 
too heavy, and as if he could not keep them open. — Eyelids red, swollen ; 
styes on them. — Lachrymation, esp. in the morning or nocturnal agglutination 
of lids. — Quivering and jerking of lids. — Paralysis of the lids, and in- 
ability to open them, esp. at night (and evening).— Confused sight, when 
reading and writing. — Presbyopia. — Weakness of sight, as from amaurosis, 
with contracted pupils. — Appearances of a veil, black spots, points, sparks, 
and streaks of lights, before eyes. — Intolerance of reflected light from 
bright objects. — Green reflection round candle in evening. — Great sensitive- 
ness of eyes to daylight. — Sight vanishes during the menses, > on lying 
down. 

4. Ears. — Otalgia. — Shootings in cars. — Stinging in the 1 . ear. — Pain in 
ear, as from excoriation.— Swelling, and purulent eruption, in external ear. — 
Herpes on lobe of car, behind the ear and on nape of neck. — Discharge of 
liquid pus from car, with itching. — Hearing extremely sensitive, esp. to music. 
— Hardness of hearing. — Sudden deafnej^, as if caused by a plug in cars. — 
Buzzing and roaring before cars. 

5. Nose. — Swelling and inflammation of nose, esp. at tip.— Scabs on tip 
of nose. — Scabby and ulcerated nostrils. — Hardened mucus in nose. — 
Epistaxis, and discharge of blood, frequently, on blowing nose, after being in 
the slightest degree overheated, or w’hen the nose has been struck by any 
thing, even lightly. — Violent bleeding of nose, esp. during menses. — Anosmia. 



SEPIA 


1167 

^Smelling too sensitive ; too feeble, yellow saddle across the bridge of nose. 
-*rFctid smell in nose. — Ozaena ; blowing of large lumps of yellow green 
mucus or yellow green membranes, with blood, from the nose.—Dry coryza.— 
Dry coryza, esp. of 1 . nostril.—Dry mucus, which causes an obstruction in 
nose. — Violent fluent coryza, with sneezing, pain in occiput, and drawing in 
limbs. 

6. Face. — Paleness and puffiness of face, with blue circles round the 
eyes, which arc red and dull — Yellowness of face (and of the whites of eyes). 
— Face emaciated. — Yellow streak on nose, and cheeks, in form of a saddle. — 
Violent heat in face. — Pale bloatedness of face. — Erysipelatous inflammation, 
and swelling of one side of face (arising from a canons tooth). — Inflammatory 
swelling of face, with yellow scurfy pimples, thickly grouped. — Herpes, scurf 
on face. — ^Warts on face.— Black pores on face.— Acnc < before menses.— 
Itching, and eruption on face and on forehead; sometimes merely like red- 
ness and roughness of skin. — Skin swollen on forehead. — Tumours on the 
forehead. — Drawing facial pains. — Spasmodic pain and tearing in bones of 
face. — Neuralgic pains (1. side, from abuse of tobacco). — Dryness and exfolia- 
tion of lips.— Tension of lower lip.— Swelling of under hp. — Yellow colour and 
herpetic eruption round mouth. — Moist and scabious eruptions on the red part 
of lips, and on chin.— Painful ulcer on internal surface of lips. — hmgorgement, 
and painful sensitiveness of submaxillary glands. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache, on compressing or touching teeth, and on speak- 
ing, also from slightest current of cold air. — Nocturnal toothache, with 
extreme excitement. — Pulsative shooting, or drawing toothache, extending 
sometimes into ear (esp. after eating, drinking, or taking anything cold into 
mouth) or into arms and fingers. — ^I'oothache during the menses. — Toothache ; 
stinging, pulsating, extending into ear during pregnancy, with shortness of 
breath, with swelled face and swelling of submaxillary glands, < from every 
cold draught of air, when touching teeth and when talking. — Toothache with 
violent ebullition of blood, and pulsation in whole body. — Tearing shocks in 
tc(;th. — Bluntness, looseness, easy bleeding, and caries of teeth. — Gums dark 
red. — Swelling, excoriation, ulceration, and easy bleeding of gums. 

8. Mouth. — Fetid breath. — Swelling of interior of mouth. — Dryness of 
the mouth, lips and tongue. — Saline salivation. — Taste bitter, sour, slimy, foul, 
mostly in morning. — Pain in tongue and palate, as if they had been burnt. — 
Tip of tongue feels as if scalded. — Excoriation of longue. -Vesicles on tongue. 
— I'ongue loaded with a white coating.— Soreness of tip of tongue. 

9. Throat. — Sore throat, with swelling of glands of neck. — Pressure, as 
from a plug m throat, or pain as from excoriation, and shootings during 
deglutition.— Pressure in throat in region of tonsils, as if neck-cloth were too 
tight. — Jerking in throat. — Swclfing and inflammation of the gullet. — Inflam- 
mation, swelling, and suppuration of tonsils. — Dryness in throat, with tension 
and scraping. — Clammy sensation in throat. — Accumulation of mucus m 
throat, and on velum palati. — Rougbne.ss and burning in fauces ; < by hawk- 
ing. — Hawking up of mucus, esp. in morning. — Expulsion of sanguineous 
mucus on hawking. 

10 . Appetite. — Putrid or sour taste. — Too salt taste of food. — Adipsia 
or excessive thirst, esp. in morning and in evening, sometimes with anorexia. — 
Great voracity. — Bulimy, with sensation of emptiness in stomach. — Eager 



Ii68 


SEPIA 


desire for wine ; for vinegar. — Creates aversion to beer. — Repugnance and 
dislike to food, esp. to meal, and milk, which produces diarrhoea. — Tobacco 
smoke disagrees.— Disagreeable risings, with nausea, after eating fat food.— 
Weak digestion.— After a meal : acidity in mouth, frequent risings, scraping 
and burning sensation in throat, pulsation in bcrobiculus, hiccough, inflation 
of abdomen, svreat, feverish heat, palpitation of heart, cephalalgia, nausea, 
vomiting, pains in stomach, &c. 

11. Stomach. — Sensation of emptiness in pit of stomach, just below 
ensiform cartilage; this is a very weak, ^^gone” feeling, which nothing can 
satisfy ; this symptom may appear in any coniplicatipn of troubles, in dis- 
ordered menstruation, &c. — Frequent risings, generally sour or bitter, or else 
like rotten eggs, or with taste of food. — Painful risings, during which blood 
comes into mouth. — Acidity, with disgust to life. — Nausea, sometimes When 
fasting in morning, > by eating a little. — Nausea, with bitter taste aiid risings. 
— Nausea from motion of a carriage. — Nausea and vomiting after a meal. — 
Vomiting of bile and of food (in morning, with headache). — Vomiting of bile 
and food during pregnancy ; straining so hard that blood comes up. — Pains 
in stomach after a meal, sometimes in evening. — Violent pain in cardia, when 
food passes into stomach. — Pain in the scrobiculus while walking. — Pressure 
in stomach, as from a stone, csp. during or after a meal, or cheat night. — Con- 
tractive spasm in stomach.— Waierbrash, csp. after drinking or eating, or 
preceded by a whirling sensation in stomach. — Vomiting of milky serum (in 
pregnant women). — Noctural vomiting, with headache. — Cramps in stomach 
and chest. — Tearing boring in cardiac region, extending to loins. — Cutting 
boring from stomacli towards spine. — Pressive shootings in scrobiculus, and 
in region of the stomach. — Burning sensation in pit of stomach and scrobi- 
culus. — Tlirobbing in pit of stomach. — Painful sensation of emptiness in 
stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Pains in the liver, when riding in a carriage. — Aching, 
throbbing, and shooting in hepatic region. — Boring or tensive shootings in 
hypochondria, csp. during movement. — Shootings in 1. hypochondriura. — 
Attacks of conti active pain in r. hypochrondrium. — Pain across hypochondrium 
at night on lying down, > from micturition. — Pain in abdomen, in bed in 
morning. — Pressure and heaviness in abdomen, with sensation of expansion, 
as if it were about to burst. — Excessive distension of abdomen. — Heaviness 
and hardness in abdomen. — Hardness in pyloric region. — Soreness of abdo- 
men in pregnant women. — Enlargement of abdomen (in women who have had 
children). — Dropsical swelling of abdomen. — Abdominal spasms, with a claw- 
ing pain, as if intestines were twisted. — Incisive colic, esp. after corporeal 
exercise, or at night, with desire to evacuate. — Digging, cuttings, and aching 
in the abdomen. — Pain, as from a bruise in intestines. — Coldness in abdomen. 
— Burning sensation and shootings in abdomen, esp. in 1. side, and sometimes 
extending into thigh. — Sensation of emptiness in abdomen. — Lancinations in 
groins. — Brownish spots on abdomen. — Movements and borborygmi in abdo- 
men, esp. after a meal. — Excc.ssivc production and incarceration of flatus. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Constipation during pregnancy. — Ineffectual 
want to evacuate, or only with emission of slime and flatus. — Slow, inefficient 
evacuations, like sheep dung. — Scanty evacuations, with straining and 
tenesmus.— Pieces too soft. — Difficult discharge even of soft stool.—- Great 



SEPIA 


1169 

difficulty in discharging stool, which seems to stick in anus or rectum as if a 
ball or potato was there. — Difficult stool with sensation of weight in abdomen. 
—Gelatinous evacuations (small), with gripings (and tenesmus).— Debilitating 
diarrhoea. Greenish diarrhoea, often of a putrid or sour smell, esp. in children. 
—Diarrhoea after boiled milk. — Whitish or brownish colour of stools. — Dis- 
charge of blood during the evacuation. — Contractive pain and tension, itching, 
tingling, burning, and shooting in anus and rectum. — Oozing from rectum. — 
Slimy discharge from rectum, with shooting and tearing pains. — ^Affections of 
anus and rectum where there are sharp, shooting, lancinating pains running up 
info abdomen. — Prolapsus recti, esp. during an evacuation. — Weak feeling in 
rectum in bed. — Congestion of blood in anus. — Inactivity of the bowels. — 
Protrusion of haemorrhoids from rectum (when walking; bleeding when 
walking), — Bleeding haemorrhoids. — Excoriation between the buttocks. — 
Contractive pain in perinaeum. — Ring of condylomata round anus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Frequent (and ineffectual) want to urinate (from 
pressure on bladder and tension in hypogastrium). — Aching in bladder. — 
Feeling as if bladder were greatly distended. — Emission of urine at night (has 
to rise frequently). — Involuntary discharge of urine at night, esp. in first sleep. — 
Deep-coloured urine, red like blood. — Turbid urine, with red, sandy, or brick- 
coloured sediment. — With white sediment and a cuticle on surface. — Profuse 
fetid urine, with white sediment. — Urine with a sanguineous deposit. — 
Sediment to the urine like clay, as if clay were burnt on the bottom of the 
vessel. — Urine very offensive ; cannot be endured in room. — Cramp in 
bladder, burning sensation in bladder and urethra. — Smarting in urethra, esp. 
when urinating.— Incisive pains and shootings in urethra. — Discharge of 
mucus from the urethra, as in chronic gonorrhcca. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Profu.se perspiration of genitals, and esp. 
of scrotum. — Itching round the genital organs. — Itching eruption on the glans 
and prepuce. — (Crop of small, velvety gonorrhoeal warts round margin of 
prepuce).— Pseudo-gonorrhoea of an acid salt smell. — Ulcers on glans and 
prepuce. — Pains in the testes. — Cutting in testes.— Swelling of scrotum. — 
Weakness of genital organs. — Increased sexual desire, with frequent erections 
(continued erections at night). — Frequent pollutions. — Discharge of prostatic 
fluid, after urinating, and during a difficult evacuation. — Intellectual, moral, 
and ph3^sical fatigue after coition, and pollutions. — In either sex, complaints 
from coition. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Excoriation in vulva, and between 
thighs, sometimes before menses (soreness and redness of labia and perinaeum). 
— Great dryness of vulva and vagina, esp. after menses ; painful to touch. — 
Internal and external heat in genitals. — Contractive pain in vagina. — Swelling, 
redness, and moist itching eruption on labia minora. — Bearing down in 
uterus, which obstructs respiration. — Pressure as if everything would pro- 
trude through the vulva (with oppression of breathing). — Pains in both groins 

. and bearing down, with constipation but no Icucorrhoja ; sleep heavy and non- 
refreshing, coldness all over, tongue flabby (cured in stout woman, 35.~*~R. T.C.). 
Prolapsus of the vagina. — Violent stitches in the vagina upwards. — Prolapsus 
uteri, with congestion, with yellow leucorrhcea. — Prolapsus, with inclination 
of fundus to 1., causing numbness in 1. lower half of body, with pain, > when 
lying, esp. on r. side, tenderness of os uteri. — Induration of cervix ; burning, 
VOL. 11 . 75 



1170 


SEPIA 


shooting, sticking pains.— ^Metrorrhagia; during climaxis or during pregnancy. 
— Menses too profuse. — Menses suppressed, or too feeble, or else too early 
(appearing only in morning). —When menses fail to appear in mothers who 
do not nurse, with inflation of abdomen. — Colic before menses. — During 
menses : irritability, melancholy, toothacne, headache, nose-bleed, and painful 
weariness in limbs, or 3pasmodic colic and pressure towards the parts. — Must 
cross her limbs to prevent protrusion of the parts.— Dull, heavy pain in 
ovaries ; esp. I. — Sterility. — Leucorrhoea, or a yellow or greenish red water, 
or purulent and fetid, sometimes with inflation of abdomen, or shootings in 
vagina. — Lcucorrhcea in place of menses. — Leucorrhoea like milk, with 
soreness of pudenda. — Itching, corrosive leucorrhoea. — Inclination to mis- 
carriages. — Abortion after the fifth month. — Tendency to abort fifth to 
seventh month.— Shootings in mammae. — Excoriation of nipples (which bleed 
and seem about to ulcerate). — Nipples cracked across the crown. — Indura- 
tion of breasts ; scirrhus, stitches, tender, burning pains.— Excoriation in 
children. — Sudden hot flushes of climaxis, with momentary sweat, weakness 
and great tendency to faint. — Retained placenta after miscarriage. — Soreness of 
abdomen, feels motions of child too sensitively. — During pregnancy yellow 
brown spots on face. — Terrible itching of vulva causing abortion. — Offensive 
excoriating lochia, very long lasting. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Roughness and soreness of larynx and 
throat. — Sensation of dryness in larynx. — Hoarseness with coryza. — Sensation 
of dryness in trachea. — Cough, excited by a tickling in larynx or chest. — Dry 
cough, which seems to arise from stomach, esp. when in bed in evening (till 
midnight), and often with nausea and bitter vomiting. — Moist cough, after a 
chill. — Cough only during day, or which wakens one at night. — Expectoration 
profuse and whitish. — Cough, with copious expectoration of mucus, generally 
putrid, or of a salt ,taste, often only in morning or evening, and frequently 
accompanied by noise, weakness, and pains as from excoriation in chest (as if 
it were raw).— Cough with expectoration in morning, no expectoration in 
evening, or with expectoration at night, none in day ; very severe cough in 
morning on rising, and expectoration of a great quantity of badly tasting 
substance. — Nocturnal cough, with cries, suffocation, and retching. — Cough, 
like whooping-cough. — Attacks of spasmodic cough, like whooping-congh, 
caused by tickling in chest or from tickling extending from larynx to abdomen, 
with expectoration only in morning, evening and at night of greenish-grey 
pus, or of milk-white, tough mucus, sometimes disagreeably sweet, which has 
to be swallowed again. — Cough < when lying on 1. side ; from acids. — Cough 
excited by a tickling sensation, and accompanied by constipation. — Difficult 
expectoration (or being obliged to swallow again what had been raised). — 
Yellow-greenish purulent expectoration during the cough. — Expectoration of 
blood while lying down. — Sanguineous expectoration, when coughing, morn- 
ing and evening, with expectoration of mucus by day. — Lancinations in chest 
or back during cough. 

i8* Chest. — Dyspnoea, oppression of chest, and shortness of breath, 
when walking and ascending, as well as when lying down in bed, in evening, 
and at night. — Pain in sides of chest, when inspiring or coughing. — Stitch in 
1. side of chest and scapula when breathing and coughing. — Oppression on 
chest produced by an accumulation of mucus, or by too profuse expectoration. 



SEPIA 


1171 

—Pain in chest from movement. — Pressure in chest, esp. when in bed in 
<?vening.— Heaviness, fulness, and tension in chest. — (Hepatisation of middle 
and lower lobes of r, lung. — Skinner).— Pain in chest, as from excoriation.— 
Cramps in chest. — Itching and tickling in chest. — Sensation of emptine^s 
in chest. — Shootings and prickings in chest, and sides of chest, sometimes 
during an inspiration, and when coughing, as well as from intellectual exertion. 
— Brown spots on chest. — The chest symptoms cease, or are > by pressure 
of hand on thorax. 

, XQ. Heart. — Ebullition (congestion) of blood in chest, and violent palpita- 
tion of heart. — Iritern*uttent palpitation of heart.— Palpitation : in evening in 
bed with beating in all arteries ; during digestion ; with stitches in 1. side of 
chest. — Heart gives an occasional hard thump. — Wakes up with violent beating 
of heart. — Nervous palpitation > by walking fast. 

20. Neck and Back. — Tetters on nape, and behind cars. — Claret- 
coloured spots on neck, and under chin. — Furunculus on neck. — Perspiration 
on back, and under axillas. — Swelling and suppuration of axillary glands. — 
Humid tetters under axillae. — Pressure and stitches in r. shoulder-blade. — 
Stiffness in small of back and neck. — Pains in loins and back, with burning 
tearing. — Throbbing m loins. — Weakness in loins when walking. — Incisive 
pains, pressure, digging and spasmodic tcarmgs in back. — Rigidity of back 
and nape. — Pain in the back, and small of back particularly with stiffness ; 
> by walking. — Tearing in back during 1 menses, with chills, heat, thirst and 
contraction of chest. — Aching and dull pain in lumbar and sacral regions, 
extending to thighs and legs. — Sprained pain over hips, in evening in bed, 
and in afternoon. — Shivering in back. — Brownish spots on back. — Reddish 
herpetic spots above hip, and both sides of neck. — Stitches posteriorly above 
r. hip ; she could not lie on r. side, and when touched it felt sore. — Stitches 
in back when coughing. — Itching eruption on back. 

21.. Limbs. — Drawing in all the limbs. — Drawing and tearing (paralytic 
pains) in limbs and joints (with weakness). — He.avinessof the limbs. — Arthritic 
paius ill joints. — Tension in limbs as if they were too short. — Easy going to 
slr.ep of limbs, esp. after manual labour. — Stiffness and want of flexibility in 
joints. — Easy dislocation and spraining of limbs. — Commotions and jerks in 
limbs night and day. — Restlessness and throbbing in all the limbs, which 
admits of no rest in any place. — Frequent stretchings. — ^Want of stability in 
limbs. — Coldness of hands and feet ; but moist. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Wrenching pain (as from dislocation) in shoulder- 
joint, esp. on lifting or holding anything. — Lassitude in arms. — Sensation of 
stiffness or coldness in arms, as if paralysed. — Drawing, paralytic pain in arm 
and shoulder-joint, extending to^ingers. — ^Swelling and suppuration of axillary 
glands. — Shootings in arms, wrist, and fingers on fatiguing or moving them. — 
Painful tension in arms, and joints of elbow and fingers, as if caused by con- 
traction. — Inflammatory, deep red, Jiard, marbled swelling in middle of arms. 
— Pustules on arms, with violent itching. — Stiffness of joints of elbow and 
hands. — Brownish spots, herpetic skin, and itching scabs on elbow (scaling 
off). — Itching vesicles on back of hand, and tips of fingers. — Itch and scabs on 
hands (soldiers’ itch). — Herpes on backs of hands. — Swelling of hand, with 
eruption of vesicles, like pemphigus. — Shootings in wrist on moving the hand. 
— Burning heat in palms. — Cold sweat on hands. — Malignant scabies, and 



SEPIA 


ttfi 

scabs on hands. — ^.■^rthritic drawing and shootings in joints of fingers. Dis- 
tortion of fingers. — Painless ulcers on joints, and on tips of lingers,--{Tingling 
in tips of fingers, which wakes her up on going to sleep, after which sleeps 
well all night. — R. T. C.). — Warts on hands and fingers ; on sides of fingers ; 
horny. — Flaws on fingers. — Deformed nails. — Panaritium, with throbbing and 
shooting pains. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Pain as if bruised in r. hip-joint.— Pain in hips, 
with tearing shootings. — Pain in buttocks and thighs, after having been seated 
for some time. — Spasms in buttocks at night, in bed, when stretching out the 
limb. — Paralytic weakness of legs, esp. after a paroxysm of passion. — Stiffness 
of legs, as far as hip-joint, after having been seated a short time. — Coldness in 
legs and feet (esp. in evening in bed). — Swelling of legs and feet « when 
sitting or standing, > wlicn walking). — Cramp in thighs when walking. — 
Tearing lancinations, or shocks in thighs and tibia, so as to extort cries. — 
Furunculi on thigh and in hams. — Drawing and tearing shootings in knees, 
hams, and heels. — Painful swelling of knees. — Synovitis of knee-joints in 
housemaids (R. T. C.). — Stiffness in joints of knee land ankle. — Cramps in 
calves, sometimes at night. — Restlessness of legs every evening (with formi- 
cation in them). — Itching pimples on legs and instep. — Drawing pain in legs 
and great toes. — Shootings in tibia and instep. — Sensation in legs, as if a 
mouse were running over them. — Jerking in feet when sleeping. — Ulcers on 
instep. — Stiffness in heels and joints of feet, as from contraction. — Pricking 
and burning sensation of feet. — Tingling and numbness in soles of feet. — 
Profuse, or else suppressed (offensive) perspiration of feet (causing soreness 
betw’cen toes). — Stinging in the heels. — Tension in tendo-Achillis. — Ulcers on 
heel, arising from corrosive vesicles. — Indolent ulcers on joints and tips of 
toes. — Corns on feet, with shooting pain. — Deformity of toenails. 

24. Generalities. — [Affections in general appearing in 1 . side ; r. upper 
and r. lower extremities ; eyelids ; internal eai ; hearing very .sensitive ; 
region of liver ; inner lower belly ; I. shoulder-blade ; back and small of 
back ; axilla ; axillary glands, esp. where there are darting pains through 
them; upper and lower extremities and joints; r. lumbar region, with^a 
violent pressing or bearing-down pain ; nails turn yellow. — Dark hair ; pale 
face ; exanthema on face, lips, nose, forehead. — Bleeding from inner parts. — 
Spasm.s : clonic ; tonic ; cataleptic ; great restlessness of the body ; great 
averbion to washing. — Debility in general or of particular parts. — Sensations ; 
of a ball in inner parts ; pain as if part would burst, were pressed or pushed 
asunder ; cramping or drawing pains in inner or outer parts ; sensations of 
emptiness or hollowness in any part, esp. when accompanied by a fainting 
sensation ; jerking in the muscles or elsewhere, as they may be felt in the 
head when talking, &c. ; knocking, throbbing, or pulsation in inner parts ; 
pressing as of a heavy load ; vibration like dull tingling or buzzing in 
the body. — < In early morning; forenoon; evening, particularly before 
falling asleep ; on waking ; stooping ; during inspiration ; while in company ; 
while coughing ; after coitus ; after eating ; from exertion of the mind ; 
during fever ; female complaints generally ; from loss of fluids ; masturba- 
tion ; musit ; milk ; fat pork ; during and after perspiration ; during 
pregnancy ; riding in a car ; from riding on horseback, in a swing, &c. ; 
from sexual excesses ; during first hours of sleep ; in snow air ; from stretch- 



SEPIA 


11*73 


jiig the affected part ; while nursing a child ; from water and washing ; from 
getting wet ; females having Icucorrhcea ; during confinement esp. — > From 
drawing up the limb ; moving ; exertion of body ; drinking cold water ; in 
solitude ; when walking quickly. — H. N. G.]. —Shooting and pricking pains 
in the limbs, and other parts of the body.— Burning pains in different parts 
of the body.— Pains, which are > by external heat.— Pains, by fits, with 
shuddering.— Wrenching pain, esp. on exerting the parts affected, and also at 
night, in heat of bed. — Rheumatic pains, with swelling of the parts affected, 
perspiration easily excited, chilliness or shivering, alternately with heat. — 
Great disturbance, caused by vexation.— Easy benumbing of the limbs (arms 
and legs) esp. after manual labour. — Stiffness and want of flexibility in the 
joints. — Easy dislocation and spraining of the limbs. — Tendency to strain the 
back. — Commotions and jerks in the limbs night and day. — Jerking in the 
muscles. — Fits of uneasiness, and of hysterical spasms. — Swelling and sup- 
puration of the glands. — Renewal or < of several sufferings, during and 
immediately after a meal. — The symptoms disappear during violent exercise, 
except when taken on horseback, and are < during repose, also in the even- 
ing, at night, in the heat of the bed (and in the forenoon). — Painful sensibility 
of the whole body. — Violent ebullition of blood, even at night, w'ith pulsation 
throughout the body. — Great swelling of body, with shortness of breath, with- 
out thirst.— Heaviness, and physical indolence. — Paroxysms of weakness, and 
hysterical or other forms of syncope, — Fainting fits, — Lassitude, with tremb- 
ling. — ^W^ant of energy, sometimes only on waking. — The patient is soon 
fatigued, when walking in the open air. — Great tendency to take cold, and 
sensibility to cold air, esp. in a north wind. — Feverish shivering, syncope, and 
afterwards coryza, after getting w'et. 

25. Skin. — Skin yellow, like jaundice ; chapping of the skin, or cracks 
may extend deeply into the tissues, and this is < by washing in water ; 
exanthema in general, particularly when it is disposed to crack. — Ulceration 
of the exanthema ; bed sores ; brown sphacelus. — Tetters in general. — Ulcers 
suppurating ; pus too copious ; swollen ; with proud flesh. — Salt rheum. — 
Excessive sensibility of the skin. — Soreness of skin and humid places in bends 
of joints. — Itching in different parts (face, arms, hands, back, hips, abdomen 
and genitals) which changes to a burning sensation. — Itching and eruption of 
pimples in the joints. — Excoriation, esp. in the joints. — Dry and itching erup- 
tions, like scabies. — Dry itcli ; bad effects where itch has been suppressed by 
Merc, or Sul. — Brown, or vinous, or else reddish, and herpetic spots on skin. 
— Annular desquamation (annular herpes). — Moist, scabious herpes, with 
itching and burning sensation. — Boils and blood-boils. — Engorged glands, — 
Scirrhous indurations. — Eruptions of vesicles, like pemphigus. — Itching, 
stinging, lancinating, burning, or sometimes indolent ulcers (knuckles, finger- 
joints, tips of fingers, joints and tip of toes). — Corns, with shooting pain. — 
Deformity of' nails.— Hepatic spot§. — Warts ; on neck with horny excres- 
cences in centre ; small, itching, flat on hands and face ; large hard seed 
warts ; dark colour and painless ; (large horny wart on abdomen). 

26. Sleep. — Strong disposition to sleep during day, and early in evening. 
— Attacks of coma, returning in a tertian type. — Falling asleep late; com. 
plaints preventing sleep ; sleeping late in the morning ; waking frequently 
during the night ; very sleepy in the morning ; sleeplessness before midnight I 



XT74 


SEPIA— SEPTIC^.MINUM 


sleepiness without sleep. — Awakens at 3 a.ni. and cannot go to sleep again.— 
Sleeplessness from over-excitement.— Early waking, and lying awake for a 
long time. — Frequent waking, without apparent cause. — Agitated sleep, with 
violent ebullition of blood, continued tossing, fantastic, anxious, frightful 
dreams, and frequent starts (screaming), with fright. — The sleeper fancies 
himself called by name.— U nrefreshing sleep ; sensation in morning, as from 
insufficient sleep. — Lascivious dreams. — Talking, cries, and jerking of limbs> 
during sleep. — Nightly delirium. — Wanderings, anguish, feverish heat, and 
agitation in the body, toothache, colic, cough, and many other sufferings at 
night. * 

27. Fever.— Pulse full and quick during night and then intermitting ; 
during day slow. — Pulse accelerated by motion and being angry. — Pulsation 
in all the blood-vessels. — Shuddering (chilliness) during pains. — Coldness of 
single parts.— Want of vital heat.-— Frequent shivering, esp. when out of doors 
in evening, and from every movement. — Flushes of heat at intervals during 
day, esp. afternoon and evening, while sitting or in open air, generally with 
thirst or redness of face. — Paroxysm of heat (transient), esp. when seated, and 
walking in open air, also when angry, or engaged in important conversation. — 
Paroxysm of heat (and of shivering) with thirst. — During chill more thirst 
than during heat— Continued heat, with redness of face and violent thirst.— 
Fever, with thirst, during shivering, pains in the limbs, icy coldness of the 
hands and feet, and deadness of the fingers. — Perspiration in general ; per- 
spires too easily ; single parts perspire too easily ; perspiration with anxiety ; 
with restlessness ; sour- smelling or offensive.— Internal chilliness with external 
heat. — Perspiration while seated. — Profuse perspiration on the slightest move- 
ment (more after than during exercise). — Perspiration only on upper part of 
body. — Noctural perspiration, sometimes cold (on breast, back, and thighs). — 
Perspiration in morning, sometimes of an acid smell.— Intermittent fever, 
followed by violent heat and inability to collect one’s senses ; this is followed 
by profuse perspiration. 


Sepsinum, see Pyrogenium. 
SepticsBminum. 

Nosode of Septicaemia (Swan). Attenuations made from contents of 

a septic absciess. 

Clinical.— Camp diarrheea. Dysentery. Typhoid fever. 

Charaoteristios. — Skinner {H. IF., xxxv. 246) gave a supply of 
Septic, lom (F.C.) to a volunteer going to South Africa, with instruc- 
tions to take a globule every four hours if attacked with anything like 
sinking or typhoid fever. The young man wrote home that Sepiiccemin 
is like magic in diarrhoea and dysentery in camp life,^^ and asked for 
more, as his supply was largely drawn on by his friends. 

Relations* — Compare : Pyro., Malar., Bapt. 



SILICA 


I '75 


Shncks, see Zea Mays. 

SUica. 

Silicea terra. Pure Flint. Silex. Silicic anhydride. Silicon dioxide. 

SiOg. Trituration of pure, precipitated Silica. 

Clinical. — Abdomen, distcuded. Aht^cess, Acne. Ancemia, Ankles, weak. Anus, 
fissure of ; fistula of. Apf^etitc, depraved. Back, weakness of. Boils. Bones, necrosis of. 
Brain, concussion of. Brainfag. Breast, sinuses in. Bunion. Cancer. Carbuncle, 
Cataract. Cellulitis. Chelotd. Chin, eruptions on. Cicatrix. Circulation, feeble. 
Coccy^odpiia. Conjunctivitis, phlyctenular. Constipation. Coryza. Cough. Debility. 
Dentition. Diabetes. Ear, affections of. Elephantiasis. Enchrodroma. Enuresis. 
Epilepsy. Eruptions. Excrescences. Eyes, afections of. Vect, burning ; perspiring. 
Fester. Fibroma. Fistula. Foot-sweat ; suppressed. Foreign bodies, expulsion of. 
Fractures. Ganglion. Gastric catarrh. Glandular swellings. Headache. Hernia. Hip- 
joint disease. Homesickness. Housemaid’s knee. Hydrocele. Hypopion. Irritation. 
Jaw, caries of. Joints, svnovi its of Lachrymal fistula. Lactation. Locomotor ataxy. 
Mania. Meningitis. Metrorrhagia. Miscarriage. Mollnscuni contagiosuni. M oil us- 
cum fibrosum. Morpheea. Morvan's disease. Nails, diseased. Necrosis. Neuralgia. 
Nodes. Nose, tip, redness of, Panaiitmm. Parametritis. Perspiration, offensive. 
F*himosis. Pleurisy. Prepuce, eruption on. Psoas abscess. Pylorus, suppuration 
of. Rheumatism ; chronic ; hereditary. Rickets. Sinuses. Somnambulism. 
Spermatorrheea. Spinal irritation. Strains. Strangury. Suppuration. Teeth, 
caries of Tenesmus. Trachea. Tumours. Ulcers. Urethra, stricture of. Urine, 
incontinence of. Vaccination. Vagina, spasms of. Vertigo. Walking, delay in. 
Whitlow. Worms. Writer’s cramp. 

Charaoteristios. — Outside homoeopathy P'lint as an internal 
remedy is practically unknown. Hahnemann introduced it into 
medicine, and it was his method of attenuating insoluble sub- 
stances that enabled him to discover its powers. Silica forms one 
of the most important remedies of the Chronic Diseases. A large 
proportion of the earth^s crust is composed of Silica. Sea sand {Silica 
marina) is mainly composed of it. The spicules of many sponges 
are made up of Silica. Silicates are taken up by plants and from them 
Silica is often deposited on the surface or in the interior of their stems. 
The strength of straw is due to Silica. EquiseUim generally contains as 
much as 1 8 per cent, of Silica to the fresh plant. Flint supplies the 
grit of the earth’s crust, of plant life, and to a large extent of 
animal life also. “ Want of grit, moral or physical,” is a leading 
indication for S/7, in homoeopathic practice. Teste puts Sil. in his 
Pulsatilla group of remedies] the other members of it being Ca/c, Hep..^ 
Graph. j Pho. According to Teste, Sil. is the “ chronic ” of Puls.y — 
it corresponds to the chronic form of such diseases as Puls, cures 
when acute •: Rush of blood* to the head, especially to the right 
temple and vertex ; headache everyday ; photophobia; lachrymation ; 
loss of taste ; aversion to fat food with rancid or oily taste in mouth, 
&c. The symptoms of Sil, differ from those of Pitls. in being more 
constant, more deep-seated, and lasting longer ; for instance, the mucous 
secretions of Puls, become easily purulent under the action of Sil, 
Teste points out that Puls, flourishes best on sandy soils (as Bell, 



SILICA 


1176 

does on calcareous soils). Schiissler, who was a homoeopathist 
before he was a Biochemist, describes the sphere of Sil. from thS 
Tissue-Remedy point of view as follows : Silicic Acid is a con- 
stituent of the cells of the connective tissue, of the epidermis, the 
hair and the nails. — If a suppurative centre is formed either in the 
connective tissue or in a portion of the skin, Sil, may be used.— After 
the functional ability of the cells of the connective tissue, which had 
been impaired by the pressure of the pus, has been restored to its 
integrity through a supply of molecules of Sf/., these cells are thereby 
enaWed to throw off inimical substances (the pus). In consequence,, 
the pus is either absorbed by the lymphatics or it is cast out. In the 
latter case there is a so-called spontaneous breaking open of the 
suppurative centre. — Sil. may also cause the absorption through 
the lymphatics of an effusion of blood in any tissue. ’ If the 
reabsorption of a sero-albuminous exudation in a serous sac cannot 
be effected through Calc, phos.^ then Sil. may be used ; for the delay 
in the absorption may also be caused by a deficiency of Sil, in the 
subserous connective tissue. — Sil. will also cure chronic arthritic- 
rheumatic affections, as it forms a soluble combination {Sodium 
silicate) with the soda of the urate of soda ; this combination is 
then absorbed and removed through the lymphatics. For the same 
reason it may also be used in renal gravel. — Sil. can also restore the 
perspiration of the feet when this has been suppressed, and is thus 
an indirect remedy in diseases arising in consequence of such sup- 
pression {e.g.f amblyopia, cataract, paralysis, &c.). — When a number 
of cells in the connective tissue are gradually deprived of Sil.y they 
become atrophied. Such a disease is by no means rare in the 
external meatus auditorious with old people. The meatus in such 
a case is dry and enlarged.^^ (Schiissler adds that he generally gives 
the I2X trituration.) The indications of Schiissler correspond so 
exactly with those already pointed out by Hahnemann that we are 
left in doubt as to how much he was indebted to Hahnemann for 
his facts and how much to his own theories. Be that as it may, the 
relation of Sil, to the connective tissues is a very real one. Sil. is a 
great evacuant. Sil. produced in the provings sensation of “ splinter 
in the finger,” of ‘‘ a pin in the throat,” and whenever foreign bodies 
have became embeded in the tissues ; or whenever portions of the 
tissues have become necrosed and quasi-foreign, Sil, will set up 
suppuration in the vicinity and bring about their expulsion. (It 
is this property which makes it necessary sometimes to use Sil, 
with caution ; if there are deposits which have became encysted 
and so far rendered harmless, the administration of Sil. might 
set up suppurative action, to the risk of the patient’s life.) 
Sil, both matures abscesses and reduces excessive suppuration. 
It will also resolve indurations left after suppuration ; this has 
been particularly noted in the case of tonsils which refuse to heal 
after the pus has been evacuated, and in abscesses which leave 
sinuses and fistulse. Sil, affects the nails, cripples them, and pro- 
duces inflammation around and under them. “ Sensation as if the 
finger-tips were suppurating ” is one of the symptoms which led to 
its use in such cases. Sil, causes inflammation, swelling and suppuration 



SILICA 


T177 

of all the lymphatic glands and also the glands of the skin. The skin 
unhealthy and every little injury ulcerates. Hands and feet are 
sweaty, and the sweat is generally offensive. The feet may give 
off an intolerable odour without any sweat. The head sweats, and this 
may be offensive. Sx 7 . corresponds perfectly to many cases of 
rickets ; children with large heads ; open fontanelles and sutures ; 
much sweating about the head, which must be kept warm ; dis- 
tended abdomen ; weak ankles ; slow in learning to walk. This 
constitutes type No. i, to which Sil. is particularly suited. It is also , 
mited to : (2) Nervous, irritable persons, with dry skin, profuse saliva, 
diarrhcea, night-sweats. (3) Weakly persons, fine skin, pale face, 
light complexion ; lax muscles. (4) Constitutions which suffer 
from deficient nutrition due to lack of assimilating power ; over- 
sensitive physically and mentally. (5) Scrofulous children who have 
worm diseases during dentition. (6) Stonecutters’ ailments (chest 
affections and total loss of strength. — The action of Sil. on the con- 
nective tissues may end in new growth as well as in suppuration and 
ulceration. It has a specific relation to scarred tissue ; and I have 
cured with it a case of recurrent cheloid : Eleanor W., 14, had a 
growth on left temple. Five months before she had been an inmate 
in St. Bartholomew’s Hospital and had had a tumour removed from 
the spot, the tumour having existed for two years. A month after 
the operation a new growth appeared on the scar. Two months 
later this was removed. But it rapidly recurred, and when I saw 
her there was a linear elevation an inch long, three lines wide, and 
raised about two lines. It was red, shiny, and slightly nodulated ; 
was tender to touch and the seat of shooting pain. Before the first 
operation there had been no pain and no discoloration of the skin. 
Hahnemann gives this symptom in the proving of Sil. Stitching, 
aching pain in the spot where an ulcer had been formerly on the 
leg.” Sil. 3 gr. iii., night and morning, was prescribed. There was 
no* further increase in the size of the growth, though it was still 
painful, the pain being apparently somewhat increased. In three 
months there was evident diminution in size, and from that time 
the pain began to diminish. In seven months the growth had 
entirely disappeared. — The sensitiveness of Sil. is one of its key- 
notes, and an over-susceptibility to nervous stimuli is a frequent 
accompaniment of conditions requiring Sil. The surface is tender 
and the least touch is painful. The senses are morbidly keen. 
Brain and spine cannot bear even ordinary vibrations. This con- 
dition may be caused by looses of fluids as in spermatorrhoea ; by 
over-worked brain. Sil. causes tendency to paralysis and paralytic 
weakness from defective nutrition of nerves of brain and spinal 
cord. Constipation is often aq accompaniment of these conditions. 
There may be epileptic convulsions. These have a well-marked course, 
starting from the solar plexus ; are < at full and new moon ; and < 
from any overstrain of mind or emotions. Sil. is indicated in 
locomotor ataxy when the fingers feel stiff with loss of power in 
them. There is spinal irritation. The neck is stiff causing headache. 
The small of the back aches as if beaten. The part of the body 
lain on goes to sleep. The headaches of Sil. present one of the 



SILICA 


1178 

grand characteristics of the remedy. They are of the chronic kind, 
and may owe their origin to some severe disease of youth* They 
ascend trom the nape of the neck to the vertex, as if coming from 
the spine, and locate in one eye, especially the right ; < from draught 
of air or uncovering head ; > pressure and wrapping head up warmly ; 
> profuse urination. The vertigo of SiL in the same way ascends 
from the back of the neck ; as if one would fall forward (sometimes 
backward) ; < looking up ; closing eyes ; lying on left side. The 
sensitiveness of Sil. comes out in the mental symptoms ; Sensitiye 
to noise ; and anxiety therefrom.^^ Sensitive, weeping mood.^^ 
Yielding, faint-hearted.” “ Children become obstinate, headstrong ; 
cry when kindly spoken to.” A curious symptom and one of great 
value is this : “ Fixed ideas : the patients thinks only of pins, fears 
them, searches for them, and counts them carefully.” This symptom 
enabled me to make a rapid cure of post-influenzal insanity in the 
case of a man of bad family history, one of whose sisters had become 
insane and had drowned herself, another sister being affected with 
lupus. The patient’s wife told me one morning that he had ‘‘ been 
looking everywhere for pins,'' SiL 30 rapidly put an end to the search 
and restored the patient to his senses. SiL has another link with 
insanity in its aggravation at the moon’s phases : epilepsy and sleep- 
walking are < at the new and full moon. The SiL patient likes to be 
magnetised, and is > by it. This is related to the persistent want of vital 
heat which characterises the SiL condition ; even exercise will not get up 
any warmth. Another curious symptom of SiL is : “ discharge of 
blood from the vagina every time the child takes the breast.” 
Another symptom in this relation is important in connection with 
cancer cases ; nipple is drawn in like a funnel.” Always before 
and during menses there is constipation. The constipation of SiL 
is characteristic. The stool is difficult as from inactivity of rectum ; 
with great straining as if rectum was paralysed ; when partly expelled 
recedes again. Faeces remain a long time in rectum. Rushmore 
(H. P., xii. 530) verified a peculiar symptom of SiL in a lady 
suffering from scirrhus of left breast. She had a feeling of dryness 
in her finger-tips^ as if made of paper ; at night. Ant. t. and SiL have 
this symptom, but only SiL in afternoon. SiL removed this and 
took away sharp, stinging pains in the tumour as well. Peculiar 
Sensations of SiL are : Susceptibility to nervous stimuli, to mag- 
netism. As if she would die. As if gradually losing senses. As if 
feeling for pins. Sensation as if she were divided into halves and that 
the left side does not belong to her. As if one would fall forward. 
Vertigo as if drunk. As if head were teeming with live things whirling 
around in it. Headache as if beaten. As if everything would press 
out and burst skull. As if brain and eyes were forced forward. As if 
head would burst with throbbing in it, internal and external at same 
time. As if forehead would be torn asunder ; as from a heavy weight 
over eyes. As if head were forced a^nder. As of water-pipes 
bursting in head. As if tremendous weight were falling on vertex. 
Head as if in a cushion and some one were pressing two fingers into 
it at occiput. As if brain collided with skull. Head as if bruised. 
As if waves of water from occiput over vertex to forehead. 



SILICA 


1179 


Sick-headaches as if coming from spine and locating over one eye. 
Head as if too large. As if head were falling off ; as if it were 
hanging by a piece of skin at nape. As if right side of head paralysed. 
As if looking through .a, grey cover. As if cornea were a mass of 
hypertrophied tissue. Eyes as if too dry and full of sand. As of a 
splinter in upper lid. As if both eyes were dragged back into head 
by strings. Objects as if in a fog. As if something alive were in ears. 
As if nasal bone has been beaten. As if a hair were on tip of tongue 
extending into trachea. As of a lump on right side of throat. As of a 
pin in throat. Thnoat as if filled up. As if he could not swallow. 
As if he swallowed over a sore spot. As of a load in epigastrium. As 
if knives were running into stomach. As if there were no power in 
rectum to expel stool. As if rectum paralysed. As if anus con- 
stricted. As of a heavy lump in anus. As if vulva were enlarged. 
As if tied round chest with a tape. As if sternum were grasped. As of 
a stone under sternum. As if mould were forming over whole body. 
As if a hand had grasped her breastbone. Cords of neck as if pulled. 
Small of back as if beaten ; as if dead. Arms and hands as if filled 
with lead. As of a splinter in finger. As if a panaritium would form 
in index finger. As if tips of fingers were suppurating. As if finger 
were thick and bone enlarged. As if joints of fingers were being 
pulled out of sockets. Limbs and feet as if paralysed. Femur as if 
beaten. Knees as if too tightly bound. Calves as if too short. As if 
spasms in ankles. As if toe-joints being pulled out of sockets. Nails 
as if decayed. As if beaten all over. As if he had lain in an un- 
comfortable position. The direction of the S/7, action is upward and 
outward : there are sliootings out through eyes and out of ears. 
The symptoms are : < By touch ; contact ; combing hair. Binding 
tightly > headache ; but pressure of hat = pain. Pressure <. 
Rest'>. Motion <. Lying down < asthma ; headache. Lying 
ri^ht side < pains in liver. Lying left side = vertigo. Sitting <. 
Gaping or swallowing > stoppage of ear. Opening eyes < pressive 
fiain. Writing — tonic spasm of hand. Walking < ; every step is 
painfully felt (incarcerated flatus). Open-air < headache ; = lachry- 
mation ; burning in back. Cold air (especially on head, eyes, back 
of neck, back) ; cold draught ; changing linen ; uncovering <, < 

Washing. Change of weather < pain in ears ; < pain in limbs. < 
Before and during a storm, > Summer. < Approach of winter. 
< At new moon ; increasing moon (hysteria) ; and full moon. > In 
warm room ; by warm wraps. < Mental exertion ; talking. Pain 
in head > while eating. < after eating. Milk < ; ss diarrhoea. 

' Aversion to mother’s milk and vomiting whenever taking it. 
Drinking cold water = dry c^pugh. Warm drinks > cough. 
Averse to v/arm food. > Fr<om magnetism and electricity. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Camph., Hep., FI. ac. It antidotes : 
Merc, cor., Sul. Incompatible: Merc. Follows well: Bell., Bry., 
Calc., Calc. p. (in rickets when Calc. p. fails), Cin., Graph., Hep., Ign., 
Nit. ac., Pho. Followed well by : Hep., FI. ac., Lach., Lyc., Sep. (If 
improvement ceases under Sil. a dose or two of Sul. will set up 
reaction, and Sil. will then complete the cure). Complementary: 
Thuj., Sanic., Puls. (Sil. is the chronic” of Puls.). Cofnpare : Head- 



sweat and open fontanelles, Calc. (Sil. lower than Calc, and offensive). 
Head must be kept warm, Sanic., Mg. m. Ailments from suppressed 
foot-sweat, Cup., Graph., Pso. Want of vital heat, Led., Sep. Vertigo 
as if one would fall forward from looking up. Puls, (from looking down, 
K. ca., Spi.). Chronic sick-headaches since some severe disease of youth, 
Pso, Headache > pressure and wrapping up warmly, Mg. m., Stron. 
Constipation before and during menses (diarrhoea before and during 
menses, Am. c., Bov). Partly expelled stool recedes, Thu. Fistula in 
ano alternates with chest complaints, Berb., Calc. p. Somnambulism, 
Luna, K. bro. Vaccination : erysipelas, convulsions, diarrhoea, Thu. 
(Thu. when the fever is high). Apis, Sul., Malan., Vacc., Var. Cicatrix, 
iissLire of anus, Graph. Offensive sweat (head, feet, axillae), Petr. 
Aversion to touch, Cin., Hep., Thu., Lach., Asaf. (Asaf., offensive dis- 
charge from tissues, “ intolerable soreness round the ulcer, cannot 
bear even the dressing ’0. Caries, Plat, mur., Ang. (long bones), 
Stron. c. (femur, with watery diarrhoea), Getty s. (caries with ulcers 
about joints, discharge excoriating), Calc, (scrofulous subjects ; sweat 
sour rather than offensive ; foot-sweat does not excoriate ; not sensi- 
tive like Sil.). Sweat of head, body dry (Rhus, sweat of body, head 
dry). Last stage of phthisis, Phell. Perforating ulcers, Nit. ac., K. bi. 
Headache ascending from nape. Meny. (bursting ; > pressure ; not 
> warmth), Paris (head feels unusually large), Stron. c., Sang, (to right 
eye), Spi. (to left eye). Clouded sight after headache, Sil. {before head- 
ache, K. bi.). < Damp change, Bar. c. Foot-sweat, scrofula, 

rickets, and headache > wrapping warmly, Mg. m. Catarrhal 
phthisis, Stn. Abscess of breast, fistula?, necrosis (of jaw), Pho. 
(Pho. has more erythematous blush and radiating streaks round open- 
ing). Hay-fever, itching at Eustachian orifices, Ars., Rosa, Ran. b. 
Nervous exhaustion, Pic. ac. Chronic suppuration of middle ear, 
Caps. Catarrhal diarrhoea, Puls. Tetanus impending, wound suddenly 
ceases to discharge, Nux. Weakness of ankles, Caust., Sul. ac. 

< Thunderstorms, Na. c., Pho., Rho., Pet. < From cold or draught 
(FI. ac., > cold applications). Nausea when fasting, Pul., Lyc. Calc. 
Impatient, Cham., Sul. Motes, persistent speck before right eye (Sul., 
before left ; Macrot., right in morning). Washed out,^^ but won't give 
in (Pic. ac., must give in). Affections of one side of tongue, Calc., Thu. 
(ulcer right border, Sil, Thu. ; left, Apis ; left side swollen with loss 
of speech, Lauro.). Hungry but cannot get the food down, Sil., Lyc. 
Hair sensation on tongue, Nat. m,, K. bi. (on back part). Children 
are obstinate, headstrong, cry when spoken kindly to, lod. Nipple 
drawn in like a funnel, Sars. UnheaHhy skin, every little injury 
suppurates, Graph., Hep., Petr., Merc. Crippled nails, Ant. c. In- 
growing toenails, Mgt. aust. Takes cold from exposure of feet, Con., 
Cup. Takes cold by uncovering ,,head (Bell., by hair-cutting). 
Difficulty in holding up head. Ant. t. Callosities in feet. Ant. c. 

< After coitus, K. ca. Evacuant of foreign bodies, Lobel. i. Drinking 
cold water rr dry cough (Caust., ». Ganglion, Benz, ac., Sul. 
Chronic and hereditary rheumatism, Led. (but Led. has < by warmth, 
and symptoms extend from below upward, whilst Sil. affects particu- 
larly the shoulders and joints). Fibroma, Nat. sf. Cheloid and scars, 



SILICA ii8i 

Thios. Homesickness, Caps., Ph. ac. Brachial neuralgia, Calc, {see 
tase under Calc.). 

Causation. — Vaccination, Stone-cutting. Loss of fluids. Injury. 

Strains. Splinters. Foreign bodies. 

’ % 

SYMPTOMS. 

1, Mind. — Despondency, melancholy, and disposition to weep. — Nos- 
talgia. — Anxiety and agitation ; yielding, anxious mood.— Taciturnity ; concen- 
tration in self. — Inqu^tudc and ill-humour on the least provocation, arising 
from excessive nervous debility. — Sciuples of conscience (about trifles). — 
Restless and fidgety ; great liability to be frightened, csp. by least noise. — 
Discouragement. — Moroseness, ill-humour, and despair, with intense weari- 
ness of life. — Wishes to drown herself. — Disposition to fly into a rage, 
obstinacy, and great irritability. — The child becomes obstinate and head- 
strong ; cries when kindly spoken to. — Excitement with easy orgasm of 
blood. — Repugnance to labour. — Apathy and indifference. — Weakness of 
memory. — Incapacity for reflection. — Great distraction. — Tendency to mis- 
apply words in speaking. — Fixed ideas ; the patient thinks only of pins, fears 
them, searches for them, and counts them carefully. 

2, Head.— Cloudiness. — The head is fatigued by intellectual labour 
{reading, writing, or reflecting). — Difficulty in holding head ,iip. — Dizziness, 
esp. in the evening, as from intoxication, — Vertigo of different kinds, esp. in 
the morning, and principally on lifting up the eyes, or when riding in a 
carriage, and also when stooping, or after moral emotions. — Vertigo, with 
nausea and retching, or proceeding from the back to the nape and head. — 
Vertigo: as if one would fall forwaid; is obliged to walk to r. side; is 
obliged to sit down ; when closing eyes ; from lying on 1. side. — Vertigo, 
which causes to fall backwaids. — Pain which ascends from the nape into 
vertex, sometimes hindering sleep, at night. — Headache when over-heated. — 
Headache, with shivering, lassitude, and necessity to lie down. — Headache 
overy morning. — Aching in head, with ill-humour and heaviness in all the 
linvbs, sometimes in morning. — Heaviness of head ; pressing out in the 
forehead, which seems ready to split, sometimes every day, from morning till 
evening « from evening till night, from stepping hard, from uncovering 
head, or if head becomes cold in open air). — Tension and pressure in the 
head, as if it were about to burst (ascending from the neck to the forehead).— 
Drawings in the head, which seem to pass out at the forehead. — Tearing 
pains in the head, often scmilateral, witli shootings which seem to pass out 
through the eyes, and into the* bones of the face and the teeth, or which 
manifest themselves every morning, with heat in the head, principally in the 
forehead (and great restlessness ; < from a draught of air and motion). — 
Lancinations ^(stitches) m head, esp. in temples (principally in the r. from 
within to without ; < at night, fiom moving eyes, from talking and writing). 
— ^riirobbing headache, generally from congestion of blood in head (pulsating 
and beating, most violent in forehead and vertex, with chilliness).— Congestion 
to head, with redness in face. — Painful shocks in head. — Movements and 
whirling in head, as if everything in it were alive.— Shaking and vibration in 
brain at every step (roaring and shattering sensation when stepping hard 



SILICA 


1182 

or knocking foot against anything).— The headaches are < principally by 
intellectual labour, talking, stooping, noise, jarring, light, and cold air, and are 
> in warm room ; from wrapping head up warmly ; from binding head 
tightly. — After the pains in the head, clouded sight. — Painful sensitiveness of 
exterior of head to least touch. — Profuse perspiration on head in evening, on 
going to sleep (this looks like Calc, carb., but in* SiL the perspiration extends 
lower down on the neck, and is apt to have an offensive smell).— Burning in 
head with pulsation and perspiration of head ; < at night, from mental 
exertion and talking ; > wrapping the head up warm. — Burning and itching, 
mostly on back part of head ; < from scratching, which causes burning and 
soreness ; < when undressing in evening and on getting warm in bed, — 
Tearing pain in scalp < at night and from pressure. — Profuse, sour-smelling 
perspiration on head only (in evening), with great sensitiveness of scalp, with 
pale face and emaciation. — Tendency to take cold in head, which cannot 
possibly be uncovered. — Tuberous elevations on scalp. — Eruption on back 
part of head and behind ears dry, offensive-smelling, scabby, burning-itching ; 
when scratching it, burning feeling, more sore, and discharging pus. — Itching 
pustules and bulbous swellings on hairy scalp and on neck ; very sensitive to 
pressure, touch, and when lying on it ; > when wrapping it up warm. — 
Sensitiveness of scalp to pressure (of hat) and to contact ; < in evening and 
when lying on painful side ; burning after scratching. — Open fontanelles ; 
head too large and rest of body emaciated, with pale wax-colour of face ; hot, 
swollen abdomen and fetid stools. — ^Violent itching in scalp. — Moist scald- 
head, which itches. — Falling off of the hair. 

3. Eyes.— Pain in eyes in morning, as if arising from the great dryness, 
or from the presence of sand. — Pressure and smarting in eyes and lids. — 
Tearing shooting pains in eyes on pressing them together. — Shootings, which 
seem to pass out through eyes. — Itching, smarting, and burning in the eyes. — 
Redness of eyes, with smarting pain in canthi. — Inflammation of ^yes. — 
Affections appearing in angles of eyes, in region of tear-ducts. — Swelling of 
lachrymal gland. — Lachrymal fistula. — Lachrymation, esp. in open air. — 
Agglutination of lids, at night, — Fungus haematodcs and ulcers in cornea. — 
Cornea thick, rough, warty, as if it were a mass of hypertrophied tissue, sealed 
off leaving cornea clear. — Specks and scars in cornea. — Weakness ; heat ; 
quivering of eyes.— Spasmodic closing of lids. — Presbyopia. — The letters 
appear confused, when reading. — Objects seem to be pale, when reading. — 
Confused sight, as if directed through a greyish veil. — Blackness before eyes 
after headache. — Momentary attacks of sudden blindness. — Cloudiness of 
crystalline lens. — Cloudiness of the sight, as from amaurosis, — Sparks, and 
black spots before sight. — Photophobia, and dazzling in broad daylight. — 
Encysted tumours of lids go away after Sil, 200 (Bradshaw). 

4. Ears. — Otalgia, with drawing pain. — Boring and throbbing in the 
cars. — Shootings in the ears, from within outwards. — Itching in ears (esp. 
when swallowing). — Inflammation and running from edges of ears. — Scabs 
behind ears. — Swelling of exterior of ear, with discharge (of pus) from the 
ear, accompanied by a sort of whistling. — Copious accumulation of moist 
(very thin) cerumen. — Otorrhoea with great sensitiveness to cold air. — 
Excessive sensitiveness to noise. — Obstruction of ears, which some- 
times disappears on blowing the nose, or else with a loud report. — Hard- 



SILICA 


1183 

ness of hearing, sometimeb without noise in cars, or else exclusively for 
human voice, — Hardness of hearing, < when the moon is at the full. — 
Paralysed auditory nerves. — Tinkling, clucking, and noise, like the fluttering 
of a bird, in ears. — Rt^^ing and singing in ears, — Caries of the mastoid 
process. — Swelling and mduration of parotids. 

5. Nose.-— Nasal bone'^inful when touched.-— Soreness as if beaten, in 
nasal bones. — Gnawing pains (and ulcers) in upper part of nose, with heaviness 
when stooping, and excessive sensibility to contact and pressure. — Pulsative 
pain, as from ulceration in the nose, and extending into the head, — Drawing 
in root of nose and r. malar bone. — Inflammation in nostrils. — Itching in nose. 
— Voluptuous itching about nose, in evening.— Itching and redness of nose 
(at the extremity), which is covered with scabious vesicles. — Sore, painful 
spots below septum of nose, with sticking on touch. — Furunculi on nose. — 
Scabs, pimples, and ulcers in nose. — Nose inwardly dry, painful, excoriated, 
covered with crusts. — Epistaxis. — Anosmia. — Frequent, violent, abortive, 
interrupted sneezing. — Too frequent, immoderate, sneezing. — Obstinate 
obstruction of nose, sometimes arising from (hardened) mucus. — Troublesome 
(painful) dryness of nose, sometimes at night. — Dry coryza. — Continued 
coryza. — P'requent fluent coryza ; or which removes an obstinate obstruction 
of nose. — Alternate fluent and dry coryza. — Acrid and corrosive mucus 
in nose. 

6 . Face. — Pale and earthy complexion. — White spots on cheeks, from 
time to time. — Red, burning spots on cheeks and nose, esp. after a meal. — 
Heat in face. — Shootings in bones of face. — Itching in whiskers. — Furunculus 
on cheek. — Cracks and rhagades in skin of face. — Scirrhous induration in face 
and upper lip. — Swelling of lips. — Ulceration of commissures of lips. — 
Scabious eruption on lips, with smarting pain. — Ulcers on red part of lower 
lip. — Furunculi on chin. — Herpes on chin. — Cramp in maxillary joint. — The 
articulation of the jaw is spasmodically closed (lockjaw). — Nocturnal shoot- 
ings and drawings in lower jaw. — Swelling and caries m bones of lower jaw. 
— Swelling of siibmaxillary glands, with pain when touched, or also with 
induration. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache from hot food, or introduction of cold air into 
mouth. — Drawing, jerking, and tearings in teeth, and cheeks, < at night, or 
else only when eating. — Toothache at night, commonly lancinating, which 
disturbs sleep, < by cold or hot things. — Toothache, witli swelling of bone 
or periosteum of jaw, and universal heat at night, wdiich hinders sleep. — 
Digging and boring in teeth. — Bluntncss of teeth. — Teeth become loose and 
feel elongated. — Painful inflammation, swelling, excoriation, and easy bleeding 
of the gums. — Gumboils. — Gums^painfully sensitive on taking cold water into 
mouth. 

8. Mouth. — Dryness of mouth. — Fetid breath, esp. in morning. — 
Stomacace. — Mucus constantly in mouth. — Sensation, as of a hair on (forepart 
of) tongue. — fexcoriation of tongue. — One-sided swelling of tongue.— Ulcer 
on r. border of tongue eating into it and discharging much pus (carcinomd). — 
Ulcer on the palate. — Tongue coaled with a brownish mucus. 

9. Throat. — Sore throat, with an accumulation of mucus in throat. — 
Severe tonsillitis (‘^ SiL I2x trit. is specilic.'’ — Bayes). — Pain as from excoria- 
tion and pricking as from pins (stitches) in throat, during deglutition (quinsy). — 



SILICA 


1184 

Swelling of the uvula.— Swelling of the palate. — Difficult deglutition, as from 
paralysis of the gullet.— Paralysis of velum palati.—Tendency of food to ascend ' 
into nasal fossae during deglutition. — Food is ejected through nose. 

10. Appetite. — Great appetite ; desire for beer and warm food ; immedi- 
ately after eating, appetite and thirst returned.— Ravenous hunger so that it 
was difficult to fall asleep. — Ravenous hunger' Before supper, with complete 
loss of appetite and trembling of all the limbs, followed by chilliness and 
coldness over whole body, with heat on chest. — Ravenous hunger : morning ; 
evening; with collection of water in mouth.— Is very hungry; eats as usual, 
and then complains that everything seems to be up in the throat. — Loss of 
taste. — Bitter, taste in mouth, also in morning. — Taste sour after eating, — 
Sour, putrid taste, or as if blood or mucus were in the mouth. — Violent thirst, 
sometimes with anorexia. — Repugnance to all food, esp. to cooked and hot 
things, with desire for cold, raw things only. — Aversion to boiled food. — 
Loathing of animal food, which proves indigestible. — Aversion of a child to 
its mother’s milk, with vomiting after sucking. — After a meal, strong disposi- 
tion to sleep, pyrosis, acidity in mouth, sour risings, fulness in stomach or 
abdomen, or else (often consecutively) aching of stomach, water-brash, 
vomiting, febrile shiverings, congestion in head, heat in cheeks. 

11. Stomach. — Risings, with taste of food, sometimes after every meal. — 
Sour risings. — Warm uprisings from stomach to throat. — Pyrosis. — Hiccough : 
before and after eating ; sometimes in evening, in bed, — Nausea, every 
morning, with pain in head and eyes, on turning eyes, or else followed by 
vomiting of bitter water. — Continuous nau^ca and vomiting ; < in morning. — 
Constant nausea and vomiting, even at night. — Water-brash, sometimes with 
shuddering. — Water tastes bad; vomiting, whenever drink is taken. — Vomiting 
of food, even at night. — Pressure in stomach, sometimes after every meal, or 
on drinking quickly. — Painful sensibility of scrobiculus, when it is pressed. — 
Heaviness in stomach. — Squeezing in scrobiculus, as by claws, sometimes 
after a meal. — Burning sensation in pit of stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Swelling and indur.ition of hepatic region. — Inflam- 
mation and induration of liver, — Pain, as from ulceration, in hepatic region, 
with throbbing ; pains are < by touch, by walking (or when lying on r. side, 
or when breathing). — Shootings in hypochondria, e^p. on the 1 . side. — Pain in 
abdomen ; colic in children from worms. — Colic, during which hands turn 
yellow, and the nails blue. — x\ching (pressing) of abdomen, esp. after a meal. 
— Abdomen, hard, tight, hot (also in children) and sometimes painful on being 
touched. — Enlargement of abdomen. — Colic, from constipation. — Cuttings or 
pinching in abdomen, with or without diarrhoea. — Burning sensation in 
abdomen. — The pains 111 the abdomen are > by application of hot linen. — 
Painful inguinal hernia. — Inflammation and swelling of inguinal glands (large 
as peas, painful to touch). — Incarceration of flatus. — Gurgling and borborygmi 
in abdomen, esp. on moving the body.—rDiflicult expulsion of flatus, — Very 
offensive flatulence. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Constipation, and slow, hard, difficult, knotty 
fieces (composed of light-coloured lumps). — Hard fieces, with frequent 
tenesmus. — Constipation where the stool comes down with great difficulty, 
comes a little way through the anus, and then slips back before it can be 
voided ; obstructed evacuation of bowels ; fetid flatus.— Even the soft stool 



SILICA 


1T85 

is expelled with much difficulty, — Stool remains long in rectum. — Stool like 
pus ; with maw-worms ; with tapeworms. — Faeces of consistence of pap, 
several times a day. — Diarrhoea (stools horribly offensive) with colic. — 
Reddish faeces, or wifh^anguineous slime. — Frequent discharge of fetid 
serum, of a corpse-like smNJ^Cutting and stinging in rectum. — Burning or 
stinging in rectum during ^ol. — Shootings and itching in anus, and in 
rectum, also during the evacuation. — Burning in anus, esp. after a dry, hard 
stool. — Constriction in anus during stool. — Constant but ineffectual desire for 
stool. — Painful haemorrhoids protrude during stool. 

• 14. Urinary Organs. — Urinary tenesmus. — Continued want to urinate, 
with scanty emission (also at night). — Strangury. — Frequent (involuntary) 
emission of urine, also at night (with distress from irritable sphincter). — 
Wetting the bed (at night). — Reddish sand, or yellow, gritty sediment in the 
urine. — Stricture of urethra. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Itching, and red spots on glans. — Exco- 
riation, itching, and redness of prepuce. — Swelling of prepuce, which is 
covered with itching and moist pimples. — Dropsical swelling of scrotum. — 
Perspiration and itching m scrotum. — Itching, and moist spots on scrotum. — 
Absence of sexual desire, with weakness in genital functions ; or else 
immoderate excitement of sexual desire, with numerous wanton ideas, and 
strong and frequent erections. — Flow of prostatic fluid during urination ; and 
passing of (hard) stool. — After coition, pain in limbs, as from fatigue, or 
sensation of paralysis on one side of head. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses too early and too feeble, or else 
too profuse. — Increased menses, with paroxysms of icy coldness ovei'i whole 
body. — Suppression of the menses. — Discharge of blood before proper 
period ; menses too late ; protracted ; blood acrid. — Metrorrhagia. — 
Diarrhoea, before the menses. — During the menses, pains in the abdomen, 
pale appearance of objects, or burning sensation and excoriation in vulva. — ♦ 
Itching m the vulva. — Pressing-down feeling in vagina. — Itching, burning, 
and •soreness in pudenda ; during menses, — Discharge of blood from the 
uttrus, while suckling. — Abortion. — Leucorrhoea, which flows when urinating, 
or after the menses. — Leucorrhoea, like milk, flowing at intervals, and pre- 
ceded by giipings in umbilical region. — Acrid, corrosive leucorrhoea. — Inflam- 
mation of nipples. — Darting burning pain in 1 . nipple. — Sticking pain in 1 . 
breast. — Painful stitches behind 1 . breast, with chilliness, all night. — Sup- 
puration of the mammae. — Abscess in brc.ist, also with fistulous ulcers ; nipple 
ulcerates. — Indurations in breast. — R. breast hard, painful, and swollen at 
nipple, feeling as if gathering.” 

17. Respiratory Organs,-*Hoarseness, with roughness and excoriation 
in larynx. — Cough, from cold drinks, or from speaking even for a moment. — 
Shaking cough, excited by a suffocating tickling m pit of throat. — Cough and 
sore throat, with expectoration of •little granules like shot, which, when 
broken open, smell offensively (like Phosphor., excepting the latter remedy 
has a hot feeling in throat. — H. N. G.). — Fatiguing cough, day and night, 
< by movement, with scanty expectoration of mucus. — Nocturnal, suffocating 
cough. — Spasmodic cough. — Hollow, spasmodic, suffocative cough from 
tickling in throat-pit, with expectoration only during day of profuse yellowish- 
green pus, or of tough, milky, acrid mucus, at times of pale, frothy blood, 

VOL. II. 76 



I r86 


SILICA 


generally tasting greasy and offensive-smelling.— Bruised pain in chest whe^ 
coughing.— Dry cough, with pain in chest, as from excoriation.— Cough, with 
vomiting of mucus. — Profuse expectoration of transparent mucus when 
coughing.— Cough vvith expectoration in the day ',^ithout expectoration at 
night. — Expectoration of pus, when coiighirgV-— Expectoration of (pale, 
frothy) blood, with deep, hollow cough. — Obstructed respiration, when lying 
on the back, or else when stooping, running, or coughing. — Deep, sighing 
respiration. — Shortness of breath, during light manual labour, or else when 
walking quickly, sometimes with dyspnoea during repose. — Panting, respi- 
ration, on walking quickly. 

18. Chest. — Oppression of chest, as from constriction of throat. — Aching 
in chest, sometimes only when coughing or sneezing. — Shooting and pricking 
in chest and side, sometimes across back. — Throbbing in sternum.- — Phthisis 
pulmonalis. — Contusive pain in chest, when drawing breath, or coughing. 

19. Heart and Pulse. — Palpitation and throbbing over whole body 
while sitting. — ^Violent palpitation on every movement. — Imperceptible pulse. 

20. Neck and Back. — Purulent ulcer in nape. — Stiffness of nape ; with 
headache, — Swelling of glands of nape, in the neck, and under the axillae 
(with suppuration), sometimes with induration. — Pimples and furunculi in 
nape. — Suppuration of axillary glands. — Caries of clavicle. — Stitches between 
the hips. — Coccyx painful, as after a long carriage ride. — Stinging in os 
coccygis on rising ; painful to pressure. — Scabby elevation on coccyx, above 
fissure of nates. — Pain in the loins, whether the parts be touched or not. — 
Spasmodic drawing in loins, which prevents rising up, and forces patient to 
remain lying down. — Inflammatory abscess in lumbar region (on the psoas 
muscle). — Weakness and paralytic stiffness in back, loins, and nape. — Tear- 
ings^nd shootings in the back. — Shootings in the loins, when seated or lying 
down. — Burning in back when walking in open air and becoming warm. — 

‘‘Aching, shooting, burning, and throbbing in lumbo-sacral region. — Swelling 
and distortion of spine (curvature of the vcrtebrrc). — Contusive pain between 
the shoulder-blades. 

21. Limbs. — Drawing, tearing, and shooting in limbs (arms and legs). — 
Nocturnal shooting in all joints. — Liability of limbs to become numbed (to go 
to sleep easily). — Pain in limbs, as though they had been broken, and paralytic 
weakness^ esp. in evening. — Cramps in arms and legs. — Icy-cold legs and 
feet. — ^Jerks in limbs, day and night. — Weakness of joints (they give way 
when walking). — Lassitude and trembling in limbs, esp. in morning. — Sore- 
ness and lameness in limbs. — Nails dirty yellow, crippled and brittle. — Ulcers 
about nails. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Drawings and tearings in arms, hands and fingers. 
— Heaviness and paralytic weakness of arms, which tremble on least exertion. 
— Numbness of the (fore-) arms when patient is lying upon them or leaning 
the elbows on a table. — Throbbing and Jerking of muscles of -arm. — Restless- 
ness and trembling in r. aim. — Skin cracked, on arms and hands.— Furunculi 
and warts on arms. — Paralytic weakness of the forearm ; everything is 
dropped from the hands. — Induration of the cellular tissue of the forearm. — 
Nocturnal shootings in wrist, extending to the top of arm. — Tearing pain in 
wrists and ball of hand. — Spasmodic pain in the hands and fingers, — Numb- 
ness of hands at night. — Paralytic weakness hands. — ^Tonic spasm of hand 



SILICA 


1 187 

.when writing.--Cramp-like pain and lameness of hand after slight exertion,— 
Profuse sweat of the hands.— Ganglion on back of hand. — Ulcer on back of 
hand. — Tingling in fingers. — Burning sensation in ends of fingers. — Pain in 
joints of fingers, when^lfyjessed. — Weakness, rigidity, and want of flexibility 
in fingers. — Contraction ori^^or tendons ; very painful when moving fingers. 
— Ganglion. — (Ganglion on wrist. — R. T. C.). — Gnawing, purulent vesicles, iwith 
burning in fingers.— Tearing, drawing, sticking pain and numbness in fingers, 
as if suppurating, or as if a panaritium would form.— Numb feeling of a 
finger, as though it were enlarged and the bone swollen,— Pain as from a 
splinter in flexor surface of one finger. — Panaritium, esp. with vegetations, 
cries and insupportable pains day and night. — Finger-nails rough and yellow. 
— Nails dirty grey as if decayed ; powder when cut and split into layers, — 
White spots on nails. — Dryness in tips of fingers ; afternoon. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Tearing, stitching pains in hips and thighs. — 
Suppurating pains in hip- joint. — Drawing, tearing, and tension in the legs 
(extending from the hips to the feet). — Easy numbing of the limbs, esp. when 
seated. — Paralytic weakness of legs. — Pressure, tearing, and shootings in 
muscles of thighs. — Itching ulcers in thighs and ankles. — Furuncuii on thighs 
and calves of legs. — Softening and ulceration of femur. — Tearings in knee 
(when sitting, > from motion). — Knee is painful, as if too tightly bound. — 
Inflammatory swelling of knee. — Fungus in knee. — Drawing pain in legs. — 
Coldness of legs. — Swelling of legs as far as the feet. — Ulcer on leg, with 
sticking, burning pains. — Ulcers in the legs, often with sickly complexion. — 
Red, smarting spot on the tibia. — Caries of the tibia. — Ulcers on lower leg, on 
tibia. — Tension of calves of legs, as from contraction. — Cramps in calves, esp. 
in evening, after corporeal labour. — ^I'orpor of calves of legs. — Itching miliary 
eruption on calves. — Tearing and shootings in calves, heels, and toes. — 
Lancination in ankle, when treading, or resting on foot. — Numbness of feet 
in evening. — Coldness of feet, sometimes after suppressed perspiration of 
feet. — Burning sensation in feet and soles, esp. in evening and at night. — 
Swelling of feet, generally in morning. — Offensive smell from feet (intolerable 
carrion-like ; without sweat, every evening). — Profuse, offensive perspiration 
on feet, with excoriation (and blisters) between the toes. — Suppressed per- 
spiration on feet. — Hard and painful callosities on soles. — ^Voluptuous tickling 
in soles, which, when the part has been scratched a little, is almost maddening. 
— Cramp in the soles of feet. — Gnawing vesicles in heel. — Corrosive ulcer on 
heel, with itching. — Stiffness of toes. — Constant, violent boring or tearing 
in great toes. — Ulceration of great toe, with shooting pain. — Bunion. — 
Itching, suppurating scabs on toes. — Ingrowing toenail ; offensive discharge. 
— Corns in the feet, with shooting pains ; also under toenails. 

24. Generalities. — [Affections in general of any kind appearing chiefly 
in light-haired people ; in r. side ; 1. side ; back ; 1. lower extremity ; scalp ; 
external head’ behind the ears ; external surface of inguinal ring ; inguinal 
ring and hernia of long standing ; finger-nails, esp. if there are white spots on 
the nails. — Griping pains with a tearing away feeling, of twisting or of 
writhing ; or as if something were being torn away. — Sensation of heaviness 
in inner parts. — ^Jerking pains. — Debility ; weakness of joints, esp. of ankle- 
joints. — < In night, chiefly in latter part ; in open air ; in children of Silica 
temperament where they are sickly, have worms, &c. ; when single parts are 



ii88 


SILICA 


cold ; from taking cold in the feet ; with profuse salivation ; on uncovering ; 
from a draught of air ; after eating ; after drinking ; lying on painful side ; 
looking fixedly at an object ; from wine ; from outward pressure ; from 
reading ; stepping heavily on ground or floor ; i^'Stonecutters ; when the 
weather changes ; from getting feet wet ; frojp^i worm troubles of any kind ; 
when writing ; from uncovering head. — > From wrapping head up ; in the 
room. — H. N. G.], — Tendency to strain back. — Swelling and induration of 
glands, generally without pain, only sometimes with troublesome itching. — 
Acid, corrosive discharges. — Trembling when writing. — Epileptic fits ; start- 
ing, distortion of eyes, twitching of lips, lolling of tongue, stretching and 
distortion of head and limbs. — Several affections and pains are <, and 
manifest themselves, at night, and in evening, also during movement. — 
Symptoms < at new or full moon. — Pains on change of weather 4 — Feeling 
as if knives were running into her. — Uneasiness in whole hody, after having 
been long seated. — Ebullition of blood, and thirst, after drinking wine. — 
Excessive emaciation. — Children are slow in learning to walk. — Careless, 
slovenly gait. — General inertia and great nervous debility. — Syncope, when 
lying on side. — Great fatigue, lassitude, and drowsiness, on approach of a 
storm. — Strong tendency to suffer from chills, even from the mere uncovering 
of the feet. — ^Want of vital warmth even when taking exercise. 

25. Skin, — Painful sensibility of skin. — Itching over whole body, which 
is of a crawling or shooting kind « at night). — F^ruptioji like varicella over 
whole body. — Tuberous spots on skin, of a light red colour. — Lymphatic 
swellings and abscesses, even with fistulous ulcers. — Engorgement, induration, 
and suppuration of the glands. — Painless swelling of the glands ; they only 
cause very unpleasant itching. — Bones very sensitive and tender to touch ; 
bending and caries of bones. — Abscesses which do not break, but burrow 
under the skin ; exanthemata in general which corrode and spread ; old and 
difficult to heal ; which itch ; fungus articularis ; haematodes ; spongy 
excrescences. — Tetters in general ; corroding and spreading. — Ulcers in 
general, wherever pus is discharged from any part of the body, or when 
appearing in the urine ; ulcers burning, scabby ; indolent ; when circum- 
scribed with redness ; very high, hard ulcers ; with proud flesh ; with 
corroding pus. — Ulcers of all kinds, also after the abuse of Mercury , — Ulcers 
smell very offensive. — Cancerous ulcers. — Inflammation, softening (swelling), 
and ulceration of bones. — Scirrhous indurations. — Ulcers, which are fistulous, 
putrid, phagedenic, fungous, &c., with vegetation, or fetid and corroding 
sanies. — Fistulous openings ; parts around hard, swollen, bluish-red. — Mild 
and malignant suppurations, csp. in membranous parts. — Unhealthy skin ; 
every injury tends to ulceration. — Small wounds heal with difficulty, and 
suppurate profusely. — Painful pustular eruptions ; at last forming suppurating 
ulcers ; on forehead, occiput, sternum, and spine. — Aching, itching, smarting, 
and boring shootings in the ulcers. — Furunculi. — Carbuncles of a malignant 
kind. — Ganglions. — Warts. — Panaritium. 

26. Sleep. — Great sleepiness after eating. — Sleepiness all day. — Excessive 
sleepiness, without being able to go to sleep. — Frequent yawnings. — Sleep 
early in the evening.— Retarded sleep.— Sleep too light at night, like dozing.— 
Not being able to sleep again after waking. — Sleeplessness in general, esp. after 
midnight. — Talking in sleep.— Sleepless after 2 a.m., with rush of thoughts — 



SILICA MARINA 




1 189 


Sleeplessness, caused esp. by ebullition of blood, heat in head, and great flow 
if ideas.-~Frightful visions at night, and many anxious and fantastic dreams, 
with tears, talking, cries, and frequent waking with a start. — Awakens with 
erections and desire t«i.minate. — ^Jerking of body during sleep. — Lascivious 
dreams (with emissions).^tooring while sleeping. — Nightmare. — Somnam- 
bulism (gets up while asleep, ^Iks about, and lies down again). — Dreams of 
robbers, assassins, dogs, voyages, spectres, &c. — At night, congestion of blood 
in head, with pulsative pains, and throbbing in brain, pain in stomach, nausea 
and vomiting, or shootings in all the joints, dryness of nose and many other 
sufferings. • 

27. Fever. — Pulse : small, hard and rapid, frequently irregular and then 
slow. — The circulation is easily agitated. — Violent chill, evening, in bed, 
< from uncovering oneself. — Continuous internal chill, with want of animal 
heat. — Chill in evening with sensation as if cold air were blowing around 
waist ; not > by wrapping up ; followed by severe fever and perspiration. — 
Constant chilliness, even when exercising or in a warm room. — Excessively 
chilly disposition, and shuddering, with frequent shivenngs, also on the least 
movement. — Heat predominates. — Frequently during day short flushes of 
heat, principally in face. — Violent general heat, with violent thirst in after- 
noon, evening, and all night. — Periodically returning heat during day, without 
any previous chill, and followed by slight perspiration. — Perspiration from 
slight exercise ; most profuse on head and face. — Perspiration only on the 
head. — Fever, with violent heat in head ; afternoons ; at night, with thirst 
and catching inspiration. — The perspiration comes periodically ; is < ii p.m., 
6 a.m., or 3 to 5 p.m. — Intermittent fever, heat predominating. — Frequent 
heat, sometimes transient. — Fever, with excessive heat, generally without 
shivering, and with little perspiration, commonly from 10 a.m. till 8 p.m. — 
Perspiration during a moderate walk. — Profuse perspiration at night, some- 
times of an (offensive or) acid smell. — Debilitating perspiration in morning. 


Silica Marina. 

Silica maritima. Sea sand. Trituration. [My preparation was taken 
from the beach, just as it was left by the tide, on a part of the 
coast many miles distant from a river estuary or a drained 
town.] 

Clinical. — Constipation. Glands, enlargement of ; suppuration of. Gonorrhoea. 
Tartar. 

Characteristics. — Having* seen a statement that SiL mar. had a 
pronounced action on inflamed glands, I had a specimen ' triturated 
and run up to the 30th attenuation. I had not long to wait for an 
^ opportunity of testing it. A tallt fair young man of 24, a violinist, 
presented himself with a mass of scrofulous glands on the right side 
of the neck softening at one point. I gave him Sil. mar. 3, gr. v., 
three or four times a day, and warned him not to poultice. The mass 
of glands soon began to diminish. The abscess matured and dis- 
charged itself through a minute opening, and eventually healed with- 
out leaving a perceptible scar. The rest of the glands in the meantime 



1190 


SILICA MARINA-SILPHIUM 


disappeared. SiL mar. 3, gr. v., three times a day, rapidly cured a 
case of gonorrhoea in a patient who had had many previous attacks, 
as well as stricture which had been treated with cauterisations and 
strong Arg. nit It was this history which parQy led me to give the 
remedy on account of the NaU mur, elemer! contained in it. The 
discharge was creamy, and there was tenrfrJrness in the middle of the 
urethra. For three days after commencing the SiL mar. there was a 
sharp aggravation, the discharge became vei*y profuse, was < at night 
and accompanied by painful erections. In a general way I use tljis 
preparation where Nat. mur. symptoms are present in a Sil. case. 
Burnett told me an interesting experience of his. He was consulted 
about a boy who persisted, in spite of punishment, in eating sand 
when playing on the beach. Burnett advised the parents to let the boy 
eat as much as he liked. He kept it up for a fortnight, at the end of 
which time he was vastly improved in health, and he neither wanted 
nor ate any more sand from that day. W. B. Clarke, of Indianopolis 
(A. H.y xxvi. 237) tells of the use of Sil. mar. as a remedy for con- 
stipation. He has used it in patients of all ages with excellent results, 
giving it crude. He prefers the rather coarse sand taken from a river 
sand-bar. This is thoroughly washed and baked in an oven. He thinks 
a finer variety may be better for younger patients. The sand is taken 
plain, or enclosed in capsules, or made into pills. In either case it is 
washed down with water, and water is to be drunk freely during the 
treatment. W. B. Clarke mentions this case as the hardest he had 
encountered : A man, 60, had suffered for thirty years with severe 
constipation, often sitting at stool for an hour and nearly fainting. He 
took a teaspoonful after dinner daily for a week, without particular 
effect. Then he took it three times a day for a week. After this he 
was able to return to the one dose a day, and soon required it but once 
a week. The peculiarity of this treatment is the ease with which 
evacuation is accomplished after the first impression is made, the 
discharges being soft, mushy, and yellow, and the regular habit then 
seems established, for the treatment can then be discontinued.'^ If 
there is any return of the trouble, a dose or two more will be sufficient 
to put it right. This experience is of great value and interest as Sil. 
in the potencies (as well as NaL m.) is a great constipation remedy. 
W. B. Clarke has never observed any ill effects of the treatment. In the 
case of a child, aet. 4, to whom Cooper gave Sil. mar. 6x (my prepara- 
tion) a thick mass of tartar which had accumulated behind the front 
teeth came away in flakes.” 

Silphium. 

Silphium laciniatum. Compass-plant. Pilot-weed. Polar-plant. 
Rosin-wood. Turpentine-weed. N. 0 . Compositae. Tincture 
of fresh plant. 

GlinioaL — ^Asthma. Bladder, catarrh of. Bronchitis. Cancer. 

Gharaoteristios. — The leaves of this plant, when they first come 
up, present their faces uniformly north and south ; later on, when the 



SINAPIS ALBA 


1 191 

leaves become heavy, the winds carry them in different directions and 
•the polarity is not to be observed. The stem of the plant exudes an 
abundance of resin, as some of its names indicate. Hale mentions 
that it has been used^in all forms of asthma ; and in chronic bronchitis 
with large quantities O^^stringy, frothy, light- coloured mucus, and in 
catarrh of the bladder. 'H^e made a proving of it, and his symptoms 
comprise the Schema. He gives this case : Mr. H., 55, had phthisis 
twenty years. On the slightest exposure or cold he would have con- 
gestion of mucous surfaces, followed with copious expectoration of 
stringy, frothy, light-coloured mucus (from one to three pints in twenty- 
four hours), causing rapid exhaustion and at times keeping him in bed 
for weeks. Silplu 2 x trit. was used, gr. 2 every two hours. During the 
next night less than a teacupful of mucus was raised, and its sudden 
decrease alarmed the patient so much that he left off the remedy until 
his doctor assured him that he was very much better, and that the 
remedy had been more successful than he himself had expected. 
Cooper has used St7/)/i. (in single doses of </>) with notable effect in 
cases of cancer of the throat and mouth. The great goneness of 
the proving shows a relation to the cancer cachexia. 

SYMPTOMS. 

5. Nose. — Irritation extends from throat up posterior nares to nose 
causing sneezing, followed by discharge of limpid, acrid mucus, attended 
with constriction and pressure in supraorbital region. 

8 . Mouth. — Tongue : whitish slimy coat, with dry sensation as if burned 
with hot soup. 

9. Throat. — Scraping, tickling, and irritation of fauces and throat. — 
Desire to hawk and scrape throat and throw off a thin viscid mucus. — 
Engorgement and thickening of mucous membrane of throat extending down. 

li; Stomach. — Nausea, sick, faint feeling, and a sense of goneness in 
epigastrium. 

*13. Stool. — Stool natural, but covered with slimy mucus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine : high-coloured, scanty. — Frequent 
micturition, with sense of heat or burning at meatus during micturition. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Rough cough, attended with expectoration 
of yellow mucus. 

18. Chest. — Constriction and tightness of lungs, with constant disposition 
to raise ; hacking, spasmodic cough. 

Sin9.pis Alba. 

Brassica alba. White Mustard. Senf-Kohl. N, 0. Cruciferae. Tri- 
turation and tincture of the seeds. 

• 

Clinical. — Anus, itching of ; affections of. Flatulence. Gastric ulcer. 
Gastritis. Headache. Heartburn. Lactation, dyspepsia of ; sore mouth of. Mouth, 
inflammation of ; ulceration of. CEsophagus. Pregnancy, dyspepsia of ; sore 
mouth of. Salivation. Threadworms. Vomiting. Worms. 

Charaoteristios. — Sin, alb.y like Sin, nig,j is indigenous in Great 
Britain, Its seeds are larger than those of Black Mustard, and of a 



1192 


SINAPIS ALBA 


yellow colour externally. Chemically they differ in containing a ^ 
crystalline substance known as sulpho-sinapisin. Moreover, its* 
myrosine yields with water a pungent oil of a different character from 
the Volatile Oil of Mustard” o&ained iromSpytnig. (Treas. ofBoL), 
The seed-leaves or cotyledons of Sin. alb. fuc’ush the “ mustard ” of 
“ mustard and cress ” — the cress ” hting<bepidinm sativum. Bojanus 
proved Sin. ^/6., taking substantial doses of the triturated seeds and of 
a tincture made therefrom. The well-known emetic effects of mustard 
were produced by it, and also its “burning” sensations in many 
parts, notably anus, stomach, and oesophagus. Flatulence, headache,. 
(> walking in open air ; < in warm room) and salivation were 
among the observed effects. Under Sin. alb. the prover, who had had 
no sign of threadworms since his thirteenth year, passed many both 
living and dead ; and had all the usual rectal symptoms which 
accompany their presence. The urine, too, was turbid, as is often the 
case in helminthiasis. A. L. Fisher {Med. T’’/s., xiii. 316) says that for 
twenty years Sin. alb. has had a prominent place in his armamentarium. 
He has used it on the indications of the proving, and he found that 
the conditions of pregnancy and lactation seem to favour the develop- 
ment of the conditions calling for it. He has verified these : “ Exces- 
sive accumulation of watery saliva or mucus.” “ Acute bruised pain, 
even on slight pressure, just beneath ensiform cartilage.” “Vomiting, 
ejecta consisting of flakes of mucus with blackish veins like clots of 
blood.” “ Crawling and burning in anus, with griping in abdomen.” 

“ Spasmodic griping in anus, appearing at intervals, and especially 
noticed after swallowing anything.” He has cured with Stn. alb. 
“Sore mouth w’ith intensely red mucous membrane, dotted with 
minute white ulcers, the least food, even of blandest character, 
increasing the burning that is present all the tune, and also in the 
throat.” Sin. alb. has a number of Peculiar Sensations : As if head 
hollow. As of a plug in throat ; of hard substance high up in 
oesophagus under manubrium sterni ; something hard lying *in 
stomach, after a moderate meal ; hard substance in rectum not > by' 
stool. Bojanus noticed an alternation betw^een the symptoms of the 
anus and those of the pharynx, I have cured with Sin. alb. : “ Sharp, 
shooting pain in right frontal eminence, < in warm room, > moving 
about and in open air.” The symptoms are < by touch. < Pressure. 
< Motion. > Rest. < Swallowing (crawling in anus). < After 
eating (sensation of hard substance in stomach). < Warm room. 
> Rest. > Open air. 

Relations.~--[An overdose of table Mustard, which contains both 
Sin. alb. and Sin. nig., with starch, &c., is immediately antidoted by 
smelling bread.] Compare : Sin. n. Plug sensation, Anac. Ball in 
anus, Sep. Lump in stomach, Bry., Ab. n., Nux, Pul. Helminthiasis, 
Teucr., Sant, Cin., Naphth., Scirrh. * 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Distracted in mind, while reading must make great efforts to 
keep thoughts from wandering. 

2. Head. — Dulness, with obscured vision, csp. of forehead over eyes ; 



SINAPIS ALBA 1193 

walking.— Sensation as if head hollow.— Rush of blood to head.— Head- 
ache > in open air < in warm room. — Heaviness in forehead, as from 
intoxication, or too great warmth of room. — Pain in 1 . frontal eminence, 
paroxysmal, pressive, tfe the evening. — Pressive pain in r. frontal eminence < 
moving head back and fofth. 

3. Eyes. — Sudden sensation of warmth with stitching in 1 . eye com- 
pelling winking ; eye fills with tears, after which the sensation disappears. 

8. Mouth. — Root of tongue thickly coated yellow on rising in morning ; 
later extends along sides, esp. 1. — Profuse salivation ; with nausea ; nausea > 
at rest, < walking abmit.— Saliva frothy, salt. 

9. Throat. — Scraping in fauces, provoking frequent hawking. — Sensa- 
tion as if a large morsel of food had been swallowed. — Burning : in pharnyx ; 
in oesophagus rising up from stomach like heartburn ; and pressure in 
oesophagus. — Sensation of hard body high up in oesophagus ; < swallowing 
hard food and on empty swallowing ; in afternoon seems as if a plug sticking 
in pharynx (this sensation alternated with biting and crawling in anus). — 
Sensation of constriction on swallowing hard food. 

11. Stomach. — Thirst with heartburn. — Thirst without heartburn ; 
drinking water ss sensation of heaviness and fulness in abdomen as after 
eating. — Eructations : frequent, tasteless and odourless ; of acid liquid with 
griping scalding in pharynx ; aggravating the heartburn ; tasting of food. — 
Heartburn : violent ; with eructations. — Nausea ; qualmishness ; inclination 
to vomit ; salivation. — Nausea > at rest, < by movement. — Retching and 
vomiting of water, witli violent retching and burning in stomach and abdomen, 
extending to both sides under false ribs and whole chest with extreme 
discomfort and anxiety in stomach-pit. — Vomits : Flakes of mucus with 
blackish streaks ; yellow, odourless, tasteless matter, with much tenacious, 
jelly-like mucus. — After vomiting, scraping in throat and burning rising from 
stomach. — Burning ; pressure ; fulness and distension in pit of stomach. — 
Pit of stomach painful to pressure. — ^Very acute bruised pain, even on slight 
pressure, in pit of stomach, just beneath ensiform cartilage ; pressure on it 
took away the breath. 

12. Abdomen. — Rumbling and gurgling, with emission of odourless 
flatus. — Emission of offensive flatus. — Griping colic. — Movements in abdomen. 
— Heaviness as of a weight, fulness and distension in abdomen. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Sensation as though a hard substance were 
lying in anus and could not be evacuated ; not > by stool. — Burning in anus, 
obliging to scratch. — Violent, sudden stitch in anus, obliging him to cry out. 
— Burning ; burning itching in anus. — Spasmodic griping in anus, appearing 
at intervals, < after swallowing anything. — Immediately after a stool, sprained 
sensation, as though anus were drawn up into rectum, with sticking, itching, 
burning and biting in anus. — Sensation as if something hard were lying just 
by anus, sooa followed by a stool, which, however, was evacuated only with 
great pressure and was unsatisfactory ; first part hard, crumbling, dark 
brownish green, covered with mucus and containing thread woi ms, followed 
by the same sensation as before the stool. — Crawling biting in anus. — Stool : 
blackish, hard, covered with mucus, followed by prickling burning in anus ; 
small, thin, soft, greenish, with dead threadworms; copious, pasty, partly 
hard partly soft, sour, fermented ; yellowish grey. 



1194 SINAPIS ALBA— SINAPIS NIGRA 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine : dark yellow, soon forming transparent 
cloud ; bright golden yellow ; dark-brown like beer. — The urine has a cloud 
of mucus, and contains numerous small granules looking like frog-spawn ; on 
the surface of the urine, at the bottom and on the side^'^jf the glass, a number 
of small red granules. — Many grains of red sand* •deposited, and iridescent 
film on surface.— -Thick, fatty pellicle.— Cloud remains suspended in urine. — 
Sediment : white ; flocculent ; like chalk, and containing grains of white 
sand. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Emissions, without lascivious dreams. 

18. Chest. — Oppression of chest compelling frequent deep breathing. — . 
Burning beneath sternum. 

20. Back. — Pains in small of back and coccyx, as if sprained and bruised, 
with urging to stool. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Heaviness in lower limbs. 

26. Sleep. — Sleep : in afternoon with vivid dreams ; after eating. — Vivid 
dreams of dead people and of death. — Dreams : confused and unremembered ; 
of foreign countries and dangerous expeditions. 

27. Fever. — Pulse full and hard. — Creeping chills on moving about ; 
over whole body after vomiting, with coldness of hands and feet and frequent 
eructations of gas. — Inclined to perspire. 


Sinapis Nigra. 

Brassica nigra. Black Mustard. N, O. Cruciferx. Trituration and 

tincture of seeds. 

Clinical. — Amenorrheea. Apoplexy. Asthma, pitiiitous. Catarrh. Chlorosis. 
Chordee. Chorea. Constipation. Coryza. Cough. Diarrhcea. Haemorrhoids. 
Hay-fever. Headache, dull, heavy. Heartburn. Hiccough. Intermittents. 
Menses, premature. Mucous fever. Post-nasal catarrh. Priapism. Scurvy. 
Variola. 

Characteristics. — Sin, yields the greater part of the condi- 
ment so generally used in this country. The plant is indigenous, but 
is nevertheless largely cultivated in Yorkshire and Durham. The seeds 
are of a reddish-brown colour. Mixed with those of Sin, a. they are 
crushed between rollers, and subsequently powdered and sifted twice 
or oftener. From the residue left on the sieve a fixed oil is obtained 
by pressure. The powdered mustard is usually mixed with a con- 
siderably quantity of wheaten flour and a small quantity of 
turmeric powder. The term ‘ flour of mustard ^ is not quite 
accurate, as the mustard seeds themselves contain little or no starchy 
material. The chemical ingredients are somewat complex. Among 
them are a peculiar acid called Myronic acidj noticeable as containing 
a large proportion of Sulphur ^ and which, when mixed with water 
and a peculiar substance called Myrosine (analogous to albumen), also 
found in mustard seeds, yields a volatile Oil of Mustard, which has no 
separate existence in the seeds, but is formed artificially in the manner 



SINAPIS NIGRA 


1195 


just stated. This oil is very acrid, and has been used as a rube- 
•facient. The fixed oil before mentioned as existing in the seed itself , 
has little or no acridity, and has been used as a purgative and 
vermifuge ” {Treas, BoL), Thiosinamincj which is extracted from 
Oil of Mustard, belongs to the same group os Urea. It has been used 
in cheloid, and for removing scar tissue, and so in tinnitus aurium 
(Spencer, H.M.y Jan., 1899). As the chemical constituents of the two 
mustards (see Sin, alb.) are not identical, and as they have been 
proved independently, I have kept them separate. The yellow colour 
of mustard suggest^ Sulplinvy a large amount of which is contained 
in the seeds. Like many other Crucifers Stn. n. has antiscorbutic 
properties ; and it has cured cases of ague ; mucous fever ; catarrh 
of bladder, of stomach, and of air passages. It is in the 
treatment of hay-fever that it has been most used. The special 
indications are : Mucous membrane dry and hot ; no discharge ; 
< afternoon and evening; either nostril may be affected alone, or 
they may be affected alternately. Hansen adds these : “ Acute coryza 
with thin, watery, excoriating discharge, lachrymation, sneezing, 
hacking cough, > lying down. Acute pharyngitis, throat feels 
scalded, hot, inflamed. Loud coughing spells with barking expiration, 
heard at a great distance. Cooper {H. H^., xxxvi. 16) suggests the use 
of Sin, n, as an aperient. He considers that the chief agent in effecting 
dislodgement of faeces in constipated states is flatus. His method of 
producing this is as follows : A tumblerful of hot water is to be taken 
in sips in the early morning ; the same at breakfast time with some plain 
brown bread or with no solid food at all, and at ii a.m. one or two 
capsules of pure mustard [Sin «.), each containing about five grains of 
the powder, to be taken, followed by half a tumbler of hot water. 

This last is most important, as the water drives on the capsule and 
prevents its lodgement about the cardiac orifice of the stomach and 
consequent distress to the patient ; and it also causes contraction of 
the walls of the stomach and consequent expulsion of flatus into the 
duodenum.^^ Peculiar Sensations of Sin. n. are : Vertex as if empty. 
As if she had taken cold. As if scalp was adherent to bones. As of 
pins sticking in eyeballs. Eyeballs as if pressed on from above. As 
if nostrils stopped up. As if movements impeded all round the chest. 
As if something heavy oppressed her on all sides from neck to 
diaphragm. As if cheeks were bulged out by a bubble of air below 
malar bone. Skin of lips as if stiff. As if blisters on tip of tongue. 
As if a load on stomach. Pain as if heart were on right side. As of 
hot water in blood-vessels.—** Sweat on upper lip and forehead is a 
symptom worth noting ; also these : mucus hawked or coughed from 
posterior nares felt cold. The symptoms are < by touch and pressure. 
> Lying down at night. < Leaning forward ; stooping motion 
<. Damp’ weather <. > Sitting erect. < In warm room. < 

Thinking of symptoms ; > by study or mental diversion. > Shutting 
eyes. > Hearty meal. Laughing = cough. 'x< Evening, 4-6 p.m. 
and 7 to Q p.m. < July and August. 

Relations. — Antidoted by: Smelling bread (immediate effects of 
taking excess of condiment). Nux, Rhus ; when blistering has been 
produced by a mustard poultice, soap is the remedy. Compare : 



SINAPIS NIGRA 


1196 

Sin. a., Thios., Armor. Scalded sensation on tongue, Sang. Cough ^ 
< laughing, Arg. n., Pho. Cough > lying dowp, Per., Mang. < ' 
From 4 to 6 p.m., Lyc. Amenorrhoea, Sul., Pul. As if hot water in 
blood-vessels (Rhus as if blood running cold). 

Causation. — Damp weather. Summer season. 


SYMPTOMS. 

r» 

1. Mind. — Irritable ; difficult to think and btudy.— Unreasonably cross. 
— Mind worked rapidly. 

2 . Head. — ^Vertigo : of old people ; violent attacks, with hard hearing 
after eating heavy food ; esp. fat. — Head dull, heavy, > when mind occupied 
by study ; > shutting eyes ; > in open air ; < in warm room ; < when 
thinking of it. — Dull feeling in vertex as if empty. — Frontal headache, most 
over bridge of nose and round edge of orbits, > when eating, < after eating ; 

> by rest. — Headache over r. eye < stooping. — Heavy, drawing feeling 
in r. temple towards night. — Sensation as if scalp were adherent to bones. 
— Forehead hot and dry. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes feel weak; pressures: pricking in them. — Pressing 
feeling in eyes as from above, difficult to keep lids open ; > shutting eyes ; 

> by hearty meal. 

5. Nose. — Symptoms of a severe cold. — Immediately on touching the 
tongue pungent odour went into nostrils causing sneezing. — Dryness in both 
nostrils, < 1 ., tender to pressure ; discharged some mucus. — L. nostril stopped 
up : in afternoon and evening ; all day, scanty discharges, acrid, making skin 
smart. — Scurvy with copious and frequent nose-bleed. 

6. Face. — Shrunken features. — Burning prickling in face. — Red round 
mouth with smarting of lips. — Sensation as if cheek were bulged outward by 
a bubble of air, just below malar bone, in afternoon. — Lips dry and feel "as 
if integuments were stiff. 

8 . Mouth, — Teeth sensitive to warm drinks and cold air, esp. stopped 
teeth. — Swollen bleeding gums. — Tongue : fissure in middle line ; dirty 
white coat in middle ; sore, raw, also gums, could not bear to eat anything 
hard ; dry and sticky ; burning scalding feeling ; fore part feels blistered. — 
Black tongue. — Breath offensive, as after eating onions. — Mouth : dry ; 
burning, extending to stomach. — Profuse saliva. — During proving, mustard 
(of which he was usually very fond) had a very unpleasant taste, and nearly 
caused nausea. — Taste : of garlic, causing nausea ; of horseradish. 

9. Throat. — Dry sensation back of nose and throat > by swallowing 
or by efforts to cough, which brings up with difficulty a little white, tenacious 
mucus, in lumps. — Throat sore, left side, on swallowing saliva, less on 
swallowing food or drink, whole throat behind uvula injected light red, — 
Sore throat r. side extending to 1 . 

II. Stomach. — Appetite good. — Aversion to sweets. — Eructations: 
of gas ; constantly accompanying other symptoms ; all food tasting of 
horseradish, later tasteless. — Hiccough. — Heartburn and belching. — Stomach : 
load in ; burning in. — Ulceration of stomach and intestines. — Pain in region 



SINAPIS NIGRA 


1197 


^of stomach with sensation of faintness compelling to bend forward, which 
Dull pain running directly across epigastric region < leaning forward 

> sitting erect, — Pressure in epigastric region. 

12. Abdome^V-Dull pain in 1. hypochondriac region. — Heavy, dull 
pain as from weight below umbilical region. — Severe twisting in umbilical 
region. — Pain from 1 . of umbilical region to 1 . iliac region ; later to r. side, 
ascending colon. — Accumulation of flatus with twinges of pain about 
umbilicus. — Rumbling. — L. inguinal gland swollen and painful. — Sharp pain 
in* r. inguinal gland. — Dull pain in r. inguinal region > by pressure. 

• 13. Stool and A\ius. — Smarting, cutting pain low down in anus, after 

a stool. — Desire for a stool without passage. — Diarrhoea. — Stools offensive. — 
First stool normal, second loose. — Before stool uneasy feeling in rectum; 
after stool, smarting cutting low down in rectum and anus.— -Constipated ; 
stools hard, like balls. — (Constipation and piles cured in the proving.) 

14. Urinary Organs. — Pain in bladder, in morning, before urina- 
ting. — Desire frequent ; flow increased. — Urine, pale, straw-coloured, without 
sediment. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Violent erections during day and night; 
obstinate, painful, and continued. — Awakening him at night ; with lascivious 
thoughts ; lascivious dreams and emissions at night. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses appear in a few hours long 
before the proper time (several cases). — Aincnorrhoea and chlorosis,— 
Cessation of catamenia. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness, evening from 4 p.m. — Cough, 
short, hacking ; all evening ; 7 to 8 p.m. ; seldom during day. — Cough mostly 
dry or with expectoration of lumps of mucus < in cold air ; > lying down 
and (temporarily) by eating ; excited by laughing. — Expectoration : from 
posterior nares much mucus, which felt cold ; white, in tenacious masses. — 
Asphyxia. — Pituitous asthma. 

18. Chest. — Wandering pains in chest. — Pain in 1 . side of chest in 
region of heart. — Respiration at base of 1 . lung roughened. — Sensation in 
r. chest as if heart were on r. side. 

19. Heart. — Dull, continual pain in heart toward apex, in evening; 
seemingly in heart substance.— Heart pains return daily 10 a.m. and 4 to 6 
p.m. — Sensation as if heart were on r. side. — Pulse : accelerated ; full. 

20. Back. — Severe, dull, pulsating pain under inferior angle of 1 . scapula. 
— Slight bachache, becoming intolerable towards bedtime ; restless all night 
from pain in back and hips ; > motion. 

21. Limbs. — Weariness in limbs with cramps in calves. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Occasional dull pain in left shoulder-joint. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Weakness in calf-muscles. — Dull, heavy ache in 
legs. — Pain constant in ankles and calves. 

24. Generalities. — It seemed to double him up ; could hardly stand ; 
tears ran from eyes ; intense pain across epigastric region. — Rose late, feeling 
sore and stiff all over.— Weakness in all muscles. — Symptoms < 7 to 9 p.m. ; 

> lying down at night, except dreams. 

25. Skin. — Skin turns red. — Burning heat and stitches in skin. — Frightful 
suppuration and gangrenous inflammation reaching down to sternum (fatal 
effects of mustard applied to swollen glands of neck). — General ecchymosis. — 



1198 


SINAPIS NIGRA— SIUM ■ 


Chronic eczema. — Small-pox ; (“ to be given until sulphocyanides appear 
in the saliva”).— Ulcers on legs. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepiness ; during day, sleepless at night. — Sleeps little at 
night, but does not feel loss of sleep. — Dreams : vivid ; or lascivious. 

27. Fever. — Severe chills, chattering of teeth, sensation of general 
coldness, with shrunken feeling (from mustard bath).— Heat through whole 
body, esp. down spine. — Quartan ague and inflammatory fever. — Sweat and 
feeling of hot water in all blood-vessels, > when menses came on. — Sweat 
general ; esp, on forehead and upper lip. — Sweat free on exertion (mental or 
physical), and from external heat. 


Siam. 

Sium latifolium. Water-parsnip. N. 0. Umbelliferas. Tincture 

of root. 

Clinical. — Convulsions. Tetanus. 

Characteristios. — Our knowledge of Water-parsnip is derived 
from cases of poisoning through eating the root The symptoms bear 
a strong resemblance to those of the other poisonous Umbelliferae. 
The most pronounced features of the convulsions of Sium were the 
drawing of the arms to the middle of the body, flexure of the fingers, 
and the preponderance of the contractions on the left side. The 
lack of mental energy recalls the action of ACthusa. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Much excited.— Fear of death.— Lack of mental activity. 

2. Head. — Dizziness ; headache. 

3. Eyes.— Pupils dilated, responded steadily to bright light. 

9. Throat.— Burning along alimentary tract, esp. cesophagus. 

11. Stomach. — Nausea and vomiting, at end of which he fell into a 
convulsion. 

12. Abdomen. — Sense of swelling and flatulence about bowels. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Breathing slow and stertorous. 

24. Generalities.— Muscles in a state of tonic contraction ; arms drawn 
to middle of body ; fingers flexed ; opisthotonos ; greater contraction of muscles 
of 1 . side than of r. — Every few minutes spasms, at first violently clonic, 
diminishing with each succeeding convulsion till they became little more 
than tremors ; by degrees the character changed until the last one (in which 
circulation and respiration ceased), which was a pure tonic spasm. — Loss of 
voluntary motion. — Prostration. 

27. Fever. — Skin cold and clammy, — Head hot, rest of body cold, — 
Wet with perspiration. 



SKOOKUM CHUCK 


1199. 


Skookum Chuck. 

Skookum Limechdtv Chuck (‘‘Strong Medicine Water Medical 
Lake. A lake in Western U.S. containing in grains per gallon : 
Sodic carbonate 63*54, Sodic chloride 16*37, Sodic silicate 10*63, 
Potassic chloride 9*24, Ferrous carbonate *526, Magnesia 
carbonate *237, Calcic carbonate *186, Aluminic oxide *175, 

, with traces of Lithic carbonate, Borax, and Potassic sulphate. 
Trituration cd the dried salt. 

Cliuioal. — Breast, tumour of. Catarrh. Eczema ; vaccinal. Hay-fever. 
Lithaemia. Ozaena. Rheumatism. Urticaria. Vaccination. 

Charaoteristios. — The information respecting the remedy known 
by the Indian name, Skookum chuck (which I will shorten into Skoo,)^ 
is collected in New^ Oldy and Forgotten Remedies, Gentry introduced 
it to homoeopathy in an article in US. Med. Month,^ 1889. He com- 
menced to prove it, but the severity of the catarrhal symptoms led to 
its discontinuance. Gentry has himself cured with Skoo, many cases 
of catarrh, and he considers it a remedy in hay-fever. The cure of 
many cases of inveterate skin disease is on record ; the external use of 
Skoo, soap or ointment has been employed as well as the internal 
administration. D. de F. Cole gave Skoo. 3X in water to a girl, aet. 12, 
who had severe urticaria which did not yield to Apis or Urt. ur. It 
cured the urticaria and improved the patient’s health. W. D. Ingalls 
reports (i) the case of Mrs. D., 48, who had eczema plantaris, fissured, 
exuding an acrid secretion, and so excessively sore that the patient 
had not been able to wear shoes or walk any distance for two years. 
Skoo. 2x was given internally ; an ointment of a drachm to the ounce 
of yaseline applied, and Skookum soap used for washing. In two 
months the patient was able to wear shoes, and in three months the 
feet were well. (2) Mrs, H., 23, had a benign growth in left breast, 
.noticed eight months. No history of phthisis or cancer in family. 
Skoo. was given thus : for the first week, one grain of i x every four 
hours ; for the second week, two grains of 2X every four hours ; for 
the next seven weeks, live-grain powders of 3X, when the patient was 
cured. (3) Mr. J., chronic nasal catarrh ; discharge greenish yellow 
having odour of ozaena, was greatly relieved and apparently on the way 
s to cure. — B. F, Bailey reports (i) the cure of Mrs. X., 40, of lithmmic 
diathesis ; never free from eczematic trouble for years. At times 
much rheumatism. Not unfrequently the rheumatism disappears and 
is immediatety followed by "styes on the eyelids. Former treatment 
allopathic and also homoeopathic. Skoo. 3X every four hours. Improve- 
ment soon showed itself, and the patient was well in three months and 
remained so, (2) Mrs. Y.,26, littiaemic, with flushed face and yellowish 
background. Urine, 1030, and with marked uric acid deposits. Much 
difficulty of digestion. Great dryness of skin, especially of scalp. Hair 
falling out to such an extent that baldness was feared. Skoo. 3X every 
four hours. Hair ceased to fall out. The heated, congested feeling 
of head and face disappeared, and the patient became well. Skoo, 
has also cured vaccinal eczema. 



1200 SKOOKUM CHUCK-SLAG 

Relations. — Antidoted by Tabac. Compare : In general, Nat. c.,^ 
Nat. m. Skin, Graph., Medor., Melit., Maland., Vacc. 

Causation.— Vaccination. 

f't* 

SYMPTOMS. 

5. Nose. — Profuse coryza with constant sneezing as in hay-fever ; 
symptoms so severe had to discontinue the remedy ; (symptoms continued 
until antidoted by tobacco). 

II. Stomach. — Appetite increased. 

20. Back. — Heaviness in sacrum. 

21. Limbs. — Severe rheumatic pains in limbs. 


Slag. 

Silico-sulpho-calcite of Alumina. Slag of blast furnaces in which iron 
is smelted. Trituration. 

Clinical . — Anus, itching of ; soreness of. Constipation. Diarrhcea. Flatulence. 
Haemorrhoids. Housemaid’s-knee. Lumbago. Phthisis. Spleen, affections of. 

Characteristics. — Pulverised Slag^ or blast-iron-furnace cinder, is 
now recognised as one of the best fertilisers of our fields and gardens. 
It was introduced into medicine by J. Meredith (H. W., xxiv. 92) who 
gave the 6x trit. to a patient suffering from housemaid^s-knee, and in 
addition to relieving this it took away a dreadful anal itching, piles 
and constipation as if by magic.’^ Meredith confirmed the rectal power 
of Slag by experiments on his own person. The specimen of Slag used 
by Meredith was analysed and found to contain in 100 parts the 
following : Silica 36-6, Alumina 15*, Calcium 36, Sulphur 3 — part of 
these occur as Calc, sulph.^ — Ferrtim i*, Phospliotus 0*5 (Meredith queries 
if the blue tint of Slag is due to Fer. and Pho.)j Magnesium 6*o, 
Manganum i*o. Loss 0*5. Turner, of Mason College, gives the 
formula of Slag as 2AI2O3 3Si02, 6(2CaO, SiOa). Acting on Meredith^s 
suggestion, George Herring instituted a proving with the 3X on 
himself and others (ibid, p. 358) Herring’s only symptom was a 
creeping irritation of the skin or under the skin, in the umbilical 
region, sufficiently severe to keep him awake. On prover No. 2 Slag 
produced no symptoms, but did something better : it cured him of 
flatulent distension in the evening, and an oppressive feeling over the 
heart. No. 3 had constipation relieved ; but Slag produced ‘‘soreness 
of anus.” His general health was much improved. No. 4, a delicate 
lady, of phthisical history, had Slag 3X gr. i. twice a day. It set up : 
diarrhoea, debility, quick pulse, lumbago, with pain in back, distension 
of stomach, so that she had to loosen her dress [the very symptom it 
cured in one of the men], profuse night-sweat ; cough and expectora- 
tion. P/m., Ph, ac.f Card, v, were given to this patient in succession 
and all did good. Another proving of Slag was made by F. C. B. 
(ibid, 453). The prover, whose symptoms are marked (B) in the 
Schema, was 33, rather dark, nervo-bilious ; had chronically enlarged 



SLAG 


1201 


tonsils, and tendency to colds in the head. He took Slag by way of 
* experiment, hoping to cure his tonsils. It had no better effect than 
remedies previously taken, but it produced a number of symptoms, 
prominent among mem being : drowsiness in evening ; dull, stupefying 
frontal headache, and stiffness at back of head and neck, and pain 
between shoulders ; spleen pain and stitches in heart. A pain (dull, 
heavy sensation) alternated between inter-scapular region and spleen. 

Relations. — Effects were relieved by : Pho., Pho. ac., Carb. v. 
Compare: Constipation, flatulence, Lyc., Carb, v., Sul. Anal 
symptoms. Graph.,, Nit. ac. Intolerance of tight clothing, Lach. 
Housemaid^s-knee, Stict. p., Ap. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — On waking, dull, stupefying, frontal headache, want of 
energy, pains in limbs (B). — Frontal headaclie extended to r. temple with 
sensation of stiffness at back of head (B) ; (this headache was constant 
throughout the proving ; at a later stage of the proving, it was slightly > 
moving about). 

5. Nose. — Cold in head (B). 

8. Mouth. — Thickly coated, greyish tongue, with terra-cotta streak 
down middle (B). — Awoke with slimy tongue (B). 

9. Throat. — Throbbing in 1 . tonsil (B). 

11. Stomach. — ^Very little appetite (B). Distended stomach, must 
loosen her dress. 

12. Abdomen. — Creeping irritation of the skin or under the skin in 
umbilical region ; kept him awake some time (3X). — In a gouty prover 3X 
removed distension of abdomen necessitating unbuttoning top button of 
trousers in evening. — (Flatulent distension.) — Aching in region of spleen 
alternating with pain between shoulders, in 1 . elbow (B) — Pain in 
spleen (B). 

• 13. Stool and Anus. — Took away a dicadful anal itching, piles and 
constipation as if by magic (6x). — Constipation relieved (3x). — Soreness of 
anus produced (3x). — Diarrhani, great debility, quick pulse : pain in back, 
inflated stomach, had to loosen dress ; profuse night-sweat ; cough with 
expectoration (3X. gr. i twice a day ; in a delicate lady). 

14. Urinary Organs. — ^Very frequent urination. — Urine darker than 
usual (B). 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Cough with expectoration ; profuse 
night-sweats. , 

ig. Heart. — Stitches in region of heart (B). — (Oppressed feeling over the 
heart.) — Pulse quick. 

20. Neck and Back.-— Stiffness at back of neck.— Lumbago ; with 
flatulence. — Aching, dull pain over small of back (B). 

21. Limbs,— Pain in limbs. — Aching between shoulders, and in 1 . elbow 
alternating with aching in region of spleen. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Pain in 1 . elbow. — Shifting pains in 1 . elbow, 
changing to r., and then back again. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pains in both knee-caps, sometimes dull, some- 

voL. n. 77 



t20i SLAG— SOL 

times aching. — (Housemaid’s knee.) — ^Occasional shooting aching through 
knees ; < going up stairs. 

24. Generalities. — Want of energy. 

26. Sleep. — Unusually drowsy in evening. — Sleep ciisturbed by creeping 
sensation about navel. 

27. Fever.— Quick pulse.— Profuse night-sweat. 


Sol. 

Sun-light. Saccharum lactis is exposed to concentrated sun’s rays and 
stirred with a glass rod till saturated. Attenuations by Finclce. 

Clinical. — Cancer. Freckles. Headache. Lupus. Menses, premature. 
Paralysis. Sunburn. Sunstroke. 

Characteristios. — Thanks to Finsen, of Copenhagen, the place 
of Light in therapeutics is on the way to be defined so far as its 
direct properties are concerned, though Finsen is reviving and con- 
firming, rather than originating, light-therapy. O. V. Thayer 
(H, R.j viii. 463) published in 1893 a series of cases in which he had 
used concentrated rays of sun-light (solar cautery), including cases 
of epithelial cancer, rodent ulcer, parasitic diseases, moles, small 
wens, birth-marks, &c. H. T. Webster (//. /?., xv. 126) gives details 
of a case of epithelioma in which the growth was removed by solar- 
cautery and a scarcely perceptible scar left. Swan and his coadjutors 
investigated sun-light from another point of view. In 1880 (Org., 
iii. 275) Swan published a pathogenesis of Soly which I have embodied 
in my Schema. Swan’s data were obtained from four provers, from 
experiences obtained from sensitives by Reichenbach {Der Sensitive 
Meiich)y from an observation by Highwood ” quoted by Fincke from 
American Obsetvery ix. 210. Reichenbach’s observations I have dis- 
tinguished by ^‘(R),” Highwood’s by “(H).” The remaining symp- 
toms arc those who took principally the iin attenuations of Fincke. 
The 15m was taken by one. Two of Reichenbach’s symptoms were 
observed on two of the provers also, and the letters “(F)” and “(L)” 
refer to these. Cured symptoms will be found in brackets. The 
common effects of strong sun-light, as sneezing, freckling, and sun- 
stroke, may be added to the list. 

Relations. — Antidoted by: Aco., Bell., Glon., Gels., and other 
sunstroke remedies. Compare: Luna, £lec., Mgt. Dislike of sun, 
Lach., Nat. c. 


SYMPTOMS. 

I, Mind. — Excitement and anxiousness in all her nerves, at first with 
trembling at heart, finally it remained in stomach-pit ; all that night and next 
day very sensitive and easily frightened; it was as if all the nerves were 
trembling inside of them ; the anxiousness in stomach-pit passes off the 
second evening. — Anxiousness if somebody comes towards her, being 
frightened thereat (F and R), 



SOL 


1203 


2 . Head, — Violent headache from vertex down to forehead, pressing, 
with sensation of heat in face ; this headache was repeated the second day 
three times ; it seems to be in connection with the excitement and anxious- 
ness at stomach-pit ^rst night). — All the sensitives are very sensitive to the 
immediate action of sunshine on the vertex (R).— Extreme painfulness if the 
sunshine strike the bare-head (R). — Most violent stitches in brain (R) — Dis- 
agreeable feelings, such as from retrograde passes, go into brain, cause 
stitches and headache, and if she does not gain the shade, stomach-ache and 
nausea follow (R) — ^Violent headache (R). — L.-sided headache (R). — Head- 
ache from sunshine oh bare head, > by laying a glass of water on stomach- 
pit (R) — In morning, severe pain in crown, and then in neck, passing off 
after breakfast (L and R). — (Heavy pressive pain in vertex.) — Intense entire 
cephalalgia. — Pain in forehead ; it seems as if forehead would crush itself 
down upon the eyes. — (Sensation of undulating or floating in head after 
mental excitement, such as attending to business or writing a letter.)— 
Instantaneous shock to brain, followed by prostration, and a scalding 
sensation on top of head (remedied by orange-coloured cloth in stove-pipe 
hat) (H) — Excessive perspiration of head and neck. 

3. Eyes. — Sun-light diminished the sensitivity of eyes ; od.-blindness 
(R). — Suffusion of veins of sclerotica. — Sensation of swelling, as if eyes would 
force themselves out of sockets. — Light offends eyes. 

4. Ears. — Sharp shooting pain from 1. ear to nose, continued at intervals 
for some time.— Partial deafness. 

5. Nose. — Sneezing, with a little sore throat, as if she had taken cold. 

6. Face. — ^Jaws rigidly set as in trismus. 

7. Teeth.-^rinding of teeth as in helminthic spasms. 

8. Mouth. — Tastes like something she cannot tell. — She puts anything 
she is going to eat in the sunshine, because then it is more palatable to her 
(R).— iTwo glasses of water of equal temperature, the one put in the shade, 
the other in the sunshine for a quarter of an hour, the latter tastes agreeably 
cod to sensitives, and stale and disagreeable to non-sensitives, whilst the 
other tastes quite the reverse (R). — Stupid ; cannot articulate a word. — 
Articulates with difficulty. 

11. Stomach. — Slight inclination to or actual vomiting. — Heat in pit of 
stomach. — Empty feeling in stomach, as if she had not eaten anything 
substantial yesterday and to-day. — Sensation of faintness and vacuity in 
stomach-pit. 

12. Abdomen. — In abdomen, distension and hardness, as large as a 
child’s head, as if it were in womb, and running throughout from it into 
mammae, as if milk would rush in as when a child nurses ; this lasted the 
whole first night till morning ; before the distension and hardness came on 
a sensation as after childbirth or at conception (with great excitement). — A 
glass of water, exposed to the sun for six to eight minutes propagates coolness, 
not only in stomach, but round about in the viscera (R). 

13. Stool. — Constipation. 

|4. Urinary Organs.— Had to urinate five times in night.— Urine and 
stool invariably suspended. 

i6. Female Sexual Organs.— Menses six to seven days too soon. 

18. Chest. — Weakness about heart. 



1204 


SOL— SOLANINUM 


20. Back.— Pain in back. — Backache. 

21. Limbs.— After riding about on horseback in his woods in the sun- 
shine all forenoon, and lying down about noon on his bed to rest, he suddenly 
gets peculiar attacks drawing through all his limbs ; after rising and making 
a few steps up and down, they disappear ; this repeats itself several times 
(R).— (The r. side, arm, and foot, which had been weak as from partial 
paralysis, became equally strong as 1.) — Hands and feet cold, 

22. Upper Limbs. — The back of hand exposed to sunshine feels warm, 
while at same time a coolness appears in palm, and runs up whole arm into 
temple (R). — Cool, refreshed hands from holding a sticK partially exposed to* 
the sun (R). 

24. Generalities.— > Of bad effects of the sun by every cloudy veil 
drawing over the sun (R). — If beds and wearing apparel have lain too long 
in the sunshine, the agreeable feeling after using them turns suddenly into 
the most disagreeable, so that she cannot bear it, and falls into headache and 
spasm (R.) — Spasm coming with sunrise and ceasing with sunset (R.) — Some 
spasms appearing at sunset (R). — Faintness. — Prostration. — (General stiffen- 
ing up of the system ; the bodily strength seems more equalised.) 

25. Skin. — Dermatitis, which often, with cold extremities, degenerates 
into megrim (R.). 

26. Sleep. — She could not sleep the first night, except from 3 to 4 a.m. ; 
otherwise no idea of sleep the whole night long. — Head very much excited ; 
could not sleep for hours. — Great sleepiness all- through the head, and not 
merely in the eyes ; heavy, sound sleep all through night. 

27. Fever. — An agreeable coolness extends over whole body, though 
the surface of the body perceives the physical heat of the sun’s rays ; 
simultaneously a kind of coldness interiorly pervades whole body, so that 
the sun makes warm and cold at the same time, but the feeling of cold 
supersedes that of warmth to such a degree that the latter is overlooked (R). 
— Running chills of increasing sensation of cold in all limbs from holding 
wires partially exposed to the sun (R). — Felt cold in night ; drew up m'ore 
cover and perspired. — Congestive chill from exposure to sun after drinking 
cold water freely. — Perspiration streaming out of stomach-pit over whole 
body (from the crude saturated sacch. lact., in one of Fincke’s provers). 


Solaninum. 

SoLANiNUM. An alkaloid obtained from various Solanums, especially 
S. dulcamara and S. nigrum ; also from the Potato plant, 
S. tuberosum. €^3^(690,6. Trkuration. Also 
Solaninum aceticum. C^3H690x 6C2H40*. Trituration. Solution. 

Clinical. — Lungs, paralysis of. Tetanus. Ticklishness. 

Ghapaoteristics. — My first practical acquaintance with Solan, 
was through seeing the excellent effect of Solan, acet, 2 in solution 
given by Dr. Hughes to a diabetic and semi-paralytic man of 60, who 



SOLANINUM 


1205 


had frequent threatenings of respiratory paralysis with accumulations 
of mucus which he was unable to expel. Solan, acet more than any 
other remedy rescued him from danger and prolonged his life. From 
that time I have frequently had occasion to use it in similar conditions. 
Solan, is obtained from many of the Solanaceae, and especially from 
Dulcamara. It exists in potatoes, and under certain conditions of 
germination potatoes may contain a poisonous amount. An accident 
of the kind occurred to soldiers at Pfuhl who were supplied with 
potatoes containing about 24 per cent, of Solan. {Med. Prcssj June 5, 
1901). Sixty-six soldiers had marked poisoning symptoms : Shiver- 
•ing, fever, vomiting, syncope, and in one case convulsions. Skin and 
conjunctivas were tinged yellow. Solajt. was proved by Clarus and 
Schroff and others. Experiments were also made on animals. Slowed 
and oppressed respiration was a marked feature. Respiration was 
slowed in inverse proportion to the increase in the pulse rate. There 
was cerebro-spinal irritation ; hyperaesthesia and convulsions < by 
touch. Skin more easily tickled than usual. In animals the hind 
limbs were rigid and paralysed ; and in the provers the lower limbs 
were weakened. 

Relations. — Compare : Dulc., Bell., S. car., S. nig., S. tub., S. t. 
segrot. (Botan). In respiratory paralysis, Dulc., Bell. Sleepy but 
cannot sleep, Bell. Hyperaesthesia, Nux, Tetanin. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Stupefaction without previous excitement. 

2. Head. — ^Vertigo. — Head : hot, heavy, dull, painful. — Pain in occiput. 
— [(In rabbits :) Injection of cerebro-spinal passages, esp. of medulla 
oblongata ; spasms < by touch ; pendulum-like swinging of head and snap- 
ping* with the mouth,] 

, 3. Eyes. — Pupils slightly contracted. 

, 8. Mouth. — Salivation. — The pure alkaloid has a cooling, acid, and 

salt taste, and when chewed causes a glutinous sensation in pharynx and 
throat, with scraping which extends to stomach, where it becomes a peculiar 
sticking pain. — Bitter taste. 

9. Throat. — Scraping in throat. 

II. Stomach. — Constant eructations. — Nausea, and diarrhoea ; and 
vomiting. — Nausea, violent, ineffectual efforts to vomit. — ^About 5 p.m., 
vomiting three times without previous nausea, or pain, or any intestinal 
symptoms. 

r 12. Abdomen. — Rumbling in abdomen. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Albumen in urine. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness. — Respiration : slow ; super- 
ficial; difficult; oppressed; distressed, esp. on inspiration. — [Decreased 
frequency of respiration in inverse proportion to increase of pulse.— Moist 
rattle during inspiration. — Frequent violent outcry (from action on medulla 
oblongata). — Masses of mucus in larger air-passages (post mortem). — Paralysis 
of respiration. (Rabbits poisoned with S.)] 

18. Chest. — [Convulsions of muscles of thorax, with which were soon 



1206 SOLANINUM— SOLANUM ARREBENTA 

associated tonic spasms of extremities, at first gentle, gradually increasing, 
and a short time before death suddenly attaining an enormous height ; < by 
touch. (Rabbits.)] 

19. Heart* — Pulse : increased in rapidity ; weak ; ^hready. — Pulse and 
respiration slowed. — [Increased pulse rate; respiration slowed. — Post- 
mortem, rigidity of heart muscle, all its cavities full of dark, cherry-red 
coagulated blood. (Rabbits.)] 

20. Neck and Back. — [Cerebro-spinal meningitis. (Rabbits.)] 

23. Lower Limbs. — Slight tonic spasms of lower limbs.— Weakness of 
lower limbs. — [Incapable of moving hinder feet forward. — Hind legs quite 
stiff, toes stretched out ; then great dejection, retching, and signs of pain. 
(Rabbits, from the sulphate.)'] 

24. Generalities. — Weakness. — Sensitiveness to light, noise, and touch. 
— Convulsions. — Fainting.— [Sudden rapidity and convulsive enibarrass- 
ment of respiration, general convulsions, tetanic spasms, and strong dilatation 
of pupil. (Dog.)] 

25. Skin. — Skin dry. — Hyperaesthesia ; creeping along spine when 
touching the skin ; more easily tickled than natural. — Itching. — Yellow dis- 
colouration of skin. 

26. Sleep. — Frequent yawning. — Great sleepiness with inability to sleep. 
— Sleep restless, frequently disturbed by frightful dreams. — Sleep frequently 
interrupted without dreams. 

27. Fever. — Extremities cold. — Shivering, fever, vomiting, and syncope. 
— Profuse perspiration without weakness. 


Solanum Arrebenta. 

Solanum rebenta, Arrebenta cevallos (Brazilian name). Trituration 
of the leaves. Tincture of the leaves. 

Clinical. — Apoplexy. Boils. Breasts, swelling of. Glands, swelling of. 
Urticaria. Vertigo. 

Characteristics. — Mure, who proved Sol, arr,^ says of it : The 
bush grows spontaneously in the provinces of Rio Janeiro, along 
roads and in cultivated places. It is from ten to sixteen inches high.” 
Among the symptoms Redness of face and rush of blood to brain ” 
recalls Bell,, as do the swelling and pains in breasts. 

* 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Impatient and irritated by trifling causes. 

2. Head. — Vertigo after bathing. — Headache. 

6 . Face. — Redness of face, and rush of blood to brain. 

8 . Mouth.— Poughy mouth in morning. 

10. Appetite. — Loss of appetite. — ^Constant thirst. 

11. Stomach —Swelling of stomach.— Difficult digestion. 



. SOLANUM MAMMOSUM 1207 

x8* Chest. — Superficial ulceration below 1 . nipple, — Pain at pectoralis 
major. — Glandular swelling in r. breast.-~Lancinations in breasts, 

22. Upper Limbs. — Painful boil below r. axilla. — Swelling of axillary 
glands. %. 

25. Skin. — Suppuration of boils. — Urticaria. — Paleness and greenish 
colour of the skin after a few days of proving. 

26. Sleep. — Waking with a start. — Dreams about quarrels and murders. 

27. Fever. — Slight fever. — Flash of heat all over. 


Solanum Carolinense. 

Solanum Carolinense. Horse-nettle. N. 0. Solanaceae. Tincture of 

fresh ripe berries. 

Olinieal. — Convulsions. Epilepsy. Tetanus. 

CharacteristiOB. — Solan, car, is a domestic remedy in the Southern 
States for convulsions/' and it has been tested by several old-school 
authorities (H. /?., xi. 20) in cases of epilepsy with some success. 
Doses of from 30 to 60 drops were given three times a day, the 
only unpleasant effects being a “mild diarrhcea" in some cases. 
Grahn (H. R.j xii. 462) relates a case of hysterical tetanus in a young 
negro woman. She had laughed whilst holding a pin in her mouth, 
and the pin had lodged in her throat. She had managed to get rid 
of it by coughing, but had hurt the throat, and the tetanic spasms 
followed. Passiflor, did good, but the supply gave out, and Sol. car, 
was given instead. By error of an attendant, maximum doses (two 
drachms every forty minutes) were given, and a state of dangerous 
stjipor followed. However, all muscles were relaxed, and remained 
, so the rest of that day. Next day a slight return of the spasms was 
remedied with half-drachm doses of Sol. car. It was several days 
before the disease was entirely overcome. 


Solanum Mammosum. 


Apple of Sodom. N. 0 . Solanaceae. Tincture of fresh ripe fruit. 

Clinical. — Coxalgia. Haemoptysis. Irritability. Sleep, abnormal. Thought, 
difficult, Tabacco, effects of, » 

CharaoteristiCB. — Hering is the authority for Sol. mam. The 
chief ‘symptoms were: Irritability and inability to think ; sleepiness, 
without being able to sleep ; a kind of stupor < at time of flood tide, 
at the full moon, > with ebb tide ; hawking of blood-streaked 
mucus ; sensitiveness to tobacco. 



1208 SOLANUM MAM.— SOLANUM NIG. 


SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Becomes exasperated at what he thinks may happen. — 
Inability for continuous thought, though with perfect comprehension of 
his subject ; he could, when writing, only express himself in short, broken 
sentences. 

13. Stool.— No stool (2nd d.) ; stool occurred later than usual, and after 
much pressure (3rd d.). 

17. Respiratory Organs. — The mucus hawked from the larynx con- 
tains streaks of bright blood. 

20. Back. — ^Twitching of large muscle below r. scapula ; as if the flesh 
were pinched up by the hand and shaken back and forth. 

23. Lower Limbs .—Sticking pain in 1. hip-joint that made him quite 
lame, frequently during and after walking, disappearing after standing and 
sitting down. 

24. Generalities. — Uneasiness; inability to keep quiet. — Everything is 
seen as in a fever with a hard pulse. — Sensitiveness to tobacco. 

25. Skin.— Causes blotches over whole body (from poisoning). 

26. Sleep. — Great weariness and desire to sleep without ability to sleep, 
followed by slumbering without real sleep, and afterwards deep sleep for 
several hours, from which he awoke and could not collect his senses for a long 
time, and remained long in an irresolute condition (this condition occurred at 
time of flood- tide at full moon ; with the ebb tide, a general refreshing as 
after a crisis). — Even after a long sleep during the day he was sleepy in even- 
ing, and slept well all night. — Dreams of death with violent weeping. 


Solanum Nigrum. 

Solanum nigrum. Black nightshade. iV. 0. Solanacea^. Tincture 

of fresh plant. 

Clinical. — Amaurosis. Chorea. Headache. Heartburn. Hydrocephalus. 
Mania. Meningitis. Night-terrors. Parotitis. Peritonitis. Puerperal convul- 
sions. Scarlatina. Small-pox. Stammering. Tetanus. Trismus. Tympanites. 
Typhoid fever. Varicosis. Vertigo. Ulcers. 

Characteristios. — SoL «. is a common weed found in waste places. 
It has white flowers and black berries. ** The leaves applied externally 
ease pain and abate inflammation. Too large a quantity occasions 
violent sickness and headache, giddiness, drowsiness, and other 
dangerous symptoms. The Arabians apply the leaves to burns and 
ulcers, skin diseases, and scrofulous and cancerous affections ; they 
are diaphoretic, diuretic, and purgative (Green's Herbal). Hale says 
some country practitioners used it with much success under the im- 
pression that it was “ an indigenous Belladonna," having been misled 
by the name ^‘nightshade." Hale verified its use in meningitis and 
headache ; in scarlatina when the eruption is blotchy. Hale justly 
points out the close affinity of SoL n. with BelL : — Delirium, headache, 



1209 


. SOLANUM NIGRUM 

fluked face, sparkling eyes, pains coming and going suddenly, fiery 
•rashes, burning skin and sweat. The Schema is made up of provings 
and symptoms of poisoning cases — ^all are unusually distinctive. A 
curious feature of the skin effects of the Black nightshade is that they 
have a tendency to blackness : “ The swelling is very painful, it enlarges, 
becomes shiny, hard, and deep red ; and in several places, quite 
black,^’ *‘The black hue of the swollen parts grows deeper, the 
fingers are stiffened/^ &c. ‘‘ The tip of the nose, the hands, from 
the finger-tips to the knuckles, and the toes to the tarsal joints 
become quite blacl^ as if regularly dyed.^^ Corresponding to the 
black appearance is a bruised feeling all over the body, — The head- 
aches of Sol. n. are described as “frightful.’’ They are splitting, 
throbbing, bursting, piercing, and are < by least movement of 
head, light, noise, stooping ; by least movement after sitting ; < in 
a close room, and rather > in open air. The day after taking a 
single dose of ^ a patient of Cooper’s had this : “ Head feels full across 
forehead, eyes heavy, and forehead burns ; could not apply himself 
to work.” The vertigo is < on moving the head. Sensation as if 
the bed was being rapidly turned in a circle. Inclines to left on 
walking. The delirium is characterised by the cephalic cry, efforts to 
escape, and by stammering speech. Dilatation of the pupils is as 
marked as with Bell.^ and there is the same dryness of mouth and 
throat. Spasms, convulsions, and tetanic rigidity of the whole body 
have been induced. The most peculiar feature of the convulsions 
is this: “ In the midst of these convulsions the children frequently 
stretch out their little hands, then carry them eagerly to their mouths, 
and go through the motions of mastication and swallowing.” The 
skin symptoms are very marked. After one dose of ^ this condition 
disappeared in a patient of Cooper’s : patches of psoriasis, knees, 
elbow,s, and forehead, scaly, with red irritating spots at roots of hair. 
Peculiar Sensations are : Brain as if swimming. As if things moving 
in a circle, when stooping. As if bed turning rapidly in a circle. 
As if brain shaking about in skull, on moving head. As if head 
would split. As from a blow on forehead. As if sand in eyes. As 
if splinter in right tonsil. Tongue as if scalded. Pains come and 
go suddenly. Symptoms extend upward. Right upper, left lower. 
Alternate coldness and heat. The symptoms are < by touch. 
< Motion. < Moving head. < Moving. < Beginning to move 
after sitting. < Walking (inclines to left). < Mis-step. < Swallow- 
ing. < Light. < Bright sunshine (eyes). > Closing eyes (headache 
s him to close eyes). There is very great sensitiveness to cold 
air, but headache is < in whrm room and > in open air. Many 
symptoms are < morning on waking. Headache at lo a.m. 

' Relations. — Compare: In general Bell, and other Solanaceas. 

‘ Cerebral cry,* Apis. Stammering, Strani. Headache lo a.m., Nat. m. 
Splinter sensation, Nit. ac., Hep. Tongue as if scalded. Sang. Pain 
in back of neck, Hell. Sensation of a blow, Naj. (Naj. on occiput, 
Sol. n. on forehead). 



1210 


SOLANUM NIGRUM 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.— ‘Delirium : with stammering speech, efforts to get out of 
bed ; with piercing cries and convulsions, — Completer cessation of mental 
faculties. — Apoplectic stupor, muscles relaxed, face flushed, pulse full and 
irregular.— Coma with twitching. 

2 . Head. — ^Vertigo : on rising and moving about, with dizziness before 
eyes ; with nausea and colic ; on stooping ; on rising in morning ; > in open 
air. — Brain seems to swim, < on moving head. — Sensation as if bed was 
turning rapidly in a circle (ten minutes after going to bed). — On stooping sen- 
sation as if everything moving in a circle. — While walking, body inclines to 
1 . — Headache : dull, heavy throbbing; followed by dilatation of pupils. — Light- 
ness in head.— Frightful headache. — Headache < beginning to move after 
sitting ; > walking in open air. — ^Verj'^ severe pain in head immediately over 
eyes, makes him partially close eyes ; < by light ; by stooping ; lo a.m. — 
Headache < in close room. — Feeling as if head would split. — Feeling on least 
motion after sitting as if brain would burst from forehead. — In forehead : dull, 
heavy pressure ; sensation as from a blow ; throbbing during whole after- 
noon. — Severe pain through temples as if head i would split. — Severe throb- 
bing pain in 1 . temple < slightest mis-step, and < stooping at i p.m, — Sharp 
gnawing pain in r. temple g a.m., causing him to grasp his hand and shut his 
eyes. — Throbbing of temporal and carotid arteries, ii a.m. — Pain in small 
circumscribed spot on vertex. — Pressure on vertex and forehead. — Eruption 
on forehead of small red pimples, sore to touch and very hard ; when one 
went another came.— Scalp sore on moving hand through hair. — Scalp sore as 
if hair had been severely pulled. 

3. Byes. — Wrinkles round eyes. — Eyes wide open, moist, and sparkling. 
— Eyes : red ; full and tense ; dull and heavy ; burning ; very sensitive to light ; 
sensation as if sand in them. — Pain : over 1 . eye ; severe in supraorbital 
region on waking in morning ; < motion and stooping ; heavy, bruised sensa- 
tion. — Sharp shooting over r. eye. — Burning in lids. — Burning in lid-margins. 
— Lids swollen and itching. — Lids agglutinated. — Pain in 1 . inner canthus.— 
Lachrymation. — Pupils dilated : enormously and insensible ; alternating with 
contraction. — Vision weak, < by bright sunlight. — Erethritic amaurosis. — 
Muscae ; flickering black points and streaks ; darkness before eyes ; everything 
seemed too bright. — Sparks before eyes (with nausea). 

4. Ears.— Most violent parotitis. —Stitches in ear. — Sounds seem distant. 
— Buzzing before ears. 

5. Nose.— Nose deep red. — Considerable sneezing. — Discharge of thin, 
watery substance ; from r. nostril, 1 . being glosed. — Burning in nose. — Nose 
swollen, painful, and black. — Tip of nose black. 

6. Face. — Wrinkles round eyes, on upper lip and on fingers. — Face 
highly congested, wild anxious. — Face ; red, swollen ; bloated ; itching. — 
Expression : fatigued ; of fright and terror ; as if intoxicated. — Face pale. — 
Sloughs detached from face.— Sharp, neuralgic-like pains shooting from lower 
jaw up into 1 , ear, coming and going suddenly (10 a.m.). — Lips dry and blis- 
tered ; as if scalded.— Trismus. 

8. Mouth.— Lips and tongue dry as if scalded.— Tongue sore as if 
burnt. — Dryness : of back of tongue and arch of palate ; of mouth. — Insipid 



SOLANUM NIGRUM 1211 

taste (with pain over eyes) on waking in morning. — Utterance becomes 

• uneasy. 

9. Throat. — Throat sore as if burnt. — Stitches in r. side of throat. — 
Raw sensation in thm)at, painful on swallowing, solids or liquids. — Tickling 
in throat causing cough. — Fauces : dry ; sticking in < on swallowing, at 
times stitches shooting to drum of r. ear.— L. tonsil swollen. — Feeling as if 
splinter in r. tonsil. — Cramp in oesophagus. — ^Violent beating of carotids. 

II. Stomach.— Appetite lost. — Great thirst, for large quantities, often. — 
Empty eructations with burning in stomach. — Heartburn. — Nausea with 
sparks before the eyes^ continuing till he went to sleep. — Nausea and retch- 
ings. — Nausea and efforts to vomit, followed by profuse vomiting, at first of 
mucus, afterwards of bluish or greyish-black fluid. — Vomit : ingesta ; blackish- 
green liquid, thick. — Severe pain in region of stomach, extending into heart 
region and L shoulder (5 p.m.). — Pressure in stomach; constant or in 
paroxysms. — Cramps; cutting; burning in pit of stomach. — Burning in 
stomach extending up into oesophagus. 

12 . Abdomen. — ^Violent cutting in umbilical region. — Abdomen exces- 
sively distended and tense. — Colic ; and ineffectual urging. — Pain 5 p.m., as 
if intestines were cut with knives. — Pains in abdomen and desire to lie down. 

13. Stool and Anus. — ^'Penesmus in anus. — Stools : natural but more 
frequent ; semi-fluid ; yellow, watery. — Stools followed by burning pain in 
stomach, extending up, with nausea.— Constipation, small, dry, hard stools. 

14. Urinary Organs. — If a sweat did not break out an extraordinary 
discharge of urine occurred, frequently followed by purging. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Respiration : rapid ; difficult ; quick but 
easy ; stertorous. 

18. Chest. — Chest : oppression of ; constriction of. — Pressure on sternum 
and at tenth dorsal vertebra. — Cutting pains in 1. side. — On upper part of 
sternum a large round blotch, deep red. 

19. ’ Heart. — ^Anxious feeling in region of heart. — Pulse : rapid, scarcely 
perceptible ; irregular ; slow, small, soft. 

. 20. Neck and Back. — Neck sore, stiff, as if bruised ; < moving head. — 

Severe pains in muscles of neck. — Great pains in back of neck and shoulders, 
and in lower limbs. — Pains in back of neck and between shoulders. — Bruised 
feeling in back and limbs. 

21. Limbs. — Restlessness in limbs and carphologia. — ^Wandering pains, 
first in shoulders, then down arm, then in lower limbs.— Severe pains in all the 
limbs, 8 p.m. — Painful drawing in arms and feet. 

22. Upper Limbs,— Arms heavy, prostrated, < r.— Dull, heavy pain in 
r. arm extending to finger-tips (10 a.m. to 3 p.m.). — Lancinating pains down 
1. arm. — Pain shooting through*!, arm and wrist. — Pain in 1, shoulder and r. 
wrist. — Palms greenish blue. — Tips of fingers black as if dyed. — Vesicles 
appear on back of hands, break and discharge an acrid fluid. — Eruption like 

• small-pox ; sfoughs form on fingers*. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Gait unsteady, heavy, insecure. — Trembling of 
lower limbs, esp. of muscles of thighs, like small successive jerks. — Lowfer 
limbs prostrated, < 1. — ^Thighs weak. — Pain in r. knee extending up to hip. — 
Legs feel sore on walking as if bruised. — In 1. calf : compression, crawling.— 
Swelling of feet. — Tearing on back of 1. foot. — Chronic ulcers on feet. 



1212 SOLANUM NIG.— SOLANUM OLERA. 


24. Generalities. — Coma, convulsive agitation, plaintive cries. — I n midst 
of convulsion the children stretch out their hands, as if to grasp something, ^ 
carry them eagerly to their mouths, ahd go through the motions of mastica* 
tion and swallowing. — Most violent, convulsive agitation.— Convulsions, tetanic 
rigidity and death. — Lies on back in entire prostration, disturbed at intervals 
by spasmodic movements. — Increased distension and prominence of varicose 
veins. — All muscles sore to touch. — Bruised feeling of whole body. — Great 
sensitiveness to cold air. 

25. Skin. — Red blotches like scarlatina ; irregularly dispersed over whole 
surface. — Great swelling and intolerable itching of face, eyelids, lips, hands, 
and feet. — Hands, feet, and nose painful, swollen, and black. — Black hue 
of swollen parts ; shiny, painful. — Tlie swelling and black discoloration 
diminish together, and are followed by desquamation. — Itching burning of 
extremities. — Vesicles on back of hands ; sloughing on lingers ; blisters dis- 
charge acrid fluid over arms. — Sloughs are detached from face, but r. hand 
swells up again. — Face cleans off, but hands are again covered with hard 
and very painful crusts, which fail off and are soon replaced by new ones. — 
Swelling of feet, arms, abdomen, scrotum, and penis. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepiness ; during forenoon ; all day. — Deep sleep. — Night 
very restless, sleepless, with hallucinations and carphologia. — In middle of 
night he wakes up uttering groans, which are wrung from him by violent 
headache. — Feeling on waking as if he had lost several nights' sleep. — 
Dreams : waking him in terror, with sensation of falling from a great height ; 
of snakes. 

27. Fever. — Alternation of coldness and heat. — Flushes across face, 

3 p.m. — High fever followed by profuse sweat. — High fever, 12 p.m., with great 
pain in back of neck, shoulders, and lower limbs. — Heat, redness of face. — 
Fever, painfulness in prascordia, distension of abdomen with at times scream- 
ing and grasping at abdomen, and constipation. — Burning dry heat. — Skin 
burning, sweating.— Heat in face, hands, and along back. — Flashes of heal 
run up and down back. — Frequent sweats. — Whole body bathed in profuse 
sweat. 


Solanum Oleraceum. 

Solanum oleraceum. Juquerioba. N. 0 , Solanaceas. Tincture of 

flowers. 

Cltoieal* — Breasts, swelling of. Catarrh^ Glands, swelling of. Herpes 
Lactation, profuse. Leucorrheea. Pustules. Sleep excessive. Stye. Urticaria. 

Characteristics. — This plant, says Mure, is herbaceous, stem 
somewhat woody, the upper branches being covered with short and 
crooked thorns. It grows on the shores round Rio Janeiro in damp 
atid shady places. The most remarkable symptom of the proving was 
Swelling of the mammary gland with profuse effusion of milk” 
occurring in a negro woman of 60. Other symptoms were: ‘*Pain 
and swelling of face and throat with inflammation.” Cold feeling 



SOLANUM PSEUDO-CAPSICUM 1213 

^in left chest after drinking.” There was drowsiness with headache, 
\nd the generally deranged sleep of the other vSolanaceae. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Sad.— Irritable. 

2* Head. — Drowsy with headache. 

• 3, Eyes. — Stye on r. lower eyelid. — Pain at internal canthi of eyes. — 
Inflammation of 1 . upp%r lid. 

5. Nose. — Discharge of fetid, yellow mucus from 1 . nostril. — ^Acute 
catarrh. 

6. Face. — Pain in face.— Pain and swelling of face and throat with 
inflammation, — Continual redness of face.— Violent pain in 1 . cheek, spreading 
over whole face. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache. — Toothache at night. 

8. Mouth. — ^Tongue coated white. — Ptyalism. 

9. Throat. — Sore throat. 

10. Appetite. — No appetite. 

11. Stomach. — Difficult digestion. — Lancinating pain in stomach not 
lasting long. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Scanty urine. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Short-lasting menses. — Discharge of 
white mucus from vagina. — Swelling of mammary glands with profuse 
effusion of milk, on the second day. — Shortly after taking the drug the 
breasts of a negro woman of 60 began to swell and discharged a quantity 
of milk. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Suffocating cough. 

18. • Chest. — Sense of chilliness m 1 . side of chest, after drinking. 

20. Neck. — Swelling of cervical glands. 

Lower Limbs. — Tickling at the lower limbs. — Herpetic eruption 
o*n ankle. 

25. Skin. — Pustules all over, first white, then red, with an intolerable 
itching now and then. — Nettle-rash with fever. — Itching. 

26. Sleep. — No sleep for two nights. — Drowsy for four hours in the 
middle of the day. — Drowsy all day. — Drowsy with headache. 


» 

Solanum Pseudo-Gapsicum. 

» 

Solanum pseudo-capsicum. Jerusalem Cherry. A". 0. Solanaceaj. 
Trituration or tincture of fruit. 

Clinioal* — Pupils, dilated. Somnolence. 

Gharaotemtios* — The few symptoms of this medicine were 
observed on a child who ate three or four of the berries. 



1214 SOLANUM PSEUDO-C— SOLANUM TUB. 


SYMPTOMS. 

3. Eyes. — Dilatation of the pupils. ^ 

11. Stomach.— Nausea. 

12. Abdomen.— Very acute pains in lower abdomen. 
26. Sleep. — Somnolence. 


Solanum Tuberosum. 

Solanum tuberosum. Potato. N. 0 , Solanace<E. Tincture of the 

berries. Tincture of green potatoes. Tincture of fresh plant. 

Clinical.— Amaurosis. Cramps. Iritis, rheumatic. Stammering. Trismus. 
Tumours. 

Characteristics. — The poisonous properties of the berries and 
leaves of the potato plant are well known, and the tubers are popularly 
believed to have anti-scorbutic properties when catenas food. Under 
some conditions the tubers have been known to contain poisonous 
quantities of Solanin. The symptoms of the Schema are the result of 
eating new potatoes, green potatoes, an extract, and the berries. 
The last proved fatal in a number of instances. Sickness and 
diarrhoea with tenesmus, giddiness, dilated pupils and indistinct 
vision, a paralytic condition of the tongue, cramps, and tetanic 
spasms are the main features of the poisonings. Cooper relieved 
with a single dose of SoL /. <^ a case of rheumatic iritis. Burnett 
cured a case of tumours feeling like masses of potatoes in the 
abdomen with SoL i. ; and it assisted him in the cure of a case of 
tumours all round the cervix uteri. Uri, ur. finished this cure. 

Relations. — Compare : Solanin. In paralysis of tongue, iJulcj. 
Iritis, Bell. Stammering, Stram. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.— Almost lost consciousness. 

2 . Head. — Vertigo ; headache ; stupor. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes deep in sockets. — Staring look. — Eyes for most part 
open. — Pupils dilated. — Vision indistinct. 

6. Face. — Hippocratic face. — Expression anxious. 

8. Mouth. — Constantly spitting through the closed teeth viscid, frothy 
phlegm. — Tongue covered with brown, moist fur. — Tongue heavy, difficult to 
move ; hardly able to articulate. — Speech thick. — Speechless. , 

11. Stomach. — ^Violent retching followed by vomiting and diarrhoea. — 
Felt sick, a darkness over her eyes, skin cold, cramped all over. — Epigastric 
region sensitive to pressure. 

12. Abdomen. — ^Violent colic and vomiting. — Pain in bowels, — Tumours. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Diarrhoea with tenesmus. — Tends to relax 
bowels. 



SOLANUM TUBEROSUM ^GROTANS 1215 


^ Female Sexual Organs.-^(Tumours round cervix uteri.) 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Respiration : hurried ; irregular ; at times 
suppressed ; usually short and incomplete, only seldom slow and sighing ; 
difficult. 

19. Heart. — Pulse small, rapid, scarcely perceptible. 

21. Limbs. — Cramps, esp. in calves, with spasmodic contractions of 
fingers and thumbs. 

24. Generalities. — ^Tossing to and fro in bed. — General rigidity. — 
Patient exceedingly weak. — Faintness. 

• 25. Skin. — Skin liVid. 

27. Fever. — Skin cold. — Face, chest, and extremities cold. — Skin bedewed 
with cold, clammy sweat. 


Solanum Tuberosum iBgrotans. 

Diseased potato. Tincture of the affected tubers. 

Clinical. — Anus, prolapse of ; patulous. Breasts, painful. Breath, offensive. 
Constipation. Epistaxis. Headache. Ileus. Irritability. Menses, interrupted. 
Noma. Odour of body, offensive. Pruritus vulvae. Rectum, prolapse of. Scalp, 
painful. Sciatica. Scurvy. Skin, darkness of. Tenesmus. Tongue, cracked. 
Vertebras, pain in , pulsation in. 

Gharaoteristics. — The Potato murrain ” is characterised by 

the rapid putrescence of the leaves and haulm, which is first in- 
dicated by the presence of a little mould, Peronospora infesians^ which 
preys upon the tissues, spreading rapidly in every direction. The 
tubers also exhibit brown spots on their surface and within their 
tissues, and according to circumstances decay with greater or less 
rapidity’* {Treas, of Bot.'), In 1846 the sudden inroad of this disease 
led to the fearful famine in Ireland, which resulted in the death of 
thousands. Mure made the first proving of S. /. rr., using a potato 
“ in an entire state of decomposition, without, however, being com- 
pletely rotten.” Effects of eating diseased potatoes, some of them 
fatal, have been observed, and these have been added to Mure’s. 
The symptoms of the proving were pretty severe, and one of the 
most important — prolapse of the rectum — has been confirmed by the 
poisoning cases. A man and three children ate boiled diseased potatoes, 
and among their symptoms were these : Pain of an acute character 
was referred to the region of the anus, which on examination was 
found perfectly patulous and exquisitely tender to the touch. Two 
of the four patients had prolapsus ani, which was probably caused 
by the violent and ineffectual efforts to discharge the contents of the 
rectum. There had not been an evacuation of the bowels, nor had 
they passed water, except in drops and with extreme suffering, for 
six days. On introducing the finger into the rectum, which caused 
acute pain, it was found that the intestine was completely filled, to 
within an inch of the orifice, with a solid substance.” The foul 
odour of the diseased potato is reproduced in the breath and body- 



i2i6 solanum tuberosum ^grotans 


odour of the patients. Lips cracked and raw ; gums bleeding ; ton^e 
coated, thick, cracked ; throat inflamed and ulcerated with sensation 
of something sticking in it or a fleshy growth. In one poisoning 
case a condition of noma of left cheek was induced. Peculiar 
Sensations are : Of water splashing on head ; as if brain were leaping 
in skull (on stooping). As of something sticking in throat. As if 
there were a fleshy growth in throat. As if a spring unrolled in left 
hypochondrium. As if a hollow body were turning rapidly in chest. 
Of stoppage in trachea. Of something becoming detached from 
sacrum. The urine has an oily pellicle. Excruciating muscular 
pains. The symptoms are < by touch and pressure. Headache is 
< on waking ; by smell of alcohol ; walking at 5 p.m. ; sleeping ; 
working (headache). Cold water zs shock. 

Relations. — Mure gives the following as the closest analogues of 
S. t. ce. — the order indicates their relative importance : Bry., Ars., Pb., 
Nux, Sep., Stron., V. trie., Scil., Puls., Graph., Aim., Merc., Na. m., 
Ign., Calc. Compare : Sensation of machinery inside, Nit, ac. Con- 
stipation, black balls, Op. Prolapsus ani, Pod., Ruta. Patulous anus, 
Ap., Pho. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Quarrelsome, irritable mood. — Bad temper. — An unintel- 
ligible expression irritates her so that she would like to break everything and 
bite her hands, — Dread of work, — Hypochondriac mood. — She wants to enjoy 
a change of scenery, &c. — She fancies she is miserable, and dwells much on 
the future. — Rises in the night imagining that there arc thieves behind the 
curtain, but dares not look, asks others to do it. — Crowd of ideas. — His 
attention is easily disturbed by other things. 

2. Head. — ^Confusion, — Heat in head, evening. — Heaviness of the . head ; 
in the vertex ; on stooping and then raising head again. — Catarrhal dulness of 
head ; esp. forehead. — Sensation on stooping as if brain leaping in skull. — 
Lancinations as if brain would burst open. — Sensation of water splashing in 
head. — Headache at noon, < by the smell of spirits. — Head feels too heavy, 
she has to make an effort to support it. — Pressure above eyes, on waking. — In 
the forehead : violent pain, all day ; stitching pain ; with dulness of head, and 
disposition to fall forwards. — Slight beating in temples. — Sensation as if the 
hair would be torn out on vertex, — Painful sensitivenes of scalp and roots of 
hair ; cannot bear combing ; > after stirring about and talking. 

3. Eyes. — Prickling about the lids, the surface of which is red. — 
Spasmodic contraction and twitching of I., upper lid. — Burning in lids. — 
Prickling and burning in eyes. — Congestion of the conjunctiva. — Profuse 
lachrymation ; on waking. 

4. Ears. — Ringing in the 1 . ear. 

5. Nose. — Repeated sneezing, followed by feeble cough.— Nose-bleeds 
— Pressure at root of nose. — Smell of blood. 

d. Face. — Face hot and red. — Mounting of heat to face, now and then. 
— Red pimples on cheeks. — Desquamation of face.— Face pale, bloodless, 
much swollen, esp. about eyelids, nearly closing them. — Bluish-black, fetid 
ulcer of 1 . cheek. — Upper lip bleeding, cracked. 



SOLANUM TUBEROSUM ^.GROTANS 1217 

7. Teeth. — Swelling of mucous membrane of the inner margin of the 
‘two incisors. — Teeth loose and very painful. — Gums, esp. lower, spongy, 

oozing blood. — Teeth covered with white mucus. 

8, Mouth. — ifi-y mouth. — The mucous membrane of the velum palati 
seems to become detached here and there. — Tongue pale. — Thick tongue, 
2 a.m. — ^Tongue swollen, cracked, early in the morning; coated white or 
yellowish white ; or coated white, with red tip, or yellowish along the median 
line. — Prickling in r. half of tongue. — Breath horribly fetid, 

. 9. Throat. — Mucus accumulates in throat and seems to cover whole 
ajiterior part. — Feeling as of a fleshy growth in throat. — Feeling as if some- 
thing sticking in throat which she cannot bring up, followed by expectoration 
of a small, hard, yellowish-grey lump. — Fauces and mouth inflamed ; ulcerated 
in patches. — Inflamed fauces, unable to swallow saliva. 

10. Appetite. — Canine hunger. — Salt taste. — Taste of raw potatoes. — 
Food tastes as bitter as gall. — Great desire for spirits and oranges. — Burning 
thirst. 

11. Stomach. — Eructations followed by rumbling in stomach. — Sour 
eructations causing a cough. — Acidity, bitterness, and gulping-up, after eating. 
— Cardialgia after, breakfast, dinner, and supper. — Pain in stomach, with red 
face, after breakfast. — Spasmodic pains, griping-tearing at night. 

12. Abdomen. — Sensation as if a spring were unrolled in 1. hypochon* 
drium. — Pains and working in the bowels, early in the morning. — Painfulness 
of abdomen to contact along the median line. — Belly hard, swollen, dropsical. 
— In abdomen: pain after eating; spasmodic pains, as though the bowels 
became twisted together ; dull pains in the hypogastric region, at night ; 
pain with chilliness ; rumbling ; the clothes cause a feeling of tightness. — 
Emission of flatulence, also with colic.— Pain, as if sprained, in r. groin. — 
Stitch in r. groin near inguinal ring. 

13. . Stool and Anus. — Frequent urging to stool. — Stool scanty, with 
straining, passing off in small, black lumps (balls). — Has to strain until tears 
come. — Hard, large, lumpy stool ; with violent burning in anus and rectum. 
~^Stool hard and latgc, followed by two liipiid stools. — Copious greenish- 
yellow diarrhcxjic stool.— Constipation for five days. — Violent colic previous 
to stool. — Alternate protrusion and retraction of rectum during stool, with 
feeling of chilliness of body. — Iholapsus recti. — After stool rectum alternately 
falls and returns again. — Contraction of sphincter am. — Strong pulsations in 
perinaeum and r. ring finger. — Acute pain m anus, which was found perfectly 
patulous and exquisitely lender. — Great heat in anus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Region of bladder distended. — Difficult mic- 
turition. — Heat (and pain) in urqthra after urinating. — Constant micturition 
while at stool. — Urine reddish, mingled with mucus. — Urine: very thick, 
becoming covered with white mucus after standing ; soapy ; turbid, of a 
dingy yellow, .with copious white sediment ; turbid, dingy yellow, covered 
with an oily pellicle.— Pain in urethra, after urinating. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — ^Weight in r. testicle all day. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Twisting pains through uterus. — Feeling 
of dislocation in hip-joint with pain in womb after a slight exertion. — Flatu- 
lence presses on uterus. — Menstrual blood rose-coloured. — Suppression of the 
menses. — Menses smelling of foul fish, mixed with black coagula. — Small 

VOL. II. 78 



1218 SOLANUM TUBEROSUM ^GROTANS 


pimples and intolerable itching of labia.— Spasmodic pains striking through 
uterus.— Burning and itching in vagina. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Constriction and difficulty of breathing, 
caused by dryness of mouth. — Hoarseness on walking.— In trachea : tearing, 
prickling, with cough ; tearing, with phlegm ; sensation as of an obstacle, 
followed by cough and expectoration of a lump 6f hard, yellowish-grey 
mucus. — Cough with expectoration of yellow mucus, at night. — Dry cough, 
day and night. — Cough as from stoppage in pharynx. — Expectoration of 
lumps of black blood, early in the morning.— Constant involuntary sighing. 
— After eating choking and difficult breathing caused by dryness of mouth.— 
Suffocation owing to previous day s dinner not digesting well ; has to rise 
3 a.m. 

18. Chest. — Oppression in chest after supper. — Tearing in diest, also 
with dryness of mouth. — Sensation on making the least motion, as though a 
hollow body were turning rapidly round in chest quickly and with a noise, 
after which she fancies she will faint, early in morning. — Prickling as from a 
thousand pins on the inner surface of sternum. — Violent stitching pain above 
r. breast. — Congestions to chest.— Acute pain in 1. side, like a stitch. — Painful 
stitches in r. side. — Mammse painful, esp. when raising arm. 

19. Heart. — ^Weight and pain in heart region. — Lancinations in heart. 
—Palpitation of heart : for moments ; at night ; when lying ; when raising 
oneself ; as though the heart would turn ; with fainting feeling ; with op- 
pression of chest (less when lying) ; irregular (after eating). — Pulse : irregular ; 
sometimes weak ; hard and tense. 

20. Neck and Back. — Swelling of muscles of neck, shoulders, and 
arms with pain so acute he winces on slightest pressure. — Sense of weight 
in the back part of the neck. — Violent beating in spine, early, when lying. — 
Prickling sensation in spine, during sleep, waking her. — Stinging pain in the 
large dorsal muscle, r. side, when drawing breath. — Burning and .painful 
sensation on the fifth dorsal vertebra, caused by friction of the clothes. — 
Sensation of weariness in whole back. — Stiffness in muscles of back.— Sensa- 
tion as if something on the os-sacrum became detached. — Pain in sacrum, 
when walking or touching the part. — Tingling in sacrum. — Beating in r. 
shoulder. — Prickling in psoas muscles. — Violent beating in loins. — Pain in 
lumbar vertcbic'e, impeding walking. — Intolerable pain in lumbar region, 
obliging hei to walk bent. 

21. Limbs. — Joints swollen and very painful. — Sense of weariness in all 
the limbs on waking. — Inclination to stretch the limbs. 

22 . Upper Limbs. — Feeling of weariness in muscles posteriorly. — Pain 
as if sprained m r. upper arm, after leanipg on elbow. — Beating in middle 
portion of triceps brachealis, — (Cannot clench hands.) — Heat in hands. — 
Stinging in 1. little finger. — Beating in r. ring finger. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Acute pains hi hip-joint caused by least motion. — 
Painful pressure on hip-joint, as with an iron bar, compelling her to lie down. ' 
— In 1. gluteus muscle : beating ; pain, accompanied by loathing. — Lancina- 
tions in posterior pari of r. thigh. — Weary feeling in muscles of r. side, after 
walking. — Feeling of dislocation in hip-joint, with pain in womb, after a slight 
exertion. — Sliooting pain in posterior and inferior femoral muscles, when 
bending knee. — Beating in internal femoral muscles. — Alternate beating and 



SOLIDAGO 


1219 


throbbing above patella in both limbs. — Pain as if sprained in whole vertebral 
•column, striking through posterior parts of thigh, and extending down to 
heels. — Drawing pain in posterior part of r. lower limb, from gluteus muscle 
down to heel. — Leg? oedematous. — Shuddering of r. leg. 

24. Generalities. — A peculiar and most offensive odour immediately 
perceived on approaching the bed.— Cannot walk erect.— General and 
partial debility. — Debility, she is about to faint. — Weariness in all the limbs, 
on waking. — Pain as if bruised, in bed, preventing her from stirring. — Mus- 
cular pains excruciating. — Cold water (whether drinking it or washing with 
it) causes a sense of oppression and shock. 

25. Skin. — Skin over whole body tender, tumefied, and preternaturally 
dark. — Rose-coloured patches appear and as suddenly vanish. — Small pimples 
on the back ; causing a violent itching. — Small red pimples on cheeks. — The 
skin in the face peels off a little. — Small pimples on back violent itching. 

26. Sleep. — Irresistible drowsiness. — ^Very sleepy in evening. — Restless 
sleep. — Starting from sleep, as in affright. — Sleepless. — Confused dreams, about 
fires, revolution, corpses, thieves, &c. — Amorous dream. — He dreams that he 
is to dress or draw the body of a drowned person, but is prevented in con- 
sequence of the body falling all the time on the clothes or paper. — Dreams 
about men who become transformed to talking animals ; that his hands arc 
cut to pieces ; that he is falling from a steeple. — She dreams that she is eating 
human flesh ; that she is swimming in a river, and cannot get out of it. 

27. Fever. — Pulse irritated ; irregular; hard and tense. — Chilliness and 
sensation of internal coldness. — Repeated chilly creepings through whole 
body, in evening. — Feeling of coldness all over, unable to get warm, her 
cheeks being very red, in afternoon. — Heat all over, with sweat.— Pyrexia, 
and afterwards dropsical appearance.— Violent paroxysms of heat, suddenly 
passing through the whole body, and proceeding from the vertex. -Alternate 
burning heat and chilliness, at night, in bed. — Exhalations from the skin, when 
performing the least work. — Sweat all over, early in morning, in bed, cold 
night-sweat. — The sweat smells of potatoes, in bed. 


Solidago. 

Solidago virgaurea. Golden-rod. N. 0, Compositae (Tribe, Corym- 
biferce). Tincture of whole fresh plant. Tincture of flowers. 

(Infusion of dry leaves and flowers.) 

• 

Olinical* — Albuminuria. Calculus. Croup. Deafness Dysuna. Eruptions. 
Gout. Leucorrhoea. Ophthalmia, .scrofulous. Pho^phaturia. Prostate^ enlarged. 
Rheumatism. Sciatica. Scrofula. Urine, scanty ; suppressed. 

• • 

Gharaoteristios. — The common Golden Rod is the only British 
species of Solidago. It is common in woods and heathy thickets. “ This 
herb,” says Rademacher, “ is a very old and good kidney medicine. 
It is a specific for kidneys, and brings the patients back to the 
normal condition.” I quote from a paper by M. Gucken in H. i?,, 
iv. 205. Gucken confirms RademacheFs observations and quotes 



1220 


SOLIDAGO 


further confirmations and cures by Dr. Buck of Wurtembux^g. 
According to Buck Solid, v. is Specially Suited to scrofulous subjects, ' 
but not exclusively to them. The grand keynote of this remedy lies 
in the condition and the action of the kidneys and *ihe quality of their 
secretions. Diseases arising from or complicated with defective action 
of the kidneys are very likely to be benefited by Solid. Pain and 
tendei*ness in kidney region ; pains extending from kidneys to 
abdomen, bladder, and down limbs ; imne dark, i*ed- brown, scanty, 
thick, voided with difficulty ; albuminous, mucous, and phos- 
phatic urine — these are the leading symptoms^ Affections of any 
other parts or organs complicated witli these symptoms will pro- 
bably find their remedy in Solid. Buck mentions scrofulous inflam- 
mation of the eyes. I have seen very sharp attack of conjunctivitis 
produced in a patient who was taking Solid, for prostatic troubles. 
The following are Buck’s cases : (i) A boy, ajt. 8, had severe mem- 
branous diphtheria witli scarlet rash, which was removed by Merc. cy. 
and Bell. ; but fever of typhoid type remained. The urine was albu- 
minous and scanty, pulse weak and intermittent, feet swollen. Kali 
ars. 4 was given, but the symptoms grew worse. A thorough examina- 
tion of the patient showed great sensitiveness of the kidneys to pressure 
in spite of the otherwise apathetic condition. Solid. 3X was given, 
and in one day the urine became more profuse with corresponding 
improvement in the general condition. The boy peeled and re- 
covered completely. (2) Clei*k, 45, had sleeplessness and pain in 
the back. He casually mentioned that it took him a long time 
to urinate for want of the necessary pressure. This he attributed 
to gonorrhoea, which he had had years before. No sleep till 3 a.m., 
when he got some sleep, which was not refreshing. On rising, tired, 
especially upper part of thighs ; then would begin the pain in the 
back, which extended to the loins and lasted till bedtime. Ni^ix did 
not relieve. The urine was found dark, slimy, reddish, slightly acid, 
not albuminous. Kidneys sensitive to presume. Solid. 3X, taken steadily 
for three months, cured, A year afterwards there was a relapse, but 
this time it took the form of sciatica, and Solid, again proved to be 
the remedy. (3) Mrs. F., 53, wife of a farmer, stout, fresh-looking, 
had had her present trouble twenty-six years. After her confine- 
ment, which was difficult, and follow^ed by prolapsus uteri — still 
existing — her legs began to swell and an itching rash broke out by 
degrees. Menstruation had always come on at the proper time, but 
suddenly stopped six months before Buck saw her. Since then the 
itching had been almost intolerable, the legs more swollen, and always 
cold. Appetite very poor ; constant bitter taste in mouth, tongue 
thickly coated ; at the same time a rising from the stomach as if 
she would suffocate, and at the least exertion she lost her breath. 
Urinated very little, and mostly at night. No pains in the back, but 
the kidneys were sensitive lo pressure. The appearance of the lower 
limbs of this patient,’^ says Buck, ^Hrightened me. From knee to 
heel they formed a bluish-red mass in the shape of a stove-pipe, and 
were covered with little blotches and crusts.” The prolonged use 
of Solid. 3x, though it did not effect a cure, produced a mitigation of 
the whole body, so that the lady induced her eldest son to consult 



SOLI DAGO 


T 22 I 


^the doctor. (4) This man had also trouble in his lower limbs not 
unlike his mother^s. A year before he had had some severe throat 
trouble, after which his lower limbs began to swell and itch. They were 
also tinted blue-red and covered with vesicles, his urine was scanty, and 
his kidneys sensitive to pressure. Solid. 3X cured him in a few months. 
Gallavardin {Alcoholism., p. 131) tells of a lady who cured her 
husband, who had been compelled to use the catheter for more 
than a year, by administering an infusion of the dried leaves and 
flowers of Solid, morning and evening. He mentions the case of 
seven patients, of ages varying from 42 to 74, who had been obliged 
to catheterise themselves for weeks, months, and years, and who 
were all cured with Solid, i x. “Clear, stinking urine is an indica- 
tion of Cooper^s. 

Relations. — Compare : In prostatic and urinary affections, 
Sabah, Santa!., Hydrang., Triticum. Kidney*ache, Santal. Gonor- 
rhoea and its effects ; sciatica, Medor. 


SYMPTOMS. 

2 . Head. — Headache. 

3. Eyes. — Scrofulous, herpetic intiammation. — (Given in a case of 
prostatic enlargement it caused inflammatory redness of e3^eballs.) 

4. Ears. — Sudden deafness, with ringing in ears and albuminous urine. 

5. Nose. — Nose dry ; inner surface covered with blood-crust ; scalding 
and very scanty brown urine. 

8. Mouth. — Flat ulcers in mouth and throat. — Continuous bitter taste, 
disturbing rest, esp. at night. — Tongue heavily coated, does not become 
clean till urine becomes normal. 

12. . Abdomen. — Chronic catarrh of bowels. — Sensation of pain in 
abdomen on both sides of the navel, on deep pressure. — Flatulent distension. 
— Severe pricking in both hypochondria to region of kidneys, reaching to 
lower limbs, with bitter taste, brown urine, &c. 

13. Stool. — Diarrhoea with scanty dark urine. — Dysentery. — Costiveness. 

14. Urinary Organs. — “A very old and good kidney medicine” 
(Radcmacher). — Pains in kidneys. — Region of kidneys painful on pressure. 
— Pains in kidneys which extend forward to abdomen and bladder. — Dysuria ; 
scanty and difticult. — Urine : dark, red-brown, with thick sediment ; dark 
with sediment of phosphates ; slightly sour, neutral, or alkaline ; with 
numerous epithelial cells or small mucous particles ; epithelial cells with 
gravel of triple phosphates or phosphate of lime. — Bright’s disease. — Clear, 
stinking urine. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— {Pmlarged prostate ; obstructing flow of 

urine.) . , 

16. Female Sexual Organs* — Haemorrhage. — Chronic leucorrhoea in 
connection with copious watery urine and sediments of mucous particles and 
uriniferous tubules ; epithelium. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Heavy expectoration on coughing.— Croup, 
with little blotches on hands and diminished urine. — Chronic catarrh of 
lungs, — Continuous dyspnoea. — Periodical asthma with nightly dysuria. 



1222 


SOLIDAGO— SPHINGURUS 


i8. Chest. — Rlicuniatihiii of inlcrcoblal mubclcs. 

20. Back.— Chronic pains in loins. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Limping, dragging gait. — Rheumatic pains in legs. 
— Pains in thigh. — ’The legs can be moved horizontally, but when moved 
perpendicularly they feel lame. 

25. Skin. — Scrofulous rash. — Little blotches on hands and feet, itching 
very much. — Very obstinate itching exanthemas. — Exanthema of lower limbs 
without swelling of inguinal glands, but with disturbance in urinating (catarrh 
of kidneys). 

26. Sleep. — Insomnia. 

27. Fever. — Rheumatic fever. — ^\^ery frequent pulse. — High fever. 


Sperminum, see Orchitinum. 


Sphingurus. 

Spiggurus Martini (Mure). Histrix subspinosum. Histrix prehensilis. 
Tree Porcupine. N. 0 , Sphingurinae. Trituration of prickles 
taken from one of the sides. 

Clinical. — Hair falling out (head ; beard). Jaw-joint, pains in. Stammering. 
Zygoma, pain in. 

Characteristics. — The Old World porcupines have the name 
Histricinm, those of the New World Sphingurime. Mure proved the 
3x trituration of the prickles. The most noteworthy symptoms were — 
falling out of the hair, of whiskers especially ; pain in the jaw^-joint 
and right zygoma. Itching of the pubes after taking tea. Embar- 
rassed speech. Nausea at sight of food. The symptoms are : 
< Lying down. < After tea. > Walking in open air. > After 
dinner. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Capricious mood. — Everything is disagreeable to him, 

2. Head.— Dizziness behind the head.— Prickings on vertex. — Darting 
through 1. skull-bones.— Hemicrania.— Boring pain in skull after breakfast.— 
The hair falls off. 

3. Eyes. — Lachrymation. 

4. Ears. — Deafness in 1. ear. — ^Whizzing and buzzing in ears. 

6. Face.— Pain in articulation of jaw.— Pain in right zygoma.— 
Desquamation of whiskers. 

8. Mouth.— Bleeding of gums.— Bitter mouth, with salt taste.— 
Embarrassed speech. 

II. Stomach.— Nausea, with piercing pain in back.— Desire to vomit 
at sight of food.— Drowsy after dinner.— Constrictive pain in stomach.— Dry 
and full feeling in stomach at night.— Shootings in epigastrium. 



SPIGELIA 1223 

12. Abdomen. — Sense of fulness in abdomen, — Painful swelling of 
abdomen before dinner.— Pain around navel. 

14. Urinary Organs.— Violent pains in 1. kidney.— Pain in urethra 
after urinating, < Stooping. — Itching of pubes after taking iea. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Cough with pain in chest. 

18. Chest.— Pain in intercostal muscles. — Pain in r. side as from a plug. 

19. Heart. — Stitch in heart. 

20. Neck. — Constriction from neck to diaphragm. 

. 22. Upper Limbs. — Pain in r. arm, as if broken. — Pain at lower end of 
r.. forearm. — Pain in r.»arm as if extension were prevented by a string. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Knees give way. — Heat and numbness of feet. — 
Cracks between toes. — Lancing pain in r. big toe. 

24. Generalities. — Passing pains in toes, r. temple, and one canine 
tooth. — Weakness.— Numbness. — Symptoms < lying down ; > walking in 
open air ; > after dinner. 

25. Skin. — Itching all over with bleeding after scratching. 

26. Sleep. — Yawning. — Morning dream about a serpent. — Merry dreams. 

27. Fever, — Shuddering. —Shuddering with chattering of teeth. 


Spigelia. 

Spigelia anthelmia. Demerara Pink-root. 0 , Loganiaceae, 
'fincture of dried herb. 

Clinical.— Adenoids. Amaurosis. ptxions. Ciliary neuralgia. Cold. 

Constipation. Depression of spirits. Diaphragm, stitches in. Exophthalmic goitre. 
Eyes, ,pains in. Gastric catarrh. Glaucoma, lieadinhc. Heart, affections of. 
Hernia, inguinal. Iritis. Jaw-joint, pain in. Neiiral}lni. Otalgia. Post-nasal 
cata-rrh. Prostatori hcea. Pterygium. Rectum, cancel of. Rheumatism. Scarla- 
tina. Sigmoid flexure, cancer of. Stammering Strabismus. Tinnitus. Tobacco 
* habit. Toothache. 

Characteristics. — Spigelia anthelmia is a common weed in South 
America. : 5 . Marylandica, Pink-root’’ or Worm-grass,” is a native 
of the Southern States of North America. Spigel. anth. is an acro- 
narcotic. It was known in Europe in Hahnemann’s time as an 
anthelmintic, this property of the drug having been learned from 
the negroes of the Antilles. Hahnemann’s proving (M. M, P.) 

revealed many other virtues. He says of the plant that it has 

this peculiarity : the primary action of a single unrepeated dose 
usually increases somewhat daily during the first seven to ten 
days, so that pure experiments with it should be conducted with 
caution, seeing that 60, 80, tq 100 drops of the tincture produce 
violent effects even in robust persons. Violence is a note of the 

Spigelia action. The pains are intense, and it produces pains in 
all parts. It is a neuralgia remedy par excellence. I was once 
written to by a patient in the country, and the only definite points 
that I could make out of the case were that there was neuralgia and 
^ that it affected the left side. I ordered Spi., and it speedily cured. 



1224 


SPIGELIA 


Spi. is more left-sided than right, but by no means exclusively left- 
sided. The pains are burning, jerking, tearing, pressing and stitching ; 
they radiate and extend to other parts ; are < by noise, jar, movement ; 
change of weather — especially stormy w^eather. Fiead, eyes, face, 
teeth, and heart are the principal seats of Spi, action. Hochecker 
(H, R., X. 147) relates the case of Miss 0 ., 27, blonde, tall, robust, who 
had neuralgia for several weeks, without traceable cause. Pains came 
suddenly, twitching and tearing of left side of face, now in ear, 
then in lower jaw, and were particularly < by mastication. A 
peculiarity was that whenever the pains were about to commence a 
diarrhoea set in. A single powder of Spi 6 cured. Hochecker also 
cured with Spi 3, 6, 10, and 20 a case of tic-douloureux of right side 
of fifteen months' duration. In this case each lower attenuation after 
first relieving caused an aggravation. That was why the attenuations 
were successively raised. Spi, 20 completed the cure. This patient 
had dark hair and dark complexion. She attributed her trouble to 
taking cold in a draught when heated by dancing. Sensitiveness to 
cold, to wet and stormy weather, is one of the notes of Spi. The left- 
sidedness of Spi. is shown in its affinity for the heart. Sometimes the 
heart, eyes, and head are affected together. A case is quoted in H. 
(xxii. 417) in which there were darting and aching pains in head, 
nose, and eyes, and similar pains about the heart with slow^, irregular 
action, but no murmur. Vertigo on stooping and heat of head. 
Sudden pains at bottom of back. The pains were < night and morning 
and in damp w^eather. In one prover the accustomed evening smoke 
caused violent toothache. I cured with Spi. a case of cardiac neuralgia 
caused by tobacco. I have frequently seen cardiac murmurs appearing 
in acute rheumatism disappear under Spi. In the eye, neuralgias, 
inflammation, amaurotic conditions, glaucoma presenting the symptoms 
of Spi. have been cured with it. The pains of Spi. are largely out- 
pressing, and proceed from within outward and below upward. A 
migraine comes from occiput and settles in or over left eye. In the 
eyes themselves there aie intolerable pressive pains < on motion ; 
but there are also stabbing pains through eye backivards into brain. 
The combination of heart and eye symptoms marks Spi. as the remedy 
in many cases of exophthalmic goitre. The anthelmintic properties 
of Spi. must not be lost sight of by homeopaths. It has the cardiac 
symptoms of helminthiasis : itching of anus and nose, colic, and bor- 
borygmus. Hering gives this case : “ Helminthiasis : dilated pupils ; 
strabismus ; putrid smell from mouth, itching of nose, griping pain 
in belly ; throat inflamed, swallows often, pale redness in throat and 
swelling of mucous membrane ; palpitation." Masses of lumbrici have 
been expelled and also threadworms. Fetid breath and fetid flatus are 
marked features of Spi. There is both constipation and diarrhoea. 
I have found it especially useful in heart cases where constipation 
has been a troublesome complication! The bodily sensitiveness of 
Spi is paralleled by the mental irritability. But the most peculiar 
mental symptom is ^^fear of pointed things as pins, &c." Meninger 
(/ 4 , H.y XX. 282) had a severe case of nausea of pregnancy which he 
cured with Spi. The only leading symptom in the case was this : 
She was afraid of pointed things and asked her husband to take away a 



SPIGELIA 


1225 


fork, crochet-needle, &c. {Sil. has a somewhat similar symptom, but 
the SiL patient hunts for pins although afraid of them.) Spi. cor- 
responds to rheujpatism as well as to heart affections the consequence 
of rheumatism. A patient whom I successfully treated for a serious 
heart affection with Spu 3 told me that under the treatment he had 
lost a pain in the right knee which he had had for eighteen months, 
and which he had not mentioned to me at first. The pain was as if 
dislocated ; unable to rise from kneeling ; cannot find an easy posi- 
tion, often for hours at night. Peculiar Sensations of Spi. are : As if 
he would fall. As if intoxicated. As if head would burst. As of a 
band around head. As if head tightly bound. As if electric sparks 
in temples. Brain as if loose. As if nerves being cut with a fine 
instrunxent in forehead and temple. As if eye would be pushed out 
of head. As if hairs or feathers on lashes. Upper lids as if para- 
lysed. Eyeballs as if too large. As if sand in eyes. As if needles 
thrust into eyeball. As if eye w^ould be pressed out of socket. As if 
eye would fly into pieces. As if eye were being pulled forward and 
backward. Pain in eye as if it would drive him crazy. As if ear 
loosely stopped or a thick mist before it. As if back of nose w^ere 
lightly touched by hair, or as if a gentle wind were blowing across it. 
Face feels as if it had been scorched. As if all muscles of left side 
of face from head to neck and left axilla were pierced with red-hot 
needles. Teeth as if too long. As if left side of lower jaw would be 
torn out of its joint. Sensation resembling purring of cat. As of a 
worm rising in throat. As of a half fluid body ascending in throat. 
As of a hard lump in throat. As if abdomen would burst. As if all 
intestines would be constricted. Suffocating as if from a quantity of 
water poured into windpipe. Pulse as if a thread pulled through 
arteries. As if heart compressed or squeezed with a hand. As if 
heart being crushed. As if everything in chest w^erc too short, loose, 
and vrabbling about. As if something tearing in chest. In left scapula 
sensation as though blood dripping through a valve. Spi. is Suited 
Ho : Anajmic, debilitated subjects, of rheumatic diathesis ; to scrofu- 
lous children afflicted with ascarides and lumbrici ; to persons with 
light hair ; pale, thin, bloated, weak ; with wrinkled, yellow, earthy 
skin. The body is painfully sensitive to touch, the part touched feels 
chilly ; touch sends a shudder through the whole frame. Spi. is a sun 
remedy : headache beginning at sunrise, at its height at noon, declining 
to sunset. In chest affections there are stitching pains synchronous 
with the pulse. Stammering : repeats first syllable three or four times ; 
with abdominal ailments ; with helminthiasis. The symptoms are 
< by touch. Contact and pressure of clothes is unbearable. 
(Pressure > neuralgia.) < Jarring; hard step. Rest>. Motion <. 
Moving, shaking head <. Moving eyes <. Moves very carefully. 
Lying with head high ; or on right side >. < Rising ; stooping; bend- 
ing forward. > Whilst eating, < immediately after. Warmth > ; 
(< headache). Open air = pain in eyes ; > headache. < Slightest 
draught ; cold, damp, rainy, stormy weather ; cold air ; cold washing ; 
(cold application > neuralgia temporarily). < Morning on waking. 
Pain increases and defines with sun. < (Also sometimes » from 
•tobacco. Opening niouth < headache. 



1226 


SPIGELIA 


'ReldAions.—Aniidoted by : Camph., Aiir. (restlessness in limbs) ; 
Cocul.^ Puls. Antidote to : Merc., Colch. (heart). Compatible : Aco. 
^endocarditis) ; Ars., Dig., K. ca., Zn. (heart) ; Iris (prosopalgia) ; 
Arn. (carbuncle). Compare: Botan. Nux, Ign., Curar. Pains; left 
eye, Aco. Neuralgia in left eye, Ther. Headaches, coming and going 
with sun, Na. m., Sang., Tab. Neuralgia, Act. r. (Act. r. < right). 
Catarrhs, Puls. Eye pains, Bell. (Bell, more right-sided ; more con- 
gestion). Heart pains ; w’hite stools, Dig. Ciliary neuralgia, Ced., 
Mez. (mercurial), Thuj. (pains go up and backwards). Stitches in heart, 
Hep., Na. m., K. ca., Ars., Caust. Headache begms occiput and goes 
to left eye (Sang, to right ; Sil. to both). Tic-douloureux, Thu., 
Coccin. Aversion to be washed, Ant. c., Clem., Hep., Rhus, Sep., Sul. 
Faintness connected with stool, Ap., Nux m., Pul., Ver. (with scanty 
stool, Crot. t., Dulc., Ox. ac.. Pet., Sars., Sul.). Neuralgia with pallor 
^dth redness, Bell.). Nausea at sight of food, Colch., Lyc., Mosch., 
Ph. ac., Saba. Worms, Saba., Cin., Teuc., Scirrh., Stn. < Moving 
head, Sol. n. Coughing, loud speech head pains, Bry., Caps., 
Nat. m., Sul. Illusions of vision, Cycl. (Cycl. when with any trouble, 
headache, sick stomach, &c., one always sees countless stars). < Tight 
clothing, Lach. Contraction of fingers. Gels., Guaiac. Sensitive- 
ness to touch, K. ca. As if eyes too large, Act. r., Comoc. Sensation 
of band round heart, Cact., Carbl. ac., Sul. Post-nasal catarrh, 
offensive, causing choking at night, Hdrast. Scirrhus of sigmoid 
flexure or rectum, atrocious, unbearable pain, Alumen. Dyspnoea, 
must lie on right side with head high, Cact., Spo. Toothache from 
tobacco, Plant. Teste puts Spi. in his Arn. group ; he considered it 
a chronic of Arn. 

Causation.— Chill. Tobacco. 

SYMPTOMS. 

L 

1. Mind. — Sadness and discouragement. — Agitation and anxiety, with 
restless care concerning the future. — ^Timidity. — Afraid of pointed things, 
pins, &c. — Sits as if lost in thought, stares at a single point. — Moroseness, to 
the extent of suicidal mania. — Great dejection in evening; he could have 
killed himself (with chilliness of body). — Weakness of memory.— Absence 
of ideas. — Difficulty of thinking. — Unfitness for intellectual labour. 

2. Head. — Head confused, as from intoxication or dizziness. — Giddi- 
ness when looking downwards. — ^Vertigo, to such an extent as to fall down 
when walking, standing, or looking down. — ^Vertigo, with nausea. — Head- 
ache, on shaking head, with vertigo, and sensation of heaviness. — Neuralgic 
pains flying from one part to another. — Headache beginning in cerebellum, 
morning, spreading over 1. side of head, causing violent and pulsating pain in 
1. temple and over 1. eye, with stitches tn left eye ; returning periodically. 
Painfulness of cerebellum with stiffness of neck. — Stitches in 1. side of head 
and out of 1. eye. — Headache like a heaviness ; on drawing the facial muscles 
it seems as though the skull would burst upward and asunder. — Fine bur- 
rowing-tearing pains in brain, esp. violent in 1, parietal bone ; < on false 
step. — Sharp shaking just behind and above r. frontal eminence. — Pressivc 
pain in r. side of head involving r. eye, morning in ^d, < after rising ; pain* 



SPIGELIA 


1227 


deeply seated, unaffected by pressure, very acute on motion ; on suddenly 
turning head brain seemed loose ; < every jar, step, even straining at stool. 
— Stitches like eleijtric sparks in head. — Pains in head < by slightest move- 
ment, by least noise, and by opening mouth. — Headaches are < from least 
noise ; > when lying with head high, and from washing head with cold 
water, — Painful tenderness of the occiput, with sensation of numbness and 
stiffness in nape of neck. — Periodical headaches. — Pressing asunder in head, 
esp. in r. temple ; < from motion and opening mouth ; > while at rest. — 
Pressure in head, compressive or expansive, < by stooping. — Sensation of a 
tight band around heAd. — Pain, as if head about to burst, when coughing and 
speaking loud, — Tearing, digging, or boring headache from within to with- 
out, ill forehead, vertex, or cerebellum, < during movement. — Sensation of 
sorene^ in forehead and vertex.-— Tearing in forehead in paroxysms, with 
fixed eyes. — Pulsative lancinations in forehead, with noise as of hammering 
before the ears. — Commotions and blows in head, while walking in open air. 
— Shaking in brain at every step, and at every movement of head. — Burning 
pain in exterior of forehead and temples as far as eyes. — Tension in scalp. — 
Painful tenderness of scalp when touched ; < when moving the scalp. — 
Head feels too large. 

3. Eyes. — Neuralgia of eyes, esp. where there is great soreness, and can 
scarcely bear a touch ; affections of the eyeball ; eyelids ; optic nerve ; dilated 
pupils ; ocular illusions — sees strange things, fiery, luminous rays, sparks, &c. 
— On shutting eyes a sea of fire appears. — Illusion as if hairs or feathers on 
lashes ; < on moving them.— Impending amaurosis. — Pains in eyes, deeply 
seated in sockets. — Aching (pressure) in the eyeballs, esp. when turning them. 
— Pains in the eyes during movement, as if eyeballs w’ere too large.— Digging, 
boring, and shootings in eyes, penetrating into head, sometimes with pain, 
which drives to despair. — Pains as if needles thrust into r. eyeball.— Move- 
ment of eyes and muscles of face < the pains. — Tingling in eyes. — Itching in 
r. eyeball, returning after rubbing, — Dry heat and burning sensation in eyes, 
wKich forces them to close. — Redness of sclerotica, with injection of blood- 

• vessels. — Inflammation of eyes and of cornea. — Inflammation and ulceration 
of lids, with smarting pain as from excoriation. — Eyes confused and dull. — 
Profuse lachrymation. — Acrid, smarting tears. — Great sensitiveness oj eyes to 
light. — Hanging down of lids as from paralysis. — Sensation as of a hard sub- 
stance under r. upper lid, > by rubbing. — Violent burrowing stitch in middle 
of eye and in inner canthus that does not prevent vision, but presses upper 
lid down. — Upper lids feel hard and immovable. — Pain as if 1 . orbit were 
pressed from above downward. — Tendency to wink. — Weakness of eyes ; in 
whatever direction they are turned they remain.— Difficulty in raising the 
eyelids, with painful sensation of stiffness. — Contraction and involuntary 
movement of eyes. — Squint ; convergent. — “ A dose of Spigel, always pro- 
duced squiiit in us when children” (American lady's testimony.— R. T. C.).— 
Strabismus whether from worms or not (Macfar Ian).— Pupils dilated.— Loss 
(momentary suspension) of sight. — Presbyopia. 

4. Ears.— Earache with an ichorous, scalding discharge ; hearing very 
sensitive ; noise in the ear as of something fluttering. — Pain in margin of 1 . 
concha,— Drawing in 1. antitragus. — Itching in r. concha.— Pressive pains in 

^ r, ear. — Otalgia, with pressive, troublesome pain, as if there were a plug in 



1228 


SPIGELIA 


ear.— Jerking tearing in ears.— Squeezing, itching, and burning sensation 
in external ear.— Itching in r. vesicle.— Stoppage of ears, with or without 
dysecoia. — Periodical deafness. — Sensation of distant ringing in ears, with 
sensation as if the ear were loosely stopped or a thick mist were in front of 
it.— Roaring, buzzing, and pulsation in ears. — Noise of hammering before 
ears. 

5. Nose. — Itching in nose, with tickling.— Tickling on back of nose, as 
if lightly touched by hairs, or as if a gentle wind were blowing across it. — 
Tingling, shooting, boring, smarting and itching in nose. — Herpetic eruption 
on nose with pain, as from excoriation. — Stoppage anti dr3mess of anterior- 
nose, with copious discharge of whitish and yellowish mucus from posterior 
nares. — Frequent sneezing ; discharge of bloody mucus. — Mucus at one time 
white, at another lime yellow, is discharged from nose ; at same time much 
mucus is discharged from mouth. — Fluent coryza, which recurs frequently, 
esp. after slightest chill. 

6 . Face. — Face pale and wan, with yellow circles round eyes. — Redness 
of face ; perspiration on face.— Cheeks and lips at one time a deep red, at 
another time pale. — Burning in r. side of upper lip. — Bloatedness of face, esp, 
after sleeping. — Facial muscles seem distorted and swollen, morning on 
rising. — Prosopalgia (mostly l.-sided). — Jerking tearings, burning sensation, 
and aching in region of zygomatic process ; or violent pains, which cannot 
bear the slightest touch or least movement, with shining swelling of side 
affected. — Periodical neuralgia ; from morning until sunset ; < at noon ; 
< from motion or noise. — Semilateral pains in face, with prrecordial anxiety 
and great agitation. — Exosto.sis of the temporal part of the orbit. — Lips tense 
and burning. — Small blackish pimples on upper lip, — Pressive pain in angle 
of lower jaw, as if in the jaw or in the teeth, proceeding from the ear. — 
Tearing in lower jaw, radiating to ear and about it as far as nape ; could 
not move head without pain. — Pain as if r. side of lower jaw would be torn 
out of its joint, only w’hen chewing. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache (in evening) after customary smoke in evening. 
— Toothache > by tobacco smoke. — Pain, like pressing asunder, in the teeth, * 
immediately after a meal, or at night, which does not permit continued lying 
down. — Toothache so that he was unable to sleep at night ; it drove him out 
of bed; not during day, except just after eating, not while eating. — Toothache 
> by W’armth of bed. — Toothache like a pressure outward ; < lying on r. 
side. — Jerking toothache, or with pulsative tearings, esp. in carious teeth, <[ 
by cold water after eating or by contact with the open air ; )> whilst eating 
and when lying down. — Toothache with prosopalgia, paleness and bloated- 
ness of face, yellowish circles round eyes, palpitation of heart, shivering and 
agitation. 

8. Mouth. — Offensive exhalation from the mouth, noticed only by 
others. — (Stinging) lancinating dryness in» mouth on waking in -morning. — 
Much white, frothy saliva in mouth. — ^White or yellow mucus in mouth 
and palate. — Tongue cracked. — Vesicles, with burning pain, on tongue and 
palate.— Took away the pain of cancer of tongue (Bayes, H, IV,, xviii. 3). 

Q. Throat. — Sore throat, with lancinations and swelling in palate. — 
Discharge of mucus from fauces all day, most from posterior nares. — Cervical 
glands swollen. 



SPIGELIA 


1229 


10. Appetite. — Putrid, fetid taste. — Anorexia, with violent thirst. — 
Repugnance to tobacco-smoke and snuff.— Dislike to coffee. — Bulimy, some- 
times with nausea and thirst. 

11. Stomaclf. — Risings after every meal. — Sour risings. — Nausea (in the 
morning) when fasting, with a sensation as if something were ascending from 
stomach into throat. — Accumulation of mucus in the stomach. — Pressure in 
stomach and scrobiculus as from a heavy body (as from a hard lump). — Lan- 
cinations in pit of stomach and diaphragm, sometimes with obstructed 
respiration. — Dull stitches in pit of stomach, < from inspiration, with 
oppression of the ch^st. — Inability to bear tight clothing round scrobiculus ; 
‘the least contact causes anguish, with redness and heat of face, and sensation 
as if something were torn away in chest. 

12 . Abdomen. — Griping in abdomen, as if intestines constricted, with 
anxiety and difficult breathing. — Abdomen hard, and painfully tight, — Stitches 
in region of diaphragm, 1. side, arresting breathing. — Pressure in umbilical 
region, as by a hard body. — Colic, with pinching pains, cuttings (from worms) 
in the umbilical region, with shivering, diarrhcea, and copious secretion of 
urine. — Lancinations (stitches) in the abdomen. — Tensive pain in the groins 
when touched. — Grumbling and borborygmi in the abdomen. — Painful pres- 
sure in lower abdomen, as if it would burst, esp. in evening before a soft 
stool; sometimes > after. — Expulsion of fetid flatus. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Frequent, urgent, and ineffectual want to 
evacuate. — Soft, liquid faeces. — White stools daily. — Nodular stool with 
violent pressure. — Faints during stool. — Hard, difficult evacuations, with 
much mucus. — Discharge (of large lumps) of mucus from anus, without 
evacuation. — Liquid diarrhoea of faecal matter and of mucus. — Diarrhoea, 
with pinchings in abdomen and coldness in body. — Discharge of fasces with 
worms. — Ejection of lumbrici and ascarides from rectum. — Itching and sen- 
sation as if something were creeping in rectum and anus, — Boring stitches in 
periiiaeum. — (Scirrhus of sigmoid or rectum, atrocious, unbearable pains. — 
H»C. Allen), 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine, with whitish sediment.— Frequent want 
to urinate, with profuse emission, even at night. — Sudden and involuntary 
dribbling of urine, with burning sensation in anterior part of urethra, — 
Discharge of prostatic fluid from the urethra. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Tingling round glans penis. — Semilateral 
swelling of glans. — Erections, with lascivious ideas, without voluptuous excite- 
ment. — (Discharge of prostatic fluid.)— Itching stitch in r. testicle and penis, 
from behind forward. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Catarrh, with hoarseness, continual dis- 
charge of mucus from nose* dry heal without thirst, prominent eyes, 
distressing headache, and disposition to weep. — Nocturnal catarrh, with 
cough.— Cough in open air, with pain in chest as from excoriation. — Dry 
cough, violent and hollow, caused by irritation low down in trachea, with 
respiration obstructed, even to suffocation. — Short, dry cough causing sore- 
ness of chest. — Shortness of breath, esp. when talking, with anxiety and 
redness of cheeks and lips. — Dyspneea when moving in bed ; can only lie 
on r. side ; or with the head very high.— Danger of suffocation on least 
movement, and esp. on raising arms. 



1230 


SPIGELIA 


18. Chest. — Achin^i at the chest, with painful oppression.— Contraction 
of chest, with anguish and obstructed respiration.— Stitches in diaphragm 
with dyspnoea. — Noise in the chest like that made by a spinning-wheel, esp. 
in region of heart. — Pressure, burning or incisive sensation, pain, as from 
ulceration and tearing in chest, csp. on lifting arms. — Cutting tearing beneath 
1. nipple, extending to region of scapulae and upper arm, < during inspira- 
tion and deep breathing. — Sensation of trembling in thorax, < by moving 
arms. — Spasmodic sensation in chest, proceeding from pit of stomach and 
causing choking. — Tensive lancinations in chest, esp. when drawing breath. 

19. Heart. — ^Violent palpitation of heart, perceptible to sight and hearing, 
often with anxious oppression of chest, < by curving chest forwards and by 
sitting down. — Noise in chest, like that made by a spinning-wheel, esp. in 
region of heart. — Sudden attack of suffocation, with palpitation of he^rt and 
anguish. — Heavy aching in region of apex, with feeling as if a dull-pointed 
knife were slowly driven through it. — (Organic diseases of the heart; rubbing, 
bellows sounds.) — Sensation in heart as if squeezed with hand ; as if crushed. 
— Lancinations in region of heart. — Stitches in heart, sometimes synchronous 
with the pulse. — Sensation of trembling in heart. — The beatings of the heart 
do not correspond with those of the pulse. — Pulse weak, irregular, trembling. 
— Undulating movement of the heart. — In affections of the heart, particularly 
if the whole 1. side is sore from the affection, and possibly the eyes also 
from sympathy ; purring of heart as of a cat ; palpitation of the heart with 
anguish ; trembling pulsation of the heart ; sympathy of the chest with heart 
troubles. — (Visible pulsation of heart. — ^Violent, oppressive action of heart ex- 
tending to top of head. — Tumultuous action of heart in acute rheumatism and 
other acute disorders. — R. T. C.) 

20. Neck and Back. — Needle-like stitches in upper dorsal vertebrae; 
in r. scapula. — Sensation in 1. scapula as though blood were dripping through 
a valve, a kind of bubbling. — Red pimples on neck, with pain as from excoria- 
tion when touched. — Hard and painful swelling of glands of the neek. — Pains 
in nape, < when still, > by motion. — Intermittent drawing in posterior cervical 
muscles and up to occiput. — Sticking pain in r. side of neck ; on swallowing, ^ 
pain in parotid gland. — Itching of anus and coccyx. — Pain in back as from 
a fracture, also during movement. — Bruised feeling in spine, even during 
rest. — Lancinations (stitches) in back, sometimes on drawing breath. 

21. Limbs. — Fatigue, — Drawing, tearing, twitching pains in limbs and 
joints. — The limbs are affected mostly when walking. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Heaviness and trembling of arms. — Easy numbing 
of arms and hands. — Jerking of muscles of arms and forearms. — Violent lan- 
cinations and shocks in bend of elbow and joints of hands and fingers. — 
Spasmodic drawings and tearings in bones oPMiands. Hard nodosities in the 
palms, with burning itching. — Hands of a pale yellow colour. — Contraction 
of fingers.— Purulent pimples on fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pain, as of a fracture, tension and shootings in 
thighs, almost exclusively, when walking, or during rapid movements. — 
Stitches in the joints of the legs and feet and in the thigh, — Violent lancina- 
tions in knee on bending it. — Painful stiffness in knee-joint. — Lancinating 
shocks in joints of feet. — Excrescences, like warts, on toes. 

24. Generalities. — [Very violent neuralgia, followed by an extreme sore- 



.SFIGELIA MARILANDICA 


1231 


ness ; boring pains ; pains as if parts were pushed or pressed asunder, or as if 
they would burst ; sensation of extension in size ; feeling as of a lump in the 
inner parts ; darting pains in inner and outer parts ; darting pain from within 
outward ; in the jdtnts; pains of a dragging or rooting character. — Affections 
in general of r. side of face and nose ; stool with maw-worms (oxyuris ver- 
micularis); discharge of urine too copious, sensitiveness of outer parts; 
aversion to washing ; trembling pulse that can scarcely be counted. — < On 
stooping ; when blowing nose ; during expiration ; after rising from a seat ; 
ffom touching the parts affected ; when walking in open air ; from having 
worms, — > While taking an inspiration.— H. N. G.]. — Arthritic, shooting, or 
tearing pains in the limbs. — Stinging pain in the limbs and principally in the 
joints. — Tearing in the vicinity of the joints, as if the bone were scraped. — 
Heaviness and soreness in the body when rising from a seat. — Sensitiveness 
of body to touch, with chilliness of the parts touched ; or it sends a shudder 
through whole body. — Great weakness, esp. mornings. — Heaviness and sen- 
sation in limbs as if fractured. — Convulsions. — Lassitude, esp. after slight 
exercise, and in open air. — Syncope, esp. when making an effort to evacuate, 
or in a warm room. — Great sensitiveness to cold air, with sufferings from 
walking in open air. — Great liability to suffer from a chill. 

25. Skin. — Pale, wrinkled skin of body. — Painful sensibility of entire 
skin when touched. — Painful glandular swellings.— Red pimples, with pain, 
as from excoriation, when touched. 

26. Sleep. — Strong disposition to sleep by day, and also in morning or 
evening ; but without sleeping until long Jifter lying down. — Sleep at night, 
unrefreshing, agitated, with uneasiness in limbs. — Heavy, stupefying sleep. — 
Confused dreams, which cause him to awake wearied, and which he cannot 
remember. 

27. Fever. — Pulse irregular, generally strong, but slow. — Trembling 
pulse. — Frequent shiverings, esp. in morning or during slight exercise. — 
Chill, frequently returning at the same hour in the morning. — Chill, alter- 
naHng with heat or perspiration. — Chilliness on some part of the body, on 

• others heat. — The chill e.xtcnds from the chest. — Frequent heat, sometimes 
transient. — Heat, esp. in back. — Heat in face and on hands, with chill in 
back. — Thirst for beer dining the heat (with flushes of heat at night).— At 
night putrid perspiration with heat at same time.— Clammy perspiration. — 
Cold perspiration. 


Spigelia Marilandica. 

> 

Spigelia Marilandica. Pink-root Worm-grass. M. 0. Loganiaceae. 

Tincture of root. 

* * 

Clinical.— Mania. Stiahismus (r.). 

Characteristics. — The symptoms of Sp/. ///. are mainly from 
overdosing. A state of mania was induced in a boy from large and 
frequent doses of a decoction of the root. Strabismus of right eye was 
noted in one case. 



1232 SPIGELIA MAR— SPIR^A ULMARIA 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.—Suddcnly affected with complete mental derangement, 
exactly like that of Siram.y countenance distorted, running and skipping, 
fits of laughing and crying, pupils greatly dilated, talk wild and incoherent, 
(lasted 2411.). 

2. Head. — Vertigo. 

3. Eyes. — Wild, staring, ludicrous expression. — Irregular movement of 
adductors and abductors of eyes. — Strabismus of r. eye. — Pain in and about the 
eyes. — Sensation of stiffness of eyelids. — Pupils dilated.^ 

6, Face. — Much swelling of face and about eyes. — Face flushed. 

8. Mouth. — ^Tongue pointed and tremulous. 

19. Heart. — Pulse : accelerated; irregular. 

24. Generalities. — On attempting to assume erect position, seized 
with general tremor lasting a few seconds and leaving her exhausted. 

26. Sleep. — Drowsiness. 

27. Fever. — Skin hot and dry. 


Spiraea Ulmaria. 

Spiraea Ulmaria. Queen of the Meadows. Meadow-sweet. N, 0 . 

Rosaceae. Tincture of fresh root. 

Clinical. — Conscientiousness, morbid. Convulsions. Epilepsy. Eyelids, 
affections of. Hydrophobia. Oesophagus, stricture of. Ptosis. Urine, deposits in. 

Characteristics. — Bojanus proved Spircca, taking substantial 
doses. A leading symptom was the production of hcafj general, and 
local. Heat in throat ; in oesophagus ; under manubrium sterni; under 
ensiform cartilage. Bojanuswasseized with remorse, a kind of morbid 
conscientiousness. Fulness and heaviness of head. Washing with 
cold water was very unpleasant, and caused a feeling as if the head 
were too large. A scurfy condition of eyelids and heaviness of lids 
after siesta were noted. The urine was turbid as if mixed with 
clay, and deposited red sand ; had an oily film on the surface. 
Hansen mentions Spii\ as having been x*ecommended in hydrophobia, 
epilepsy, and eclampsia. The burning in oesophagus was > by eating 
and drinking but not by empty swallowing. %mptoms were < 
indoors ; > in open air. < Moving head. < Sneezing. > Moving 
about. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.-— At i a.m, was attacked with remorse over a long-past slight 
indiscretion, with most fearful qualms of conscience and loathing of himself ; 
could not rest on account of it, obliged to rise and walk about. 

2 . Head. — Vertigo with heat in cheeks. — Headache : < shaking head ; 
with increased warmth of body, as if blood flowing more rapidly through 
vessels ; > towards evening. Dulness and heaviness in head with pressive 



. SP1R^.A ULMARIA 


1233 


headache. — On lying down at 1 1 p.m, sensation like vertigo, as if all senses 
vanished and all blood left the head, with a prickling in face. — Pain over 
whole head as if a ryig were tightened about head with heaviness ; on shaking 
head, brain seemed to wabble to and fro.— After washing, licad felt large. — 
Pressive headache and fulness in forehead, < in house, > in open air. 

3. Eyes.— Eyes full of mucus, dried to crusts on waking.— Lachrymation 
of 1. eye, increased warmth in it ; sclerotic bright red. — On waking lids so 
heavy cannot open them for a long time. — Sensation as if something hot 
mounted to eyes, causing biting and burning and sensation as if tears would 
flow, but they did not. ' 

6. Face. — Face red. — Sensation as if blood mounted to face with 
increased heat. 

8 . Mouth. — Slight drawing toothache in 1. back teeth. 

9. Throat. — Increased warmth in pharynx, extending down to stomach ; 
burning pressure in oesophagus, generally > at night; > eating and drinking, 
not on empty swallowing.— Sensation as if oesophagus too small, constricted. — 
Cold sensation in oesophagus extending to both sides of chest. — Warmth in 
oesophagus opposite the manubrium sterni. 

11. Stomach. — No relish for smoking. — Frequent eructations. — Burning 
in small spot beneath ensiform cartilage as if something hot or acrid had 
been taken. 

12. Abdomen. — Frequent emission of very offensive flatus. — Movings 
and gripings in hypogastnuni during stool. — After eating moving in navel. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Pi ickling, crawling, sticking m rectum and anus. — 
Prickling, constrictive sensation long after stool. — Frequent desire for stool, that 
suddenly disappeared. — Stool delayed, evacuated wnth pressure and straining, 
hard, scanty, like sheep’s dung. — About 10 p.ni. somcwiiat hard stool, accom- 
panied and followed by binning and soreness in the anus, and a sensation as 
if the anus were drawn up into rectum and something hard were still remain- 
ing there. 

Urinary Organs. — Burning at orifice of urethra while ui mating 
during stool. — Urine bright yellow when passed, becomes cloudy, forming 
a deposit like clay with red, gntty sand. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — In morning in bed, violent erections with 
great sexual desire. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — At 7 p.m. cough, at first dry, afterwards 
loose, with tickling and scraping in throat, that continued long after the 
cough. — On inspiration air of room seemed very cold as if he had been 
chewing peppermint. 

18. Chest. — Pressure beneath manubrium sterni as if he had swallowed 
too large a morsel ; or a large piece of hard-boiled egg. 

19. Heart. — Pulse : hard and tense ; weak, soft ; small, contracted, hard, 
afterwards fuU and large. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Cramp m muscle of forearm on lifting anything. — 
Veins in hands distended. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Heaviness in lower limbs as if full, esp. on ascend- 
ing steps. 

24. Generalities. — In afternoon, exhaustion with stretching and yawn- 
ing. — Discomfort after siesta. 

VOL. II. 


79 



1234 SPIR^.A ULMARIA— SPIRANTHES 


26. Sleep. — Overpowering sleepiness, heaviness in limbs and dulness of 
head.— Difficult falling asleep in evening ; restlessness, frequent waking.— 
Dreams : vivid during midday nap ; in evening lascivious and emission. 

27. Fever. — Great heat over whole body. — Heat like rush of blood to 
head and face. — While eating, and after, heat over whole body and rush of 
blood to head, with slight outbreak of sweat on chest, face, and hands. 


Spiranthes. 

Spiranthes autumnalis. Lady^s Tresses. N. 0 . Orchidaceae. Tincture 

of the root. 

Cllnloal.— Breasts, painful. Breath, putrid. Burns. Coryza. Dysparunia. 
Eczema. Hysteria. Kidneys, pain in. Lumbago. Milk, excessive. Skin, affections 
of. Vision, dimness of. 

Characteristics. — The genus to which this orchid belongs 
received its name from the spiral arrangement of the flowers. The 
tuberous roots of Spir, auhinu were formerly esteemed as an aphro- 
disiac ” (Treas, of BoL), The tincture of the root was proved by 
Dr. Patti Chagon, Due de Sorentino, who says of it : “ The action of 
this drug begins with decided symptoms of inflammation of the eyes, 
chin, chest, which become red and hot ; the whole skin is dry and 
hot ; the hands are burning, the extremities of the feet are cold most 
of the time ; there is a sensation of oppression and heat, with palpita- 
tion and a desire to uncover.” This condition lasted two hours and 
gave place to others, including desire to meditate and complain, 
vertigo, pains in shoulders, ennuij loss of appetite. The last 
symptoms to appear are : pains in scalp, on vertex, distress in 
kidneys and intestinal troubles after eating. The secretions of urine and 
milk were first diminished, afterwards increased. The aphrodisiac 
property of Spiran. was shown in some of the symptoms of the proving, 
and this bears on the increased secretion of milk. A number of 
symptoms appear in the lower abdomen, and the globus hystericus 
rises from thence to oesophagus. Heat in lower abdomen ; preceding 
eructations ; caused by laughing. Among the Peculiar Symptoms 
are : cerebral troubles on bending or raising the arm. Sensation of 
a band tied round head. Sensation of a foreign body in throat. 
Coldness of teeth. Pulsation in arteries over whole body. Coldness 
of the affected part. Preference for lying on left side ; or else on 
back. Pain followed by numbness. The symptoms are < by touch. 
< Bending or raising arm. < Raising breast. Laughing rs heat in 
lower abdomen. Least emotion zz palpitation. < Mental effort. 
> Lying on left side. > Lying on back. < Bending over (rheumatism 
of shoulders). < Stooping. 

Belations. — Compare: Botan., Cypr. Skin and mucous mem- 
branes, Ar. t. Desire for tight clothing ; dryness of vagina, Nat. m. 
Pain followed by numbness, Giiaph. 



SPIRANTHES 


1235 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Melancholy. — Complaining and sobbing. — Ill-humour. — Con- 
fusion'of ideas. — Indolence and ennui. 

2 . Head. — ^Vertigo : obliged to lean head against wall ; on rising 
from bed ; < sitting or lying. — Heaviness and heal in brain. — Brain troubles 
< bending or raising arm. — Sensation of band tied about head. — Weight on 
forehead. — Pain in forehead and nasal bone. — Pain in roots of hair. — Hair 
falls out. 

. 3. Eyes. — Eyes brilliant ; fixed. — Pain in eyes on looking up. — Burning 
in eyes and lachrymation.— Heaviness of brows.— Lids swollen. — Eyes hot, 
inflamed. — Vision: dim; obscured, with sleepiness; instantaneously lost; objects 
at a distance seem to move ; on closing lids, sees wheels of fire. 

4. Ears. — Pain in 1. auditory canal. — Itching in ear, externally and 
internally, 

5. Nose. — Dry coryza. — Epistaxis : in clots. — Dripping of water from 
nose. — Pain in (r.) nasal bones. — Burning itching at root of nose. — Itching of 
r. ala. — Smell very acute. 

6. Face. — Face : swollen ; red and hot ; blackish ; pale. — Fixed, medi- 
tative expression, — Burning in upper lip. — Chin : red ; pain in, 

8. Mouth. — Pain and elongation of teeth. — Toothache only at night.— 
Sensation of coldness in teeth. — Gums red and burning. — Numerous small 
excrescences on palate, which was bloody. — Putrid odour from mouth. — 
Irritation of sublingual glands. — Taste : acid ; sweetish, like nitre ; bitter in 
morning. — Salivation with dryness of mouth. 

9. Throat. — Globus rising from lower abdomen to oesophagus. — Sensa- 
tion of foreign body in throat. — Incessant desire to clear throat, caused by a 
thick mucus. — Tickling in throat, provoking cough. — Burning in pit of throat. 
— Irritation of tonsils. — Sensation of acidity and burning in oesophagus. — 
Incarceration of air in oesophagus. — Pain on swallowing. 

11. Stomach. — Desire for acid food. — Loss of appetite. — Constant 
thirst. — Regurgitations. — Eructations : preceded by heat in lower abdomen 
and lancinations in colon ; acid ; bitter ; difficult ; empty. — Nausea : after 
eating. — Vomiting; of food after eating. — Epigastrium: distended, intolerant 
of touch ; painful after a meal, the pain corresponding to the pain in loins, — 
Heat rising from stomach to head. 

12. Abdomen. — Pain : in liver ; and spleen ; on pressure. — Inter- 
mittent pressure in umbilical region. — Pain ; weakness ; tympanites ; after a 
meal. — Borborygmi. — Desire to tighten clothes. — Piercing, lancinating, in- 
supportable pain in colon ; on becoming erect. — Laughing ss heat in lower 
abdomen. — Eruption in groin. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Burning and itching in anus < during evacua- 
tion. — Stool preceded and followed by prickling and itching in anus. — 
Diarrhoea or constipation ; stools sour in children. 

14. Urinary Organs. — In kidneys : cramp-like pain at night, obliging 
change of position ; burning ; pain preventing stooping ; < going up stairs, 
> lying on back ; coldness and heat. — In bladder : pain on urinating ; pain 
and burning after waking.— Urine : abundant ; scanty ; decomposes rapidly ; 
deposits a gelatinous red sediment. 



SPIRANTHES 


1236 


15. Male Sexual Organs.— Erections, on waking ; constant.— Prick- 
ing pain in cords. — Great desire for, or repugnance to, coition. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Redness of vulva with pruritus.— 
Pressing pain in uterus. — Bloody discharge from vagina. — Yellowish 
leucorrhoea. — Burning in vagina. — Burning pain in vagina during coition. — 
Dryness of vagina. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Burning in larynx. — Hacking cough, caused 
by tickling in larynx. — Dry cough at night, with burning in throat. — D17 
cough. — Respiration : difficult ; short ; panting on walking. 

18. Chest. — Sensation of dilatation of 1 . lung. — Sensation of weakness of 
lungs. — Pleuritic and intercostal pains, < 1 . side. — Milk, abundant ; more in 
1 . breast. — Pain in breast on raising it.— Burning on tips of breasts, esp. 1 . 

19. Heart. — Pain in heart.— Palpitation : with difficult respiration ; 
from least emotional excitement.— Pulse full and hard at beginning of proving, 
afterwards small and quiet. 

20. Neck and Back. — Cramp-like pain in neck at night compelling 
change of position. — Lumbago preventing walking. — Pain in centre of 
scapula. — Pain in scapula, when standing, < walking. 

21 . Limbs. — Trembling in limbs ; weakness. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Shoulders : heavy pain in ; boring in r., extending 
to r. breast and preventing breathing ; pressure on and in chest ; lancina- 
tions < bending over, — Arms : trembling ; weakness ; numb and heavy 
(esp. r.) ; desire to stretch. — Pain in forearms by the pulse ; in r. pulse. 
— Rigidity of muscles of forearm,— Sudden pain in forearm followed by numb- 
ness. — Hands : swollen, esp. r. ; veins swollen ; blackish ; yellowish ; red and 
perspiring ; burning, numb. — At night numbness of hand on which he rested 
cheek. — Pressing pain in extremities. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Eruptions on nates; in groins ; 011 thighs. — Sciatic 
pain in limbs, esp. r. — Drawing pain in r. limb.— Knees : weak; pain in; 
pain in r. — Pain in r. malleolus. — Feet (esp. r.) swollen. — Pain in heels, 

24. Generalities. — One appears intoxicated.— Pulsations in arteries over 
whole body. — Lies on 1 . side rather than r, 

25. Skin. — Dryness of skin. — Whole skin red ; red in spots.— Jaundice. 
— ^Yellow spots, — Miliary rash. — Eruption of red points on nates with itching 
and heat. — Vesications as from a burn, with purulent secretion from the groin, 
and in folds of skin about neck. — Pricking over whole body. — Burning itching 
in 1 . cheek near mouth. — Itching : in axilim ; iii pubes ; scrotum ; forearms 
at night ; backs of hands ; tip of I. thumb. 

26. Sleep.— Incomplete, yawning. — Sleeping during day. — Starting up 
during sleep.— Late falling asleep, evening. — Sleeplessness in infants. — 
Lascivious dreams with emissions. 

27. Fever, — Coldness, evening, esp. of hands. — Alternations of cold and 
heat. — ^Affected part colder than rest of body. — Coldness of feet ; and toes. — 
Fever, followed by thirst.— Fever at night, sweat in morning. — Heat of whole 
skin ; flushes of heat in head, followed by sensation of cold. — Heat of head 
on waking.— Heat and itching over head.— Heat and redness ; external ear. 
—Heat of face, esp. r. side.— Hands very hot. — Sweat of palms, 



SPONGIA TOSTA 


1237 


Spongia Tosta. 

Common Sponge, roasted. N, O, Coelenterata. Tincture (20 grains in 
400 drops of alcohol). 

Clinical# — Aneurism. Angina pectoris. Asthma. Catalepsy. Chin, affections 
of. Clumsiness. Constipation. Cotif^Ii. Croup, Diplopia. Exophthalmos, 
Fainting. Goitre ; exophthalmic. Heart, hypertrophy of. Hernia. Jaw-joint, pain 
in*. Laryngismus. Laryngitis. Myopia. Rheumatic fever. Rheumatism. Testicles^ 
ittflammatiou of. Tuberculosis. Varicosis. Whooping-cough. Worms. 

Characteristics. — According to Hahnemann, Toasted Sponge was 
lirst mentioned as a specific for goitre by Arnald von Villanova in the 
thirteenth century ; but it was generally given mixed with other sub- 
stances, and had fallen into disuse w^hen Hahnemann proved it. The 
virtues of Spongia have been attributed to the Iodine contained in it, and 
partially liberated by the presence of roasting. But Spongia contains 
many other elements besides lodtncj and it has a distinctive action of 
its own. It is antipodal to lod. in this respect, that it is best Suited to 
blue-eyed, fair-haired patients, whereas lod. acts best on brunettes. 
Spo. is suited to scrofulous affections, and is often indicated with 
women of lax fibre, and children. One of the keynotes of Spo. is 
Dryness of mucous membrane — of tongue, pharynx, larynx, trachea. 
Cough is caused by dryness. The cough itself is dry, intensely 
hacking, crowing, dry as a bone,’^ or sounding like a saw being 
driven tlirough a pine board. Dry asthma. In laryngismus, croup, 
and asthma the patient rouses up generally after midnight with fear 
of suffocation and death. The sputa cannot be raised, must be 
swallowed, swallowing > . In laryngismus there is contraction of larynx 
as if suddenly grasped. With the dyspnoea there is terrible sinking ; 
he seems to be sinking down in a pit. The larynx is sensitive, but has 
not*the hyperajsthesia of Lack. Like Lach. Spo. has < after sleep. 
Rouses up in sleep as if in a great fright. Cough is excited by talking ; 
by dry, cold winds ; > by eating or drinking ; by swallowing ; 
especially > by warm food. Sweets <. Spo meets some cases of 
true tuberculosis ; of larynx ; of apices, with commencing solidification ; 
tubercles spreading downwards. Congestion of chest coming on 
when the patient is moving about with sudden weakness as if he 
would fall. Rawness in the chest is another note of Spo. The action of 
Spo. on the respiratory organs is closely connected with its action on 
the glandular system, the lymphatics, the thyroid, and testes are 
indurated. The blood, heart, and veins are also involved, and with 
the protruding eyes a perfect picture of exophthalmic goitre is pro- 
duced. Hypertrophy of the heart is frequently met by Spo.^ and 
it is especially indicated when the right heart is affected and when 
asthmatic symptoms are associated with it. Spo. meets some cases of 
croupous deposit on the valves of the heart as it does croup of the 
larynx. The Spo. patient in phthisical and other conditions is subject 
to frequent flashes of heat. The chill commences usually across the 
back. He shakes near a warm stove. The heat which follows 
^extends over the whole body except the thighs, which remain numb and 



SPONGIA TOSTA 


1238 

chilly. In the heart affections the patient is aroused from sleep as 
if smothering ; sits up in bed with an anxious look, flushed face, and 
hard, rapid breathing. Kent xxv. 17) gives this indication : 

“ Rheumatic fever after having been over-heated, with arising heart 
complications.^^ Nash gives this keynote of Spo, in valvular diseases : 

Awakes out of sleep from a sense of suffocation, with violent, loud 
cough, great alarm, agitation, anxiety, and difficult respiration.^’ He 
says it is better than Lack, here ; and relieves the dry, chronic, 
sympathetic cough of organic heart disease” more frequently and more 
permanently than Naja, Spo meets also thick, lining of joints aft^r 
rheumatic fever. In orchitis, with heaviness and screw-like squeezing 
pain in cord and testicle, Spo is the chief remedy, though others arc 
generally needed before that stage is reached. Timidity, fear, and 
terror are leading mental symptoms. Any excitement and thinking 
of symptoms <. Peculiar Sensations are : As if head would fall to one 
side. As if tipsy. As if all her blood were mounting to head. As if 
skull would burst. As if hair were standing on end. Eyes as if 
twisted around. As if a battery of guns were discharged in ears. 
Stitches as if passing through tympanum. Nodule in concha as if 
it would gather and break. Jaw as if dislocated. As if eruption 
were to appear near chin. Left side of chin as if ulcerated. As if 
something had got jammed between teeth in chewing. As if gums 
and teeth were swollen, the latter being lifted. Outside of throat as 
if something were being pressed out. As of a plug in throat. As if 
he had drunk a great deal of luke-warm water, relaxation of stomach, 
and oesophagus. Pit of stomach as if growing together. Stomach as 
if standing open. Of obstruction in abdomen (and in trachea). As 
if something alive moving in abdomen. As if something alive beneath 
skin of abdomen. As if diarrhoea would ensue. As of a plug in 
larynx. As if a stopper or valve were in larynx. As of a nail 
pressing in larynx. As if larynx and trachea were removed. As if 
she would suffocate. As if child could not get breath. As if breath- 
ing through a sponge. As if chest would burst. Chest as if sore and 
bloody. As of a large accumulation and weight at chest. As if a broad 
body armed with points were pressing upward. As if a weight were 
dragging down on chest. As if she had something hot inside chest. 
As if blood would burst out of chest. As if cervical glands were 
swelling. As if skin of neck were compressed between fingers. As 
if air were passing up and down thyroid and cervical glands. Thyroid 
gland as if^ hardened. As if everything were shaking and moving 
about in goitre. As if goitre were alive. As if a pointed instrument 
were thrust into scapulae. As if bones of forearm were being pressed 
together. As if parts in and between wrists were weakened by 
decay. As if a muscle were too short in upper end of thigh. As if 
knees would give way. As if weight hanging on lower end of tibia. 
As of pins in heels. As if she were going to faint. As if everything 
were in flames. As if sweat would break out. There is excitement 
of the nerves ; tendency to start ; twitching of muscles, with fever. 
Stiff without ability to move. Conscious but unable to act on her 
limbs ” (as in a cataleptic state). Clumsiness of body. Faint when 
losing her breath. Feeling of numbness of lower half of body. 



SPONGIA TOSTA 


1239 


< When thinking of her symptoms. Complaints extend downwards ; 

from within out ; from right to left. There are cramp-like pains. 
Bitter taste in throat. Aversion to tobacco. Desire for dainties 
(but sweets <)! The symptoms are < by touch and pressure. 
Scratching does not > biting itching. < Motion ; walking ; stoop- 
ing ; rising ; raising arms (becomes faint) ; talking ; singing. Bending 
forward > dyspnoea ; < symptoms of circulation. > Descending. 
> Resting in horizontal position. Lying with head low < . Lying right 
side <. < At night. Before midnight : croup < ; dry sound of 

breathing and cough ; sleepless until midnight. After midnight : 
‘wakes with palpitation ; with suffocation. < Warm room. > Warm 
food or drink. Frosty weather > cough. Dry, cold weather > 
headache. Cold weather ss coryza. Cold air < cough. < Sudden 
changes of atmosphere. < At full moon. < Periodically ; every 
night. Eating and drinking > cough ; drinking cough. < Sweets. 

< After sleep. 

Relations. — Antidoted hy : Camph. Follows well : Aco., Hep. 
Followed well by : Bro., Carb. v., Hep. [Boenninghausen’s croup 
powders consisted of a sequence of Aco., Spo., Hep., given in that 
order. Spo. is dry ; Hep. rattling ; Spo. < before midnight ; Hep. < 
after.] Compare : In general affections, Chlo., Bro., lod. (lod. dark, 
Spo. fair subjects), Thyroidin, Badiaga. Laryngitis, Samb. (with Samb. 
the spasms occur frequently) ; Lach. (sensitive to touch ; Lach. from 
hyperaesthesia ; Spo. from inflammation of cartilages). Cough > by 
eating, Anac. Dry tongue, Nux m. (with Spo, the dryness extends 
downwards ; not with Nux m.). > Warm drinks, Ars., Aim., Lyc., 
Nux, Rhus (> cold drinks, Ver.). Heart, Naj., Sep., Kalm., Abro., 
Lach. Orchitis, Gels., Pul., Ham. (intense soreness), Merc, (with a little 
yellowish -green gonorrhoea) — Spo. comes after tliese when there is 
induration. Bitter taste in throat (Ruta, nausea in throat). Jaw-joint 
as if dislocated, Rhus. < Thinking of symptoms. Ox. ac., Pip. m. 
Tubercular diathesis, Bac., Tub. Voice fails. Aim., Dro. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Disconsolate and lachrymose humour. — Timidity and 
tendency to be frightened. — Combative and boastful humour. — Immoderate 
and mischievous gaiety. — Great inclination to sing. — Mental obtuseness, with 
complete disinclination and incapacity for attending to intellectual labour. 
— Distraction of mind, — Pert, witty humour. — Alternately gay, lachrymose, 
and cross. — ^Conscious but unable to act on her limbs. — Fancies appear on 
shutting eyes. — Fretful and anxious about her condition, fears she will die of 
suffocation. — Anxious sweat and faintness — She is very timid, and is esp. pur- 
sued and incessantly tormented by a frightful scene of some mournful event 
of the past. — Anxious as from presentiment. — Fright awakens. — Satiety of life, 
with the heat. — Obstinacy. — Every exertion < the cough. 

2. Head. — Vertigo, with giddiness, to such an extent as to fall, some- 
times in evening, or else with a sensation as if head were about to fall on one 
side. — ^Vertigo, with nausea, on waking at night. — Heaviness and fulness of 
head. — Dull semilateral headache on entering a warm room from the open 



1240 


SPONGIA TOSTA 


air. — Headache, with lachrymation, when looking fixedly at an object. — 
Pressive headache, sometimes with compression.-— Pressing headache in (r.) 
frontal eminence, from within to without, < when sitting, when entering a 
warm room, after walking in the open air, when looking intensely at any- 
thing; > when lying on back in a horuontal position. — Sharp stitches in 1. 
temple extending to forehead.— Pains in head as if it were about to split, 
csp. in forehead. — Throbbing and pulsation m head. — Congestion of blood in 
head, with pressing, beating, and pulsation in forehead, with redness of face, 
anxious look, restless sleep, > in a horizontal position. — Disagreeable tender^ 
ness of exterior of head. — Sensation as if hair were ^ standing on end (on 
vertex). — Troublesome (violent) itching in scalp. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes dull and clouded, with puffing in lids. — Eyes deeply 
sunk; or protruding, staring. — Maculae of cornea. — On looking intensely at 
one spot lachrymation and headache. — Pressure and shootings m eyes. — Eyes 
burning, red, and weeping. — Agglutination of lids. — Eruption of yellow scabies 
in eyebrows (painful to touch on 1. eyebrow). — Pressive heaviness of lids. — 
Contraction of lids in morning. — Myopia. — Sees visions on closing eyes. — 
Double vision > lying down. 

4. Ears. — Otalgia, with contractive pain. — Pressure in ears. — Ulcera- 
tion of external ear. — Pain in cartilages as from soreness, not affected by 
touch. — Boils on 1. ear painful to touch. — Inflamed nodule in 1. concha. — Red 
swelling of 1. helix. — Heat in ears. — Hard hearing. — Dull ringing in ears; 
in r. 

5. Nose. — Epistaxis, esp. after blowing nose (at dinner). — Fluent coryza, 
with much sneezing. — Dry coryza; nose stuffed up. — Eruption on point of 
nose. 

6. Face. — Paleness of face, with dulness of eyes (with sunken eyes). — 
Face bloated, red, or bluish, with anxious expression ; heat on one side of 
face, renewed when thinking of it. — Cold sweat on face. — Swelling of cheeks. 
— Itching and shootings in cheeks. — Eruption on lips. — Spasmodic pajn in 
maxillary joints. — Tension in articulation of 1. jaw (when walking in the open 
air). — Stitches transversely through 1. upper jaw. — Cramp-like pain from 1. , 
jaw-joint to cheek in evening when eating. — Swelling of the submaxillary 
glands with tensive pain ; painful to touch. — Numbness in chin. — Heat in 
chin. 

7. Teeth, — Sensation of bluntness and looseness in teeth while masti- 
cating. — Itching and shootings in teeth. — Heat in teeth. — Swelling of gums, 
with pain during mastication. 

8. Mouth. — Mouth and tongue covered with vesicles, with burning and 
shooting pain (on that account cannot eat any solid food). — Salivation. — 
Speech difficult. — Tongue dry and brownish.— Vesicles on edge of tongue. 

9. Throat. — Burning sensation and stinging in throat. — Rawness, 
swelling, and scraping in throat. — Penetrating tickling in throat, toward ear. 
— Sore throat < after eating sweet things. J^T hr oat symptoms > lying down, 
-^Constantly recurring needle-like stitches above pit of throat, externally, in 
lower part of goitre. — Sticking internally in throat, esp. after eating. — Thyroid 
gland swollen and hard, with suffocative attacks at night ; stitching pains 
and pressure. — Bitter taste in throat. — In oesophagus : heat ; relaxed sensa- 
tion. — Swelling in fauces projecting from r. to 1. — Swallowing difficult. — On 



SPONGIA TOSTA 


1241 


swallowing : stitches in neck pass off ; violent straining pain ; pain in goitre ; 
moving sensation in goitre. — (Goitre painful, pain synchronous with cardiac 
pain. — R. T. C.) ^ 

10. Appetite. — Diminished taste. — Bitter taste, sometimes only in throat. 
— Sweetish taste in mouth— Moderate appetite and speedy satiety. — Increased 
appetite. — Excessive, insatiable hunger. — Desire for dainties. — Thirst, some- 
times insatiable.— Thirstlessness ; rarely thirst with chill.— Violent thirst after 
smoking. — Tobacco smoke is disagreeable. — After a meal, fulness and pains 
ifl abdomen, as from difficult digestion.— Eating and drinking > cough. — 
Drinking milk, ale, sptrits, cold or hot tea, cold water == cough. 

11. Stomach. — Risings, sometimes with cuttings and tearings in stomach. 
— Bitter risings. — Sour regurgitations. — Frequent hiccough. — Nausea, with 
acidity in mouth. — Craves dainties ; after eating has dyspeptic distress and 
fulness of stomach ; > from warm drinks, esp. colicky pains in abdomen. — 
Vomiting after having partaken of milk. — Relaxation of stomach, with sensa- 
tion as if it were open. — Aching in stomach and scrobiculus. — Pressure of 
(tight) clothing on stomach is unbearable. — Contractive pains in stomach. — 
Stitches in region of stomach from least pressure. — Chill m pit of stomach. — 
Craving at stomach before menses. 

12. Abdomen. — Abdomen hard and tight. — Spasms in abdomen. — 
Violent action of abdominal muscles during inspiration. — Viscera drawn 
up against diaphragm. — Pain in 1. side of abdomen ; digging and choking ; 
> after discharge of wind ; at times as if something alive were moving 
there. — Pain m abdomen instead of menses. — Fine stitcli externally in 
abdomen. — Heat in abdomen. — Digging and obstruction in abdomen. — 
Gripings in abdomen, after a meal. — Rumbling in the abdomen, esp. in 
evening and morning when lying down. — Pain as from a hernia in inguinal 
ring. — Swelling and inflammation of 1. inguinal ring. — Swelling of inguinal 
glands. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Hard (insufficient) and retarded evacuations. — 
Lobse, whitish evacuations. — Before the evacuation shootings in the anus and 

•gurgling and rumbling in the abdomen. — During the evacuation tenesmus in 
the anus. — Itching, smarting, and pain as from excoriation in anus. — Passage 
of ascarides from rectum and tingling in rectum. — Diurnal dirrrhoea with a 
large number of ascarides, after which she always feels great relief. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Increased secretion of urine. — Frequent want 
to urinate, with scanty emission. — Incontinence of urine (in whooping-cough). 
— Small stream of urine. — Frothy urine. — Thick, whitish, greyish, oi yellow 
sediment in the urine. 

15. Male Sexual Organs^ — Spasmodic contraction in the testes. — Hard 
swelling of the testes, and of the spermatic cord, with pressive pain.— 
Drawing, painful stitches extending from body through glans. — V’^oluptuous 
itching at point of glans for several hours, urging him to rub it. — Pinching, 
bruised, squeezing pain in testicles. — Stitches from testicles into spermatic 
cord. — (Gouty pains in testicles in old men. — R. T. C.) — Heat in genitals, 
penis, scrotum, testes, and cords. — Sexual desire very moderate. — Absence of 
erections. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Catamenia too early and profuse. — 
Before the catamenia, palpitation of the heart, following pain in back, — 



1242 SPONGIA TOST A 

During the catamenia, drawing in the thighs.— Enlargement and induration of 
ovaries. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— [Affections in general, of larynx and 
trachea, particularly in all such affections as croup, asthma, &c., where every- 
thing is perfectly tight and dry, no loose rattling sound appearing in the 
breathing or cough. — Burning sensation is felt in throat after coughing, suffo- 
cative attacks of breathing (as in asthma), without any mucous rattle ; respi- 
ration loud ; very hollow voice, all without any rattling sound, or any looseness. 
— H. N. G.] — Hoarseness (voice cracked) ; sometimes with cough and coryza. 
— Weak, husky voice, which fails in singing and converi>ation. — Pain in larynx 
on touching it, and on turning head. — Pressure in larynx when singing. — 
Sensation of obstruction (as from a plug) in larynx, with impeded respiration. 
— Dyspnoea > by bending the body forward. — Roughness and dryness in 
throat. — Burning pain in larynx and trachea. — Cough, proceeding from 
bottom of chest with pain as from excoriation and burning sensation. — 
Cough, with yellowish expectoration and hoarseness. — Great dryness of 
larynx, < from hawking. — Sensation in region of thyroid and cervical 
glands on breathing, as if forced in and out. — Hollow, dry, barking or 
whistling cough, day and night, < towards evening, and sometimes with 
pain in larynx. — Laryngeal cough, croupy-sounding, always goes away with a 
dose of Spo, (woman, 65. — R. T. C.). — Cough, with expectoration of viscid 
mucus. — Expectoration : scanty, of saltish mucus ; tenacious, yellow, in- 
durated, sour ; loosened mornings but must be swallowed again ; smelling 
like milk ; of yellow mucus in little lumps ; of cutaneous masses. — Dry 
cough, excited by a burning tickling in the larynx. — Slow and deep respira- 
tion, as from weakness. — Wheezing respiration. — Wheezing, whistling, saw- 
ing, anxious breathing ; < during inspiration and when lying down (with 
violent labouring of abdominal muscles). — Mucous rale in trachea by fits. 

18. Chest. — Respiration, quick, anxious, and difficult, sometimes with fits 
of suffocation, and mucous rattling in chest.— Short, panting respiration, 
surging from heart into chest, as if it would force out upward. — ^Awakbns 
from sleep with suffocative sensation. — Fixed, lancinating, and pressive pain- 
in region of bronchia. — Spasmodic, constrictive pains in whole chest (and 
larynx). —Pain in chest, with dyspnoea. — Fulness and obstruction in chest — 
Shootings in chest. — Burning sensation, which ascends into chest. — Burning ; 
rawness, soreness in chest. — Ebullition of blood (congestions) in chest after 
slightest effort and least movement, with obstructed respiration, anguish, 
nausea, and weakness, which induces syncope. 

19. Heart. — Pains and anxiety in region of heart. — Constricting, 
stinging, pressing pain in cardiac region. — Palpitation of heart (before 
menstruation), with suffocation, violent gasping respiration, pain in heart. — 
Rheumatic affections of valves of heart (fibrous deposit on valves). — ^Violent 
palpitation of heart, beats rapid (each beat was accompanied by a loud 
blowing as of a bellows), awakens him after midnight, with a sense of suffo- 
cation, loud cough, great alarm, agitation, anxiety, and difficult respiration. — 
Pulse full, hard, and frequent. 

20. Neck and Back. — Painful tension and rigidity in muscles of neck, 
nape, and throat ; on 1 , side when turning head to r. — Neck cold in evening. 
— Back of neck snaps on stooping. — Goitre large and hard, with pressure, 



SPONGIA TOSTA 


1243 


tingling, and shootings. — Cramps in the muscles of neck. — Coldness in back, 
not > by warmth of stove.-— -Sacrum sore before menses.— Sensation of numb- 
ness in loins and^ buttocks. — Drawing, tearing, and pressive pain in loins. 

21. Limbs. — Painful weariness in arms and legs. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Jerking of muscles about 1. shoulder- joint. — 
Heaviness and trembling of forearms and hands.— Drawings in forearms and 
joints of hands. — Large blisters in the foieanii. — Swelling of hands, with stiff- 
ness of lingers. — Redness and swelling in joints of fingers, with tension when 
.they are bent. — Numbness in points of fingers.— Cramp-like pain in ball of 
. (r.) thumb ; on moving hand it extends to thumb. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Nates and thighs numb and cold.— Jerking of 
muscles of buttocks. — The thighs are spasmodically drawn forward or back- 
ward.— Irritation and restlessness of both legs. — Tearing in tibia all after- 
noon. — Rigidity of legs. — Drawing and tearing in legs and feet, sometimes 
at night only. 

24. Generalities. — Uncomfortable feeling of the clothes, they being an 
oppression and annoyance to the wearer ; growing pains ; darting pains from 
within outward ; itching, no better from scratching. — Troubles in general of any 
kind appearing in the sexual organs, esp. r. side ; testicles and spermatic cord ; 
anterior surface of thigh. — Phthisis pulmonalis, cough, breathing, &c., being 
very tight and dry. — < From turning head ; on ascending (going up stairs, 
up a hill, rising from a chair, &c.) ; from tobacco ; wind ; from the west wind. 
— > On descending. — Stinging pain in limbs, esp. joints. — Painful sensitive- 
ness of body to touch, with chilliness on the parts touched, or with tingling 
running through whole body. — Sensation of torpor in lower part of body. — 
Heaviness when walking in open air, must sit down. — Heaviness (and sore- 
ness) of the body (when rising from a scat). — Excessive moral and physical 
dejection. — Extreme exhaustion and heaviness of the body after slight exer- 
tion, with orgasm of blood in chest, heat of face, vessels hard and distended, 
great anxiety, and difficult breathing. — More relief is experienced from lying 
d6wii quietly than from any other position. — Fits of anguish, with pain in 
region of heart. 

25. Skin. — Swelling and induration of the glands. — Itching shootings in 
the skin, esp. on becoming warm in bed. — Sensation of something creeping 
over the skin, with redness and heat of the part when it has been scratched. 
—Red, itching spot (blotches) on the skin. — Itching eruptions. — Miliary 
eruptions. — Tetters. 

26. Sleep. —Sleepy, yawning, no activity, afternoons. — Sleeplessness, 
with fantastic dreams and delirium on going to sleep.— Sad, anxious, frightful 
dreams. — Awakens towards morning from a jerk upwards from the larynx, as 
if she would suffocate, must sit up, and raises sour, salty mucus. 

27. Fever.— Pulse full, hard, and quick. — Frequent shiverings over the 
whole body, esp. the back (even near a warm stove).— Violent heat, soon after 
the chill, with dry, burning heat all over the body with the exception of the 
thighs ; they remain numb and chilly. — Anxious heat, with red face and 
weeping, inconsolable mood. — Cool perspiration on the face in evening. — 
Morning, sweat over the whole body. — Flushes of heat. — Feverish heat, with 
skin dry and hot, continued thirst, headache, and delirium. — Nocturnal 
perspiration. 



1244 


STANNUM 


Stachys Betonica. 

Stachys betonica. Wood Betony. N, 0, Labiatae. Tincture of 
whole fresh plant. 

Clinical. — Cold. Diaphragm, paralysis of. Headache. Vertigo. 

Characteristics. — Berridge published the proving of Stack, made 
by Croker and himself with some others. Dizziness, fulness in head 
and eyes with disposition to take cold were the most prominent symp- 
toms. A feeling of oppressed breathing as from paralysis of diaphragm 
is a peculiar symptom. Stack, has been used in eye-waters, and as a 
remedy for headaches. 

Relations. — Compare Lycopus and the Labiatae. 

, SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Dizziness > open air ; < closing eyes, or moving head. — 
Fulness over and in eyes as if they would burst. — Dull, heavy action in frontal 
region > walking about in room. 

3. Eyes. — Heavy, sleepy feeling in eyes.-— Pam in eyeballs as if too 
tense ; < looking at light, reading, thinking, bending head down. 

4. Ears. — Slight earache. 

5. Nose. — Frequent sneezing ; on going indoors from open air ; in- 
creased nasal mucus. 

II. Stomach. — Eructations ; tasting of drug, — Warmth in stomach ; in- 
creasing to sharp cutting pain. — Weight in stomach with feeling of sickness. 

14. Urinary Organs.— Woke with desire to urinate in night. — Urine : 
high-coloured ; ammoniacal. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Breathing oppressed as from paralysis of 
diaphragm ; constriction just behind ensiform cartilage, on walking up hill 
must keep mouth open. 

24. Generalities. — Tired, csp. in legs. — Great sensitiveness to take cold. 

27. Fever. — Free diaphoresis. — In night profuse sweat, limited to head, 
neck, and chest. 


Stannum. 

Stannum. Tin. Sn. (A. W., ii8*8) Trituration of the pure metal. 

Clinloak — Anaemia. Asthma. Bronchitis. Chilblains. Colic. Consumption . 
Convulsions. Cramps. Debilitj". Dentition. Diaphm^m^ fains in. Dyspepsia. 
Ears, ring-holes, ulceration of. Epilepsy. Epistaxis. Gastralgia. Hsematemesis. 
Haemoptysis. Headache. Hectic fever. Hemiplegia. Hypochondriasis. Hysteria. 
Lachrymal fistula. Lachrymal sac, suppuration of. Milk, altered, Nails, splitting. 
Neuralgia. Neurasthenia. Opisthotonos, Paralysis. Phthisis pituitosa. Ptosis. 
Sleeplessness. Styes. Tapeworm. Trachea, affections of. Uterus, prolapse of. 
Vagina, prolapse of. Worms. 

Ghapaoterifitics. — Stannum is the Jupiter of the alchymists. 
“The ancients have recorded wonderful cures of the most serious 



STANNUM 


^245 


diseases with Tin/’ says Hahnemann, but in'his day, until he proved 
it, its only use was as a vermifuge. Alston obtained indirectly from 
*^a woman of Leith in Scotland’’ this prescription, of which he has 
witnessed the efficacy in a case of tapeworm : “ Take an ounce and 
a half of Tin (pewter metal) and grind it small to powder, mix it with 
sugar syrup, and take, on a Friday before the change of the moon, 
one-half of it, the following day the half of the remainder, and the 
Sunday following the rest, but on the Monday a purgative.” Alston 
also says, in his Materia Medica^ that he has seen haematemesis cured 
by this as if by m^igic. Hahnemann’s proving appears both in his 
'Mateiia Medica Pura and in his Chronic Diseases. A number of worm 
symptoms appear in the pathogenesis : Sinking, empty, all-gone 
feeling, diaphragmatic and abdominal pains ; tendency to excessive 
mucous secretions ; pale, sunken, sickly countenance, with dark rings 
round eyes ; convulsions. Many of these symptoms occur in conditions 
not due to helminthiasis, and Sian, will be the remedy. Pains in the 
hypochondria, associated with the hypochondriac or hysterical mental 
state. Diaphragmatic neuralgia. Colic > by hard pressure, as by 
laying the child with its abdomen across the knee or on the 
point of the shoulder. This is one of the keynotes of Stan. ; but 
the most important one is in the type of the Sian, pains : they 
begin lightly, increase gradually to the highest point and then as 
gradually decline. Other remedies have pains of this type but not 
to the same characteristic degree. This feature applies to the 
headaches, facial and dental neuralgias, abdominal and other pains. 
Another cardinal feature of Stan, is iveakness : exhaustion of mind 
and body. The chest is so w’eak as to make talking impossible. The 
patient IS so weak, she drops into a chair instead of sitting down. While 
dressing in the morning has to sit down several times to rest. There 
is w.eakness and aching of the deltoid and arm, and this has the curious 
modality that it is felt ivhcn singing or otherwise using the voice. Stan. 
is*aii important remedy for singers and public speakers. The weak- 
. ness of Stan, makes it an appropriate remedy for many states of 
neurasthenia, nervous exhaustion. A peculiarity of the weakness is 
that it is felt much more on going down stairs than on going up. 
The relaxation of tissue is probably responsible for the weak, empty, 
sinking sensation felt at the epigastrium ; and also for the uterine 
prolapse. In the dyspepsias of Stan, there is nausea and vomiting 
from the smell of cooking ; and the gastralgia compels the patient to 
walk about for relief, yet the iveakness is so great that he is soon com- 
pelled to rest. The weak, empty feeling in the chest is one of the 
notes of Stan, in phthisical conditions, and the stitches are another ; 
hectic fever ; deep, hollow, shattering cough ; expectoration, profuse 
like white of egg, sweetish, salty ; sour, putrid, musty ; yellow-green 
pus ; deep, husky, hollow' voice, > for the time by hawking or 
expectorating mucus make up the rest of the picture. Stan, is a low- 
spirited remedy, and when phthisical patients are despondent and 
without hope (they are usually the reverse) Stan, will most likely be 
needed. (The yellowness of the Stan, secretions is worth noting : The 
tongue is yellow ; sputa and leucorrhoea are also yellow.) Palpitation 
, and anxiety occur from ever so slight exertion, as giving directions 



1246 STANNUM 

about the household. Trembling of arms and legs; limbs as 
heavy as lead. The pains of Stan, are frequently compressive and 
cramp-like ; and cramps and spasms are a marked feature of the 
Sian, effects. The convulsions are opisthotonic ; the thumbs are drawn 
in. They are such as are met with in teething children ; or in children 
who masturbate ; or who have worms. A typical case of Stan, neuralgia 
is quoted in Clintqiie (xxi. 62) : Man, 30, suffered for eight years off and 
on, and for some months continuously, with neuralgic headache. Pain 
centres over one or other eye (usually right) and extends over whole 
or part of head and is at times unbearable. It begins in early morning 
(4 to 5 a.m.), increases gradually to noon, when it gradually declines 
to sunset, reappearing again the following morning. Two doses of 
Sian, cured in a fortnight. There is sexual excitement in both sexes. 
Emissions with excessive prostration. In the female the menses 
are early and profuse. Orgasm is easily produced : “ Scratching arm 
produces an intolerable sensation of pleasure in genital organs which 
extends to uterus and produces orgasm.’’ The uterine and vaginal 
prolapse of Stan, has this distinguishing feature : it is < during stool ; 
especially during pressure. Labour pains are spasmodic and put the 
patient out of breath. The milk of nursing woman is changed, and the 
child rejects it. Hering gives as cured by Sian. Monday constipa- 
tion” — that is, constipation occurring on days following rest-days. Stan. 
has marked periodicity. T. H. Urquhart (quoted H. R.y iv. 147) cured 
in two months an affection of the nails characterised by breaking and 
splitting, a sequel of scurvy, by applying to them Stannum oleaie on a 
narrow flannel bandage. Peculiar Sensations are : As if all objects were 
too far off. As if forehead were shattered. As if forehead would be 
pressed inward. Pain as if from an ulcer in hypogastrium. As if there 
were a hole in his side. As if there were no sensation in bladder. Chest, 
as if eviscerated ; as if internally constricted. Epigastric region as if 
beaten. Tickling as from soreness in trachea. Inclination to hawk as 
if mucus were in chest. As if she would faint. As if limbs beaten. 
As of a heavy load in affected arm and side of chest. As if sweat would 
break out. The girdle ” sensation of Sian, accompanies yawning. 
The secretions of Stan, are bland. The symptoms are < by touch. 
> By pressure. > Lying across something hard. < Rest. < Lying ; 
(but must lie down from weakness of chest). < Lying on r, side. 
Sitting bent over > (cough). Bending double >. Walking > pains, 
but must soon rest. Motion > pains in head, but < other symptoms. 
< Using voice (laughing, talking, singing). < Going down stairs 
(faintness). Blowing nose = shrieking noise in ear. Warm drink 
sr cough. ^ Open air > ; (< vertigo). < During stool. 

Rdations* — Anttdoted by : Puls. Complementary : Puls. Follows 
well: Caust., Cina, Is followed well by: Calc., Phos., Sel., Sul., Bac. 
Compare : Sour sensation in stomach, Chel., Pho., Sep. Weeps all the 
time, but crying < (Nat. m. < by consolation). Pul. (menses scanty, 
delayed), Sep. < Descending ; can go up well enough, Brx. (Calc, 
opp.). Pain increases and decreases gradually, Plat, Stro. c. (Arg. m. 
has headache increasing gradually and leaving off suddenly). Weak- 
ness seems to proceed from chest ; (from abdomen, pelvis, Pho., Sep.). 
Nausea from smell of cooking food, Ars., Colch. < Laughing, Arg. 



STANNUM 


1247 


m, < Warm drinks ; « cold drinks, Spo.). Weak from talking, 
Coccul, Ver., Sul., Calc. Prolapsus uteri < during stool, Pod. (Pod. 
with diarrhoea, stool green and coming with a rush). Catarrhal 
phthisis, Sil. (mbre induration ; old people), Pho. (more blood in 
sputa), Seneg, (lungs feel pushed back to spine ; fat persons of lax 
fibre), Colch., Bals. peruv., Eriodict., Teuc. scorod, Illic., Pix., Myos. 
Paralysis by emotions, Stph., Nat. m. > Hard pressure, Coloc., Pb. 
Pain like subcutaneous ulceration ; bland discharges. Puls. Claw 
sensation, Bell. Nausea in throat, CycL, Ph. ac., Val. 

Causation. — Eiyiotions. Fright. Masturbation. Dentition. Using 
voice. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Sad, hypochondriacal humour. — Great agitation and anguish, 
melancholy and disposition to weep. — Sad, despondent, feels like crying all 
the time, but crying <. — Quiet fretfulness; answers unwillingly and abruptly. 
— Continued restlessness with anxiety. — Her distress of mind ceases as soon 
as menses begin to flow. — Uneasy, does not know what to do with himself ; 
pains > by walking, but so weak he soon must rest. — Earnest application to 
business, with inability to complete anything undertaken. — Discouragement. 
— Ill-humour, with taciturnity and dislike to society and conversation ; hope- 
lessness. — Sudden fits of passion. — Nervous excitement. 

2. Head. — Vertigo, during which all objects seem too far off. — Vertigo 
on sitting down, with loss of ideas. — Headache, usually neuralgic, which 
comes on gradually and grows steadily < till it reaches its height or severest 
point, when it begins to grow > and goes away just as gradually as it came 
on — c.g,^ if it was twelve hours in coming on, it will be twelve hours in going 
off. — .Headache, with nausea and retching, sometimes with burning sensation 
in the sinciput, eyes and nose, or else in the morning, with ill-humour. — 
He'kviness in head in evening. — Heaviness and stunning pressure in head, 

•esp. traversing forehead. — Shooting pains in head, esp. in forehead, and < 
after a fit of coughing. — Spasmodic pains in head, as from tension or squeez- 
ing (as from a band in whole upper part of head, and in forehead, slowly 
increasing and decreasing). — Intermittent tearing pain in r. half of forehead, 
< on stooping. — Crushing pain in forehead. — Sharp jerking in r. anterior 
lobe of brain, above orbit. — Pressive drawing and tearing in the head. — 
Boring pains in head. — Throbbing pains in temples. — Painful jerks through 
1. temple, forehead and cerebellum, < during rest, > from motion. — Burning 
in forehead with nausea, > in open air. — Painful shocks across head. — Pain 
as from suppuration in head externally. — Burning tension on scalp just above 
r. forehead. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes sore, and, as it were, excoriated by rubbing. — Pressure 
in lids and canthi. — Burning lancmations in lids, — Itching, smarting, and 
burning sensation in eyes. — Nocturnal agglutination of lids. — Pressive pain in 
1. inner canthus, as from a stye. — Styes. — Ulcer in the internal canthi (pustular 
swelling of 1. inner canthus) like a lachrymal fistula. — Eyes dull (sunken), and 
clouded. — Jerking and quivering of eyes.— Convulsed or prominent eyes,— 
Variegated areola round candle. 



1248 


STANNUM 


4. Ears. — Earache, with drawing tearings. — Ulceration of holes pierced 
for earrings.— Tinkling in ears. — Ringing in 1 . ear. — Cries (screeching) in ears, 
on blowing nose. 

: 5. Nose. — Heaviness, and sensation of obstruction, in upper part of 
nose.—Inflammation of interior of nose.— Burning sensation in nose. — Epis- 
taxis : on moving, on rising from bed ; immediately on waking. — Dry coryza 
on one side only, with soreness, swelling, and redness of nostrils. — Over- 
sensitiveness of smell. 

6. Face. — Pale and wan countenance, with (deep, sunken) eyes ; sickly 
expression ; features elongated. — Pains in the face, with pressive drawing, 
esp. in zygomatic process, and orbits. — Burning, lancinating pain in musples 
of face. — Swelling of cheeks and upper jaw. — Spasm in jaw. — Painful swelling 
of submaxillary glands. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache after a meal, with jerking pain and heat in the 
face. — Sensation of elongation and looseness in teeth.-r-Ulcer on gums, with 
swelling of cheeks. — Epileptiform convulsions from teething ; child > lying 
with abdomen across something hard ; clenching of thumbs. 

8. Mouth. — Fetid exhalation from mouth. — Flow of acid saliva. — Diffi- 
cult, weak speech, occasioned by vveaknes.s, esp. on chest. — Tongue coated 
with a yellowish mucus. — Tongue yellow. — Tongue red. 

9. Throat. — Sore-throat, as from an internal swelling, with drawing 
and tension. — Sensation in velum pendulum as it a foreign body were there, 
or some mucus which could neither be hawked up nor swallowed ; same 
sensation in posterior nares. — Sensation of stinging dryness in throat, with 
lancinations « when swallowing). — Cutting in pharynx and oesophagus on 
swallowing. — Ulcerated sensation in r. side of throat. — Roughness and scraping 
in throat, esp. in evening. — Accumulation of thick, viscid, greyish, bloody 
mucus in throat and mouth, with necessity to hawk, followed by a sensation 
of excoriation (efforts to expel it excite vomiting). — After hawking muci4S the 
voice for singing is higher. — Tobacco has a sharp, dry taste in the fauces. — 
Permanent rawness and dryness in throat ; during swallowing a painful feeling 
as of being denuded. — Rawness and dryness in throat, without thirst. — Nausea 
in fauces and pharynx. 

10. Appetite. — Bitter and sour taste. — Bitter taste of all food (except 
water). — Bitter, herbaceous taste of beer. — Increased hunger, which cannot 
be satisfied. — Increased thirst, — Nausea and vomiting after a meal. — Excessive 
weakness of digestion. 

11. Stomach. — Bitter risings ; or with a taste of rotten eggs. — Sour 
risings, with scraping in throat. — Frequent hiccough. — Nausea and vomiting; 
in the morning ; fiom odour of cooking food. — Nausea, esp. after a meal, fol- 
lowed by bitter and watery vomiting. — Vomiting : of bile ; of blood. — ^Violent 
retching, followed by vomiting of (undigested) food. — Aching in stomach, 
sometimes very violent. — Tensive pressure at scrobiculus, which is painful 
when touched, as from subcutaneous ulcelration. — Cramps in stomach, some- 
times with bitter risings, sensation of hunger and diarrhoea, or else with 
nausea, and pale and sickly complexion.— Squeezing, as from a claw in 
stomach, and umbilical region, with nausea. — Sinking, gone feeling in 
epigastrium. 

12. Abdomen. — Dull blows across hypochondria. — Cramps in region of 



STANNUM 


1249 


diaphragm.— ^Pressure and burning sensation in hepatic region. — Pressure, 
spasmodic pain, and shootings in the 1. hypochondrium. — Abdomen painfully 
distended, and sensitive to touch. — Spasms (colic) in abdomen, with pa^s 
above and below navel. — Hysterical spasms in abdomen. — Digging, pinching, 
and griping in abdomen ; before every stool.—Burning sensation, and shoot- 
ings in abdomen. — Feeling of excoriation in abdomen, < by touch. — Severe 
pain causing the patient to lie over the sharp corner of a table or sofa, or 
something hard, and to press the abdomen firmly against it, as in this way > 
ia afforded. — Griping as of something being torn away. — Sensation as if 
stretched in (r.) abdominal muscles. — Squeezing, as from a claw, in umbilical 
region, followed by nausea. — Sensation of emptiness (hollowness) in abdomen ; 
even after eating. — Incarceration of flatus. — Stitches from both sides through 
hips. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Hmmorrhoidal pimple on 1. side of anus, with 
painful soreness when touched. — Violent shooting, like needle pricks at base 
of rectum extending to anus. — Soreness and smarting at anus, with fine 
stitches, immediately after a stool. — Itching stitch in rectum. — A corroding 
pain about anus, while walking and sitting. — Burning in anus ; constant 
itching. — ^Constipation. — Frequent, ineffectual want to evacuate. — Hard, dry, 
knotty faeces, or else scanty and greenish. — Stools : green, curdy, with colic ; 
insufficient with renewed desire afterwards. — Slimy evacuations. — Violent 
dysentery, urging and tormina, stools bloody, mucous with intolerable tenesmus. 
— Violent diarrhoea. — Passes worms ; lumbrici ; tsjnia. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Dull stitches inward in kidney region.— Sensitive 
pressure in neck of bladder and urethra after urinating ; seems as though 
more would follow ; some drops pass when the pressure is <. — Blister on 
margin of meatus. — Retention of urine. — Scanty emission of urine. — Frequent 
want to urinate, sometimes with scanty emission. — Absence of want to urinate, 
as from insensibility of bladder (only a sensation of fulness indicates the 
necessity to urinate). 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Increase of sexual desire. — Violent and 
Toluptuous excitement during emission. — Frequent pollutions ; with excessive 
prostration. 

x6. Female Sexual Organs. — Increased sexual desire; early orgasm. 
— Catamenia too profuse. — Before catamenia, anxiety and melancholy. — 
During the catamenia, colic. — Cramps in uterus. — Prolapsus of the vagina, 
with hard stool. — Bearing down m uterine region ; prolapsus uteri et vaginae. 
— Prolapsus strangulated tends to gangrene — Leucorrhoea of transparent or 
yellowish mucus, with considerable prostration of strength, — Itcliing in vulva, 
< evening {Sian. mur.). — Spasmodic labour pains ; they exhaust her, she is out 
of breath. — A child leaves the breast of its mother, and will not suck. 

1% Respiratory Organs. — Hoaisciicss and roughness in larynx, with 
tickling, which excites a cough. — Catarrh, with hoarse voice, sensation of 
* fatigue in chest, obstructed respiration, and cough with expectoration. — 
Great accumulation of mucus in trachea, which is easily detached. — The voice 
is louder in singing, after having hawked up the mucus,— Cough excited by 
laughter, talking, and singing, or by a tickling in chest ; or by warm drinks. — 
In chest affections, when talking, reading aloud, singing, &c. ; they cause a very 
weak feeling in throat and chest, an exhausted, “ given-out sensation, and 

, • vou a. 80 



1250 


STANNUM 


produce hoarseness ; using the voice produces weakness in the arms between 
the elbow and shoulder, then the weakness extends all over the body. The 
above symptoms are very often found in operatic singers, actors, auctioneers 
— all who use the voice a great deal. — Dry, violent, shaking cough, in bed, in 
evening, until midnight, or more violent in morning.— Shattering, deep cough. 
— Fatiguing, paroxysmal cough, so that epigastric region was painful, as if 
beaten. — Short cough from weakness of chest, having a hoarse, weak sound. 
— Cough concussive, with paroxysms of these coughs. — Cough excited by 
lying on the r. side. — Cough, with retching and vomiting of food. — Cough, 
with frequent expectoration of mucus. — (Cough cc/ming after whooping- 
cough in girl, 9; very profuse, white, thick expectoration, hoarse, tongue 
coated, sleepless, no appetite, rapid emaciation and debility, with contracted 
chest and pleuritic adhesions.— R. T. C.) — Expectoration when coughing 
(during the day, in morning expectoration is most profuse and) is greenish, 
sweetish, or yellow ; saltish ; or else viscid, and in lumps ; or serous, and 
composed of liquid mucus, or of a putrid smell (after coughing and expecto- 
rating the patient feels hollow and empty). — During and after the cough, pain 
as of excoriation, and shootings in the chest. — Phthisis pituitosa. 

18. Chest. — Obstructed respiration at night, esp. when lying down ; or 
by day, on least movement. — Dyspnoea, esp. in evening, with sensation of 
emptiness in scrobiculus, and anguish, which causes the patient (to loosen or) 
tear his clothes. — Oppression at chest when walking or ascending. — Asthma 
when attacks gradually come on, culminate, and gradually decline. — Rattling 
of mucus and wheezing in chest. — Agreeable sensation of lightness on taking 
a full inspiration. — Contusive pain in chest. — Heavy pressure in chest as by a 
weight. — Tension in chest (hydrothorax). — Constriction of chest, sometimes 
in evening, with anguish. — Lancinations in the 1 . side of the chest, during 
inspiration, or when lying on the r. side. — Sharp, cutting stitches in 1 . side of 
chest, < from stooping, — Burning stitches on 1 . chest, < on expectoration. — 
Suddenly, a long stitch in 1 . side of chest beneath axillae, causing fright. — 
Pain, as from excoriation, in chest. — Sensation of weakness in chest, as if it 
were empty, esp. after speaking or expectorating. — Itching-tickling in chest. ^ 

19. Heart. — Pain in praecordial region and hiccough. — Pulse : frequent, 
small ; indistinct, fluttering. 

20 . Neck and Back. — Lancinations in the shoulder-blades, and nape 
of the neck. — Weakness of the muscles of the nape of the neck, and crack- 
ing of the vertebrae of the neck when shaking the head. — Opisthotonos. — 
Stitches in back, in small of back, and into limbs. — Violent tearing in lumbar 
vertebrae, from both sides into region of kidneys, < on every motion of trunk. 
— Dull thrusts in lumbar region with a sensation of external coldness against 
him. 

21. Limbs. — Great heaviness and paralytic weakness in arms and legs. 
— Swelling of hands and feet in evening. — The pains in limbs < gradually 
and > in the same manner. — Insupportable restlessness in all the limbs. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Paralytic pain in the shoulder-joint. — Paralytic 
heaviness in the arms ; if he holds a light weight even a short time. — Pressive 
tearings in muscles of joints of the arms, hands, and fingers. — Weakness and 
trembling of hands. — Swelling of hands, esp. in evening. — ^Jerking of hands. 
— Violent burning sensation in hands. — Small red spots on backs of hands.— 



STANNUM t25i 

Xhilblains on hands.— Contraction of fingers.— Retraction of thumbs.— Shoot- 
ings in joints of fingers.— Stitches in finger-tips.— Painful flaws in nails. 

23. Lower Limbs, — Drawing and pressive tearings in hips, extending 
to sacrum, and also to legs and knees. — Paralytic lassitude and heaviness of 
legs. — Bending of knees when walking. — Stiffness and tension in ham, — 
Sensation of heat, and burning sensation in feet.— Swelling of ankles in 
evening, — Swollen ankles in delicate girls (R. T. C.) — ^Tearing shocks in 
ankles, extending as far as toes. — Swelling of feet, esp. in evening. — Red 
swelling of feet. 

* 24. Generalities.— Pressive and drawing pains, esp. in limbs, gradually 
becoming very violent, and decreasing in the same way. — Affections in general 
of 1. chest ; 1. side ,* trachea and inner chest ; upper part of chest ; inner 
surface of thighs. — Consumption. — < After moving ; lying on side ; using the 
voice ; from motion ; when descending. — > When lying on back ; from 
loosening garments ; from walking (except weakness). — Attacks of epilepsy 
(in children during dentition), with retraction of thumbs, and tossing about 
of body; or else with throwing back of head, paleness of face, convulsive 
movements of hands and eyes, and loss of consciousness ; the attacks come 
on sometimes in evening. — Excessive emaciation. — Pain as if paralysed in 
extremities. — Paralysis (of arms and legs). — Great heaviness and indolence. — 
Excessive dejection (weakness), and physical and moral depression, with 
trembling, esp. during gentle exercise (or when talking), and with disposition 
to perspire easily. — Profuse debilitating sweat, night and morning ; hot, even 
on slight movement ; with mouldy, putrid smell.— Nervous excitement. — 
Hysterical spasms, with pain in abdomen and in diaphragm. — Insupportable 
uneasiness in body. — Excessive fatigue after conversation. — The sufferings 
seem to disappear during a walk, with the exception of the depression, which 
is then excessive ; they reappear as soon as the patient is at rest. — Extreme 
prostration ; must sit or lie down continually. — Faintness in going down 
stairs ; can go up without difficulty. — Pains commence lightly, increase 
gradually to a very high degree, and decrease again as slowly. 

• 25. Skin. — Itching (burning) shootings over skin of whole body (or 1. 
side), — Itching pimples ; on face, sore to touch or on washing. — ^Chilblains. — 
Flaws in nails. — Painful hang-nails. 

26. Sleep.— Tendency to sleep during day.— Frequent yawning, with 
oppression of chest, as if it were encircled by a belt. — Sleep retarded. — 
Feeling, in morning, as after insufficient sleep. — Deep sleep. — Nocturnal 
agitation and many vivid dreams, an-xious 01 lascivious. — Moaning, weeping 
(timid supplications), and plaintive lamentations, while sleeping. 

27. Fever.— Shivering and shuddering in morning, with coldness in hands, 
and numbness of points of fingers. — Chill every forenoon (10 a.m.). — Slight 
chilliness with violent chattering of teeth. — Shivering in evening, which runs 

^ over back (preceded by heat with perspiration) ; or only in head, with thirst. 
—Burning heat in limbs, esp. in hands. — Sensation of anxious heat, on least 
movement. — Heat every afternoon (4 to 5), with perspiration at the same 
time. — Perspiration smells mouldy. — Small, quick pulse.— Debilitating per- 
spiration from least exertion. — Very debilitating perspiration at night. — 
Profuse perspiration in morning. 



tJ54 STAPHISAGRIA 

Stannum lodatum. 

Iodide of Tin. Sn la* Trituration. 

Clinical.— Phthisis. 

Charaoteristios. — Sian. iod. has been used in preference to the 
metal in some phthisical cases in which the general features of Stan. 
were present. O. S. Haines (Clinique, vii. ii) considers it especially 
indicated where the patient “ has a clear comj-)(rexion and long eye- 
lashes, and where the progress of the disease is rapid.^^ He uses the 
2 x trituration. M. D. Youngman (H. M., Jan. 1895) finds it a deeply 
acting drug, chiefly of value in chronic chest diseases characterised 
by plastic tissue changes. It is indicated in cases that hang fire 
and need an alterative.'’ He gives this keynote: “A persistent 
inclination to cough, excited by a tickling dry spot in the throat, 
sometimes in one place, sometimes in another, often apparently at 
root of tongue.” This cough, which begins as a weak-sounding cough, 
accompanied by shortness of breath, soon gathers strength and 
sound and induces raising of a free, copious, pale yellowish expecto- 
ration, which at first >, but is soon followed by a feeling of dryness, 
weakness in throat and chest, and increased oppression. An in- 
veterate smoker, who had a cough of this kind, said it came from his 
throat, and ascribed it to his smoking. Youngman found consoli- 
dation areas in middle of right lung. There was weak feeling in 
chest after coughing. Stan. 1. 3X trit. greatly relieved. The man 
was sent to a high altitude, where he enjoyed perfect health and 
was freed from his smoking habit. 


Staphisagria. 

Delphinium staphisagria. Stavesacre. N. 0 . Ranunculaceae 
Tincture of the seeds. 

Clinical. — Adenoids. /Iw/jrr, fits of Anus, itching of. Backache. Bashful- 
ness. Bkpharilib. Bones, diseases of. Cauiitiower excrescences. Chalazion. 
Condyloniata. Cough. Cvsls. Dentition. Dysentery. Dysparunia ; in newly 
married women Ec/ema. Eyes, tumours on. Fistula dentalis. Gastralgia. 
Glands, affections of. Hip-joint disease. Hypochondriasis. Impotency. Iritis ; 
syphilitic. Jaw-joint, easy dislocation of. Lumbar abscess. Mania. Masturba- 
tion, effects of Xcuitilgiti Night-sweats. Nymphomania. Ovaries, affections ol . 
Pediculosis. Perspiration, of/cnsire. Pregnancy, nausea ol. Prostate, affections of 
Psoas abscess. Ranula. Klieumatisin Sciatica. Scurvy. Sea-sickness. Scborrha*a 
Self abuse. Spermatic coids, affections of. Spermatorrhoea. Steatoma. Stiff- 
neck. Styes. Swallowing, constant while talking. Teeth, canes of. Testicles,' 
affections of. Tibhe, ))ains in Tobacco, effect of. Toenail, ingrowing. Tonsillitis. 
Toothache. Tumours ; tarsal. Voice, nasal , hoarse. Warts. 

Characteristics* — The seed Df Stavesacre was known to 
Dioscorides as an agent for producing vomiting and salivation, and 
for the cure of toothache ; “ the origin of which application,” says 



STAPHISAGRIA 


1253 


Hahnemann (M. M, P.), “was evidently domestic practice. J. H. 
Schultze, when suffering from toothache, took some of the seed in 
his mouth, but it gave him such a violent exacerbation that he 
thought he should go mad. ... As an exterminator of vermin this 
seed was called by the Greeks (pdeipoKOKKov^ and as such it still enters 
into the composition of an officinal ointment {ungucntum pediculosum),^^ 
This last is the only use of Staph, now known to orthodox medicine 
(Brunton). Teste (who groups Staph, with Caiist.) remarks that 
Slaph,j which shares this property with Coicul.y is, like Coccul.j used in 
some countries for ithe purpose of stupefying fish. Again, Teste 
found Staph, (he gave it in 6th dil.), like Cocuil.^ a remedy for sea- 
sickness. To be successful, Staph, had to be taken at the moment 
when dizziness and nausea commenced, before vomiting set in ; and 
it always helped “ nervous persons, not over fat, and disposed to 
sadness.’^ Staph, produced in Teste himself these symptoms : “Long- 
lasting vertigo, accompanied by continued nausea as in sea-sickness, “ 
and this : “ Vertigo, which ceases on rapidly turning round on one^s 
heel.“ This corresponds with one of Hahnemann's symptoms : 
“ Wheeling vertigo, especially while sitting, > by walking about (in 
a circle)." It is noteworthy that Staph, and CocciiJ. are both head- 
remedies and both effective against head lice. Both also affect the 
genitals, Staph, more especially, and both are remedies for crab lice. 
An application of a dilution of the tincture of the strength of one 
part to four of water will destroy the parasites, though the state 
which favours their presence needs internal treatment (probably with 
a dilution of the same remedy) at the same time. In Teste's ex- 
perience, Staph, was no less effective in the nausea of pregnancy than 
in the nausea of sea-sickness. Tabac, is another remedy for sickness, 
and Teste cured with Staph, effects of tobacco smoking (excoriated 
tongue ; gastralgia) ; and he also cured with it the habit of “ sw^al- 
lowing the tobacco smoke.” The use of Staph, in the sickness of 
pregnancy arises out of its power over the genital functions. It 
produces both physical and morjil sexual disturbances, provokes 
excesses and irregular sexual appetites, a tendency to masturbation, 
and a physical state corresponding to the effects of that habit. It is 
one of Gallavardin's chief remedies (Pa^swn Geniiale) for removing the 
habit of masturbation in children, and for removing improper appe- 
tites in adults. Staph, is one of the remedies which has “ < from 
coition " (in men), dyspnoea occurring during or after the act ; 
dyspnoea and prostration also follow an emission. In women coition 
is painful because the external parts are excessively sensitive. This 
property (which is also allied lo the vulnerary power of Staph.) makes 
Staph, a remedy of extreme value to women in the early days of 
married life. Some women suffer very acutely (in mind as well as 
body) during and for some timd after the first coitus. I have seen 
Staph, 30 give unspeakable relief in such cases. “ Constant urging to 
urinate in young married women" is the characteristic. Another 
urinary peculiarity is burning in the urethra when not urinating. 
Urinary difficulties after severe labours. Prolapse of bladder, I have 
seen cystocele relieved by Staph, Sensitiveness j stinging, stitching, 
shooting pains < by touch ; itching — are the chief notes of Staph, in 



1254 


STAPHISAGRIA 


affections of the genital organs of both sexes. It has cured prosta- 
titis in the man, with pain running from anus along urethra ; inflamed 
testicles with shooting and drawing in the cords ; stitching towards 
groin and testicles. In one female prover Staph, brought on the 
menses a year after they had ceased, at the new moon. The 
symptom did not recur the following month, which led Hahne- 
mann to conclude that this ** was only the primary action of the drug.^^ 
Staph, is not only a remedy for ovarian and other affections, it also 
meets the conditions following operations on ovaries. Effects qf 
“ wounds made by clean-cutting inst rumen t$ is the keynote. 

P. C. Majumdar (Ind, H, Rev,^ v. 134) gives two cases in which loss of 
memory following masturbation and seminal emissions was cured 
with Staph, 30 : (i) A student, naturally robust and intelligent, lost 
his memory when he contracted the habit of masturbation. His 
symptoms were : Vacant countenance ; no aptitude or inclination for 
mental work ; despair of the future ; great languor and weakness ; 
occasional nocturnal emission ; constipation. When he read any- 
thing he forgot it the next moment. Heaviness, headache, and vertigo 
after the least mental exertion. Staph, 30 was given morning and 
evening. Improvement began at once and the cure was complete in a 
month. (2) Another student had constant involuntary emissions, 
weak memory, languor ; headache every morning on rising ; no 
appetite ; constipation. Staph, 30, once a day, cured. Hypochon- 
driasis, apathy ; weak memory ; caused by sexual excesses or con- 
stantly dwelling on sexual subjects, is how the symptom is given. 
But the mental state of Staph, need not necessarily have a sexual 
origin. Staph, is a remedy for anger and for the effects of anger, 
especially it the indignation cannot have its natural expression, “ Was 
insulted ; being too dignified to fight, swallowed his wrath, and went 
home sick, trembling and exhausted.'^ The mental state of Staph.y 
like its physical, shows great sensitiveness to the least impression, 
^^the least word that seems wrong, hurts her very much.'' The 
touchiness may take the form of sudden, violent outbreaks provoked 
by mere trivial causes. I have known Staph, 30 remedy this state 
when the impulse to throw things at persons who had caused a trifling 
or imaginary irritation, had almost passed into a mania. This irrita- 
bility may be manifested in sensitiveness to criticism. Irritated by 
trifles. Want of self-control. Fear : afraid of his shadow. Among 
the consequences of anger which are met by Staph, is colic : ‘‘ Colic 
of screaming, ugly, pot-bellied children, especially if they suffer 
much from their teeth, which turn black, with tender, spongy gums, 
sensitive and painful." The irritability of Staph, is shown in the 
intestinal tract in “ < from least food or drink," This applies to 
vomiting, colic, or dysentery. When colic follows operations on the 
ovaries or intestines. Staph, is as useful as in colic from anger. The 
action of Staph, on the teeth is only one of many points in which it 
touches Merc,, and which makes it one of the best antidotes to Merc, 
The characteristic of Staph, is ; “ Teeth turn black, and have dark 
streaks through them ; cannot be kept clean ; crumble ; decay on 
edges ; scorbutic cachexia." The toothache of Staph, occurs during 
the menses ; affects sound as well as decayedjeeth ; < from touch 



STAPHISAGRIA 


1255 

of food or drink ; but not from biting or chewing ; is < drawing 
cold air into mouth ; < from cold drinks and after eating. Staph. 
has the ** sinking'^ sensation to an extreme degree. The stomach 
and abdomen 4 eel as if hanging down relaxed. There is extreme 
hunger even when the stomach is full. There is ravenous hunger for 
days before an attack of fever ; craving for tobacco ; and a cough 
excited by tobacco smoke is an indication for it. Inability to per- 
spire is one of the notes of Staph. ; as also is sweat smelling of rotten 
eggs, Bibby (quoted A. xxiii, 405) has used with much success 
Staph, p (three droos in two ounces of water ; a teaspoonful every 
two hours) in cas^ of night-sweat in patients bordering on con- 
sumption.^^ Eruptions, like the sweat, when moist are foul-smelling. 
There are diy, scaly eruptions over the ends of bones. Pressing, 
stinging, tearing pains in periosteum. Exostoses and gouty nodes 
on fingers and toes. Sycotic and syphilitic condylomata. Seed 
warts. The ulcers of Staph, are generally very painful and sensitive. 
Peculiar Sensations are : As if legs would go under him. As if 
stupefied. As of a round ball in forehead. As if head would burst. As 
if brain were compressed. As if bones would be pressed out. Brain, 
as if torn to pieces. As if occiput hollow. As if back of brain were 
made of wood and couldn’t think. As if occiput compressed ex- 
ternally and internally. As if hard substance were pressing on skull. 
As if eyes were very dry. As if a hard substance were lying beneath 
left upper lid. As if wind blew into ears. As if cheek swollen. As 
if glands beneath chin were swollen. As if teeth were hollow. As 
if stomach were hanging down. As of a heavy weight lying on 
stomach. As if abdomen would drop. As if bladder were not yet 
empty. Testicle feels as if compressed. As if something were loose 
in pit of stomach. As if chest were bruised. As if small of back 
were broken to pieces. As if a hard skin were drawn over tips of 
fingers of left hand. As if toes would be drawn down. Whole body 
a»if bruised. As if done up after much hard work. Compressive 
, pains are marked with Staph. Sensation of squeezing between stones 
or in a vice, in intestines, testes, head. The symptoms are : < By 
touch. < By pressure (as of hat). But pressure > toothache. 
Motion <. Rest > ; (but < pain in back). Sitting <. Swallowing 

< pressure in throat-pit. Eating and drinking <. < From drinking 

cold water. < Anger ; emotions ; excitement. Heat ; cold ; wash- 
ing ; open air ; change of air ; winter < (but warmth > pain in 
kidney and neuralgia of scalp ; and cold water > pain in stye). 

< Evening to morning ; night ; early morning. Periodicity is 

marked. Croupy cough alternates with sciatica. Nightly twitch- 
ing. < New moon ; every month before full moon. More symptoms 
appear on left side than on right, < By coitus. < After urinating ; 
when not urinating. * 

Relations. — Antidoted by : C^mph. Antidote to: Merc., Thuj., 
Complementary : Coloc. Compatible : Caust. (Caust., Coloc., Staph., 
follow well in this order). Inimical : Ran. b., before and after. 
Compare : Effects of sexual abuse, Plat, (spasms, emaciation), Calad. 
(glans flabby, K. bro. (depression ; weakness of legs), Gels., Dros., 
Nux, Sul., Calc., Lyc., Nat. m. Colic from mental causes, Cham. 



1256 


STAPHISAGRIA 


(hot face, red cheeks, hot sweat), Coloc. (bends double). Teeth, 
Kre. (premature decay of milk teeth ; first become yellow, then dark, 
then decay ; Stp., turn black and decay), Ant. c., Cham., Coff. Styes 
and tarsal tumours, Graph, (cystic tumours midway befWeen inner and 
outer surface), Calc. Figwarts and condylomata, Thu. (Thu. 
sessile ; Stp., on pedicles). Bone affections, Stillin., Merc., Ka. iod., 
Stront., Aur, mur., Plat, mur., Gettys. Arthritic ophthalmias, Coloc. 
(gout of eyes). Stomach hanging down, Ipec., Tab. Diarrhoea, with 
flatus smelling like rotten eggs, Cham. (Stp. is < on any attempt to 
take food or drink). Clean-cut wounds and operc^tions, Arn. Crusta 
lactea, Vine. m. Lumbar pains compel early rising, Rhe. Paralysis 
with tingling in affected parts, Aco. Paralysed by emotions, 
Stan., Nat. m. Throwing things from him, Kre. Irritated by t-rifles, 
Sul., Ig. Cauliflower excrescences, Pho., Thu. Stitches from throat 
into left ear on swallowing, Lach. Perspiration impossible, Lach. 
Diarrhoea immediately after eating, Alo., Ars., Chi., Lyc., Pod., Tbd. 
(Fer,, while eating). Ravenous hunger, Ars., Calc., Cin., Iod., Sil. 
Sinking immediately after meals, Ars., Cin., Lyc., Sil., Ur. n. 
Dyspnoea towards end of coitus, K. bi. < After coitus, K. ca. 
Relaxed Stomach, insufficient gastric juice, Selen. Cross, puny, sickly 
children, Syph. Nodosities on eyelids after styes, Con., Calc., Mag. 
Teeth decay on edges (Mez., Thu. at roots). Urging to urinate after 
difficult labour. Op. Painful sensitiveness of sexual organs, can 
hardly wear a napkin, Plat. Cough excited by tobacco smoke, Spo. 
Nodosities on fingers, Caul., Colch., Lyc. Pain in small spot, K. bi. 
Wind blowing into ears ; eruptions ; Mercury antidote, Mez. 
Urinating with cough, Caust. < After stool, Nit. ac. Involuntary 
stool when passing flatus, Alo. Black marks on teeth, Scill. 

Causation. — Anger. Anger suppressed or reserved. Injury ; 
falls ; clean-cut wounds ; operations. Coitus. Masturbation. 
Sexual abuse. Sexual craving. Emissions. Dentition. Tobacco. 
Mercury. * 


SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Hypochondriacal humour, with indifference to everything 
(after onanism). — Apathetic ; gloomy. — Sadness, with fear for the future. — 
Weeping, and grief respecting the state of health. — Susceptibility. — Patient 
is so sensitive that the least action or word troubles or annoys his feelings. 
— Amorous dreams. — Desire for death. — Anxiety and agitation, which allow 
no rest. — Ill-humour, irascibility, spitefulness, inducing patient to fling 
violently whatever is at hand ; in the morniMg. — Justifiable ill-humour over 
what has happened or has been done by oneself ; weeping and dejected 
over the supposed ill consequences of it. — Hypochondria and hysteria after 
unmerited insults (or sexual excesses), with complaints of flatulence. — Dislike 
to conversation, meditation, and all intellectual and serious labour. — Weak- 
ness of memory ; a few minutes after reading anything can recollect it only 
dimly, and whenever he thinks of anything the sense escapes him; can 
scarcely recall it after long reflection. — Instability of ideas. Excessively 
dull intellect, with inability to attend to any occupation.— Delusions with 



STAPHISAGRIA 


1257 

respect to past events, — Illusion, as if all surrounding objects were lower, 
and the patient himself much taller than in reality. 

8* Head. — Head confused and embarrassed ; dull feeling of head with 
inability to perfofm any mental labour. — Whirling vertigo, sometimes in 
evening, in bed, or during day, when sitting or lying ; > by walking ; or by 
turning rapidly round on the heel. — Fine, burning, needle-like stitches, ex- 
ternally on vertex. — Hard, pressive pain in vertex. — Headache in the morn- 
ing on waking, as if brain were bruised. — Stupefying, pressing headache, as 
if brain were compressed. — (Stupefying headache that she had had for three 
days goes away at once. — R. T. C.) — Pain in 1. side of head with inability to 
keep eyelids open (produced. — R. T. C.). — Stunning pain in the head, some- 
times alternately with boring.— Heaviness in head, esp. forehead, above 
root cif nose (> by resting head upon hand). — Pressing in forehead as* 
from a very heavy lump (wedge of wood or plug) which will not be shaken 
off ; < in morning, from motion and from stooping ; > when at rest, and 
when leaning head against something. — Dulncss in small spot in middle of 
forehead. — Violent pressing boring stitches in 1. half of forehead, from 
within outward, in morning. — Drawing, tearing, or lancinating pressure in 
the head. — Headache, as if forehead were about to split, on moving it, or on 
stooping. — Burning in 1 . temple ; internally and externally, as if bones would 
be pressed out, < from touch. — Compressive or expansive pains in head. — 
Semilateral headache, as if a nail were driven into brain. — Lancinating head- 
ache. — Sensation as if brain were loose. — Feeling as if occiput were hollow 
or empty, or as if brain were not large enough for the space. — Feeling as 
if all back part of brain was wood and couldn’t think. — Feeling as if the 
occiput were compressed, internally and externally. — Head becomes more 
pulled down (agg. in an old rheumatic. — R. T. C.). — Neuralgia of scalp. — 
Rheumatic and drawing pains in exterior of head. — Tingling itching, some- 
times^ also gnawing, in scalp, with pain as of excoriation ; the skin peels 
off, with itching and biting ; < in evening and from getting warm. — Much 
itching dandriff on scalp. — Moist, fetid scald-head, with violent itching. — 
.Humid, scalding-itching, fetid eruption on back part of head, sides of head, 
and behind ears ; when scratching, the itching changes place, but makes it 
more humid. — (Eczema of scalp and other parts. — Scald-head ; hair matted 
together, very stinking. — R. T. C.) — Falling off of hair. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes sunken, with blue raised rings around them. — R. eye 
much larger than usual (lids wider open). — Pupils dilated. — Eyes sleepy. — 
Aching in the eyes, lids, and canthi. — Itching in margins of lids. — Itching and 
biting smarting in internal canthi. — Smarting and burning sensation in eyes 
when writing. — On looking at sun, hot water runs out of 1 . eye, scalding 
cheek and making eye smart.—Violent lancinations in eyes on fatiguing 
them. — Inflammation of eyes, which are surrounded by pimples.— Inflamma- 
tion in margins of the lids.— Styes. — Steatoma of eyelids (Koch).— Nodosities 
in margins of lids. — Great dryness ’of the eyeballs and lids. — Syphilitic iritis 
with bursting pain in eyeball, temple, and side of face, < from evening to 
morning, and on using eyes by any light. — Laceration of cornea with prolapse 
of iris (after Aco .), — (After operations for cataract.) — Much purulent dry 
mucus in canthi. — Obstinate catarrh with swollen eyelids (Baehr). — Noc- 
turnal agglutination of eyes,— Spasmodic closing of lids.— Pain in upper lid, 



1258 STAPHISAGRIA 

< on dosing eye, — Pain as if a hard substance were beneath 1. upper lid, — 
Diminished power of sight.— Confused sight, as if water were in the eyes.— 
Black flashes and luminous sparks before eyes. — Sparkling before eyes in the 
dark, — Areola round candle in evening. * 

4, Ears. — Shootings in ears. — ^Tensive stitches in 1 . ear. — Eruption 
behind ears. — Hardness of hearing, as from enlargement of tonsils, < after 
abuse of Mercury , — [Perforated tympana with deafness as in winter. — Deaf- 
ness in children, < at meals, with stuffy cold, thick voice and snuffles 
(adenoids). — R. T. C.]. — Tinkling in ears. — Ringing in ears on moving head; 
reports in ears ; sensation as if wind blew into thenv — Noises in ears like 
sawing of wood, with swollen tonsils and vertigo ; and shooting pains froni 
temple to temple (much relieved. — R. T. C.). 

» 5. Nose. — Nose ulcerated, with scabs, deep in interior. — ^Violent fluent 

coryza, with obstruction on one side of nose, frequent sneezing, and lachry- 
mation. — Sneezing without coryza. — Coryza, with ulcerated nostrils. — Coryza ; 
at first discharge of only thick mucus, after of thin water. — Obstruction of 
nasal fossae, with nasal voice. 

6. Face. — Face wan and sharp (countenance sunken, nose peaked), 
with eyes hollow, and surrounded by a blue circle. — Bashful look. — Bluish 
and brownish colour of face, when excited by passion. — Distressing pressive 
and throbbing pain in face, from teeth into eye. — Sharp, burning stitches in 
1 . cheek, which provoke scratching. — Prosopalgia in an old lady ; on touch- 
ing lips with spoon or fork inexpressible pains shot from lips over face ; 
fluid food had to be eaten with fingers, could take no solid food : mastication 
impossible. — Inflammation of bones of face, with burning shootings, or 
incisive drawings and pressive tearings. — Facial eruption, with itchings and 
shootings. — Lips scurfy, covered with ulcers and scabs, with burning pain. — 
(Neuralgia that affects 1 . upper lip, with shootings up side of face.— R. T. C.) 
— Neuralgia of Staph, is < by holding cold water in mouth (R. T. C.) — 
Swelling of lips. — Easy dislocation of maxillary joint. — Painful swelling and 
induration of submaxillary glands. — Painfulness of submaxillary glands, 
with (or without) swelling. — Sensitive induration, like a cartilage, beneath, 
chin, pain on swallowing and on touch. — Caries of lower jaw, following 
osteitis after tooth extraction. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache, with swelling of cheeks and submaxillary 
glands. — Toothache, immediately after a meal, and after mastication, and also 
after cold drinks, and the introduction of cold air into mouth (but not when 
biting on them), < at night or in morning. — ^Tearings and pressive drawings 
in carious teeth, or in the roots of those which are sound (in open air), and also 
in gums. — Teeth sensitive to touch, esp. at night and in the morning. — (Front 
teeth get loose from alveolar periostitis going on to caries of jaw. — R.T.C.) 
— Gnawing pain in carious teeth. — Blackness, brittleness, and caries of teeth 
(which exfoliate).— Dentition : child very sensitive ; teeth decay as soon as 
they are cut. — Toothache so sensitive that’ one can’t bear to move the tongue 
(hard pressure frequently > the toothache) ; black streaks running through 
teeth. — ^Affections of teeth on r. side chiefly; decayed teeth very often 
excessively tender on being filled ; can’t bear the operation. — Painful sensi- 
tiveness, swelling, and easy bleeding of gums. — Painful nodosities and 
excrescences on the gums. — Tearing in gums of lower incisors, and their 
roots while eating. — Gums pale, white, ulcerated (spongy). 



STAPHISAGRIA 


1259 


8. Mouth, — Mouth and tongue covered with vesicles; stomacace.-— 
Conditions of mouth and throat like scurvy and mercurial poisoning. — 
Painful excrescences on interior of cheek. — Ulcers in mouth. — Salivation. 
— Sanguineous saliva. — Constant accumulation of mucus In mouth. — 
Swelling of glands under tongue. — (Cysts in connection with salivary ducts, — 
R. T. C.) — Ranula. — ^Tongue : white-coated ; dry, with tough mucus stop- 
ping posterior nares ; stitches in tip ; sore pain in anterior part ; stick- 
ing in margins. — Shootings in tongue, as from splinters. — Low voice, from 
weakness of the organs of speech (after anger). — Nasal voice from stoppage 
of posterior nares. — ^While talking she swallows continually. — (Chronic winter 
throats with enlarged tonsils. — R. T. C.) 

9. Throat. — Roughness (dryness) and scraping in throat, with feeling 
of excoriation, when sWallowing and speaking. — Constant deglutition when 
speaking. — Dryness and shootings in palate and throat. — Sticking in throat 
on swallowing. — Tonsillitis, on sw’allowing a stitch runs up from throat into 
ear. — Swelling of tonsils (also after the misuse of Mercury ). — Painful drawing 
from hyoidal arch into throat, < touching side of neck. — Tonsillitis : both 
tonsils inflamed and swollen ; 1. sends stitches into ear on swallowing. 

10. Appetite. — Mawkish and watery taste, with normal taste of food. — 
Bitter taste of all food. — Sour taste of bread. — Appetite, with want of taste. — 
Voracity. — Bulimy, even after a meal, sometimes with waterbrash. — Child 
cries as soon as it eats. — After eating : cutting in abdomen ; dysenteric stool ; 
after meat, cough <. After drinking : cutting in abdomen ; dysenteric stool. — 
Great desire for milk. — ^Tobacco has an acrid taste, and produces pyrosis. 
— Appetite for liquid food only (soup). — Craving for wine, brandy, and 
tobacco. — Thirstlessness. 

11. Stomach. — Eructations, generally empty or scraping. — Bitter 
risings after acid food. — Salt and bitter risings after eating meat. — Fre- 
quent hiccough. — Sobbing risings. — Waterbrash. — Nausea, with inclina- 
tion to vomit every morning. — Frequent nausea. — Pressure at the stomach, 
as from a weight, in morning in bed. — Sensation as if stomach were hanging 

• down relaxed. — Tension and pressure in stomach, < or > by eating, esp. 
bread. — Fulness, pressure, and shootings in scrobiculus. — Digging pain in 
stomach.— Anxious tension across hypochondria, in morning, with obstructed 
respiration. 

12 . Abdomen. — Biliary colic, after domestic disturbance.— Tensive 
pressure in abdomen. — Hard pressure in r. side beneath umbilicus. — Pinch- 
ing stitch in 1. viscera. — Enlargement of the abdomen in children. — Drawing 
pains across abdomen. — Sensation of weakness and bearing down in abdo- 
men, as if it would drop ; wants to hold it up. — Gripings after all kinds of 
food and drink. — Colic with urging to urinate. — Spasmodic cuttings, with 
want to evacuate. — Frequent production and incarceration of flatus (smelling 
like rotten -eggs). — Eruption of pimples as large as peas on whole abdomen 
and thighs, itch; when scratched off are moist and then burn. — Frequent 
discharge of hot or fetid flatus. — Painful swelling of inguinal glands. — 
Inguinal hernia. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation. — Hard evacuations. — Frequent 
want to evacuate, with scanty evacuations, hard or soft.— Evacuation tardy, 
without being hard. — Difficult evacuation. — Obstinate constipation sets in 



I26o 


STAPHISAGRIA 


two weeks after a single close of (R. T. C.).— Loose evacuations, preceded, 
accompanied, and followed by tenesmus and gripings.— Diarrhoea : < after 
drinking cold water ; < after eating ; in children. — Loose, evacuations, with 
frequent expulsion of fetid wind. — Involuntary evacuation of liquid stools. — 
A thin stool passes unconsciously, as if flatus would pass.—Dysenteric stools ; 
with pressing and cutting in abdomen before, during, and after stool. — 
Smarting, sore pain in rectum for long after stool. — Itching in anus, while 
sitting. — Burning cuttings, pressure, and constriction in anus, during evacua- 
tions. — Haemorrhoids, with enlarged prostate ; intense pain in back and* 
through whole pelvis. — F'latus : hot, smells like rottefn eggs. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Itching, needle-like stitches in region of kidneys. 
— Pressure on bladder on waking from sleep. — Very frequent want to urinate, 
with emission drop by drop, or else of a slender stream of deep-coloured 
urine. — Excessively painful emission of urine. — Frequent (profuse) emission 
of clear watery urine (with much urging). — Frequent emission of red urine. 
— Constant micturition at night (produced. — R, T. C ). — Bloody urine (pro- 
duced. — R. T. C.). — Involuntary emission of urine when coughing. — After 
having urinated, a fresh want is felt, as if bladder were again full. — Burning 
sensation in urethra, esp. (after and) when urinating (with urging, as if the 
bladder were not emptied). — Constant urging in young married women. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Soft, moist excrescences, upon and behind 
the glans (sycosis). — Inflammation of testes, with burning shootings, or pres- 
sive drawing and tearings. — Pressing pain in 1 . testicle when walking ; and 
after rubbing ; < from touch. — Drawing, tearing, in r. testicle, as if com- 
pressed. — Drawing, burning, extending from r. inguinal ring, as if in sper- 
matic cord, into r. testicle. — Chronic prostatitis in old men ; pain extending 
from anus along urethra. — Sensation of worms crawling in back of scrotum, 
— A very marked increase of sexual desire, with frequent erections, esp. at 
night. — Voluptuous itching in the scrotum, which provokes emission. — Fre- 
quent pollutions, even during a siesta. — Effects of onanism ; face sunken, 
abashed look ; melancholy ; nocturnal emissions ; backache, legs weak ; 
organs relaxed. — Seminal emi.ssions followed by great chagrin and mortifica- 
tion ; great prostration ; dyspnoea. — Dyspnoea (towards the end of, and) after 
coition. — Discharge of prostatic fluid, during a hard evacuation, 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Nymphomania, with extreme sensitive- 
ness to mental and physical impressions ; mind dwells too much on sexual 
subjects. — Painful sensitiveness of genital organs (esp. when sitting). — 
Prurigo senilis ; or from pediculi. — Smarting and lancinating itching in 
vulva. — Sufferings after coitus in newly married women. — Inflammation of 
the ovaries with burning, stinging, and pressing-drawing. — Very sharp 
shooting pains in ovary, which is exceedingly sensitive to pressure ; pains 
extending into crural region and thighs. — Flow of blood from genitals a long 
time after critical age. — Menses which had ceased for a year, reappeared with 
cutting colic and violent rumbling, at the new moon. — Spasmodic pains in 
vulva and vagina. — Menses ; irregular, late, and profuse ; sometimes want- 
ing ; first of pale blood, then dark and clotted ; occasionally spas- 
modic uterine contractions. — Amenorrhcea from chagrin with indignation. — 
Granular vegetations of vagina. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness, with accumulation of mucus. 



STAPHISAGRIA 


1261 

which adheres to larynx and chest. — Sensation of pressure and contraction 
in pit of throat, after a fit of passion, < by deglutition.-- Rougiiness, rawness, 
in larynx, after much speaking. — Dry, hollow cough, excited by a tickling in ' 
the larynx, — ^Viotent cough, w’ith expectoration of viscid mucus, in evening, 
after lying down. — ^Violent spasmodic cough, with (tough) purulent, yellow 
expectoration, esp. at night. — Croupy cough in winter, alternating with 
sciatica in summer ; cough excited by tobacco smoke. — Expectoration of 
blood, when coughing.— Dyspnoea ; with constriction ; after seminal emis- 
sions ; towards end of coition. — Pain (soreness and rawness) as from ulcera- 

* tion in the chest, durjng cough. — Dyspnoea with constriction and restlessness 

* in chest. 

18. Chest. — Aching in chest, with heaviness in that part when sitting, 
mitigated by walking. — Contractive oppression, and great agitation in chest. 
— Itching stitches in costal cartilages. — Itching in sternum beneath pit of 
throat. — Lancinations in chest. — Pain in chest, as from excoriation and 
ulceration. — Cramp in diaphragm, after a fit of passion. — Miliary eruption on 
the chest, with redness and itching when heated.— Herpetic eruption on 
lower ribs, with burning itching. 

ig. Heart. — Tremulous palpitation of heart ; on least movement ; after 
least intellectual fatigue ; when listening to music ; after a siesta. — Stitching 
pains in heart, or region of heart; stopping breathing.— Heart feels weak 
(produced.— K. T. C.). 

20. Neck and Back. — Drawing, rheumatic pressure, and tension in 
nape, with rigidity. — Stiff-neck, shoulders sore to lie on (produced. — 
R. T. C.) — Weakness of muscles in nape and neck. — Eruption of itching 
pimples on nape. — Painful swelling of glands of neck, of nape, and under 
axillas. — Lancinations under axillae. — Pam, as if broken in loins, or sensa- 
tion as from overlifting, or straining the back, esp. during repose, and 
principally night and morning, — Pain in loins on rising from a seat, or on 
turiiing in bed. — Itching stitches in region of kidneys.— Violent (stitches) 
lancinations, which pass up back. — (Suppurating swelling in the psoas muscle.) 
— Lumbar abscess. 

21. Limbs. — Drawing, tearing, stitching pains in extremities. — Limbs 
feel beaten and painful, as after a long walk, below shoulders and below hip- 
joint. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Aching of shoulders, — Stitches in shoulder-joints, 
< on touch and motion. — Dislocation pains in r. shoulder-joint, only on 
moving. — Stiffness of shoulder-joint in morning. — Shoulders sore to lie on, 
and stiff-neck (produced. — R. T. C.). — Pains in bones of arms, during move- 
ment. — Pressive, paralytic, drawing, and lancinating learings, in arms « on 
motion and touch), and fore#irms, shoulders, hands, and lingers.— Painful 
pressure in bone of arm. — Paralytic drawing in metacarpal joints, < from 
motion. — Hands become ameinic from cardiac inertia ; gouty pains in little 
finger, index and thumb of 1. ha«d at night, and loss of power in 1. thumb 
with pain in r. shoulder (produced. — R. T. C.). — Herpes on hands. — Herpes 
with scabs on elbows. — Numbness in ends of fingers. — Jerking tearing in 
fingers, esp. in the tips. — Burning itching in 1 . thumb. — Arthritic nodosities in 
joints of the fingers. — Osteitis of phalanges of fingers.— Cramps in fingers, — 
Convulsive movements of fingers. 



1262 


STAPHISAGRIA 


23. Lower Limbs.— Pulsating pain in hip-joint as from beginning 
suppuration,— Stiffness of coxo-femoral joint in morning.— Nates ache while 
sitting ; pain extend'^ to small of back, sacrum, and hip-joint.— Daily pains 
beginning at crest of ilium, r. side, extending backward and downward to 
thigh, < early morning, on rising or on sitting down, > standing and from 
warmth.— Exceedingly severe pain in r. leg, extending into genitals, esp. 
testes ; attacks followed by great prostration. — Painful weakness of thighs 
and legs, esp. of knee-joint. — Pain as of a fracture in thighs when walking. — 
Itching tetters on thighs and legs. — Itching on inner side of thighs. — Drawing, 
shootings in the knees and knee-joints « on motion) .-t Drawings, and pres-, 
sive tearings in tibia, and bones of feet. — Boring stitches in r. tibia during 
rest. — Nocturnal cramps in calves and soles. — Tearing in muscles of Jegs 
when sitting and standing. — Stitches in r. calf.— Swelling of instep. — Swelling 
of metatarsal bones. — Burning itching in toes, as if they had been frost- 
bitten. — R. toe inflames round nail and forms an abscess (produced, — R. T. C.), 

24. Generalities. — [Flatulent colic, where the flatus is incarcerated; 
gnawing pains ; darting pains ; sensation of trembling in inner parts. — Pains 
in zygoma ; in cheeks ; in under jaw. — Affections of angles of eye, particu- 
larly the inner ; glands about neck and lower jaw ; diseased ovaries, particu- 
larly r. one. — ^Yellow scabs behind ear. — Flat taste ; obstructed evacuation of 
bowels. — Micturition too frequent ; too sparing. — Polypus ; arthritic nodes ; 
restlessness of the body ; scurvy. — < From : mental affections ; anger ; 
grief ; mortification, esp. if caused by offence ; from loss of fluids ; tobacco ; 
Mercury ; sexual excesses ; sleeping in afternoon ; touching the parts (as in 
toothache, can’t bear to have the tongue, drink, or anything touch the teeth) ; 
from the least touch on affected parts. — > After breakfast ; from breaking 
wind. — H. N. G.] — Has been used as an application for healing recent 
wounds. — Paralytic drawing in joints, esp. during movement, or when 
the parts are in a false position. — Drawing tearing in muscles, esp. when 
seated. — Twitches at night. — Acute, penetrating, deep lancinations m 
different parts. — Cramps in limbs. — Painful inflammations of bones; sup- 
puration of bones and periosteum. — Swelling of bones. — Semilateral paralysis, 
after a fit of anger. — Syncope. — Painful sensibility of all muscles, when 
touched, and of joints, when using them. — Mechanical injuries from sharp- 
cutting instruments. — Painful weariness and excessive lassitude, esp. during 
movement ; > by sitting or lying down. — Continued disposition to remain 
lying down. — Great fatigue, early in morning, with stiffness of all joints. — 
Sore and stiff all over, swollen fingers and sore tibiae (produced. — R. T. C.). — 
After a siesta, cloudiness, with heaviness in limbs.— Relieves pains of cancer 
(R. T. C.). 

25. Skin. — Tingling, as from insects, over whole body, esp. in morning. 
— Chronic miliary eruptions, sometimes with convulsive jerks at night. — 
Eruption of itching, oozing nodosities, with burning pain. — Scaldrhead with 
yellow scab, smells badly, itches very much, &c. — Exanthema on cheeks, 
face, or particularly if it is yellow ; with a creeping itching. — Incised wounds, 
with great pain. — Herpetic eruptions, with itching in evening, and burning 
sensation after scratching them. — ^Arthritic nodosities on the joints. — Dry, 
crusty tetters on the joints.— Painful engorgement and induration of the 
glands. — Unhealthy skin, easily suppurating. — Frequent furunculi. — Ulcers, 



. STELLARIA MEDIA 1263 

with tearing shootings (gnawing pains), or itching smarting.— Jerking and 
tearing round ulcers, esp. morning and evening.— Wens and encysted tumours 
burst after Stafh, 200 (R. T. C.). 

26. Sleep. — Strong tendency to sleep all day. — ^Violent yawnings and 
stretchings, which cause tears to come into the eyes.— Sleep retarded by 
mental activity (crowding of ideas) ; or in consequence of an itching and 
burning sensation in the tetters and ulcers, or of violent pains in calves, — 
Sleepy all day ; awake all night ; body aches all over.— Jerking of limbs, 
when sleeping. — Disturbed sleep, with unquiet dreams, and frequent waking 
V^ith a start. — Child wmkes, pushes everything away and wants everybody to 
go away ; restless at night as from frightful dreams ; calls for mother often. 
— Lascivious dreams, with emissions. 

27.* Fever. — Pulse very fast but small and trembling. — Frequent shiver- 
ing and shuddering, also at night. — Fever in evening, manifesting itself only 
by chilliness. — Chilliness and coldness predominate. — Violent chill in evening 
with heat in face. — Chilliness 3 p.m. ; > when exercising in open air^ — Chill 
ascending from back over head. — Chill running down back. — Before and 
after the paroxysms of intermittent fever, ravenous hunger. — Tertian fever 
(with symptoms of scurvy, such as putrid taste), bitter taste, bleeding gums, 
anorexia, and constipation. — External burning heat, with ebullition of blood, 
and thirst (after midnight, followed by chill towards morning). — Burning 
heat in hands and feet, at night, which renders it needful to uncover them. — 
Great tendency to perspire by day, even when seated quietly ; or else 
inability to perspire, with paleness of face and headache. — Profuse perspira- 
tion at night, sometimes with putrid smell (like rotten eggs).— Cold sweat on 
forehead and feet. 


Stellaria Media. 

•Stellaria media. Chickweed. N, 0 , Caryophyllaceae. Tincture of 
whole fresh plant in bloom. 

Clinical. — Gout. Liver, inflammation of. Rheumatism. PsoriasivS. 

Characteriatios. — The first mention of SteL appeared in H. 
xxviii. 284 (June, 1893). F. H. Brett gave an experience with the 
tincture applied externally, in the case of his wife to enlarged, inflamed 
gouty fingers-joints, and in his own case to painful, aching great 
toes. In each case a few applications removed the trouble. Brett 
was led to this use by having heard a rumour that ‘‘chickweed 
poultices were good for gouty joints. In the same volume, p. 560, 
F. Kopp published a proving of the tincture on himself. The symp- 
toms of the proving make up^my Schema. Kopp took frequently 
repeated doses of the tincture, and also chewed some of the 
weed. The pains induced were of a rheumatic character, and were 
so severe that they had to be antidoted with Nux and Bty. Kopp 
confirms Brett’s observations in the value of external applications of 
SteL Internally he gave the 2x. The most prominent symptom, apart 



1264 


STELLARIA MEDIA 


from the rheumatic effects, was the pain, swelling, and soreness of the 
liver. The pains were > by motion, and were accompanied by 
soreness. Bellairs (H, xxi. 24), published this case : E. B., i8, 
had had rheumatic fever which had left him in a 'hopeless state of 
chronic ‘‘ shifting rheumatism : pains now in ankle, now in knee, 
now in arm, wrist or fingers. SteL 2x, taken three times a day, com- 
pletely cured in a month. Bellairs suggests that “ shifting-pains may 
be a keynote ; and Kopp confirms this. Brett (//. l^., xxxiv. 93) 
cured himself with SteL 1 of a violent attack of sickness, with sharp 
pains in stomach, increasing in violence and culminating in an ex- 
plosive vomit. The liver was much enlarged, 'Ihard to the toucli. 
The pain began in the region of the gall bladder. Vomiting ceased 
after the first dose, and the liver enlargement quickly subsided. 
Cooper gave much relief with a single dose of ^ in the case of a 
woman, 55, who had psoriasis, dating from twenty-one years back, 
with irritation in the spots, chiefly on flexures of joints, with much 
irritation of scalp and soreness of eyeballs. 


SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Rheumatic pains over r. side of head, csp. at back ; sore to 
touch. — Rheumatic pains ; darting through whole head < r. side ; through 
1. half of forehead, over eye ; sore to touch. 

3. Eyes. — R. eyeball horc to touch. — Flushes of heat below r. lid. — 
Darting pain m r. eye. — Vision dim. 

5. Nose. — Dryness of nostrils. 

6. Face. — Neuralgic pains r. side of face.— Burning on lower lips. 

8, Mouth. — Persistent taste of the drug with slight acrid feeling.— Heat 
and dryness of mouth ; numbness of lower gums and tip of tongue. — 
Sensation as if incisors set on edge. 

9. Throat. — Numbness and dryness in tliroat, followed later by sharp, 
stitches in 1. tonsil. 

XI. Stomach. — Slight nausea with frequent eructations, tasting of 
the drug. 

12, Abdomen. — Stomach and bowels sore, < by touch. — Navel sore to 
touch. — Soreness and dragging pains in lower bowels. — ^A\^andcring pains 
around navel, settling between navel and liver. — Sensation as if liver too 
large for body. — Burning pains all over liver, — Liver sore to touch. — Burning 
pressure in region of liver. — Bilious feeling. — Pains in r. groin. 

13, Stool. — Stools loose, dark brown, attended with slight pain. 

14, Urinary Organs. — Kidney region sore to touch. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Short cough from tickling on upper chest, 
< deep inspiration. — Hawking of viscid, ualtish mucus. 

18. Chest.— In chest : tickling, upper part ; constricted ; oppression ; 
heat. 

20. Back.— Rheumatic pains across small of back, < bending.— Loins 
stiff and sore. — Dull pain under r. scapula. 

21. Limbs.— Joints stiff. 



STICTA PULMONARIA 1265 

a0. Upper Limbs. — Darting, rheumatic pain : down r, arm, and in 
* middle of index finger of 1. hand. 

23. , Lower Limbs. — Rheumatic pains : in r. hip ; 1. foot ; ankle ; 1 . knee, 
gradually extendiifg along thigh ; below r. knee-cap ; in calves which are 
sensitive. 

24. Generalities. — Pains < on motion ; parts sore to touch. —Symptoms 
come on rapidly after taking the drug ; next morning on rising bruised feeling 
all over thighs as from over-exertion. 

26. Sleep. — Sleeps well but unrefreshed on waking. 

27. Fever. — PuIsq slightly raised but temperature normal. 


Sticta Pulmonaria. 

Sticta pulmonaria. Lung- wort. A', 0 . Lichenes. Tincture. 

Cllnieal. — Angina pectoris Anus, pain in. Asthma. Bronchitis. Catarrh. 
Clergyman's sore throat. Cold. Cough. Diabetes. Diaphragm^ rhcnmattsm 
0/. Diarrhoea. Glands, swollen. Hay-fever. Headache. Housemaid's knee. 
Hysteria. Influenza. Laryngitis. Levitation. Measles, cough of. Migraine. 
Milk, scanty. Neuralgia. Ozjena. Phthisis. Post-nasal catarrh. Pott’s disease. 
Rheumatism. Seminal emissions. Sick headache Sleeplessness. Syphilis. 

Characteristics. — There cannot be much doubt whence Sticia 
received its name of Pulmonaria. The likeness of the plant to lung 
tissue is self-evident. It was a popular remedy of great repute in 
catarrhs and coughs when Hale introduced it to homeopathy. S. P. 
Burdock, C. H. Lutes, and S. Lilienthal proved it and elicited some 
very remarkable and valuable symptoms. Hering added many no less 
valuable clinical symptoms. Dewey (Trans. Pans Int. H. Cong. 1900, 
p. 317) conducted another proving on several persons which has 
further enriched the pathogenesis. His additions are marked (D) in 
the Schema. “ It was first used/^ says Hale, “ for severe, harassing 
cough, and such good results accrued that provings were made to 
ascertain its full value. It was found to cause severe coryza, with 
violent sneezing, intense headache, and conjunctivitis. These attacks 
were preceded or followed by rheumatic pains and swelling of the 
small joints.’* The catarrh of Stic, is for the most part obstructive ; 
and if there is discharge it dries quickly, and forms crusts or scurf. 
Constant need to blow the nose, but no discharge ccfmes on account 
of dryness. In syphilis, or any other disease where this condition is 
present, Stic, will be the renledy. A grand characteristic both of 
headaches and catarrh is a dull, heavy pressure (or stuffed feeling) 
in root of nose.” The cough of Stic, is also dry. ** Dry night cough ” 
is a keynote cough dry, < evenir/g and night ; can neither sleep nor lie 
down ; must sit up. P. C. Majumdar {Ind. H. R.^ v. 109) cured two cases 
of whooping-cough with Stic. 6x. The cough began just after sunset, 
and went on till vomiting occurred, and all the contents of the stomach 
were thrown off. Stic, will often cure coughs left by measles, 
whooping-cough, influenzat Hard, dry barking coughs following colds. 

VOL. ir. 81 



1266 STICTA PULMONARIA 

In cases of phthisis and haemoptysis it is of great service. Oppression 
at chest ; sensation as if a hard mass on it. Sudden pain from sternum 
to spine, constant, < on movement,” are leading symptoms in such cases, 
in addition to those of the cough. Phthisis and‘*rheumatism not 
infrequently occur in diiferent members of a phthisical family ; and 
rheumatism (as the word implies) is related to catarrh. Stic, meets all 
these conditions ; and it has, like Bacil.y “ a deep-in headache,” Elias 
C. Price (in Southern y, of H.) relates this case : Boy, 8, had acute 
rheumatism with inflammation and redness of one knee, ankle, toes, 
wrist, and fingers ; valvular heart disease from a previous attack. Aco, 
and Sul, failed to relieve. Stic, i x was given every hour. Next day 
there was a considerable quantity of fluid in the knee-joint [an aggra- 
vation by Stic, apparently], but otherwise the boy was better, *'Siic, 
was continued. Next' day half the fluid was gone, and the third day 
it was all gone, and the boy was cured in nine days. Price rcmarl^ 
that he had noticed one symptom so frequently present in the cases he 
cured with Stic, that he began to regard it as a characteristic although 
it was not in the provings : A spot of inflammation and redness on 
the affected joint like the hectic flush on the cheeks in phthisis. In 
houscmaid’s-knee Stic, comes as near being a specific as a remedy 
ever can. M. D. Youngman (H. M., 1893, p. 360) related a number 
of cases of catarrhal and pulmonary affections cured with Stic, 0, 
the indications being ; Harsh, racking, incessant, “ unprofitable ” 
cough of spasmodic type. He considers it especially Suited to 
neuralgic, rheumatic, gouty individuals. Here is one of his cases : 
Mrs. H., 42, had an attack of bronchitis in January, and when seen, 
March 29th, had a harsh, racking cough, with pain all through chest 
on coughing ; spongy state of mucous membrane of pharynx, which 
bleeds easily ; has had several attacks of asthma ; has hay-fever every 
August ; paroxyms of cough often end in convulsive sneezing, .which 
she dreads because it is followed by asthmatic symptoms. She 
takes cold in her head, which in a day or so goes down in her throat, 
and thence into her chest.” Every cold she gets does this. Stic, i 
gave relief in five days. Hale says Site, is indispensable in February, 
March, and April in the American climate. L. O. Rogers (S. y, ofH,) 
prescribed Stic, for a patient with the cough of the reme% at 
the time she was nursing her seventh child. She had always been 
annoyed because of a scantiness of milk ; it had been occasionally 
entirely suppressed. Whilst taking Stic, the flow became ample, and 
remained so as long as an occasional dose was being taken. Rogers 
subsequently verified this effect in a number of cases. Another use 
of Stic, is in sleeplessness, which is due to nervousness, or to cough. 
This is part of its action on the nervous system. Stic, is one of the 
remedies which produce the levitation symptom : the legs feel as if 
floating in the air ; head as if floating off ; as if the body and limbs 
did not touch the bed. Hysterical chorea coming on after pro- 
fuse haemorrhage has been cured by Stic. Peculiar Sensations arc : As 
if she cannot keep her tongue still. As if stomach full of yeast. 
Throat and mouth burn as if scalded. As if hard mass collected in 
lungs. As if floating in air. The right side is more prominently 
affected. The symptoms are : < By touch. < Motion (also : must get 



STICTA PULMONARIA 


1267 


up and move about for relief from pain of knee). < Turning eyes. 
Pressure >. Lying down > headache ; < cough. Influenza is > 
in open air. Many symptoms are < as the day advances, lasting all 
day. Cough nights (comparatively free from it during day). 
Coughing < cough (the more he coughs, the more he wants to). 

Relations. — Compare : Lung affections ; deep-in headache, Bac. 
Catarrhs and coughs, Bros., Nux, Rx. c., Samb., Meph. Rheumatism, 
Act. r.. Stellar. Nerve symptoms, Asar, Tarent. Asthma of con- 
sumptives associated with splitting headache, Rx. c.,Meph. Levitation 
^mptoms. Calc., SiU, Can. i. Sensation of lightness of body, CoccuL, 
Gels. The more he coughs, the more he wants to, Ign. Heaviness 
from front to back, Naja. Headache as if skull being raised and 
lowered, Can. i. 

Causation.— Fall. H ^morrhages. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Confubion of ideas, cannot concentrate them. — Great 
desire to talk about anything and everything, doesn't care whether any one 
listens, cannot keep her tongue still. — Lively, wanted to strike out ; lay on the 
lounge and began to *^kick up her heels” ; when reproved said she couldn't 
help it but felt as if she wanted to fly away. 

2. Head. — Slight vertigo (D). — Dull sensation in head with sharp dart- 
ing pains through vertex, side of face, and lower jaw. — Dull, heavy pressure 
in forehead and root of nose, increasing in intensity during the day.— Pam in 
r. supraorbital region ; became more acute and extended through brain on r. 
side ; deep in brain. — Headache extending through brain, almost intolerable. 
— Headache as if entire skull were being raised up and lowered again, comes 
on aft9r dose of 0 in man, 43, with arthritis deformans ; the pain had been 
felt before but not so severely (R. T. C.). — Darting pains in temples, 
inci^asing in intensity the entire day. — Catarrhal headache before catarrh 
gets in. — Sick-headache, must lie down ; < from light and noise ; nausea 
and vomiting, nearly to faintness. — Headache with severe pain in eyes felt 
on closing lids or turning eyeballs. — Scalp feels as if too small, or as if drawn 
too tight. — [Painful weight oh back of head. — Confused, heavy sensation on 
head. — The head seems as if flying in space. — Frontal migraine > by cold ; 

< by pressure.— Slight pressive headache deep in.— The head seems full and 
confused by every dose (D),] 

3. Eyes.— Eyes feel heavy,— Burning in lids with soreness of the ball 
on closing lids or turning eyes ; increasing during the entire day.— [Eyes : 
painful as if inflamed.— Sight difti as if he had read too much.— Pain in 1. 
internal canthus.— Right eye painful as if something were in it (D).] 

4. Ears.— Acute neuralgic pains in mastoid apophysis, rather deep in. 

5. Nose,— Fulness at root of*nose. — Constant need to blow nose, but 
no result on account of dryness. — Excessive and painful dryness of mucous 
membrane ; secretions dry rapidly, forming scabs difiicult to dislodge.— Inces- 
sant sneezing with fulness in forehead and r. side of nose, tingling in r, side of 
nose. — Desire to put finger in nose to clear out gluish secretion. —Coryza 

< afternoon ; > in open air. — Constant desire to blow nose without dis- 



1268 


STICTA PULMONARIA 


charge (tertiary syphilis).—[Slight epistaxis.— Slight liquid coryza* — Sensa« 
tion of obstruction in nose.— Yellow, thick discharge for several days (D).] 

6. Face.— Darting pains in side of face ; and in lower jaw.— [Pain in 
malar bone.— Sensitiveness of lower jaw.— Pain in r. submaxillary gland, 
< by pressure. — Pain in parotid gland (D).] 

8. Mouth,— Mouth and throat burn as if scalded.— [Thick yellow coat 
on posterior half of tongue with a narrow yellow stripe running along centre 
to tip ; many red papillae show through. — Patch covered with pearly white 
coat, rough and hard to dislodge ; saliva abundant and foamy (D).] 

Q. Throat. — Excessive dryness of soft palate, fcels like dried leather, 
causing painful deglutition. — Dropping of mucus from posterior nares, throat 
feels and looks raw. — Sore throat ; coryza from slightest cold. — [Scraping 
sensation in throat. — Obstruction in throat (D).] 

11. Stomach. — Slight pyrosis with acid and bitter regurgatition ; sleepy 
after dinner and diminished appetite (D). — Dull, oppressive pain in cardia. 
— Severe pains from sternum to spinal column, and a feeling of rumbling 
burning in stomach as if full of yeast. 

12. Abdomen. — Dull pains in r. hypochondrium. — Feeling of fulness 
in 1. hypochondriac region. — Rumbling as if full of yeast. 

13. Stool and Anus — Mucous diarrheea and loose cough. — [Thick 
diarrhoea ; stools profuse, frequent, little colour. — Constant desire for stool 
with no result. — Profuse stool i a.m., driving him hurriedly from bed. — 
Foamy stool, with flatus. — Stool 3 a.m. with effort. — Constipation with 
acute tetanic pain in anus, lasting half an hour after stool (D).] 

14. Urinary Organs. — [Bladder seems distended. — Urine thicker than 
usual, and increased in quantity. — Sensitiveness or pain in bladder. — Urine 
much increased. — Frequent necessity to urinate ; must rise several times at 
night.— Efforts to urinate with emission of a small quantity (D).] 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — [Pollutions for several nights, — Pollution 
whilst he slept in afternoon. — Mind drawn to sexual subjects (D).] 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — [Uneasiness in the pelvis. — Menses 
more abundant and paler than usual (D).] — Scanty milk became abundant. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Tickling in larynx and trachea causing 
cough. — Tickling in r. side of trachea below larynx.— Clergyman’s sore throat, 
characterised by great dryness of mucous membranes. — Hay-fever, with dry- 
ness of membranes. — Cough ; dry, < evening and night ; can neither sleep nor 
lie down ; dry, noisy ; severe, dry, racking with splitting frontal headache. 
— Cough after influenza ; after measles ; after whooping-cough ; barking ; 
< night and morning. — [Cough : dry ; spasmodic ; the more he coughs the 
more he wants to. — Spasmodic cough which he cannot stop. — Dry cough, 
causing pain in upper part of sternum (DJ.] — A lady had catarrhal asthma 
so badly was refused admission to an hotel ; Sii, p. ix was given, and next 
day she walked into the hotel without any sign of asthma (R. T^C.). 

x8. Chest.— Slight oppression of lungs.— Feeling of a hard mass in chest. 
— Sudden pain through chest from sternum to spine ; constant, < on movement ; 
arms powerless from extreme pain if an attempt was made to move them ; 
difficult breathing and speaking. — Pulsation from r. side of sternum down to 
abdomen.— Coryza with expectoration of dark blood brought on by every 
cold, damp spell, 



.STILLINGIA SYLVATICA 1269 

xg* Heart. — Dull, oppressive pain in cardiac region. — ^Attacks of anxiety 
about heart ; awakes with strange sensation about heart and for a few moments 
feels as if floating in air. — [Pulse uneven, drops every third or fourth beat, — 
Veins of hands f^ distended, also superficial veins of arms and legs (D).] 

20. Neck and Back. — Cervical glands swollen, 1. side, neck sensitive.— 
[Woke with heavy pain in second and fourth lumbar vertebrae, > sitting 
upright or bending forward. — Great w^eakness in the back in afternoon (D).] 

21. Limbs. — Darting pains in arms, legs, and shoulders, beginning in 
muscles of arms, then in lingers, joints, thighs, and toes.— Swelling and stiff- 
ness of hands and feetj»— Rheumatism of joints. — Hands and feet tend to be 
cold (D). — Red spots of inflammation on affected joints (Price). 

22. Upper Limbs. — Rheumatism m r. shoulder-joint, deltoid, and 
biceps; extending at times to forearm ; commencing at night ; > during day. 
—Lancinating pain in second joint of middle linger, increasing in intensity 
all day. — Rheumatism of wrists ; wrists and hands swollen, little redness, 
very painful on moving. — On movement, painful bruised sensation in muscles, 
esp. of forearm (D). 

23. Lower Limbs. — L. leg felt as if floating in the air, feels light 
and airy without any feeling of resting on the bed. — (Fluid in knee-joint.) — 
Rheumatism of r. ankle, swollen, very painful. — Knee painful from a fall. — 
Housemaid’s-knee. — [Lancination in knees and legs. — Feet cold and 
sweating (D).] 

24. Generalities. — Dulncss. — Very soon after taking Sti. p, prover said, 
I feel that medicine all over me.'’ — General feeling of weariness. — Burning, 

biting, sticking pains all over body during entire day. — Feeling of levitation 
of different parts. — Hysteria after loss of blood. — Swelling and painfulness 
of lymphatic glands. 

26. Sleep. — Sleeplessness : from nervousness ; from cough ; of children ; 
after sprgical operations (^.^., setting broken leg). 

27. Fever. — Increase of temperature. — Shudder through the whole 
body, esp. of toes and fingers. 

Stigmata Maidis, Zea. 


Stillingia Sylvatica. 

Stillingia sylvatica. Queen’s *Delight. (Pine barrens from Virginia 
to Florida.) N, 0, Euphorbiace«e. Tincture of the root 
after flowering. 

Gliiiieal • — Bones, diseases of ; nodes on. Clergyman’s sore throat. Elephantiasis. 
Haemorrhoids. Headaches, syphilitic ; mercurial ; catarrhal. Hip-joint disease. 
Influenza. Larynx, affections of. Liver, affections of. Nodes. Periostitis. 
Psoriasis. Rheumatism, Scrofula. Syphilis. 

Oharaotoristios.— has long been a popular remedy for 
syphilis in the southern states of U. S. T. Y. Symons introduced it 



1270 STILLINGIA SYLVATICA. 

into professional medicine, and Hale to homoeopathy. H, R Frost, 
A* B. Nichols, J. M. Cunningham, and others proved it, chewing the 
root or taking the tincture. One prover chewed the bark. The 
proving shows an action closely parallel with that of syphilis, attack- 
ing the genito-urinary organs, throat (pharynx, larynx, and trachea), 
mouth, head, and bones. I have cured with it syphilitic cough of 
the hoarse, barking type. In one case of secondary syphilis the 
patient (who was taking Still, i) complained that the medicine made 
his legs and feet feel tired and his feet feel sore. Still attacks the 
periosteum and produces pain in the bone. It hae removed nodes oi> 
the forehead, tibia, and elsewhere, and arrested caries of the nasal 
bones. Pain in the cranial bones and the headaches of syphilis. It is 
not confined to syphilitic cases in its action. It has a popular repute 
in scrofula, skin affections, liver diseases, and rheumatism — all of 
which the provings confirm. One prover was cured of a pustular 
eruption during the proving. In chronic rheumatism Hale classes it 
with Phyl and K. tod. Peculiar Sensations are : As of a heavy 
substance pressing on brain. Tongue as if scalded {Still has the 
irritating properties of the Euphorbians). As if room were tooAvarm. 
Pains are sharp, shooting, darting. The.cartilages of larynx and trachea 
are sore and feel bruised, Dfyness is a common feature. Hale quotes 
a case of secondary syphilis treated by Preston, one of the provers. 
The patient, a man, suffered extreme torture from bone pains. After 
receiving Still he slept well. The immense nodes disappeared from 
head and legs ; and from the most deplorable, down-hearted (some- 
times almost raving from derangement), miserable, thin-looking 
object, he changed into a buoyant, joking, rotund-looking fellow.” 
The symptoms were < by movement. < Walking. Pressure > 
pain in forearm. < Exposure to cold or to air. Warmth > itching 
of legs. 

Relations. — Antidote to : Merc. Antidoted by : Ipec. (nausea from 
the fumes). Compare : In syphilis, Syph., Med., Merc., K. lod. 
Chronic rheumatism, Guaiac., Phyt. Nodes, Mang., Corydalis, Staph. 
Hip disease, Nat. s. (Still, secondary or inherited syphilis, pains in and 
through hip < night, < wet weather ; Nat. s. hydrogenoid con- 
stitution, pains < night rouse patient from sleep, > turning over in 
bed). 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Depression of spirits; and gloomy forebodings. — Intellect 
dull and stupid. 

2. Head. — Dizziness and throbbing in head. — Persistent dull headache 
in vertex. — Dull, heavy pain in r. side of head. — In frontal region a feeling 
as of a heavy substance pressing on brain, becoming sharp and darting, 
almost unendurable. — Pains in head, with inflamed and watery eyes, and 
general soreness of muscles. — Sharp darting pains in r. occipital pro- 
tuberance. — Mercurial, spyhilitic, and catarrhal headaches. — Bone swellings 
in head and forehead, in latter size of hen’s eggs. — Mercurial periostitis of 
skull. 



.STILLINGIA SYLVATICA 1271 

3* Eyes.— Eyes inflamed and watery, with severe headache and general 
muscular soreness, as if he had taken cold.— Sharp darting pain over 1. eye ; 
lachrymation of both eyes, esp. after reading ; r. eye <. 

4. Ears. — Burning in 1. ear in evening; next morning a vesicular 
eruption. 

5. Nose. — Catarrhal discharge, first watery then muco-purulent ; 
followed by small abscesses on inside of r. nostril.— Sharp burning sensation 
in r. nostril, 6 a.m. on waking. — Influenza. — Necrosis of bones of nose. 

. 6. Face. — Pains under malar bone, extending transversely through 

face, — Stinging darting pains in face ; with frontal headache. — Periostitis of 
facial bones. 

'8. Mouth. — Paroxysms of neuralgic toothache. — ^Tongue : coated 
heavily ; yellowish white ; white ; feels rough and sore. — Scalded sensation 
on tongue, with soreness in region of larynx. — Heat in mouth and fauces. — 
Taste : salty ; bitter in morning. — Increased flow of saliva. 

9. Throat. — Smarting, stinging, dryness and rawness of fauces. — Con- 
striction of throat. — Intense burning in fauces and throat extending to 
stomach ; < on any attempt to swallow. 

11. Stomach. — Appetite : increased ; lost. — Regurgitation and vomiting 
of ingesta. — Pyrosis daily, 3 p.m.' to bedtime. — Nausea with constipation. — 
Sickness and salivation. — Faint, empty sensation in stomach. — Distress; 
griping; cramps in stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — ^Torpidity of liver with jaundice, great depression, 
constipation. — Severe cramps in both hypochondria. — Sharp darting in 1 , 
hypochondrium, followed by passage of flatus. — Borborygmi. — Colic, 
periodical. — Heavy pain in hypogastric region. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Severe attack of piles lasting several weeks. — 
Pain in rectum and sphincter with stool ; burning and tenesmus ; lasting 
half qn hour after. — Bowels loose and irregular. — Stools : copious, acid, 
frothy, bilious ; papescent ; white like curds ; dysenteric. — Constipation, 
stodls delayed. 

, 14. Urinary Organs. — Dull pain in region of kidneys. — Incontinence 

of urine. — ^Violent smarting burning through whole length of urethra < by 
micturition, with difficulty in voiding urine. — Urine : increased ; flocculent, 
mucous sediment. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — On micturating, sharp pain in glans 
extending up urethra, so severe as to cause perspiration. — Slight drawing up 
in r. testis. — Dull tearing pain in 1. testis. — Gonorrhoea. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Both ovaries pained very severely.— 
Copious muco-purulent leucorrhoea, with rheumatic pains. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Laryngitis, esp. if syphilitic, with hoarseness 
and dry spasmodic cough ; or cough may be loose. — Hoarseness and chronic 
laryngeal affections in public speakers. — ^Croup. — Slight uneasiness and 
tickling in trachea and bronchi* < on rising in morning. — Tickling 
sensation in trachea in evenirlg which ss dry, spasmodic cough. — Slight lame 
feeling seemingly in cartilages of larynx. — Hoarse cough. — Bruised feeling 
in trachedi* — Short, hacking cough. — Cough deep and loose. 

x8. Chest. — Oppression of chest. — Darting pain in thorax, with tick- 
ling in throat and short, hacking cough.— Sharp darting pains through chest 



1272 STILLINGIA SYLVA.-STRAMONIUM 

and shoulders.— Sore aching above 1. clavicle.— Raw feeling in chest whole 
length of sternum.— Incipient phthisis in persons of strumous habit, 

ig. Heart— Boring pains about region of heart, with irregular pulse.— 

i^ulse weak and very irregular. * 

20. Back. — Aching in back and down thighs and legs. — While sitting 
pain in 1. lumbar region, darting forwards. 

21. Limbs.— In evening pains in r. elbow and leg, aching and pulsating, 
with soreness. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pain in r. scapula runs up neck. — Soreness and, 
aching in humerus. — Sharp shooting pains in both arris, from middle third, 
of humerus down to fingers. — Very large node on olecranon. — Aggravating 
pains in 1. elbow, shooting towards shoulder and head ; slighter in r. elbow 
and wrist. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Aching pain in r. leg. — Pains in 1 . lower anterior 
third of leg. — Burning-itching of legs. — Enlargement of tibia to such 
a degree as to deprive the child of all power of motion ; limbs contracted 
and swollen. — Ulcers on legs, venereal, chronic, and indolent. — Periostitis 
and nodes of tibia. — Syphilitic and gonorrhoeal sciatica ; l.-sided complaints 
— (Legs and feet feel tired, and feet sore.) 

24. Generalities. — Soreness of muscles all over ; feels as if he had 
taken a severe cold. — Weak and emaciated. — Symptoms lasted eight weeks. 
— Nothing seemed to > ; much < by exposing parts to cold or even to air ; 
> from the aggravation only by covering with flannel or getting into bed. 

25. Skin. — (Postular eruptions healed rapidly during the proving.) — Itch- 
ing and burning-itching of legs < exposure to air. — Vesicular eruption on 
ears. — Scrofulous, venereal, and other skin diseases. — Ulcers with unhealthy 
skin. — Elephantiasis. — Lepra. 

26. Sleep. — Unusual drowsiness all day, with general malaise and 
headache. — Very sleepy after eating. 

27. Fever. — Cold on going to bed ; immediately after broke oiit in 
sweat, with excessive warmth all night. — Feverish heat, evening. — Fever 
I a.m. ; gets into heavy sleep. — During day, room felt too warm. — Great 
warmth in face like catarrhal fever. 


Stramonium. 

Datura stramonium. Thorn-apple. Jamestown- weed. Stink-weed. 
(Grows in vicinity of cultivation on rank soil where refuse 
is deposited in all parts of the world.) N, 0. Solanaceae. 
Tincture of fresh plant in flower and fruit. 

Cliliioal. — Anasarca (after scarlatina). A^tasta. Apoplexy. Burns. Cata- 
lepsy. Chordee. Chorea, Delmunt tremens. Diaphragmitis. Ecstasy. Enuresis. 
BUlcpsy, Erotomama. Eyes, affections of. Headache ; from sun. Hiccoi^h. 
Hydrophobia. Hysteria. Lochia, offensive. Locomotor ataxy. Mania. Meuln^s. 
Nymphomania. (Esophagus, spasm of. Scarlatina. Stammering, Starting, 
Strabismus. Sunstroke. Tetanus. Thirst. Tremors. Trismus. Typhus^^ 

GhaFEOtaristios. — The first to use Stram, in medicine, according 
to Teste, was Stoerck, who was one of Hahnemann^s predecessors. 



STRAMONIUM 


1273 


Stoerck first tried it in mental alienation, because it was supposed to 
produce a marked and persistent disorder of the mental faculties.’^ 
Hahnemann proved it, and introduced it into the homoeopathic 
materia medical In his introduction to the remedy he points out that, 
though it produces many uncomfortable symptoms, it does not in its 
primary effects cause actual pain. Hahnemann attached a good deal 
of importance to this. Strain , he says, “allays some spasmodic 
movements, and restores suppressed excretions in several cases 
in which absence of pain is a prominent symptom.’^ In addition to 
the absence of paii^ there is with Strain, (and in many mental cases) 
an extreme muscular mobility. This mobility affects muscles of 
expression and muscles of locomotion. The movements of Stram. 
are -generally gyratory, and graceful when they occur in the 
arms/ The forms of mania specially mentioned by Teste as calling 
for Strain, are : Nymphomania of lying-in women. Certain forms of 
religious monomania, in exaggerated and ridiculous scruple of con- 
science. Fixed notion that some unpardonable sin has been com- 
mitted (which the patient IS nevertheless unable to remember) ; that he 
is possessed of the devil. Hallucinations. The delirium of Strain, is 
for the most part terrifying. It corresponds exactly to many cases of 
delirium tremens. Visions of animals enter largely into it. In a case 
of severe pleuro-pneumonia of right side, supervening on scarlatina, 
the patient, a young man, said he saw a large black dog about the 
room. This led me to give Strain. j which rapidly altered the wliole 
case for the better, including the pneumonia, and resolved a situation of 
no little anxiety. Strain, is also called for in congestions without actual 
inflammation, but with high mental exaltation and furious delirium 
and little or no fever ; without pain but with some coma. J. Emmons 
Briggs {New Eng, M. Gaz.y xxx. 151) relates this case of poisoning : 
Briggs had an urgent call to see James M., 4, in “ convulsions.” He 
found him lying on the bed in a state of wild delirium, requiring the 
constant combined efforts of two people to keep him in bed. Face 
. exceedingly flushed ; expression becoming in rapid alternation 
pleasant and anxious. Pupils widely dilated ; iris scarcely visible, 
giving the eye a very brilliant appearance. Marked convergent 
strabismus, skin hot and dry, resembling scarlatina eruption. Abdomen 
tense. The most alarming symptom was rapidly recurring convulsions 
with twitching of the arms and lower limbs. Thirty or forty of 
these spasms occurred in rapid succession, followed by a moment 
during which the countenance briglitened and seemed at rest, only to 
be followed in an instant by a series of clonic contractions. 
Grasping at imaginary objects before the eyes, when expression 
frequently became anxious, as if the patient w’as trying to ward 
off imaginary foes. At times the mind was very active, and 
the patieiit talked rapidly and incoherently. Between the spasms 
laugher and crying frequently occurred. The boy, it transpired, 
had oeen chewing a Thorn-apple. When he came home he 
seemed,, rather dazed, and vomited. He then threw himself on the 
sofa and slept very soundly till he awoke in the convulsions. The 
boy recovered under Kali bro, in five-grain doses, though it was with 
great difficulty that he was made to swallow. This difficulty of 



1274 


STRAMONIUM 


swallowing is a marked feature of Strain.^ and with the intense thirst, 
delirium, and hallucinations completes the picture of many cases of 
hydrophobia. Another symptom indicating it here is ** < by bright 
light, mirror or surface of water.** S. A. Jones (quoted A, xxii. 410) 
relates the case of a little girl with brain symptoms for whom he had 
prescribed a remedy. The report was brought late at night, that the 
patient was much worse. She vomits,** said the father, “ if she even 
raises her head from the pillow.** The vomit was green, Jones 
found this under Strain, by aid of the Cypher Repertory, He gave 
Strain,^ and the next morning the case was entirely changed for the^ 
better. Acting on this analogue, Jones also cured a ^Womiting of 
green stuff always induced by bright light.** On the other hand, the 
Strum, patient is dependent on light and company ; cannot walk in 
the dark (hence it is indicated in locomotor ataxy) ; and going through 
railway tunnels without a light in the carriage may cause fainting. 
Some of the head-movements of Strum, are characteristic : Continually 
jerks head up from pillow ; head bent back ; boring head into pillow. 
The twitchings of single muscles and the squint mark Stram. as the 
remedy for many cases of chorea. I find it correspond to about an 
equal proportion with Agarictis; and when there is fright in the causa- 
tion Stram, will almost certainly avail. Stram, has a relation to the 
hip-joints, and Stram, has cured both coxalgia and morbus coxae (left). 
This is accompanied by very severe pain, and is one exception to the 
** painlessness ** of Stram. affections. The effect of Stram. on the secre- 
tions is to suppress them ; and this makes Strain, an excellent remedy 
in many cases of illness due to suppressed secretions — menses, lochia, 
sweat, eruptions. Stram. causes high fever with rashes, some scarlet, 
like scarlatina ; petechiae ; spots on the arms like flea-bites ; 
vesications ; and it corresponds also to burns and scalds. Stram, 30 
caused the face of a boy to whom I gave it to swell and come out in 
blotches soon after commencing the remedy. (I have seen Dulc. 30 
produce furfuraceous rash on the face in the same way.) In a case 6f 
mine Stram. relieved an extensive eczematous eruption which came 
on after a fright. As a result of suppressions convulsions occur. These 
may be general, or they may be partial or choreic. The convulsant, 
spasmodic properties of Stram. are shown in the respiratory sphere 
in constriction of the chest, asthmatic symptoms, and cough of the 
whooping-cough type. The common practice of smoking Stramonium 
leaves for asthma is roughly homoeopathic. Peculiar Sensations of 
Stram, are ; As if spinning or weaving. As if objects were smaller 
than they really are. As if dizzy. As if he had no limbs. As if 
drunk. Head as if drawn backward. Starts as if a shock of 
electricity had been passed through her body. As if eyes were 
forced out. As of sparks of fire rushing from stomach, to eyes. 
Eyelids as if swollen, or as if oppressed with sleep ; as of wind 
rushing out of ears. As if sawing cheek-bone ; as if a hole were 
there and the brain were touched. As if nose were shifted. As if 
pins and needles were in forehead. As if he was seeking something. 
As if bones were sawed through. As if front teeth would fall out 
Teeth as if pressed together. Moving fingers as if searching for 
something. Cries as it from sight of hideous objects. As if lips 



STRAMONIUM 


1275 


would grow together. Inner mouth as if raw. Soft palate as if 
drawn down. As of boiling water in throat. As if a ball were wedged 
in throat. As if falling. As if he would vomit. As if navel were to 
be torn out. Abdomen as if puffed up. As if abdomen were ex- 
panded to extremest degree. As if urine could not be passed on 
account of narrowness of urethra. As if a cylindrical body were 
being passed through urethra. As if he had not power to close 
neck of bladder. As if very tall. As if something turned round in 
.chest. Limbs feel as if gone to sleep. As if parts of limbs 
.were completely separated from body. Hands and feet as if loose in 
joints. As if cold water were poured down back. Strain, is an ill- 
sm’elling plant, and the discharges and secretions it causes are often 
foul^nd even cadaveric in odour. Strain, is Suited to: Ailments of 
young, plethoric persons; especially of children (chorea, mania, 
fever, delirium). The symptoms are : < By touch ; by pressure. 
Motion < ; removing head from pillow z= vomiting of bile ; walking 
ss involuntary micturition ; walking in dark =: vertigo. < After 
motion (vomiting of bile ; palpitation ; pain in back, shoulder, and 
abdomen). Whilst sitting : involuntary micturition ; cough = lower 
limbs to be jerked up. Lying > pulsating heat of vertex ; in evening 
= prosopalgia in 1. cheek ; = cutting pain in sternum. Lying on side 

< vertigo. Warmth >. Wind <. Cold <. < Evening and night. 

< In dark. > In light. > In company. < Looking at shining 

objects, water, &c. < Sun. Great desire for acids ; citric acid >. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Lemon-juice, Vinegar, Tobacco injec- 
tions ; Senna for cerebral symptoms ; Bell., Hyos., Nux ; and “ Par- 
ticularly Camphor^* (Teste). Antidote to: Merc., Pb. Follows well : 
Cupr., Bell. Incompatible : Coffea. Compare : Metrorrhagia, from re- 
tained placenta with characteristic delirium, Sec. (Sec. often acts 
when Stram. fails), Pyro. (with fever and septic tendency). Delirium, 
Bell., Lach., Agar., Cupr., Zn. Illusions of shape, Bapt., Petr., Thuj. 
E^sipelas, Bell., Rhus. Stuttering ; unable to combine consonants 
. with vowels, Bov. Bright light == convulsions, K. bro. > Light, Stro. 
Hiccough, Ign. « after eating, smoking, emotions), Ver. (after 
hot drinks). Hears voices from far off talking to him ; behind him, 
Anac. Body bathed in hot sweat, Op. Gyrating movements (Hyo., 
angular). Loquacity, Cup., Hyo., Lach., Op., Ver. Hands constantly 
on genitals, Zn. Laughs and weeps by turns, Aur., Pul., Aim., Lyc., 
Caps., Graph., Phos., Sep., Sul., Ver. Tetanic convulsions < touch 
and light, Nux (Stram, with mania ; Nux, mind clear). Desire to 
escape in delirium. Bell., Bry., Op., Rhus. Hydrophobia, Hfb. Pain- 
lessness, Op. Sleepy, but cannot sleep, Bell., Cham., Op. < After 
sleep, Apis, Lach., Op., Spo. Objects appear small. Plat. Night- 
blindness,. Bell., Nux. 

Causation.— Shock. Fright. Sun. Childbirth. Suppressions. 

SYMPTOMS. 

X. Mind. — [The principal range of this remedy is found in the mental 
affections.— In young people who are sometimes hysterical, showing the 



STRAMONIUM 


1276 

following condition : praying and singing devoutly, beseeching, entreating, 
&c.--Young women with suppressed menses may be affected in this manner. 
— In some kinds of fevers, where the patients can’t bear solitude or dark- 
ness, if they are left alone or are in a dark room, the mental affections are 
very much < ; also in unconscious delirium when the patient will every now 
and then jerk up the head from the pillow, then let it fall again, this being 
kept up without intermission for a long time ; women in puerperal fever or 
convulsions have many absurd notions — ^that they are double, that some one 
is in bed with them, and other strange and unmeaning fancies. — ^Affections of , 
the intellect in general; madness. — H. N. G.] — Melancholy. — Sadness, with 
deadly anguish, and copious tears, esp. in evening, in bed. — Anguish of 
conscience. — Inconsolable disposition, and susceptibility to irritation "by 
trifles. — Great activity and rapidity of movement. — Obstinacy and self-will. — 
Bursts of laughter, alternating with choleric passion or moaning. — HoHvling 
and groans. — Murmurs, or continued cries. — Ungovernable fury, desire to 
bite, to strike and to kill. — At one time great indifference to matters of busi- 
ness, at another time fear of being found incapable of discharging them 
properly. — Love of procrastinating and loss of will-power (cured in a man, 75 
— R. T. C.). — Desire to run away. — Desire for society, candle-light, sunshine, 
because darkness and solitude < the moral symptoms. — The moral symptoms 
are < after the autumnal equinox. — Loss of memory (loses thoughts before 
she can utter them ; calls things by wrong names). — Dulness of all the senses, 
insensibility to external influences (insensibility to mental impressions). — 
Dizziness, with internal agitation. — Mental derangement, esp. in drunkards, — 
Loquacious delirium and mania. — Mania-a-potu with clonic spasms and 
desire for light and company. — Deliria, generally characterised by terror, 
with visions of frightful spectres. — Loss of consciousness, so that the patient 
forgets his own relations. — Fixed ideas ; the body is supposed to be cut in 
two. — Carphologia. — Delusions of fancy, in which all surrounding objects 
appear to be very small, and the sufferer himself very large, and oh an 
elevation. — Deliria, with strange ideas. — Mental alienation, with praying and 
pious actions (prayers, hymns, devout aspect, &c.). — Mania, generally with 
endless fictions of imagination, lascivious talking, conversation with spectres, 
affectation of importance, dancing, laughter, and blows, or ridiculous 
buffoonery, in constant alternation with sad and serious behaviour. — 
cinations : a voice near r. mastoid process scolding her ; frightful, of rats, 
mice, cats, dogs, and animals moving. — Hallucinations that ss terror or rage, 
— Saw people coming out of all corners. — Rush of blood to head with furious 
loquacious delirium. — Fear; of losing his senses; that his lips will grow 
together ; that he will suffocate ; of falling ; of everything falling on her. — 
Boy seemed to see black objects, spoke of black people, black clouds, and 
grasped at air. — Awakens with a shrinking look as if afraid of first thing 
she sees. — Dulness of senses before a rash. — Conversing in different languages. 
— Talking in Jewish jargon. — Ecstatic. — ^Mania from shock. — Nervousness 
and restlessness. 

a. Head. — Intoxication and dizziness.-— Vertigo ; cannot walk,, in the 
dark, falling to 1 . or backward.— -Vertigo, with giddiness and staggering, 
or with clouded sight, headache (red face, colicky pain and diarrhoea). — 
Vertigo, head feels drawn backward. — Stupefaction with vanishing of vision 



STRAMONIUM 


1277 


and hearing, and convulsive movements of head.— Headache, with clouded 
sight and dysecoia.— Headaches with tendency to speak incoherently (much 
relieved.— R. T. C.). — ^Anaemia of the brain in old people (relieved. — R. T.C.). 
— Distressing sensation of lightness and weakness in head. — Woke up with 
fearful headache and extreme sickness, got up at noon but could hardly 
speak to any one all day ; this went on for three days and then left (pro- 
duced in a woman, 60, fourth day after single dose of 0. — R. T. C.). — 
Head feels empty, hollow ; sensitive to every sound — Throbbing pains in 
•vertex, with syncope. — Congestion of blood to head, with heat. — Congestion 
jC>i blood to head, pulsation in vertex, loss of sight and hearing, bloated, turgid 
face, total loss of consciousness, and painlessness. — Inflammation of brain, 
with heat and pulsation of vertex, attacks of fainting, loss of sight and hear- 
ing, tonvulsive movement's of head, frequently raising head up or bending it 
backward ; > while lying still, — Hydrocephalus with convulsive movements 
of head, sensation of lightness of head, and frequently raising head up. — 
Painful dark-red swelling of the highly congested head and turgid face, with 
convulsive movements, delirium, and desire for light and company. — Retrac- 
tion and convulsive movements of head. — Lifting head frequently from 
pillow when lying down. — Bores head into pillow. — Bends head backward. — 
L. side of head numb. — Head perspires more than usual. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes red (inflamed) and swollen. — Pressure and tension in 
eyes and lids. — Inflammation of margins of lids. — Eyelids ulcerated. — 
Involuntary lachrymation. — Nocturnal agglutination of eyes. — Eyes wide 
open, staring, prominent. — Conjunctiva injected, as if the vessels were filled 
with dirty liquid. — Eyes fixed, wide open, and sparkling.— Eyes half open in 
sleep. — Photomania. — Vague, melancholy look. — Paralysis and spasmodic 
closing of lids. — Eyes convulsed. — Contortion of eyes and lids. — Marked 
convergent strabismus. — Pupils dilated and insensible. — Cloudiness of sight. 
— Tr^ansient blindness. —Blindness (at night), periodical. — Objects appear 
blue. — Myopia. — Diplopia. — Indistinct, confused sight.— (Everything looks 
jiflnbled up. — R. T. C.) — (Used as a lotion to prevent cataract by a well- 
known oculist.— R. T, C.).— Amblyopia.— Confusion of letters, when reading. — 
Errors of vision ; objects appear oblique or coloured. — Illusions of vision. — 
Hallucinations dark ; black spots before eyes. — Luminous vibrations ; fiery 
sparks. — Sees balls of fire roll over the counterpane. — Sensation as of sparks 
of fire rushing from stomach to eyes. 

4. Ears. — Wind rushes out of both ears.— Dryness in Eustachian tube. 
— Pains in ears.— Pain in 1. ear pressing down to 1. side of cheek.— Tearing 
pain in r, ear with shooting through forehead and vertex. — Hearing very 
acute. — Hallucinations of hearing. — Deafness. — Deafness of r. ear improves 
at once from 30th (twitching oPpomum Adami led me to it.— R. T. C.). 

5. Nose. — ^Obstruction of the ndsfe.-^Alas nasi white, face red. — Nasal 
discharge yellow, bad-smelling, quickly liquifies.— Nose feels obstructed and 
dry, though she is able to breathe through it. — The cold of Siram. is accom- 
panied by catarrh of nasal passages and shooting pains over r. eye (^pro- 
duced.— R. T. C.).— Spasmodic sneezing. 

6. Face.— Dull and bewildered air, with timid behaviour.— Stupid, dis- 
torted countenance.— Anxiety and fear is expressed in the countenance. — 
Sardonic grin.— Painful distortion of features.— Facial muscles in constant 



STRAMONIUM 


1278 

piay daring delirium. — Twitching in muscles of face; frowns on forehead. — 
L. side of face for moments distorted with painless convulsions ; contraction 
of zygomaHc muscles draws cheeks and mouth from below up, and from face 
backward to temples. — Face deeply furrowed and wrinkled. — Face bloated, 
puffed with blood, sometimes with an idiotic expression. — Circumscribed 
redness of cheeks. — Hot cheeks. — Blood rushing to face. — Deep red, or very 
pale colour of face. — Fainting with paleness of face, dr5mess in throat, and 
subsequent red face. — Erysipelas on one side of face and nose. — Boils come 
out on face while taking Siram, (R. T. C.) — Lips dry and glued together.—; 
A yellow streak in red part of lips. — Quivering in lips. — Distortion of the 
mouth. — Crawling sensation on chin. — Chewing motion with mouth. — Mouth 
spasmodically closed. — Lock-jaw. 

7. Teeth. — Grinding of the teeth. — Pulsative toothache, as if the»teeth 
were going to fall out. 

' 8. Mouth.— Dryness of mouth (dry fauces and dry, sticky lips). — 
Dribbling of glairy saliva from mouth. — Copious salivation. — Saliva decreased. 
— Sanguineous froth before mouth. — Haemoptysis. — Tongue swollen and 
paralysed. — Tongue felt stiff, dry, and parched to the very root ; as if edges 
rolled up as hard and dry as leather. — Tongue paralysed, trembles when put 
out. — Imperfect speaking and stammering (with distortion of face). — 
Continued murmurs.— Complete loss of speech. — A trembling tongue. 

9. Throat. — Spasmodic constriction of throat. — Impeded deglutition, 
with shootings in throat, or pressure in submaxillary glands. — Deglutition 
obstructed, sometimes by dryness in throat. — Dryness of throat and fauces 
not > by any sort of drink. — Paralysis of pharynx and oesophagus.— 
Contracting, tearing in throat ; sensation as if a ball were lodged in throat, 
— ^Twitching of pomum Adami, up and down movement as in swallowing 
(R, T. C.) — Spasm of oesophagus. 

10 . Appetite. — Loss of taste. — Food tastes only of sand, or straw (or 
has no taste at all). — Violent thirst (for large quantities, drinking with avidity). 
— ^Violent thirst, csp. for acid drinks. — Constant bitterness in mouth, with bitter 
taste of food. — Burning thirst, generally with dread of water and all liquids, 

IX. Stomach. — Risings, with sour taste. — Nausea. — Watery vomiting, 
with colic and diarrhoea.— Vomiting of mucus, which is greenish, or of a sour 
smell. — ^Vomiting of green bile after slight exercise. — Convulsive hiccough. — 
Pain in stomach, with smarting or pressive sensation. — Anxietas precordium, 
with obstructed respiration. — (Inflammation of stomach.) — Diaphragmitis ; 
delirium ; burning along diaphragm ; short-breathed ; spasms ; struggles 
against the water offered. 

12. Abdomen. — Abdomen painful when touched. — Abdomen distended, 
not hard. — Abdomen inflated, hard, distended^ — Contusive pain in abdomen 
during movement. — Violent pains in abomen, as if navel were being torn out. 

, — Hysterical spasms in abdomen. — Swelling of inguinal glands. — l^rborygmi 
and fermentation in abdomen. — Expulsion'^of much flatus. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation (unsuccessful urging to go to 
stool). — Tenesmus. — Fetid faeces (painless) of a corpse-like smell. — Diaserhoea, 
with pain and borborygmi in the abdomen. — Discharge of coagulated blood 
from anus. — ^Suppression of both stool and urine. — (Stools passed uncon- 
sciously and very frequently loose, with mental derangement.— R. T. C.) 



STRAMONIUM 1279 

14. Urinary . Orgfans. — Suppression of secretion of urine (in typhus), — 
Emission of urine, drop by drop, with frequent want to urinate.— Involuntary 
emission of urine. — Urine : profuse flow ; sudden ; and burning. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Lasciviousness (exalted sexual desire in 
both sexes). — ^Constant uncovering of genitals ; indecent talk. — Priapism. — 
Scrotum oedematous. — ^Testes retracted, penis erect as in chordee. — Onanism, 
causing epilepsy. — Impotence. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Nymphomania.— Increased catamenia, 
with discharge of large masses of coagulated black blood. — (Menses too 
profuse and attendee^ with headaches.— R. T. C.)— Increased sexual desire. 
— Metrorrhagia (with characteristic mental symptoms). — Eclampsia. — 
DtAring catamenia, fetid smell from body, great loquacity, drawing pains in 
abdomen and thighs. — Sobs and moaning after catamenia. — Too profuse 
secretion of milk in nursing women. — During pregnancy : mania ; faceache ; 
is full of strange fancies. — Cadaverous odour of lochia ; she is full of strange 
fancies and visions. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Voice : hoarse and croaking ; high, fine, 
squeaking ; indistinct. — (Sudden aphonia in hysterical girl just recovering from 
chorea. — R. T. C.) — Twitching of pomum Adami. — Constrictions of larynx. — 
Periodically returning attacks of painless, barking, spasmodic cough, in fine, 
shrieking tone, from constriction of larynx and chest, without expectora- 
tion. — ^Voice loud and bawling. — ^Want of breath. — Difficult (hurried or) 
sighing respiration, — Suffocating obstruction of respiration. — Oppression with 
desire for open air. — (Asthma continually recurring, with some gouty ten- 
dency : attacks < at night.— R. T. C.) — Dyspnoea on waking up every 
morning, cold winds catch her breath, can cough at any time ” (much 
relief.— R. T. C.) 

18. Chest. — Constrictive oppression on chest (with dyspnoea). — Pressure 
on chest, < by speaking. — Sensation, as if something were turning over in 
chest. — Spasm in pectoral muscles. — Red rash on chest. 

• ig. Heart and Pulse. — Pressure about heart — ^Angina pectoris. — 
For a week after single dose of 0 felt as if heart beat insufficiently, and had a 
* suffocating feeling in throat (R, T. C.).— Palpitation, — Pulse rapid, full, strong ; 
irregular, hard, slow, small, frequent. 

20. Neck and Back, — Neck stiff, cannot bend head backward.— Pain 
in nape, from neck over head. — Sensitiveness along spine. — Pain as of .>v 
fracture in back, when moving. — Drawing and tearing in the back and loins. 
— Spine sensive ; slightest pressure outcries and ravings. — Drawing pains 
in middle of spine ; in sacrum. — Opisthotonos (with distorted countenance). 

2 X. Limbs. — ^Twitching of hands and feet ; of the tendons.— Trembling 
of limbs ; they fall asleep. » 

22. Upper Limbs. — Convulsive movements of arms, above head. — 
Convulsive^ movements of arras and hands ; carphologia. — Contractive 
pain in arm, with acute lancinations in forearm. — Distortion of hands. — 
Clenched fists. — Cramps in hands. — ^Trembling of hands.— Numbness of 
fingers. 

dS. Lower Limbs.— Coxalgia, 1 . hip ; violent, distracting pain when 
abscesses form. — Pain in muscle of outer side of r. hip. — Morbus coxae, 1 . — 
Drawing pains in thighs.— Jerking in legs, as from a shock, with retraction,— 



I28o 


STRAMONIUM 


Drawing pains in thighs. — Bending of legs when walking, (he falls over his 
own legs).— Trembling of feet. — Contractive cramps in feet. 

24. Generalities. — Face red and bloated. — Cannot walk or keep on the 
feet in a darkened room, is sure to fall. — Restlessness of thb body ; stagger- 
ing when walking ; pithy, numb feeling of outer parts. — Complaints con- 
comitant to morbid sleep. — < During perspiration ; after sleep, when first 
awakens from sleep will shrink away as if in fear ; in the dark ; in solitude. — 
> In company. — The Strain, patient longs for light ; if lying down, longs to 
sit up, and dislikes having head on pillow. — Spasmodic, drawing, paralytic 
pains in muscles and joints of limbs. — Contractive cramp in limbs. — Tingling 
in the limbs. — Sensation as if limbs were separated from body. — Slow con- 
traction and extension of limbs. — Attacks of cramps of different kinds. — 
Tetanus. — Opisthotonos (the body is bent backwards with distorted counte- 
nance). — Cramps, and other hysterical sufferings. — Stiffness and contraction 
of several of the limbs. — Attacks of cataleptic stiffness in body, with loss 
of consciousness, preceded by headache with vertigo. — Easy movement, or 
great heaviness, of limbs. — Involuntary motions; hydrophobia. — Excessive 
aversion to liquids. — Convulsions, which resemble St. Vitus' dance. — ^Con- 
vulsions (in children) with profuse perspiration followed by sleep. — The 
movement of the muscles subject to the will is easier and increased. — Con- 
vulsive jerking of limbs, with weeping. — Convulsive movements and jerks, 
esp. on toughing, or fixing the eyes on brilliant objects (such as a candle, a 
mirror, or water), or else appearing periodically. — Convulsions, as in epilepsy, 
but without loss of consciousness. — Puerperal convulsions. — Syncope, with 
stertorous breathing. — Unconscious snoring ; jaws hang down ; hands and 
feet twitch ; pupils dilated. — Trembling of limbs (also in drunkards). — 
Tottering of limbs, when walking, and when standing upright. — Paralysis, 
sometimes after an attack of apoplexy. — (General paralysis of insane. — 
R. T. C.)— Symptoms as from old age, sight becomes dim, has to use glasses, 
mind gets weak, cannot complete sentences, avoids people and suspects 
them ; wakes with r. arm over his head and cannot get it down again (pro- 
duced. — R. M. Theobald.) — Weakness, with necessity to lie down. — Sup- 
pression of all secretions and excretions. — Painlessness with most dl 
ailments. — Movements hurried. — Restlessness and nervousness beyond de- 
scription. — Whole body sensitive to touch and every movement <. 

25. Skin. — Suppressed eruptions and the consequences thereof. — 
Intense, bright, scarlet-red rash over whole body. 

26. Sleep.— Strong disposition to sleep by day. — Deep sleep, with 
snoring, cries, and howling. — Lies on back with open, staring eyes. — Rest- 
less sleep, with tossing about, twitching, and screaming. —(Restlessness of 
old age ; she constantly wakes up those attput her. — R. T. C.) —Comatose 
somnolency, with a ridiculously solemn expression of countenance on waking. 
— (Boy wakes in a great fright from indefinable terrors ; stammers and puffs 
on least excitement.— R. T. C.)— Agitated sileep, with vivid dreams. — Frightful 
visions during sleep.— Kneeling position in bed, and starting at least touch, 
with shrieks and wild gestures. 

27. Fever. — Coldness of whole body, esp. of limbs, with shaking and 
shivering and general jerking. — Coldness of hands and feet, with redness of 
face.— General coldness in afternoon after previous heat of head and face, 



STRA^MONIUM— STRONTIUM CARB. 1281 

followed by general heat. — During chill great sensitiveness to being uncovered. 
— ^Chill running down back. — Heat over whole body, with red face and per- 
spiration. — Profuse perspiration already during the heat with violent thirst. — 
Greasy, oily, putrid-smelling perspiration. — Cold perspiration. — Intermittent 
fev^r.— Chill over whole body without thirst, followed by heat and anguish ; 
sleep during hot stage, and violent thirst after waking up, which causes a 
stinging in throat, until he drinks something.— Heat, with anxiety, and redness 
of cheeks, or else with thirst and vomiting.— At first, heat in head, then 
general coldness, followed by heat and thirst. — Pulse very irregular, generally 
full, hard, and quick, •or small and rapid, at times slow and scarcely per- 
ceptible, occasionally intermitting and trembling. — Frequent profuse sweat, 
also at night. — Retention of urine in any fever. 


Strontium Bromatum. 

Bromide of Strontium. SrBr^. Trituration. Solution. 

ClinioaL —Dyspepsia. Gravel, Legs, swollen. Phlebitis. Varicosis. Urine, 
offensive. 

Charaoteristios. — Cooper gives me the following experiences with 
Sir. bro. : (i) A woman, 40, had tenderness of limbs, and veins of legs 
show up and incline to inflame (chronic cellulitis), left ankle inclined 
to swell ; vertigo, at times darkness comes over sight ; appetite not 
good, bowels regular, menses every three weeks, cannot keep awake 
in evening. Great relief came from Sir. bro. 3X, but after taking it for 
ten days, severe ardor urinae, with constant enuresis day and night, set 
in, which yielded to Ferr. phos. 6x., after failure with other remedies. 
(2) Woman, 60, had left leg and left foot swollen, hard and tender, 
red and pitting ; right also but less in degree ; indigestion with pain 
aftbr food, and sickness after food for seven or eight years ; is rheu- 
.matic and has had sciatica, off and on, for two years ; bowels con- 
fined, sleep very restless generally. Sir, bro. 3X was given, and in 
two weeks the legs had gone down very much and she felt altogether 
better, urine had become clear, but though ravenous for food had to 
stop eating and felt more sick, and the bowels were more confined. 
After this patient got quite well without further medicine. (3) Sir, 
bro. 30 gave great relief to a lady broken down by sorrow who could 
not digest food. (4) Stro. bro. 6x produced in a woman, 70, the follow- 
ing symptoms : Urine thick, and offensive and dark-looking, with 
grains of red sand. * 

Strontium * Carbonicum. 

Strontiana carbonica. Strontianite. SrCOj. Trituration. 

OItttkal*— -Angina pectoris. Ankle, sprain of. Anus, burning in. Apoplexy, 
Bones, diseases of. Cardialgia. Constipation, Cramp. Diarrhoea. Emaciation. 
Enuresis. Feet, cold. Femur, caries of. Haemorrhoids. Headache ; congestive ; 

VOL. H. 82 



1282 STRONTIUM CARBONICUM 

tensive. Heart, affections of. Hiccough, Hoarseness. Leucorrhcea, Menses, 
disordered. Phlebitis. Sciatica. Sprain. Sternum, pains in. Sycotic eruptions. 
Varicosis. Vision, affections of. 

Charaoteristios. — Native Strontium Carbonate, a mineral named 
Strontianite, was first discovered in the lead-mines of Strontian in 
Argyllshire, from whence it received its name. It occurs in massive, 
fibrous, stellated, rarely orthorhombic crystals. The metal Strontium 
is dark yellow. Stro. c. varies in colour from white to yellow and pale 
green. It was proved by Nenning, Schreter, Seidel, Trincks, and 
Woost. Among the prominent symptoms were hushing in the face and 
violent pulsation of the arteries ; congestion to heart, lungs, and head. 
The distinctive feature about these states with Stro. c. is that they are 
> by warmth and wrapping up and < by cold. This also dis- 
tinguishes the headaches of Stro. c. The headaches are boring, 
pressive, and tensive. There are various expressions of the congestive 
state. One of the tensive pains is peculiar : Tension from vertex 
to upper jaw, as if head were expanded from within, and as if scalp 
were too tight, < in evening when lying with head low, slowly 
increasing and decreasing, > from heat. The pressure appears in the 
stomach ; it is > by eating ; and < by walking. There is also 
pressure after eating. There is both diarrhoea and constipation, the 
stools of both are accompanied and followed by burning in the 
rectum. A. P. Bowie (H. i?., ii. 62) cured this case occurring after a 
tedious labour ; Stools large and hard, expelled with great effort, 
followed by great pain in anus, burning, lasting a long time and 
compelling patient to lie down. Anus violently contracted after 
stool. Complains of coldness in spots on calves of legs. Stro, c. 6 
entirely relieved. The diarrhoea is < at night, and the stools are 
yellow. Walking < all complaints : headache ; leucorrhcea ; dyspnoea ; 
pressure in sternum. The symptoms about the chest and ster.num, 
with the < by walking, suggest angina pectoris, and a similar but less 
serious state often met with in gouty patients. The tension is mani- 
fested in the nape, as if the tendons were drawn up ; tensive drawing 
in dorsal and lumbar muscles. In the arms there is venous tension : 
“ the veins of the arms and hands are injected and tense, with great 
prostration and ill-humour — suggesting phlebitis and varicosis. 
Stro. c. has a relation to sprains and bone affections. The femur is 
especially affected by it. It is particularly suited to bone affections 
of scrofulous children when associated with diarrhoea. The diarrhoea 
of Stro. c. is < at night ; is very urgent ; can scarcely leave the 
vessel before having to return ; > after 3 a.m. Stro. c. is indicated 
in chronic sprains of the ankle when oedema exists. C. M. Roger 
(H. R.f XV. 339) cured with Stro. c., after other remedies had failed, a 
sciatica accompanied by oedema of left ankle. Sensations of Stro. c. 
are : As if a load on chest. As if head were expanded from within. 
As if scalp were too tight. As if tendons of neck were drawn up. 
As if bruised in back and sacrum. As if all power had left right arm. 
Gnawing as if in marrow of bones. Symptoms as if in marrow of bones. 
Symptoms like phantoms difficult to locate. External soreness is a 
note of Stro. c. ; also numbness. Emaciation has been caused by it. 
The symptoms are < by touch j by rubbing ; by scratching. Lying 



STRONTIUM CARBONICUM 1283 

.with bead low < tension in head. Motion < ; walking especially 
<. Stooping <. Exertion <. Motion > weakness of right arm. 

< Evening ; night, and early morning, 2 or 3 a.m. Warmth, 
covering >. Heat of sun > tension in head. Least draught <. 
Pain and itching alternate. Right side most affected. Pressure in 
stomach is > by eating ; and < after a meal. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Camph. Compare : Bar. c. (closest 
congener ; scrofulous, apopletic conditions ; chilliness). In headache 
> wrapping up warmly, Sil. (Sil. headache comes up spine and over 
head ; Farrington says Stron. has the same). > Wrapping ; sheep- 
dung stools, Mag. m. Sprains, Arn., Rhus, Ruta. Caries of femur 
with watery diarrhoea, Sil. Scrofulous bone affections, Staph. 
Paina increase and decrease gradually, Plat., Stan. > By light ; 
aversibn to darkness, Stram.. Am. m.. Calc. Bar. c., Ars., Carb. a., 
Carb. V., Caust., Lyc., Pho., Puls., Rhus, Val. (Cin., aversion to light). 

< Walking, .^sc. h. Threatened apoplexy, Ast. r. 

Oansation. — Operation (photopsia). Sprains. Haemorrhages 
(chronic sequelae). 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Inquietude and anguish. — (Depression of spirits. — R. T. C.) — 
Apprehension as from a bad conscience. — Peevishness, with tendency to fly 
into a rage. — Excessive forgetfulness. 

2. Head. — Headache, with nausea and vertigo.— Troublesome pres- 
sure in forehead. — Threatening apoplexy ; violent congestion to head ; > 
wrapping head up. — (Dizzy when talking to people. — R. T. C.) — Burning 
in forehead. — Tensive headache as if all the skin were being drawn 
towards the vertex, and the contents of the skull pressed outwards ; < in 
evening when lying with the head low, slowly increasing and decreasing, 
> from heat. — Chilliness over scalp and upper part of back, < in evening, 
at night, and in cold air. — Tension on head (externally and internally), 
< in evening, and from cold, > from warmth, esp. in heat of the sun. 
— ^Tension from vertex to upper jaw. — Distensive pressure in entire head ; 
in 1 . side of head. — Lancinating headache. — Stitches in head. — Vibration in 
temples in evening. — Sensation of burning heat in head and face, when walk- 
ing in afternoon, with redness of face, anguish, and sleepiness. — Boring in 
small spot r. side of occiput. — Dull, pressive pain in occiput. — Sensation of 
heat of head and face, with red face, anxiety, and sleepiness. — (Tendency of 
hair to fall out with irritation of scalp.— R. T. C.) 

3. Eyes. — Burning in eyes.— Burning, drawing, and redness in eyes.— 
Pressure on upper part of eyeball. — Violent jerking and quivering of eyelids. 
— Red and blue circles before eyes, after rubbing them, with pressure, as by 
sand. — Sparkling before eyes.— Luminous vibrations before the eyes.— 
Photopsia, remaining after an operation, esp. when objects appear covered 
with blood.— Green spots before eyes in the dark. 

4* Ears.“-Tearing in front of r. ear as if in the bone,— Sticking in 
front of 1 . ear extending into it.— Boring and tearing in r. ear, — Roaring and 
tearing in r, ear in frequent paroxysms. — Humming in the ears. 



1284 STRONTIUM CARBONICUM 

5. Nose. — Quivering on one side of nose, — Blowing of (dark) san- - 
guineous scabs from nose.— Twitching of 1. side of nose. 

6. Face. — Redness of face, with burning heat. — Itching of face ; of r. 
cheek, < by scratching. — Jerking, tearing and boring in zygomatic processes. 
—Twitching of 1. malar bone extending to frontal eminence. — ^Violent boring 
pain in (r.) malar bone. — Stitch in 1. side of chin extending into jaw-joint. 

7. Teeth. — ^Toothache, with jerking pain. — Sensation in teeth as if 

screwed together. — ^Tearing at root of teeth. — Grasping pain in teeth, 
preceded by copious accumulation of saliva.— Gums swollen, painful when 
touched. ‘ 

8. Mouth. — Bad odour from mouth. — Sensation of numbness 'and 
of dryness in mouth, in morning (early when waking), without absence of 
saliva. 

9. Throat. — Roughness and dryness of throat. — Inflammation Of 
palate, with pain during deglutition. — ^The fauces are inflamed and painful 
(stinging) during deglutition. — Sticking in throat on swallowing. 

10 . Appetite. — Earthy taste in mouth. — Violent thirst, esp. for beer. — 
Appetite only for brown bread. — Hunger after dinner. — (Ravenous, but dis- 
comfort prevents him eating more than a few mouthfuls. — R. T. C.) 

11. Stomach. — Nausea, with burning heat in face. — Violent hiccough. 
— Sickness after all food, sometimes quickly, sometimes after an hour or two 
(produced. — R. T. C.).—( Heartburn, distension of abdomen, flatus with dull 
aching across waist and aching in 1. temple. — R. T. C.) — Pressure in stomach, 
> by eating ; < on walking. — Constriction in stomach with uprisings of clear 
water. — Stitches in stomach now r. now 1. side. — Pressure in stomach, with 
sensation of fulness in abdomen, esp. after a meal. 

12. Abdomen. — Pressive, bruised pains in hypochondria. — Abdomen 
distended and painfully inflated.— Colic in umbilical region. — Gripings, with 
diarrhoea, with chilliness, and shiverings. — Lancination in sides. — ^Grumbling 
in abdomen, with abundant expulsion of very fetid flatus. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Hard, knotty faeces (compact and in large 
lumps), evacuated slowly, with effort and much pain (in anus). — The stool is 
passed in lumps like sheep-dung, and only with great effort so that she thought 
she would faint, and with most frightful pain followed by boring in anus. — 
Diarrhoea, of yellow water, with gripings and pinchings in abdomen. — 
Diarrhoea < at night, is scarcely off the vessel before he must return, > 
towards morning at 3 or 4 o’clock. — Tenesmus after (the diarrhoea-like) stool, 
— Burning sensation in anus, during and after a stool. — Pain, as from 
haemorrhoids in rectum. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Diminished ^secretion of urine. — Increased 
secretion of a yellow, deep-coloured urine. — Nocturnal emission of urine.— 
Pale urine, with a strong smell of ammonia. — Urine has a normal appearance 
with a strong smell of Iodine. — (Urine strong-smelling.— R. T. C.y 

15. Male Sexual Organs.—A very transient, pressive pain in r. 
spermatic cord while urinating. 

x6. Female Sexual Organs. — Retarded catamenia, at first serous 
(like meat-water), afterwards in clots. — Menses too early and of too short a 
duration. — Lcucorrhoea while walking. 

Respiratory Organs.— Hoarseness and roughness in throat, which 



STRONTIUM CARBONICUM 1285 

excites a cough.--Dry cough, excited by irritation in trachea, < at night.— 
Dyspnoea, when walking, with heat and redness of face. 

x8. Chest. — Pressure at chest. — Drawing pain in muscles of chest. — 
Constriction ; pressive pain < walking. — Spasmodic drawing and clawing ; 
stitches on coughing and inspiring. — Painfulness of sternum to touch. — Slight 
burning 1 . side of sternum extending upwards. — Pressure in sternum. — 
Pressive pain beneath sternum, at night, disappeared in morning on rising. 
—Slight sticking in ensiform cartilage on walking in open air. — Dull stitches 
deep internally beneath ensiform cartilage, taking away the breath. — (Pain in 
1 . breast with oppression < after meals. — R. T. C.) 

]^« Heart. — Dull, intermitting pressure in prascordial region. — Violent 
beating of arteries and of heart. 

20/ Neck and Back. — Tearing tension in nape as if tendons were 
drawn *up. — Sensations as if bruised in back and sacrum, < from stooping 
and when touched. — Pain, as of a fracture, in loins and back. — Drawing 
pain in back, and lumbar region. — Slight drawing pain along spine in after- 
noon, changing to a seated dull tearing in joints of legs, < walking. 

21. Limbs. — ^Tearing (rheumatic pains) in the limbs, esp. in the joints, 
< in the evening, and at night in bed. — One side of the body is generally 
only affected (r. side). — Immobility of the limbs, on one side only (the r. side 
of the body), like paralysis, in the evening. — Trembling of the limbs. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Painful paralytic sensation in 1 . shoulder and elbow- 
joint at night. — Constant burning pains in r. shoulder-joint. — Veins of arms 
and hands injected and large ; prostration ; ill-humour. — Tearings in arms 
hands, and fingers, esp. in joints. — Numbness, almost paralytic, of the fore- 
arms and hands. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Paralytic drawing in limbs. — Swelling and caries 
of femur, usually on scrofulous children ; diarrhoea. — Cramp in calves and 
soles, esp. in people who suffer from cold feet. — Sprains, esp. of ankle. — Jerking 
of legs. — ^Jerkings and tearings in legs, feet, and toes, esp. in joints. — Swelling 
of fbet. — Sensation of icy-coldncss in outer surface of calf (in spots). — Icy- 
i:old feet, evening. 

24. Generalities. — Excessive emaciation. — The majority of the pains, 
the exact situation of which it is difficult to determine, seem to be in the 
medulla of the bones (?). — The symptoms imperceptibly increase to a certain 
intensity, and diminish in the same manner. — Predominance of symptoms on 
one side of the body. — Violent involuntary starts of the body; tension in 
inner or outer parts ; heat, with aversion to undress or uncover one's self. — 
Affections in joints of legs. — < In night ; evening ; from cold in general ; 
from undressing ; after lying down and rising again ; from rubbing ; in 
darkness. — > from light ; from d very bright light ; from warmth in general ; 
from wrapping up warmly. — > In open air, esp. from heat of sun. — Great 
lassitude and depression, morning and evening. 

25. Skin.— Tension of skin in different parts, when in bed, in evening.— 
Skin adherent to scar in forearm becomes looser.— Eruption of small pimples 
in different parts, with burning itching, esp. after scratching. — Sycotic erup- 
tion on face and elsewhere in mouth, itching, burning. 

26* Sleep. — Retarded sleep. — jerking in body and starts when sleeping, 
— tFrequent waking at night, principally caused by a dry cough. — Sleep, with 
many fantastic dreams. 



1286 STRONTIUM GARB.— STROPHANTHUS 

27. Fever.— Pulse full and hard, with violent pulsation in the arteries.— , 
Chill in forenoon, descending from sacrum to posterior part of thighs.— 
Chilliness from head over shoulder-blades. — Shiverings, morning and evening. 
— Heat seeming to stream from nose and mouth, with thirst. — Dry heat at 
night (with thirst). — Profuse perspiration at night, and when^ a limb is 
uncovered pain is instantaneously felt in the part. — Perspiration of parts 
affected (during morning hours). 

Strontium Nitricum. 

Nitrate of Strontium. SrNOj. Solution. 

Clinical. — Cravings, morbid. Ears, eczema behind. Headache. Kidneys, 
congestion of. Menses, scanty. 

Characteristics. — C. M. Roger {H. R., xv. 337) records the 
following cases : (i) Miss D., 18, brunette, had dull pains over eyes 
< by sunlight, motion, loss of sleep, sewing, reading ; > after stool. 
With the headache, swelling of upper lids, < in morning. Some- 
times bad taste in mouth. Menses irregular, profuse, dark. Feels 
tired and weak. Is addicted to eating cloves. In hot weather sweats 
profusely and easily about head and chest, staining yellow. Very 
susceptible to cold. Cough provoked by oppression of breathing 
and talking. Formerly had catarrh ; now has right-sided deafness. 
Had typhoid fever two years before, and during the fever was allowed 
unlimited quantities of ice. Preceding the fever she had a post- 
auricular eczema suppressed by salves ; now is anaemic and bloated. 
The urine contained epithelium, excess of chlorides, calcium oxalate, 
and a trace of albumen (due probably to the clove habit). Glonoin 
helped the case, but for a time only. StronU nit. was chosen because 
Stroni. irritates the kidneys, and Nit. ac. corresponds to the vaso-motor 
disturbance, besides having cravings for odd things. Slront. nit. 6x 
was given, and in a few days the headache vanished. At the end of 
a month the post-auricular eruption had reappeared. Five months 
later there had been no return of headache or palpebral oedema ; the 
craving for cloves had gone ; the patient had taken on good flesh and 
colour. The eruption had not all gone. (2) A case of passive con- 
gestion of the kidneys was completely relieved by Stroni, nit, in a 
woman at the climacteric. The menses, which were usually exceed- 
ingly scanty, became profuse. 

Strophanthns. 

Strophanthus hispidus. Inee. Onaye. Onage. Poison of Pahonias. 

N, 0 , Apocynaceae. Tincture of the seeds. 

Clinioal. — Alcoholism. Anaemia. Cough. Diplopia. Dropsy; cardiac. Haemo- 
ptysis. Heart, affections of. Levitation. 

Ghai^aoteristios . — Strophanthus is an ornamental, evergreen, 
climbing shrub, native of Tropical Africa and Asia. It is used as an 



STROPHANTHUS 


1287 

arrow-poison by natives of Africa. T. R. Fraser experimented with 
it on animals, and his conclusions are marked (F) in the Schema. 
Piedvache proved the tincture (C. Z). P.), but only with reference to 
the pulse. His symptoms are marked (P). Gisevius {H. P., xii. 502) 
proved Strop, beginning with 5 drops, increasing to 80 drops during 
the five days of his proving. His symptoms are marked (G). Matthes 
{ibid, 508) proved Strop, p (10 drops), and Strop, 2 (10 drops). His 
symptoms are marked (M). Some well-marked symptoms were 
.produced on two chemists from preparing the tincture (C. D, P,), 
.Other effects curative and pathogenetic have been observed on 
patients taking the drug. Strop, disorders the digestion, causes burn- 
ing in the oesophagus and stomach, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea. 
A. P. Skw’orzow {H. W.^ xxix, 534) gave to a dipsomaniac, 63, for 
weak* heart and intermittent pulse, in 7 -drop doses three times a day, 
an infusion of Strop. The first dose caused nausea, and a repugnance to 
alcohol which proved to be permanent. The man entirely discontinued 
the habit. On this hint Strop, was given to two other alcoholics, with 
the same result of abolishing the taste for alcohol. It caused nausea 
and profuse sweating, and the sudden withdrawal of alcohol was not 
attended with delirium. A case of mine illustrates the gastric and 
cardiac action of the remedy {Dis. of Hearty p. 191) : W. G., 16, a 
delicate- looking boy, was admitted to hospital, having had rheumatic 
pains about him for three months, and an attack of rheumatic fever 
two years previously. He had been laid up a month before admission, 
and a week before was taken with cough, shivering, and occasional 
vomiting. When admitted he had a frequent, short, dry cough, < 
lying down ; had to be propped up in bed ; had oedema of feet, 
especially left. Tongue white ; unable to retain any food for three 
days ; no pain after food, but much flatulence, eructations giving 
much relief. Heart greatly dilated, pulsation diffused ; double mitral 
bruit. Dulness at bases of both lungs, moist rales halfway up right 
lutig. Expectoration of bright blood seven days. Strop. </>, one drop 
. every four hours, was given. Improvement in all the symptoms was 
immediate ; sickness, cough, luemoptysis, and dropsy all disappeared ; 
and the heart sounds had cleared up to a large extent when the boy 
went home, less than three weeks after admission. Hamer mentions that 
has cured “functional disturbance of the heart from alcohol, 
tobacco, and tea.’’ This agrees with the relation of Strop, to alcoholism, 
and to symptoms of indigestion. A wTiter {A. H., xxiii. 304) gives his 
experience with Strop, (in 5-drop doses of ix tincture) in urticaria 
— ^which again bears out the gastric relations of Strop.) : A lady 
had constant outbursts of ufticarial rash dating from exposure to an 
offensive effluvium from a dead whale cast on the sands. The 
attacks would recur after drinking a glass of table beer. Strop. 
cured. Any accompanying cardiac weakness would be an additional 
indication. The same writer considers Strop, of great service in 
the anaemia of young girls when palpitation and breathlessness 
are marked features. — An accidental proving on a girl of five 
(fir. R.y iii. 175^ was made through the mother giving twenty drops of 
the tincture oy mistake. Some half an hour later this condition 
was foimd : Face flushed, lips scarlet, eyes brilliant ; temperature 



1288 


STROPHANTHUS 


raised, skin dry, tongue normal. Pupils quivering, dilating, and con- 
tracting every few seconds. Pulse 140, arteries distended. Heart 
sounds vigorous, slight regurgitant mitral murmur. Intellect clear ; 
precociously loquacious during the five hours the poisonous symptoms 
lasted. An Ipec, emetic was administered. No urine passed for ten 
hours after the dose. 

Relations. — Compatible: Per. (in anaemia). Compare: Botan., 
heart, dropsy, Apocy. c. Heart, Dig. (Dig. is cumulative ; Strop, is 
not), Cretaeg., Phas., Cact. Anaemia, Per. Alcoholism, Chi., Nux, 
Aven., Querc. ^ 

Causation.— Alcohol. Tea. Tobacco. 

STKPTOHS. 

1. Mind. — Irritative humour (G). — Precociously loquacious (child). 

2. Head. — Some vertigo (M). — Stitches in 1. temple ; later in r. (M). — 
Waving and bubbling in whole head ; stitches in 1. temple, later r. (M). — 
Severe headache about junction of skin and hairy scalp, gradually spreading 
to temples ; accompanied by double vision ; (from preparing tincture). — 
Pulsation in head and heart (G). — Undulating sensation in head and whole 
body (M). — ^Twitching pain in occiput (M). 

3. Eyes. — Impaired sight of 1. eye ; with nausea and faintness ; follow- 
ing the headache and double vision (from preparing the tincture). — Eyes 
brilliant. — Pupils quivering, dilating, and contracting alternately every few 
seconds. 

6. Face. — Face flushed, lips scarlet. 

9. Throat. — Burning in oesophagus. — Burning in throat and oesophagus 
to stomach, compelling empty swallowing (M). — Dryness of tongue and 
fauces (M). 

11. Stomach. — Eructation and hiccough (M). — Twitching in stomach 

(M). — Burning in oesophagus and stomach with loss of appetite and extreme 
gastric distress, which not rarely rose to vomiting ; sometimes there was 
diarrhoea.— Nausea without actual vomiting (from preparing tincture). — 
Loathing of food, followed by choking and vomiting after eating. — Repug- 
nance to alcohol. ^ 

12. Abdomen. — Pressure in hepatic region (G). — Shooting pains in 
r. hypochondrium (M).— Stitches in r. renal and hepatic regions (M). — 
Colic (G). — Rumbling in abdomen and pinching at navel (M). — Stitches in 
region of sigmoid flexure. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Diarrhoea.— Frequent diarrhoea with violent 
colic but good appetite (G).— Stool with burning and tenesmus in anus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — The kidneys become hyperaemic not only in 
the cortex and medullary portions but esp. at tips of pyramids.-^No urine 
passed for ten hours after the dose (child).-^Quantity of urine decreased about 
one-third after the first two or three days (P). 

17. Respiratory Organs. — (Expectoration of bright red blood. — Cough 
< by lying down.) 

xS. Chest.^Pressive pain middle of r, third rib on anterior half < by 
pressure (G). 



STRYCHNINUM 


1289 


19* Heart. — The heart is easily and powerfully affected ; systole is 
increased and the contractions slowed by small doses ; the heart is paralysed 
in rigid contraction by large doses ; this action is produced if the influence 
of the cerebro-spinal system be altogether removed (F). — Pulse slowed at 
first ; increased after drug discontinued (P). — Evidence of the physiological 
discrotism of the pulse obliterated (P).-^Chronic degeneration of cardiac 
muscle, pulse small, frequent and irregular ; great difficulty of breathing, and 
oedema. — Nervous palpitation and arrest of breathing.) — Lively perception of 
action of heart ; then pressive sensation of anguish, tending to deep respira- 
tion ; pressure on hepatic region (G). — Intense palpitation from comparatively 
slight exertion (G). — Distinct stitching and restlessness towards apex of heart, 
increased impulse with peculiar pulsation and twitching throughout body 
(M),-T-Stitches and twitches at apex beat. — Loud heart sounds, slight regur- 
gitant * mitral bruit (child). 

21. Limbs. — Heaviness and pains in forearm and fingers, then same 
pains in 1. hip-joint, extending into drawing twitches in top of 1. shoulder, 
extending into joints of foot, which is quite painful when moved (M). 

23. Lower Limbs. — (Swelling of legs.) — Itching and stitching in both 
feet (G). — Dorsum of foot painful and tense (M). 

24. Generalities.— Coldness of extremities and faintness (from preparing 
tincture). — Increases contractile power of all striped muscles, rendering their 
contractions more complete and prolonged (F). — In lethal doses it causes the 
rigidity of contraction to pass into rigor mortis (F). — During afternoon nap, 
sensation as if being lifted from the couch (G). 

27. Fever.— Coldness of extremities. — Temperature raised ; skin dry.— 
Profuse sweat. 


Stryohninum. 

STRYCHNINUM, Strychnia. Strychnine. An alkaloid obtained from 
several species of Strychnos. CatHaaNaOa. Trituration. Solu- 
tion, [The Liquor Strychnise of B. P. is a solution of the 
• alkaloid in a very weak solution of hydrochloric acid and 
alcohol, the proportions being : Strychnia gr. iv., diluted hydro- 
chloric acid TT^vi., rectified spirit 5ii., distilled water 5vi.] 
STRYCHNINUM NiTRicuM. Nitrate of Strychnine. CaxHaaNjOaHNOj. 
Solution. T rituration. 

STRYCHNINUM PHOSPHORICHM. Acid Phosphate of Strychnine. 

CaiHa3Na0aH3P042Ha0. Soli^tion. Trituration. 
STRYCHNINUM SULPHURICUM. Normal Sulphate of Strychnine. 

(CajHaaNa0a)aHaS047Hi30. Solution. Trituration. 

Strych. VALERIANIC. Valerianate of Strychnine, CajHjaNaOaCjHxoOa, 
Solution. Trituration. 

Olinical.— Amaurosis. Aorta, pain in. Aphonia. Asthma. Athetosis^ Bladder, 
paralysis ctf ; pains in. Breasts, pains in. Cough, explosive. Cramps. Diaphragm, 
spasms of. Emphysema. Enuresis. Exophthalmos. Eyes^ optic nerve^ sclerosts 0} 
(w)* Headache. Hemiplegia. Influenza. Joints, stiffness of. Laryngeal crises 



1290 


STRYCHNINUM 


of locxunotor ataxy. Locomotor ataxy. Malar bones, pains in. Neurasthenia (#)• 
Ni^ht-blindness. Paraplegia. Proctalgia. Rheumatism. Scrotum, abscess of. 
Spinal irritation (^). Tetanus. 

Gharaoteristlos. — Poisonings innumerable with Strychnine are on 
record, the symptoms being convulsions of a tetanic nature, in the 
fatal cases ending in asphyxia. The spasms are intermittent, and the 
least touch or movement is sufficient to induce an attack. Lying on the 
back is the only tolerable position. Here is a case : Lying on her 
back, body rigid, jaws set, arms and hands flexed, the thumbs nearly 
touching across the chest, and the whole muscular system convulsed, 
with short, jerky spasms, which would continue for about a miuute 
and then remit, the muscles remaining contracted and as hard as 
wood during the intervals between the paroxysms. The convulsions 
generally take the form of opisthotonos ; ciies, terror, hippocratic 
countenance, and frothing at the mouth are common occurrences. The 
Liquor strychnice is responsible for many of the poisonings, the powdered 
crystals, either pure or mixed in pills or rat-poison, for others. Strychnia 
itself is very sparingly soluble in cold water (i in 5760). I have not 
attempted to distinguish between the different salts of Stiych, An 
extensive proving of the Liquor Slrych, was made under the supervision 
of Heniy Robinson on two provers, a man and a woman (M. H. /?., xii. 
252). The man took 900 drops in twenty-three days ; the woman 445 
drops in fifty-three days. These have furnished the most distinctive 
symptoms. Extreme nervous excitability ; visions of an ugly face ; fits of 
laughing, with light, swimming sensation in the head and giddiness ; 
involuntary, idiotic-like chuckle ; confusion of ideas, stupor and weari- 
ness — ^were some of the mental symptoms. The drowsiness was a 
well-marked feature and characterised some of the headaches. The 
headaches were frontal largely, or momentary dartings like electric 
shocks. A lady to whom I gave Strych, ph, 3X in five-drop doses twenty 
minutes before meals felt at once constriction of the throat, and after 
each meal violent headache in forehead over the eyes. The choking 
sensations were a constant feature in provings and poisonings. A 
patient now under my care suffering from locomotor ataxy has 
had among other manifestations alarming laryngeal crises with 
choking attacks. For these Felix Semon had given him subcutanqpus 
injections of Strychnine^ which was exquisitely homoeopathic to the 
case, and gave marked relief. The direct “ tonic action of 
Strych. was shown in one of Robinson’s provers, who had 
** unusually good appetite, she enjoys her food amazingly.” Gamper, 
of St. Petersburg (C. D. P.), experimented with Strych, nit, on healthy 
young hospital assistants and found that* it increased the amount of 
gastric juice secreted, the general acidity, and the quantity of free 
acid in the secretion. It hastened the absorption from the 
stomach, and strengthened the mechanical movements. The effects 
continued some time after the administration was stopped. The 
action of Strych. on the rectum and genito-urinary organs was as 
pronounced as that of Ign, and Nux ; the male prover had his left 
testicle and cord swollen, and an abscess of the scrotum developed 
and discharged. Meyhoffer (C. D, P.) experimented with Strych, on 
himself and two other persons, one of whom was a woman of 



STRYCHNINUM ug, 

lymphatic temperament. It always brought on electric shocks, 
occurring whenever the prover was touched or whenever any one 
lightly shook the bed on which he or she was lying. This happened 
to all, only the*woman (lymphatic and feeble) needed a stronger dose.’^ 
This prover also had this curious symptom : Any touch on any part 
of the bodyssa voluptuous sensation. Hale mentions the follow- 
ing uses of StrycL and its salts as observed by him and others : 
(i) In the tetanic spasms of cerebro-spinal meningitis. Sirych, 6. 

. (2) Amaurosis from atony of retina. (3) Diplopia, and night-blindness. 
Facial neuralgia an^l neuralgic headache, Strych. suL ; (and in one case 
*\Khen all other Strych. preparations had failed, Sltych, vaL cured). 
(4) Spasm of oesophagus in an hysterical woman, Strych, (5) Brain 
exhaustion of women in whom high nervous erethism exists. Strych, 
vaL'ax, (6) Chorea, when the convulsions do not cease during sleep. 
Strych, 12, or 30. — A suggestion of Cooper that many cases of persistent 
cough recurring after influenza are met by Strych, I have found to be 
correct. The influenza cough has in it a strong spasmodic and 
asthmatic element, whether dry or not, and this seems to give one 
point of correspondence. C. W. Lawson (quoted H, W„ xxxiv. 134) 
relates the case of a medical man who took continuously for two years 
Liq, Strych, Hydrochlor.^ 5 to 10 minims, thrice daily, with a little Sal 
volatile. He was at first benefited, but afterwards experienced a 
desire to take abnormally deep inspirations, and he felt that to do 
so would overcome the inhibitory power over the lung, probably the 
action of the diaphragm.’* One morning, after a dose of Strych,^ he 
was taking such an inspiration, and from that moment experienced 
the sensations complained of : inability to take a deep breath ; fixation 
of chest walls compelling him to stoop ; weakness on exertion, great 
confusion of thought and memory ; occasional clay-coloured faeces, 
usually greater in amount than ordinary. After six months the apex 
beat descended to the 6th interspace, and headache and drowsiness 
bbcame marked. He travelled for six months without benefit. All 
attempts to act on the heart with drugs increased the headache. 
Lawson then found the heart dilated, wide subcostal angle, chest 
emphysematous, moving en masse. After a year of treatment Hyoscy- 
amus tincture, Tf^xx. at bedtime, was ordered and proved strikingly bene- 
ficial, drowsiness ceased entirely and improvement in all other respects 
followed. — Peculiar Sensations of Sltych, are : Feeling as if head and 
face were enlarged. [Hence Nux and Strych, are remedies for the 
after-affects of debauches.] As if an iron cap were on head. Paralysed 
feeling in left half of head and face. Scalp sore, as if hair had been 
pulled. As if nerves suddenly pulled out of teeth. As of a lump in 
throat. As if water dripped off right elbow ; at intervals ; and off 
right shQulder. As if chopped in half at waist, at night. The pains 
and sensations of Strych, come suddenly and return at intervals. 
Sudden palpitation. Darting, pinching lancinating, fulgurating, 
electric pains. Gurgling noise in rectum with electric darts ** is a 
symptom of one prover. Many pains centre about the lips and eyes, 
^ns and chills occur in the occiput and nape and run down whole 
length of spine. There is much itching of the whole body and 
“violent itching in roof of mouth,” which should prove a useful 



1292 STRYCHNINUM 

♦ 

symptom. Jerkings, twitchings, and shocks in all parts run through* 
out the pathogenesis. The sensitiveness is shown in the increased 
activity of the spinal senses; the dread of touch; shrinking from 
draughts of air ; and in Meyhoffer’s prover touch anyWnere excited a 
voluptuous sensation. Stiffness is a leading note of Strych.^ and Cooper 
gives rheumatism with stiff joints as an indication. The symptoms 
are < in morning. < By touch ; noise ; motion ; exertion ; walking. 
< After meals. > Lying on back. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Passiflor. (?) (suggested by Hale) ; 
Hyo. (drowsiness, respiratory affection) ; Tobacco Chlorof., Camph., 
Aeon, have been advised. See also under Nux. Osterwald {Med, Press^^ 
January 6, 1901) found inhalation of Oxygen an effective antidote m 
animals. Black draught (Senna and Epsom Salts) relieved the con- 
stipation better than any other aperient. Sul. 30 in globules dvv on 
the tongue brought about a rapid and almost complete relief of all the 
rectal symptoms of Robinson^s male prover. Compare : Headache 
extending from occiput down spine, Pic. ac. Sudden pains. Bell., Lyc. 
Itching on palate, Glon. Sensation as if cut in two at waist, Ars. 
Headache with drowsiness, Bruc. Head jerked forwards and back- 
wards, Strain. Spasm of throat, inability to swallow, Stram. 


SYMPTOMS. 

X. Mind. — Delirium : like that of hydrophobia ; like delirium tremens ; 
frightened ; shrinks from persons ; from currents of air. — Shouted out, ** They 
are coming for me ! — Extreme nervous excitability ; painful nervousness. — 
Immoderate hts of laughing, with light, swimming sensation and giddiness. 
— Moaning ; sobbing ; screaming. — Exceedingly despondent. — Irritable. — 
Confusion of ideas. — Loss of memory. — Consciousness perfect till death; 
though there may be loss of consciousness. 

2. Head. — Vertigo : inclines to fall forward ; with roaring in ears ; 
while lying, with nausea. — jerking of head forwards ; and backwards. — ^Veins 
of head, and neck and face turgid ; red, protruding eyes. — Violent headache 
with bursting pains in forehead, esp. 1 . side. — Stupid headache with extreme 
drowsiness. — Severe pains over 1 . eye and behind ears, with a feeling of stupor 
and drowsiness, 8 p.m. — Sensation as if an iron cap on head. — ^Violent thump- 
ing pains in head, esp. r. half and over 1 . eye. — Shattered sensation in head 
with drowsiness.— Sharp, darting pains in 1. temple and round to back of 
1 . ear. — Rapid pulsation in 1. temple and 1. hypochondrium. — Sudden pain 
and pressure in vertex and 1 . eye. — Peculiar paralysed feeling in 1 . half of 
head and face.— Dull pains in back of head 'and temples. — Constant pains 
on back of head and nape of neck. — Boring pain in occiput.— Pains on 
back of head, extending down whole length of spine. — Sharp pains in occiput, 
extending to 1 . eye and back of r. ear. — Sore pains in scalp as if hair had been 
pulled. — Intense itching of scalp and nape. 

3. Byes. — Eyes highly congested and in constant motion, as in great 
affright, — Eyes red ; injected and protruding. — Eyes ; sunken ; rolling ; 
distorted ; turned to one side ; turned to r. and fixed, with dilated, insensible 
pupils and red conjunctiva.— Aching, smarting, dull pains in eyes, with misty 



STRYCHNINUM 


1293 


vision, — Burning in eyes, < 1, — Feeling as if eyes were suddenly stiffened and 
drawn back.— Burning ; intense, sudden ; in eyes and lids.— Feeling as if 
cold in cyes.—^olling of eyes as if they were two cold bullets. — ^Tender, 
bruised feeling over 1. eye. — Rapid pulsation over 1. eye ; in 1. upper lid with 
weakness, swelling, discharge. — Increased lachrymation. — Needle-like pains 
in balls. — Pupils dilated, eyes staring. — Pupils contracted. — ^Vision ; dim ; 
confused, misty ; persistent amaurosis. — Sparks before eyes, blackish, white, 
or red. — Increased peripheric sensibility for blue. — Enlargement of field of 
vision. — Everything seemed to turn green and he fell on the floor. 

4 . Ears. — Credlping, tingling sensation in external ears. — Sudden burn- 
ing itching in ears, nose, lips, and eyes ; in 1. ear m afternoon. — Intense 
aching behind ears and down spine. — Sharp, darting pains behind r. ear ; 
behind ears and back of head and neck. — Digging pain deep in 1. ear. — 
Intense fulness in ears. — Hearing extremely sensitive, hears slightest sounds. 
— Roaring ; burning ; noise like wind. 

5 . Nose. — Face swollen and burning hot, eyes half closed as if stung 
by bees. —Face puffy, pale, distorted. — Muscles stiff. — Risus sardonicus. — 
Expression of extreme terror. — Face : livid ; flushed and bathed with cold, 
clammy sweat. — Sharp, needle-like pains in cheek-bones ; in 1. cheek-bone 
shooting into teeth. — Lips : blue ; livid ; swollen ; retracted. — ^Trismus. — 
Stiffening of jaws affecting speech. — Dull pains in jaws generally shooting 
into temples. — Needle-like pains under jaws. — Pulsation in chin. 

7 . Teeth. — Teeth clenched. — Toothache : at midnight ; in 1. upper 
teeth shooting into cheek-bone ; as if nerves suddenly pulled out, at night ; 
drawing; shooting. 

8 . Mouth. — Tongue : dry and papillae erect ; dry, with white moisture 
on edges ; gums and lips violet ; hot ; sore, and roof of mouth. — Frothing at 
mouth. — Violent itching in roof of mouth.— Taste : bad ; feverish ; hot and 
bitter ; dry. — Mouth filled with (frothy) saliva. — Articulation difficult. — 
Sj)eech : indistinct ; lost. 

9 . Throat. — Choking sensation in throat ; as if something were held 
tightly round it. — Dry ; spasmodic ; contracted feeling ; intense difficulty in 
swallowing.— Feeling as of a lump in throat, evening.— Dry, hot feeling ; 
soreness (1. side); scraping. — Every attempt to swallow as violent spasms of 
muscles of pharynx. — Severe dull pains in muscles and glands of neck and at 
back of ears. — Sharp pains in glands of neck, behind ears and back of head. 

n. Stomach. — Unusually good appetite, enjoys her food amazingly. — 
Thirst : intense ; feverish. — Eructations : of bitter wind before vomiting ; 
bitter, greasy ; with bad taste. — Nausea. — ^Almost constant retching. — Violent 
vomiting. — ^Vomiting thin, colourless liquid. — Heavy feeling in stomach. — 
In pit of stomach ; intense ^ain ; sharp pain ; intense twitching ; violent 
jerks ; spasm. — Spasm of pit of stomach, suddenly, while at dinner, lasting 
an hour with severe pain and feeling of suffocation, compelling to loosen 
clothes. — Burning along oesopha|;us and in stomach. — Immediately felt a 
burning sensation in stomach for about a minute then felt as if the blood 
ran cold. 

xa. Abdomen.— R. hypochondrium : aching at intervals, with sick, faint 
feeling ; tense pain in r. ; sharp, needle-like and cutting pains. — Sharp pains 
in 1. hypochondrium shooting to pit of stomach. — Rapid pulsation in 1. hypo- 



1294 


STRYCHNINUM 


choadrium and 1. temple.— Abdominal muscles rigid in tetanic spasms. — In 
muscles: sore, contracted, bruised feeling.— Rumbling.— Griping, cutting, 
gnawing pain in bowels.— Sharp, cutting pain in r. lower and 1. upper half 
of abdomen. — Uneasiness in bowels and constipation. — Deep-seated, sore, 
contracted, cramp-like feelings in lower abdomen. — Sharp, needle-like pains 
in 1. groin. 

23. Stool and Anus. — Gurgling sounds in rectum, with spasms of 
darting pain compelling him to sit on the ground as if shot, — Two agonising 
darts of pain during the night. — Two darts .like shocks from a strong galvanic 
battery before going to bed. — Spasmodic jumping in anus. -Diarrhoea ; copious, 
watery. — Faeces discharged involuntarily during the spasms. — Stools : lumpy 
and dry, flatus smelling of fresh putty ; lumpy with mucus. — ^Very obstinate 
constipation ; with griping. 

14. Urinary Organs.— Contraction of bladder; it expelled urine 
apparently as fast as it was secreted. — Bladder paralysed. — Painful pressure 
in bladder and rectum. — Uneasiness about bladder and urethra < walking or 
sitting on anything hard. — Darting and shooting pains from bladder down 
thighs ; from back of bladder down rectum ; from front wall of bladder along 
urethra ; Anally the pains left the bladder and settled in gla^s penis. — Scald- 
ing in urethra. — Constant urging. — Urine : copious ; scanty ; 'variable, natural, 
dark like beer, thick, red sediment, albuminous-looking ma* floating in it. 

25, Male Sexual Organs. — L. spermatic cord • .1, 1, testicle 

swelled, painful only on standing or walking ; hard, swq , later burning 
pain on 1. side of scrotum where the skin was tense oiii^the testicle, and a 
large abscess formed in the dartos and cellular tissue ; this was opened by 
a small incision, and yielded a very large quantity of semi-transparent fluid, 
partly mixed with blood, after the discharge of which the size of the testicle 
became somewhat less ; there was no connection between the testicle and the 
abscess. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — While falling asleep, quite suddenly 
several hysterical jerks as from the womb, with burning, irritating heat and 
violent pulsation in the passages ; also feeling of great pressure and bearing 
down. — Darting pain and thrilling sensation in vagina with momentary pulsa- 
tion coming on at intervals. — Violent tearing pains in womb, at intervals. — 
Menses at proper times, lasted only two days and were scanty. — ^Any touch 
on the body, it mattered not where, excited a voluptuous sensation. 

27. Respiratory Organs. — Spasm of muscles about larynx and of 
arms ; she felt and looked as if strangled ; the muscles on each side of 
larynx became tense like cords. — Spasm of respiratory muscles, breathing 
irregular, intermittent, difficult.— Voice : weak ; low ; hoarse.— Aphonia. — 
Occasionally spasmodic, explosive cough ; dry .—^Breathing : hurried; difAcult ; 
choking ; tight ; with great pain in praecordia ; sobbing ; moaning. — Asphyxia. 

18. Chest. — Walls of chest fixed. — Oppression. — Chest moves en mmsct 
is hyper-resonant. — ^Tightness. — Pain : severe, sharp, contractive, spasmodic, 
darting, on chest, neck, and back. — Sharp needle-like pains : in upper chest 
and small of back ; in r. (and 1.) upper chest ; in 1. side under the ribs. — 
Severe stabbing pains in r. breast passing through to back at intervals.— 
Violent tearing in 1 . breast, at intervals. — Sharp pains in 1 . breast. 

29. Heart. — ^Tightness about prsecordia. — During day, dull pain, shifting 



STRYCHNINUM 


>295 


along line of aortic arch. — Fluttering sensation about heart with faintness. — 
Sudden p^pitation.— Tumultuous action of heart.— Feeling as of heart coming 
into throat. — Heart fluttering like a wounded bird. — Pulse ; irregulat ; ac- 
celerated ; corded, tense, strong ; full, rapid ; nearly extinct in the paroyxsms. 

ao. Neck and Back. — Neck swollen ; jugular veins distended. — Neck 
stiff, muscles like rigid cords.— Stiffness : painful ; extending down back ; 
momentary in 1. half of neck. — Darting, knife-like pains ; in muscles of neck and 
top of shoulders ; chest, abdomen ; with sick feeling. — Violent pain (stabbing, 
darting) in nape and down spine. — Back stiff.— Convulsive jerks in the back, 
and spinal column,— Intense aching or icy-coldness in entire back. — ^Agonising, 
gpawing pain in back and neck and muscles of legs.— Cutting in 1. half of 
back. — Sudden stiffness in lower back and hips. — Sharp, needle-like pain in 
back about waist. — Suddenly violent cutting pain in back about waist, as 
though she were chopped in half, extending r. and 1. to stomach at night, 

2X. Limbs.— Fingers and toes violet-coloured, fingers spasmodically 
drawn in, toes drawn back. — Limbs outstretched and rigid, at times jerking 
movements. — Cramps. — Darling pains in muscles. — Rheumatic pains in arms 
and legs. — Crawling in limbs after spasms. 

22. Upper Limbs. — On washing his hands, half an hour after touching 
an abrasion on 1. thumb with Liquor, Sitych,^ immediately felt numbness 
extending from thumb to whole of 1. hand and wrist and rapidly to elbow 
and shoulder ; in two hours joints of all fingers swollen and numbness gone ; 
later enormous swelling of whole limb. — ^Arms stretched out, hands clenched. 
— Soreness, tenderness of muscles.— Sharp rheumatic pain in socket of r. 
shoulder.— Sharp pains in back of 1. upper arm and fore part of thigh.— 
Sharp pain r. elbow-joint. — Sensation as though a drop of cold water were 
dripping off r. elbow at intervals ; at times as if cold water dripped off r. 
shoulder. — Subsultus tendinum. — Trembling of hands. — Violent twitching in 
veins of r. hand ; it seemed as if the blood had stopped and then flowed on. 
— Hands : partially paralysed ; spasmodically clenched. — Momentary stiffness 
of lingers. — Cramp-like ; rheumatic, sharp pains in hands. — Prickling, numbed 
sensations : in 1. hand, at intervals ; sudden in fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Painful convulsions in lower limbs and nape, 
with lightning-like pains in lumbar region, constantly shooting. — Loss of 
power of lower limbs. — Stiffness ; rheumatic pains ; sharp, needle-like pains 
in joints and limbs.— Trembling of legs.— Sudden jerking of legs ; at night.— 
Hard rigidity of legs.— Stiffness of 1. leg and back.— Agonising, gnawing pain 
in muscles of thighs,— Cramp-like pains in r. foot and leg.— Severe pains in 
r. ankle-joint < walking. — Cramp-like pains in feet. — Sharp, darting pains in 
feet, esp. in bottom of heels.— Thrilling from toes up legs.— Stiffened, twisted 
feeling in toes. — ^Violent itchingjtingling in soles and palms. 

24. Qreneralities. — Spasmodic, convulsive twitchings. — Every muscle of 
the body in a state of constant twitching. — Extremely violent twitching, first 
in limbs then in whole 1. side. — ^Vioksnt, electric-like starting and shuddering ; 
followed by opisthotonps.- Shocks in muscles so violent that r. thigh is dis- 
located. — Constant inclination to bend towards r. side. — Convulsions recurring 
regularly. — Every attempt to move threatened a convulsion.— Convulsive jerks 
on falling asleep. — In convulsions, skin hot, bathed in perspiration and steam- 
ing,— Everything seemed tq turn green and he fell on the floor.— Can lie in no 



1296 STRYCHNINUM-SUCCINUM 

position but on her back ; any other fli convulsions.— -An attempt to take liquids 
violent, spasmodic fit preventing her swallowing it.— Pains cramp-Uke, 
made her feel as though she would be stiffened. — < Evening.— < At night. 
— < From 8 to lo p.m. 

25. Skin. — Skin : pale at first ; then livid and bluish. — Burning ; prick- 
ling sensation ; formication.— Formication on tips of fingers*— Intense itching 
of skin of entire body ; esp. of scalp, face, arms, and legs. 

26. Sleep. — ^Yawning ; extreme drowsiness. — Sleeplessness ; from internal 
uneasiness and anxiety ; from dread of rectal spasms ; with visions of dead 
persons.— Extreme restlessness and talking in her sleeptwith peculiar working 
in back of brain. — Restless nights with profuse perspirations. — Dreams : d*s* 
agreeable ; strange wanderings of the imagination. 

27. Fever. — Extreme chilliness; and drowsiness. — Peculiar creeping 
chilliness all over with a tremulous sensation in the jaws. — ^Extreme chilliness 
even in a warm room. — Icy coldness : painful ; of entire body ; sudden. — A 
single cold chill down entire length of spine ; afterwards she felt deathly cold, 
— Icy coldness down spine. — Extremities cold. — Lower extremities cold and 
perspiration flowing in a stream from head and chest. — Fever of adynamic 
intermittent type. — Intolerable sense of heat over whole body though some 
parts cool to the feel. — Burning heat with hot sweat. — Bathed in warm sweat. 
— Profuse sweat after the spasm. — Sudden cold sweat and icy coldness of 
entire body.— Cold sweat with the convulsive shocks, and increased shaking 
and stiffening. 


Succinnm. 

Electron. Amber. (A mineralised resin not to be confounded with 
Ambergris, Ambra.) Trituration. Solution of the non-rectified 
oil (Oleum Succini non rectificatum) prepared by dry distU- 
lation of Amber. Solution of Succinic acid. C4H6O4. 

Olinioal.— Asthma. Fear ; of trains and close places. Globus. Hay-fever. 
Hiccough. Hysteria. Leucocythaemia splenica. Spleen, affections of. 

GharaoterlBtios.— Dr. Morris Weiner (quoted in New, Old, and 
Forgotten Remedies, tested Suedn. ac., which he prepared himself from 
Amber by dry distillation. The fumes of the crude acid, he says, are 
inflammable, and produce asthma, cough, sneezing, weeping, dropping 
of watery mucus from nostrils, pain in chest, arid headache. On this 
indication he treated thirty persons suffering from hay-fever, and cured 
them all, and saved them the necessit)^ 6f making an annual exodus. 
He gave one or two grains of the 3X trit. of Succinnm itself diluted in 
twelve teaspoonfuls of water ; a teaspoonful every two hours.* Burnett 
{Dis, of Spleen) used the non-rectified 6il as an organ remedy in spleen 
affections, especially when accompanied by nervous and hysterical 
phenomena. The crude oil is a thick brown liquid having a strong 
empyreumatic odour. It is a powerful local irritant, and has been 
used with success as such in lumbago, rheumatism, and sciatica. It 
enters into the composition of Rochets Embrocation,^^ and “ Haarlem 



SULFONAL 


1297 


Oil/^ and has a popular reputation as a remedy for whooping-cough, 
the directions being for it to be rubbed into the spine night and 
morning (Murrell, in BriL Med. your). A tablespoonful dose, says 
Murrell, has e&used persistent vomiting, diarrhoea, and symptoms of 
collapse ; and the patient aborted. These observations are of value in 
relation to Burnett's experience. He gave the oil thus : To six ounces 
of Acorn-water are added half a scruple of the oil. •They do not mix 
chemically, but by shaking each time a dose is taken the required 
^ division and attenuation is attained. Burnett’s keynote is : Painful 
‘ spleen affections wjjerewith there are convulsive attacks such as the 
'hysterical and hypochondriacal often have." Burnett relates in his 
book a most remarkable case of “ chronic enlargement of the spleen, 
with hemi-hyperaesthesia, cephalalgia, dyspnoea, orthopncea, convul- 
sions 7 in a young lady “ towards the end of her teens." After years of 
treatment under others and himself, Burnett concluded from Rade- 
macher’s account of Succ. ol. that it might provide the remedy. It was 
given in live-drop doses three times a day. In forty-eight hours the con- 
vulsive attacks ceased for good, and all the phenomena slowly 
disappeared. Burnett has also found Succ. oL curative in splenic 
leucocythaemia. A keynote of Burnett’s is: ‘^Fear of trains and close 
places." His dose is live drops of the oil three times a day. 

RelEtions. — Compare: Splenics, Cean., Nat. m., Querc., Mang. 
ac., Nat. sul. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.—F ear of trains and close places*. 

2. Head. — Headache. 

3. £yes. — Lachrymation. 

5. Nose. — Sneezing ; dropping of watery mucus from nostrils. 

9. Throat. — Globus. 

, n. Stomach. — Persistent hiccough. — Violent vomiting, 

13. Stool and Anus. — Persistent diarrhcea and vomiting. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Abortion. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Asthma.— (Incipient phthisis.— Chronic 
bronchitis. — Whooping-cough.) 

18. Chest. — Pain in chest. 

24. Generalities.— Symptoms of collapse; the patient aborted, but 
recovered.— Hysterical convulsions in women (from the smell.— Burnett). 

Sulfonal. 

Diethylsulphone-dimethyl-methane. (CH3),C(C,H5S),. 

Trituration. 

Clinical.— Albuminuria. Cramps. Cyanosis. Ears, noises in. Epilepsy. 
Headache, with tinnitus, Haematoporphyrinuria. Locomotor ataxy. Paralysis, 
ascending. Reflexes abolished. 

Chuaoteristics . — Sulfonal was at first regarded as one of the 
safest of hypnotics, but many cases of poisoning by medicinal doses 

VOL. II. 83 



1298 


SULFONAL 


have occurred, and my Schema is made up of reported effects pro- 
duced on patients. The accounts will be found in recent numbers of 
H. W. Prominent symptoms were : Stupor. Headache, with noises 
in ears. Vomiting and diarrhoea. Urine retained, or secretion arrested ; 
claret-coloured ; containing albumen ; porphyrin. Ataxic gait and 
diminished or abolished reflexes point to locomotor ataxy. Ascend- 
ing paralysis has been observed. The heart is weak ; fainting occurs ; 
and death takes place by heart failure. Rashes have been noticed on 
the skin, purpuric, erythematous, &c. One man {H, IT., xxxii. 174) 
observed uniform skin effects every time he tool^S/<?., more intense 
the larger the dose. This occurred from gr. v. : Patches of erythema 
appeared (i) first on inner side of first phalanx of right little finger ; 
(2) next over proximal ends of metacarpal bones of left thumb and 
index ; (3) on posterior surface of left forearm a little below elbow ; 
(4) fourth on prepuce. The symptoms were > by cold douches. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Stupidity. — Unconscious, with dilated and fixed pupils and 
profuse sweat. 

2. Head.— Headache and tinnitus aurium. 

3. Eyes. — Pupils dilated and fixed. 

4. Ears. — Tinnitus. 

8. Mouth. — Breath smells of onions, 
d. Face. — Face livid. 

11. Stomach. — Vomiting, diarrhoea, and violent chills. — Constant 
retching, vomiting, and soreness over epigastrium. — Great disturbance of 
digestion with scanty urine, 

12. Abdomen.— Spleen enlarged ; hyperajmic. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Diarrhoea and vomiting,— Great constipation. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Dark brown urine. — Urine very scanty ; 
albuminous ; almost solid when cooled. — Haematoporphyrinuria and death ; 
ntme osdWated between deep claret and light claret colour. — Retention of 
mme’, bad to be drawn oft *, dark-coloured. — ^Urine cberry-colour, later like 
dark port wine. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Brythcma on prepuce. 

18. Chest. — Oedema of lungs. — Signs of broncho-pneumonia. 

19. Heart. — Death from heart failure and cedema of lungs. — Heart's 
action feeble, occasionally intermittent. 

20. Back. — Chronic leptomeningitis, circumscribed softening of dorsal 
portion of cord, with hypostatic pneumonia erf r. lung, and cyanosis of liver 
and kidneys (post mortem of poisoning cases). 

23. I^wer Limbs. — Gait ataxic ; reeled about. — Plantar reflex 
deficient. — Paralysis of lower limbs.— (Cramps of legs and single muscles.) 

24. Generalities.— The symptoms disappear slowly. — Paral3rsis of 
body, — > By cold water ; cold douches. — Great prostration. — Progressive 
paralysis affecting legs first then arms.— Paralysis sometimes progressive, 
sometimes with hyperaesthesia and abnormal sensation. — ^Twitching of 
muscles, esp. of face and flexors : < by voluntary movement, but always 



SULPHUR 


1299 


present in sleep.— Reflexes abolished.— (Epilepsy, inveterate cases with over- 
excitability of the cortical substance.)— Fainted and vomited.— Livid, esp. 
face. — Cyanosi%— Death by respiratory failure preceded by unconsciousness. 

25. Skin. — Discoloured patches like purpura on skin. — Patches of 
erythema, of intensity proportionate to dose (i) On inner side of first 
phalanx of r, little finger ; (2) over proximal ends of metacarpal bones of /. 
thumb and index ; (3) on posterior surface of 1. forearm, a little below elbow ; 
(4) on prepuce. — Erythematous measles-like eruption. 

* 26. Sleep. — Stupor. — Heaviness and drowsiness. — Sleepiness and weari- 

.ness with unsteady g 3 it. 

- 27. Fever.- Violent chills. 


Sulphur. 

Brimstone. Sublimed Sulphur. S. (A.W. 31*98). Trituration of 
Flowers of Sulphur.” A saturated solution of Sulphur in 
absolute alcohol constitutes the <p tincture. [A trituration of 
amorphous Sulphur has also been used. Effects of Milk of 
Sulphur” or Precipitated Sulphur, x.e., Sulphur prepared by 
precipitation from a solution of Calc, sulph. with Hydrochloric 
acid, are included in the pathogenesis.^ 

Clinleal. — Aticiwids. Ague. Alcohol habit. Amaurosis A^}l€uovrhoco. 
Atiaeinia. Anus, proLipsc of. Asthma. Atelectasis. Bed-sores. Biliousness. 
Boils. Brain, 1011 fii'stwii of. Bi casts, aflectums of. Bright’s disease. Bronchitis. 
Cataract. Catarrh. Chagres fever Chancre. Cheloicl. Chest, fains in. 
ChtlhUuns. Chloasma. Cli maxis, sufferings of. Cold. Constipation. Consnmp- 
twn. Corns. Cotifih. Crusta serpiginosa. Dental fistula. Diaoeles. Diarrhoea. 
Dysentery. Dysmenorrha'a. affcctton.s of. Eczema. Emaciation. Enuresi>. 
Epilepsy. Ernctations. Eruptions. Eyes, affections of. Faintness. Feet, hurninjf: 
^rsfmn^. Fever, Freckles. Ganglion. Glands, affections of. Gleet. Globus 
hystericus. Gonorrbcca. Gout. Hmnotrhoiei.s. Heaeiachc. Head, rush of blood 
to. Herpes. Hip-joinf disease. Hydrocele. Hydrocephalus. Hydrothorax. 
Hypochondrtasi's. Impotence, tuductna. Jntcnuittc/ifs. itriiatwn. Itch. Jaun’ 
dice. Laryngitis. Lcucorrhcen. Lichen. Liver, derangement of. Lumbago. 
Lungs, affections of. Lupus. Mania. Mcaste.s. Memory, weak. Meningitis. Men- 
stniativu, disorders of. Miscarnnge. Molluscuin. Nettierash. Neuralgia. Nipples, 
sore. Nose, bleeding of ; infiammaUon of. (Esophagus, coUvStriction of. Ophthalmia, 
acute ; scrofulous ; rlieum.Ltic. Fclvic hivmaiocek. Phimosis. Phlegmasia dolens. 
Peritonitis. Pleurisy. Pncnnwuia. Pregnancy, disorders of. Prostatonheea. 

Rectum, affections of. Rheumatic frver. Rheumatism, acute , chronic; gonorrhoeal. 
Ringworm. Sciatica. Sclf-abust. Sinking Skin, affections of. Sleep, disordered. 
Smell, dlnstons of. Spinal irritation. Spine, curvature of. Spleen, pain in. Start- 
ings. Stomatitis. Taste, illusions of. Tenesmus. Thirst. Throat, mucus in. 
Tongue, coated. Tonsillitis. Toothache. Trachea, irritation in. Ulcers. Urticaria. 
Uterus, prolapse of. Vaccination. Varicocele. Varicosis. Vertigo Warts. 

White swelling. Worms. Worry. Yawning 

9 

Characteristics. — Sulphur is an elementary substance, occurring 
in nature as a brittle crystalline solid, burning in the air with a blue 
flame, being oxidised to Sulphur dioxide {Sulphurous acid). The repu- 
tation of Sulphur as a remedy is perhaps as old as medicine. As 
early as 2,000 years ago,” says H^nemann, “ Sul. had been used as 
the most powerful specific against the itch. . . . The itch, with which 



1300 


SULPHUR 


the workers in wool are so much affected, causes an iniolembly 
abky tingling^ itching^ gnawing as of vermin. Some designate it as an 
intolerably voluptuous titillating itching, ceasing as soon as the parts 
are scratched and commencing to burn, which burnfng continues 
after the scratching. SuL frequently produces in healthy persons 
burning-itching pimples and vesicles resembling the itch vesicles, and 
especially itching in the joints, and in the night.^^ The specific power 
of Sul, to cure itch was abused. It was applied externally as baths 
and ointments, and the skin affection was not cured but repelled, and 
a host of secondary affections appeared in its place. Hahnemann 
found in Sul, the homceopathic counterpart of the peculiar constitu- 
tional dyscrasia which tends to manifest in itch-like eruptions, and 
which he named Psora. Sul. is the chief of the antipsoric remedies. 
A proving of Sul. appears in the M, M. P., and this is amplified 
in the Chronic Diseases. The domestic use of Sul. (in the familiar 
Brimstone and Treacle ”) as a Spring medicine is based on its 
antipsoric properties. “ It is one of the most popular diaphoretics 
of the day,’^ says Milne, ^*few old women failing to use it when any 
eruption is supposed to be struggling through the skin.^^ It is this 
property of Sul. to divert to the surface constitutional irritants Which 
renders it the chief of Hahnemann’s antipsorics. Sul. has also an 
antipsoric action independently of its power of “ bringing out ” rashes. 
The psoric poison may be present and active in a case of disease 
and apparently well-indicated remedies may fail to act in conse- 
quence. In such cases one or two doses of SuL will frequently anti- 
dote, as it were, the psora, and either clear up the case, or open the 
way for the action of other remedies. In such cases there will almost 
certainly be some Sul. indications present. Sul. is a potent antiseptic, 
and is one of the most certain destroyers of the acarus of itch. The 
exact relation of acarus itch to psora and other itching eruptions need 
not be considered ; but as SuL has the power of repressing constitu- 
tional eruptions when locally applied, as well as the power of destroy' - 
ing the acarus, it is best to use other means {e.g.j Oil of Lavender) for 
the latter purpose, and give Sul. or other indicated remedies internally. 
In my experience the psora of Hahnemann (which is a very real and 
definite dyscrasia) is generally inherited. The symptoms of latent 
psora are set forth in detail in Hahnemann’s Chronic Diseases^ and they 
are for the most part almost exact reproductions of the symptoms of 
Sul. But whilst SuL is the chief of antipsorics, it is only one of many ; 
and Sul. is in no way limited in its uses to cases of latent or declared 
psora. Much more important is it to know the leading features of 
the drug’s action, which are sure guides in any case, (i) A key to 
many of the Sul. conditions is to be found in an irregular disitibuiion 
of the circulation : flushes of heat ; rush of blood to head, chest, 
heart ; plethora from suddenly su|Ttju‘essed eruptions, piles, dis- 
charges ; heat and burning sensation of all parts or coldness, sweating 
of many parts. These irregularities may go on to actual inflammation 
withrausions ; and to fever of intermittent or other types. Another 
manifestation of this is found in the redness of orifices and parts near 
orifices : red ears, red nose ; red eyelids and red borders round eye- 
lids : brilliant red lips ; bright red anus in children ; red meatus 



SULPHUR 


1301 


urinarius ; red vulva. The orifices are not only red and congested, 
but they are sore and hypersensitive as well ; the passage of all dis- 
charges or excretions is painful. (2) The other side of this feeling of 
fulness is a fteling of emptiness. There is no medicine which has this 
symptom in a more extreme degree than Sw/., and there is no single 
symptom that is of greater value to the homoeopathic prescriber than 
Faint, sinking, all-gone sensation at 11 a.m.’^ When that symptom 
is marked I give SuL (generally 30), and get all the good I can out of 
the remedy before prescribing anything else, and very rarely am I 
disappointed. There is no need to wait to be told the symptom, or 
. to ask patients directly if they experience it. I generally ask if they 
get hungry out of their usual mealtimes ; and if they say “ Yes ; I 
ask “What time»?’^ The time need not be exactly eleven ; though 
that is the most characteristic time. People who “ must have some- 
thing between breakfast and dinner-time are generally benefited by 
Siti, This ravenous hunger at ii is often associated with other Sul. 
symptoms, as heat at vertex ; dyspepsia ; portal congestion ; constipa- 
tion with ineffectual urging ; piles ; constipation alternating with 
diarrhoea. When the dyspeptic gets food and relieves his hunger he 
begins to feel puffed up, feels heavy and sluggish, and is low-spirited, 
he scarcely cares to live. The dyspepsia of Sul. is often the result of 
suppressed eruptions. It is well known that drunkenness “ runs in 
families, and the underlying disease of drunkenness is often psora. 
Sul. both causes and cures craving for beer and spirits. Gallavardin 
cured many apparently hopeless drunkards with Sul. im. The sink- 
ing, empty, all-gone sensation is a common feature in the dys- 
pepsia of drunkards. Dyspepsia from farinaceous food. Cannot 
take milk ; vomits it at once ; sour vomit with undigested food. 
Voracious appetite is a frequent symptom of scrofula, and scrofula and 
psora are frequently convertible terms. The child clutches at all food 
offered to it as if starved to death. Defective assimilation ; hungry 
*yet emaciated. Stopped catarrh ; nose obstructed indoors, > out of 
doors. The child looks dried up, a little old man ; skin hanging in 
folds, yellowish, wrinkled, flabby. Head large in proportion to body. 
Lymphatic glands enlarged. Defective assimilation. When scrofula 
exists without particular symptoms Sul. will develop them. Allied to 
scrofula is tuberculosis ; in connection w'ith which many symptoms of 
SuL appear : marasmus with hunger at 1 1 a.m. ; sore, red orifices ; 
flushes of heat. In tuberculosis of the lungs a keynote is “ body feels 
too hot.^^ The patient must have windows open no matter how cold 
the weather may be. The caution is usually given to repeat SuL 
seldom in cases of tuberculosis ; and to give it only in the early stages, 
b) < ®y ’’ is another keynote of Sw/., and marks it out as the 
remedy, in a large number of cases ; the < is most noticeable by 
warmth of the hed. Whenever, a patient says he is all right till he gets 
warm in bed, Sul. must be examined, it will generally cover the case. 
(In some cases stove heat >.) The cases of rheumatism and sciatica 
requiring Sul. will generally have > morning and < at night in bed. 
4) “< At night is scarcely less characteristic. Sul. is related to both 
the sun and the moon, which makes it one of the most important of 
periodics. Cooper cured many cases of neuralgia < at noon or at 



1302 


SULPHUR 


midnight. He regards every twelve hours as the most characteristic 
periodicity, but it may be multiples or divisions of twelve* Lippe 
cured with a single dose of Sul. at new moon a case of menor- 
rhagia, patient had not been well since her last miscarriUge. Skinner 
gave to a man who had paresis of the lower limbs a single dose of 
SuL cm, with instructions to take it on a certain date (when the moon 
was full). The man recovered almost suddenly. Cooper has had some 
important experience with SuL in intermittent fevers. He generally 
gave two pilules of SuL ^ every four hours. Correspondents of his found 
this treatment preserve them from fever in India, ^nd one, an officer, 
by means of it kept his regiment of sepoys in health when many others 
were in hospital. One writer treated nine cases with the pilules, and 
arrested the fever in twenty-four hours. One of the cases was a 
particularly obstinate one, and had been pronounced by the doctors 
to be complicated with liver affection. Quinine had been tried brfore 
the SuL cured. In a case of “ Chagres fever (of West Indies), which 
had lasted three months, Cooper ordered a Sulphur bath as well as 
the Sul. pilules. That single bath seemed to alter the whole condi- 
tion ; from being an unhealthy, anaemic, bilious-looking man, the 
patient rapidly became the picture of health. Cooper recalls the fact 
that workers in Sulphur mines, though in malarial districts, enjoy a 
complete immunity from intermittent fevers. The power of SuL in 
acute inflammatory conditions is allied to its action in intermittent 
fevers. SuL is the chronic of Aeon, in the effects of chills ; and if 
Aeon, does not promptly solve the difficulty, SuL will be required. 
In the acute inflammations of the high South African plateau, where 
the variations of temperature are extreme, and chills and their conse- 
quences are very common, Van den Heuvel tells me that for the pain, 
fever, and anxiety before physical signs have appeared, Aeon, is his 
first remedy. But if the fever does not yield in twenty-four to forty- 
eight hours, Sul. will clear it up. “ Chill is suppression in another 
form. SuL is a remedy of such universal power that it may be mis- 
leading to speak of it as more related to one side than to another. 
Taken altogether there are more symptoms on the left side than the 
right. It acts strongly on the left side of the chest : “ Sharp stitching 
pains through left lung to back, < lying on back, < by least motion,^' 
is characteristic. In a case of left pleuro-pneumonia following a 
violent haemoptysis, SuL 30 rescued a patient of mine from a condition 
which seemed desperate. SuL acts on the whole respiratory tract, 
from the nose to the lung tissues. It causes a condition often met 
with in scrofulous patients, nasal catarrh where the nose is stopped 
indoors and free out of doors. All the features of asthma are produced 
in the pathogenesis, and SuL has the alternation between skin irrita- 
tion and asthma often met with in asthmatics. Villers (H. i?., xv. 563) 
relates the case of a girl, 22, afflicted since three years did with 
eczemas of the most varied form, mostly moist, the chief seat being 
the region about the pudenda, armpits, fold behind ear ; but the 
whole body was defaced, the only parts which had remained white 
and normal being the breasts. She had been continuously under 
treatment for the nineteen years, the worst effects resulting when 
external applications had been used to dry up the eruption, llien 



SULPHUR 


1303 

most frightful asthma occurred, which lasted till the corrosive, ill- 
smelling eruption appeared again. She had recently come under the 
care of a homoeopath, who gave Ars, iod. 3. From this there resulted 
a condition of which the patient said, “ I cannot describe it, but I felt 
as if I was being killed/’ Her doctor then sent her to Villers, who 
sent her for three months to a water-cure before he would commence 
treatment. Her general health was somewhat improved thereby, but 
the skin remained the same. He then thought of some very high 
potencies he possessed, and gave a few pellets of StU, cm. Three 
days later he was sent for in a great hurry late one evening, and on 
arrival found the patient had torn off all her clothes, was rolling about 
* on the floor of her room, continually trying to rub her back and her 
legs on the legs of chairs or the edge ot the door. Then she jumped 
up, brought a knife from the kitchen and scraped her whole body ; 
would eat nothing and only drank enormous quantities of cold 
beverages. This lasted five days, after which she slept for two full 
days. Then this happened : The eruption dried up completely and 
scaled as after scarlatina. The girl had always had very weak 
menses ; the next three were increasingly strong and intolerably 
fetid. There was very disagreeable discharge fxom the ears, corrosive 
secretion from the eyelids, and a dreadfully tormenting and burning 
discharge from the pudenda, strongly exciting to voluptuousness. 
Under the action of the single dose steady improvement occurred, and 
in four months she was a youthfully blooming maiden in the full flow 
of all her functions, and the skin in perfect condition. To test this 
Villers made the patient wear rough wool ; dip her hands in first hot 
and then cold water ; and for two weeks he made her rub her body 
daily with pretty coarse sea-salt. The only effect of these measures 
was to make the skin improve in texture. — Sw/., when indicated, 
will cause absorption of effusions, pleuritis (plastic, or hydrothorax), 
hydrocephalic, or synovial. I have frequently cured ganglion of the 
wrist with Sul. cm and lower, given on general indications. In the 
rheumatism of SuL the affection begins below and spreads upwards. 
(This is analogous to the ** from without inwards ” direction of the 
psoric complaints which Sul. meets and reverses.) SuL acts on the 
right eye and on all regions of the head — forehead, vertex, and 
occiput. It is the remedy for a large number of periodical headaches ; 
headaches occurring every week ; every month. Sick-headache. 
The headaches are accompanied by red face and hot head ; are 
> in warm room ; at rest ; < in open air ; < from stooping. 
There is also a headache on coughing. I have cured a severe 
occipital headache < on coughing with SuL 30. Among the charac- 
teristics of SuL are : (i) ‘Aversion to be washed, always < after 
a bath. (2) Complaints that are always relapsing (menses, leucor- 
rheea, &c.) ; patient seems to get almost well when the disease 
returns again and again. (3) Congestions to single parts : eye ; 
nose ; chest ; abdomen ; ovaries ; arms ; legs ; or any organ of the 
body, marking the onset of tumours or malignant growths, especially 
at climacteric. (4) Chronic alcoholism ; dropsy and other ailments 
of drunkards ; they reform but are continually relapsing. (5) Sensa- 
tion of burning : oii vertex ; and smarting in eyes ; of vesicles in 



SULPHUR 


1304 

mouth ; and dryness of throat, first right then left ; in stomach ; in 
rectum ; in anus, and itching piles, and scalding urine ; like fire on 
nipples ; in chest rising to face ; of skin of whole body, with hot 
flushes ; in spots below scapulas ; burning soles, musi find a cool 
place for them at night. (6) Hot head with cold feet. Lutze (AT* A. 
y. H.f XV. 286) finds that SuL im will make feet that have been cold 
for years comfortably warm. (7) Cramp in calves and soles at night. 
(8) Hot flushes during day, with weak, faint spells, passing off with a 
little moisture. (9) Diarrhoea : after midnight ; painless ; driving 
out of bed early in morning ; as if bowels were too weak to contain 
their contents. (10) Constipation : Stools hard, dry, knotty, as if 
burnt ; large, painful, child is afraid to have stool on account of 
pain ; or pain compels child to desist on first effort ; alternating with 
diarrhoea, (ii) Boils : coming in crops in various parts, or a single 
boil is succeeded by another as soon as the first is healed, (12) Skin : 
itching, voluptuous ; scratching > (“ feels good to scratch ; scratch- 
ing ss burning ; < from heat of bed ; soreness in folds. (13) Skin 
affections that have been treated by medicated soaps and washes ; 
haemorrhoids that have been treated by ointments. (14) Nightly 
suffocative attacks, wants doors and windows open ; becomes sud- 
denly wide awake at night ; drowsy in afternoon after sunset, wake- 
fulness the whole night. (15) Happy dreams, wakes up singing. (16) 
Everything looks pretty which patient takes a fancy to ; even rags 
seem beautiful. (17) Ailments from the abuse of metals generally. 
(18) Offensive odour of body despite frequent washing. (19) Red 
nose < by cold : the colder the redder. (20) Cutting, stabbing pain 
in right eye. (21) Poor breakfast eaters. (22) Worried by trifles. 
(23) White, frothy expectoration. (24) Empty sensation (head ; heart ; 
stomach ; abdomen). [Sul. aggravates much more in high dilutions 
than in lower ones ; especially where extensive collections of disease- 
tissue exist, a single globule of 200th will often set up violent disturb- 
ance. The domestic use of Sul. is interesting. In one form or 
other Sul, is used in various countries for allaying pain ; a piece of 
stick Sul. carried in the pocket is much used in England to ward off 
rheumatism. Natives of South America apply Sul. in solid form to 
parts in pain, and allow it to act for an hour before resuP is effected ; 
and for lumbago and chronic rheumatic pains a bag filled with Flowers 
of Sulphur and applied heated to the part, immediately relieves the 
pain. An experienced sea captain testified to the extreme frequency 
of rheumatism amongst his sailors ; but, he added, when carrying 
cargoes of Sm/., he had never had a case of it (acute rheumatism) 
on board. In the treatment of croup., and diphtheria the local 
application of Sul. to the fauces has been highly spoken of by 
many practitioners. Dr, Laugardierc, of Toulouse, reported recently 
to the Academy of Medicine that he has discovered a cure for croup 
— a tablespoonful of Flowers of Sulphur dissolved in a tumbler of 
water. After three days of this treatment his patients were rescued 
from imminent death, and fully recovered. Nettlerash is often 
relieved by a little Flowers of Sulphur and water ; and SuL mixed with 
sea-sand and rubbed over itch vesicles destroys the acarus at once. 
In the early days of vaccination it was found that the action of Sul. 



SULPHUR 


1305 


on the frame was decidedly adverse to the receptivity of vaccine. 
According to Dr. Tierney, Dr. Jenner failed in vaccinating thirty 
soldiers, all under treatment by SuL (B, M. y., Jan. 6, 1872, George 
Gascoin, letter on antiseptic treatment of small-pox). Seeing that 
operatives in sulphur mines enjoy an immunity against ague when 
prevalent in surrounding districts ; and that, before going on hunting 
expeditions in malarious districts, men in Ethiopia submit themselves 
to fumigations with Sm/., and find it an efficient prevention of ague, 
the probability of SuL having a power of destroying the organisms 
*in the blood of ^gue patients is certainly great, and deserves 
investigation (Cooper)]. SuL is a great resorhent^ and is frequently 
needed after acute illnesses which do not entirely clear up. Peculiar 
Sensations are : As if a band were tied tightly round forehead ; round 
cranium. Vertigo as if swinging. As if bed w^ere not large enough 
to hold him. As if one stood on wavering ground. As if hair on 
vertex stood on end. As from a weight pressing on top of brain and 
a cord tied around head. As if head soft ; brains bashed in. As if 
brain were beating against skull. As if eyes w'ere pressed down. As 
if he had taken too much alcohol. As if hair would be torn out. As 
if head would burst. As if head were enlarged. As if she would 
sneeze. As if head had been beaten. As if top of head were being 
pressed against wall. Occiput as if hollo^\^ As if flesh of scalp were 
loose. As if scalp had been beaten. As if cornea had lost its trans- 
parency. As if eye were gone and a cool wand blew out of socket. 
As if eyes had been punctured. As if a needle or splinter were 
sticking in eye. As if a thick veil were before eyes. As if eyeballs 
were dry. As if balls rubbed against lids. As if eyes were rubbed 
against spicules of glass ; eyeballs dry ; salt in eyes ; cornea covered 
with fine dust ; lids would become inflamed. As if sounds did 
not come through ears but forehead. As of water in ears. As 
if he smelt perfume. As if nose w^ere sw^elled. Nostrils as if 
sore. As if low^er jaw w^ould be torn out. As if air just in front 
^ of her were hot. Teeth as if loo long ; as of a hot iron in teeth. 
* As of a hard ball rising in throat. As if swallowing a piece of 
meat. As of a lump in throat. As of a hair in throat. As if throat 
too narrow. Stomach as if puffed up ; as if torn with pincers. 
Intestines as if strung in knots. As if hernia would form. As if 
muscles of abdomen and peritonseum had been bruised. As if obliged 
to urinate, in urethra. As if something in larynx. As of a lump of 
ice in (r.) chest. As if lungs came in contact with back. As if 
strained in chest. As if he had fallen upon chest. As if chest wmld 
fly to pieces when coughing, or drawing a deep breath. Heart as if 
enlarged. As if muscles of neck and back were too short. As if 
vertebrae gliding one over the other. Small of back as if beaten. 
LfCft shoulder and hip as if luxated. Like a weight on shoulder. As 
if something heavy hanging on upper arm. Arms as if beaten. As of 
a mouse running up arms and back. Thigh as if broken. As if too 
^ort in popliteal space. Skin as if denuded and sore. Sweat may 
occur on one side of the body only ; or on neck only. Sul. is Suited 
to : (1) Lean, stoop-shouldered persons, who walk and sit stooped ; 
standing is the most uncomfortable position. (2) Persons of 



SULPHUR 


1306 

nervous temperament, quick-motioned, quick-tempered, plethoric, 
skin excessively sensitive to atmospheric changes, (3) Dirty, filthy 
people, with greasy skin, and long, straight, matted hair, prone 
to skin affections. (4) Children who cannot bear to be washed or 
bathed ; emaciated ; big-bellied ; restless, hot, kick off clothes at 
night ; have worms. (5) Persons of scrofulous diathesis, subject to 
various congestions, especially of portal system. (6) Lymphatic tem- 
peraments, nervous constitutions disposed to haemorrhoids, with con- 
stipation or morning diarrhoea ; diseases caused especially by 
suppressed eruptions, peevishness, sudden and frequent flushes of 
heat all over body, followed by perspiration, hot palms, soles, and 
vertex ; faintness in epigastrium in forenoon. (7) Children, emaciated, 
old-looldng faces, big bellies, dry, flabby skin. (8) Full-blooded per- 
sons with great irritability, restlessness, and hastiness. (9) Old people. 
(10) People with hot, sweaty hands, (ii) Ragged philosophers^' ; 
dirty-looking persons who are always speculating on religious or philo- 
sophical subjects. (12) Freckled people. (13) Light-complexioned 
people. (14) Red-haired people. (15) Dark-complexioned people ; 
negroes. (16) People who refer all their sufferings to the epigas- 
trium : everything affects me there.” The symptoms are : < By 
touch. < Pressure (pressure > pain in head when coughing). Rest 
<. Standing <. Stooping <. Lying on (r.) painful side >. 
Motion > pains in head, hips, knee, haemorrhoids ; < other symp- 
toms. Moving arms <. Every step <. Rising <. Ascending <, 
Talking fatigue of whole body. Vivacious talking sz hammering 
headaches. < ii a.m. ; 12 noon ; midnight ; morning ; evening; 
night ; after midnight. Wants doors and windows open. Susceptible 
to temperature ; warm things feel hot. Indoors =: nose stopped up ; 
> emptiness in occiput. Open air <. Draught of air <. Raw air 
<. Warmth <. Sun < (headache). Washing <. Cold, damp 
weather <. Cold food and drink < thirst. Cold water > head ; left 
eye ; whitlow. < Before a storm. < After sleep. < From milk ; 
sweets ; alcohol. > By eating ; < after. < Before eating. > By 
warm food. < Before, during, and after menses (headache ; leucor- 
rhcea). < Looking down. < Crossing running water. < Raising 
arms. Hearing is < eating and blowing nose. 

Relations. — [Sul. frequently serves to rouse the reactive powers 
when carefully selected remedies fail to act (especially in acute dis- 
eases ; in chronic, Pso.). In this respect it is a close analogue and 
ally of Medor. and Syph., which should be studied with it.] Anti-^ 
doted by: Aco., Camph., Cham., Chi., Merc., Puls., Rhus, Sep., Thu. 
Antidote to : Aco., Alo., Chi., lod., Merc., Nit. ac., Clean., Rhus, Sep., 
Thu. ; ailments from abuse of metals generally. Compatible : Calc., 
Calc, ph., Lyc., Sars., Sep., Puls. (Sul., Calc., Lyc. ; and SuL, Sars., 
Sep. frequently follow in this order. It is generally said that Calc, 
should not be used before Sul.). Follows well : Merc. Complementary : 
Alo. (Sul. is generally the remedy when Alo. has been abused as a 
purgative), Aco., Nux, Puls. (Sul. is the ** chronic ” of the last three. 
If a patient is sleepless Sul. may be given at night. If the patient 
sleeps well it is best given in the morning, as it may disturb sleep if 
given at night ; Nux may be given at night and Sul. in the morning 



SULPHUR 


1307 


when their complementary action is desired). Sul. complements Rhus 
* in paralysis. Follows and complements Ant t and Ipec. in lung 
affections, especially left ; atelectasis. An interpolated dose of Sul. 
helps Sil. in ihdurations. Pso. complements Sul.; Pso. loves heat, 
Sul. hates it. Teste includes in the Sul. group : Crot. t, Merc, c., 
Bov., JEth. c., Kre., Lob. i., Merc, sol., Aster., Cic., Rat Compare : 
Meningitis, Apis. Injuries to eyes, Aco. (Sul. follows). Early-morn- 
ing diarrhoea, Bry. (as soon as he moves), Nat. s. (with much flatus), 
Rx. e., Pod. (stools changeable ; go on all day, though < at noon ; 
Sul. raw, sore anus]^ Diosc. (colic flying to other parts). Defective 
reaction, Pso., Cup., Lauro., Val., Anibr., Carb. v. Flushes at 
climaxis, Lach., Sul. ac.. Amyl., K. bi. Intermittent fever and 
neuralgia, Chi., Ars., Bapl. Ravenous hunger with heat at vertex, 
Calc:, ^ Pho. Tuberculosis, Bac., Calc., Pho. Itch, Merc., Sep., 
Caust Dyspepsia, Nux, Sep. Excessive venery, masturbation, 
Nux, Calc. Yellow-brown spots, Sep., Lyc., Curar. Rheumatism, 
paralysis, Rhus. Sour stools, sore anus, Cham. Pneumonia, resto- 
ration imperfect. Sang. Paralysis from cold, Aco., Caust., Rhus, 
Accumulation of flatus, sour and bitter taste, Lyc. (with Sul. patient 
refers accumulation to left groin, region of sigmoid flexure). Bad 
effects of mental exhaustion ; of seminal losses, Selen. (Sel. is a 
cognate element of Sul. and close analogue ; Sel. < from tea ; 
Sul. < from coffee ; Sel. has tingling in spots ^^). Morning aphonia, 
Carb. V. (Carb. v. also evening). Edges of eyelids, Graph., Bac. 
Congestion of lumbar spine, Pic. ac. Atrophy of infants, Ars. Sink- 
ing < II a.m., Na. m., Pho., Indm., Na. c., Zn. (nervous symptoms, 
Arg. n.). Prophylactic of cholera, Cup. Weak from talking, Stan., 
Cocc., Ver., Calc. Falls easily, Na. c. Hasty speech and action, 
Bell., Lach., Dulc., Hep. Weak ankles, Sul. ac., Caust. > Open air ; 
desire to be uncovered. Pul., Lyc. Wetting bed in deep sleep, Bell, 
(in first sleep, Sep.). Effects ot losses of fluids, Ars., Calc., Chi., Fer. 
Persistent speck before left eye (right Sel.). Vision mostly green, Sang. 
^Rhagades of hands, Na. c. Hard, horny hands, Na. m.. Graph, (opp. 
*Calc.). Left to right, Lach. Stitches up vagina, Sep., Pho., Nit. ac. 
(also down and out). Aim,, Berb., Pul. (Sul. stitches go to head). Left 
ovarian and left inframammary pain, Lil., Lach., Caulo., Vib. o., Pul., 
Ustil. Bearing-down pains, Bell., Sep., Gossyp., PuL, Sec. < On 
awaking, Lach., Na. m. Alarmed about soul’s salvation, Ver. < 
Hearing water run, Hfb. Violent movements of foetus, Op., Croc., 
Thuj. Dread of losing mind, Calc., Lyc., Nux. Hollow sensation in 
region of heart (Lil. as if heart empty). Earthy complexion, Na. m. 
T^l, slender people, Pho. (SiJ. with stoop). Aversion to be washed, 
Ant. c., Clem., Hep., Rhus, Sep., Spi. (Puls, baby likes being washed). 
Fear of ghosts, Aco., Ars., Bro., Carb. v., Cocc., Lyc., Pho., Pul., 
Ran. b., Sep., Zn. (I have been frequently asked by patients taking Sul. 
not to give them “ that medicine again as it made them see faces,” 
generally described as horrible). < Heat of bed at night, B^., 
Merc., Pul., Cham, (toothache), Dros., Led., Sbi., Apis. Laughing 
alternately with weeping, Aur., Pul., Lyc., Croc., Pho., Ver. Vertigo 
looking dowtl, Clean. (Calc, turning head, Pul. looking up). Throb- 
bing headache, Glo., Calc., Pul. Drowsiness with headache, Bruc., 



SULPHUR 


1308 

Strych., Gins., Herac., Na. s., Gels., Nux m. Passes almost pure blood 
from rectum, Merc., Aco. Diabetes with impotence, Mosch." 
Phimosis, Can. s., Merc., Nit. ac., Sep., Thu., Rhus, Sbi. Hunger at 
night, Chi. s., Pso., Pho. (with febrile heat, unappeas&ble), Lyc., Ign, 
Hot breath, Calc., Rhus. Sharp splinter sensation on slightest 
touch, Arg. n.. Hep., Nit. ac. Throat, right then left, Lyc., Bar, c. ; 
left side, Lach., Sul. Freckles, Adren. Weak chest when speaking, 
Calc. Acid smell from mouth, Nux. Taste of blood, Ham. Sensa- 
tion of hair in throat, K. bi., Sil. Intolerance of pressure of clothe^ 
Lach. Blackish stools, Lept. Burning betweei? scapulae, Pho., Lyc. 
Sinking sensations, worms, Scirrh. and other cancer nosodes. Vividly 
remembered dreams, Chi. Mistakes time of day, Merc., Lach. 
Boils, Anthrac. Vaccination effects, Thu., Malan. Red lips, red 
borders round eyelids, Bac. Offensive body smell ; checked erup- 
tions and discharges, Med. Excessively sensitive to atmospheric 
changes. Hep., K. ca., Pso. (Pso. is generally extremely chilly, Sul. 
hot). Restless, hot, kicks off clothes at night, Hep., Sanic. Wants to 
find cool place for feet, Sanic. Relapsing alcoholism, Pso., Bac. 

Causation. — Suppressions. Alcohol. Sun. Sprains. Chills. 
Over-exertion. Reaching high. Falls. Blows. Bed-sores. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Melancholy and sadness, with grieving ideas ; uneasiness 
respecting the patient’s own condition and prospects, and about business 
affairs, so as to become exceedingly unhappy, disgusted with life, and even to 
despair of eternal salvation. — Egoistic. — Dwells on religious or philosophical 
speculations ; anxiety about soul's salvation ; indifference about lot of others. 
— ^Vexatious and morbid ideas of the past arise and cannot be got rid of. — 
Hypochondriac mood (through the day, in evening he is inclined to be merry). 
— Strong tendency to weep, and frequent weeping, alternating sometimes 
with involuntary laughter. — Disconsolate humour, with scruples of conscience,, 
even with respect to the most innocent actions. — Fits of anguish, esp. in 
evening ; timidity and great tendency to be frightened. — Precipitation, rest- 
lessness, and impatience. — Peevishness ; childish peevishness in grown 
people. — Ill-humour, morosencss, quarrelsome disposition, disposition to 
criticise, and dislike to conversation. — Irritability, disposition to anger and 
passion.— Great indolence and repugnance to all exertion, both mental and 
bodily. — Too lazy to rouse himself up, and too unhappy to live. — Indecision, 
awkwardness (at his work), inadvertence, anthropophobia, with feeling of 
giddiness. — Stupidity and imbecility, with difficulty in understanding and in 
answering correctly. — In afternoon, stupefied state after a glass of wine,^ 
Great weakness of memory, chiefly for proper names. — Misplaces or cannot 
find the proper word when he speaks.— Mistakes as to time, thinks it earlier 
than it is ; at vesper bell (7 p.m.) insists it is only 5 p.ni., quite angry when 
one attempts to convince her of her error. — Forgetfulness of that which is 
about to be uttered. — Great flow of ideas, for the most part sad and unplea- 
sant, but sometimes gay, and interspersed with musical airs, — Strong ten- 
dency to religious and philosophical reveries, with fixed ideas.-*-lncbhereut 



SULPHUR 


1309 

speech. — Mania, with a settled idea of having all things in abundance, 
'possessing beautiful things, &c.— Delirium, with carphologia.—Errors re- 
specting objects, a hat is mistaken for a bonnet, a rag for a handsome gown, 
&c.^Foolish happiness and pride ; fantastic illusions of the intellect, esp. if 
one turns everything into* beauty, as an old rag or stick looks to be a beautiful 
piece of workmanship ; everything looks pretty which the patient takes a 
fancy to. — Melancholia and epilepsy, with strong impulsive tendency to 
suicide by drowning or leaping from window ; live fits a day with at times 
two hours of unconsciousness, always < during menses {Sul, lom cured). 

. 2. Head. — Confwion in head, with difficulty in meditating ; or weak- 

ness, dizziness, and stupor, sometimes with necessity to lie down, and esp. in 
morning or in evening, or when walking in open air, or when going up an 
ascent. — Vertigo and staggering, esp. when seated, or after a meal, or when 
exercising in open air, when stooping, looking down, walking, going up an 
ascent, rising from a seat, lying on back, passing over running water, and 
also in morning, in evening, or at night, and often with nausea, syncope, 
weakness, and bleeding at nose (with inclination to fall to 1. side; with 
vanishing of sight).—Hcadache as if caused by incarcerated flatus, by 
obstruction in head, or by a debauch. — Painful sensibility of head, chiefly of 
vertex, on least movement, with pain at every step, when coughing, blowing 
nose, or masticating.— Sensitiveness of the vertex, pressing pain when touch- 
ing it, < from heat of bed, in morning when waking, on scratching it, it bites 
and burns. — Fulness, pressure, and heaviness in head, chiefly in forehead « 
when raising head and after sleeping and talking, > when sitting or when 
lying with head high) and occiput. — Tearing or stitches in forehead or 
temples, from within to without, < from stooping, > when pressing head 
together, or when moving about. — Sensation of emptiness in back part of 
head, < in open air and when talking, > in room. — Pulsation in head with 
heat in brain, pulsation of carotid arteries and of heart, < on waking in 
morning, when moving about, on stooping, when talking, in open air ; > 
whfbn at rest and in warm room. — Hammering headache on vivacious talking. 
^—Throbbing all over head with furious pain taking away her sight and pre- 
venting her from stooping : it affects vertex more and is < by v/ashing her 
head (produced. — R. T. C.). — Heat on crowm ; cold feet; frequent flushings. 
— Pauiful tingling on vertex and in temples. — Violent pain in vertex in even- 
ing, as if hair would be torn out ; it bristles on the most painful spots. — 
(Pain in vertex, r. side, < 5 to « p.ni., > by warmth.— R. T. C,)— Boring 
headache on top, beneath vertex ; the spot is painful Jo touch externally.— 
Severe burning in vertex ; went off after getting up ; succeeded by cool 
feeling in same place. — Aching ; burning ; throbbing ; pressing in vertex.— 
Vertex very sensitive when touahed ; and when not. — Tension in forehead 
and eyes on exercising brain ; < when lifting up eyes, after sleeping ; > 
when sitting in room.— Tension and painful contraction in brain, sometimes 
with a sensation as if head were compressed by a band (with the sensation as 
if the flesh were loose around it, followed by inflammation of the bones and 
caries ; < in wet, cold weather and when at rest ; > from motion). — Expan- 
sive pressure, as if head were about to burst, principally in temples. — Sharp 
and jerking pains, or drawing and shootings in head, — Painful sensation, as 
if brain were wounded or bruised. — Sensation as if the Iiead were soft; 



13^0 


SULPHUR 


as if the brains had been bashed in.— On moving head brain strikes against 
cranium.— Congestion of blood in head, with pulsative pains, clucking, and 
feeling of heat in brain. — Rush of blood to head ; a pressjire out at eyes ; 
with roaring in ears and heat of face ; during menses ; during soft stool ; at 
night in bed ; arising from chest with throbbing ; < when stooping, talking, 
in open air ; > sitting in warm room.— Tinkling, buzzing, roaring, and vibra- 
tion in head. — The headache is often only semilateral, or confined to vertex, 
or to occiput, or to forehead above eyes, with inclination to frown or to close 
eyes, confusion of sight, unfitness for meditation, humming in ears, and nausea, 
with inclination to vomit— Quotidian, periodical, and intermittent headaches, 
appearing principally at night, or in evening in bed, or in morning, or after a 
meal ; (every 3, 4, 6, 12, or 24 hours ; 12 noon or 12 midnight ; < midsummer 
or midwinter).— Movement, walking, open air, and meditation often excite or 

< the headaches. — Pimples with itching in head, principally in forehead. — 
Dry or thick yellowish scabs in scalp, with secretion of a thick and fetid pus, 
but always with great itching.— Dry (seldom humid), offensive, scabby, easily 
bleeding, burning, and sore paining eruption on back part of head and behind 
ears, with cracks, > from scratching (tinea capitis). — (Scabby eruption over 
head and on various parts of body ; with hard lumps that discharge and irri- 
tate and prevent sleep. — R. T. C.) — Coldness in head, sometimes only in 
circumscribed places,— Painful sensitiveness of the roots of hair and of scalp 
when touched. — Mobility of scalp. — Falling off of hair ; with great dryness 
of the hair, painfulness of scalp to the touch and violent itching in evening 
when getting warm in bed, with swelling of glands on neck (also in lying-in 
women). — Fontanelles remain open too long. — Head bent forward when 
walking. — Itching in head, with impatience. — Exanthema and itching on 
forehead. 

3. Eyes. — Heaviness and aching in eyes and lids, with a sensation of 
friction as from sand. — Itching of eyebrows. — Itching, tickling, and burning 
sensation in eyes, canthi, and lids. — Pains as from a bruise or wound, and 
smarting in eyes and lids. — The pains in eyes often extend into head, and are 

< by movement of eyes, and also by light of the sun, which sometimes < 
them to an insupportable degree. — Pain (cutting) in r. eye, renewable by 
touching r. side of tip of nose. — Stinging in eyes, esp. in sunshine and from 
light of a candle. — Inflammation, swelling, and redness of sclerotica, conjunc- 
tiva, and eyelids.— Pain in lid, as if rubbed against spiculne of glass.— Smarting 
pain as from dryness of margins of lids. — Redness of borders of lids. — Ulcera- 
tion in the margins of the eyelids. — Pustules and ulcers round orbits as far as 
cheeks.— Inflammatory redness of iris.— Affections in general of the cornea ; 
eyeball ; sclerotica. — Opacity of cornea, as if covered with dust, or clouded, 
with a deposit of greyish lymph betweeif the lamellae. — Specks, vesicles 
(pustules), and ulcers in the cornea (with redness of eye). — Injection of 
vessels of conjunctiva.— Pupil unequal, or dilated and immovable ; or con- 
tracted. — Cloudiness of crystalline lens.— *Nodosity, like hordeolum, in lids. — 
Eyes water, itch, and feel hot. — Profuse lachrymation, esp, in open air ; or 
great dryness of eyes, < in a room. — Pain as from dryness of eyeballs, and a 
sensation as if they rubbed against the lids. — Lachrymation in morning, with 
burning. — Retinitis, caused by over-use of eyes, congestion of optic nerve, — 
Oily tears. — Copious Secretion of mucus in eyes, day and night. — Nocturnal 



SULPHUR 


13 ” 


agglutination of lids.— Palpitation and quivering of eyelids. — Contraction of 
eyelids in morning.— Trembling of eyes.— Confused sight, as if directed 
through a mist, or as if down or a veil were before eyes.-~-Dim-sightcdness, 
cataract.— Great aimness of vision, as if cornea had lost transparency, confu- 
sion of head and dull aching in forehead.— Objects seem more distant than 
they are. — Presbyopia. — Myopia. — Clouded sight when reading. — ^The eyes are 
dazzled by daylight. — Dazzled by looking long at an object. — Sparksand white 
spots, or dancing flies, black points, and spots before eyes. — Night-blindness. 
—Visions of faces appear on closing the eyes. — Objects appear to be yellow. 
—Great sensitiveness (find aversion) of eyes to light, principally to that of the 
sun, and during warm and oppressive weather. — Halo around a lamplight ; 
cataract. — Yellowish colour of sclerotica. 

4. Ears. — Itching in ears (in external ear). — Stitches in 1. ear. — Sharp 
or drawing pains, or shootings in ears, sometimes extending into head or into 
throat. — Recurring earaches in tubercular meningitis. — R. T. C.) — Burning 
heat which goes out at ears. — Gurgling in ears as if water were in them. — 
Discharge of pus from ears. — Otorrhoea, < 1. ear. — Discharge from both ears, 
dirty, very offensive ; profuse, of a penetrating odour ; at times causing an 
eruption about auricles ; objects strongly to having ears washed. — Bad effects 
from suppression of otorrhoja ; hard hearing, esp. if cars are very dry ; noise 
in ears in general, particularly a humming.— Otitis ; in psoric subjects. — 
Furunculus on tragus. — Great acuteness of hearing ; the least noise is in- 
supportable, and playing the piano occasions nausea. — Something seems to 
come before ears.— Swashing in ears. — Hardness of hearing preceded by 
hypersensitiveness of hearing. — Dysecoia, esp. for human voice ; from dis- 
position to catarrhs ; < after eating or blowing nose. — Obstruction and 
sensation of stoppage (pressure and pain when sneezing, as if ulcerated) in 
one ear, often when eating or blowing nose. — Tinkling, humming, and 
roaring in cars (in evening in bed) ; sometimes with congestion of blood in 
head.-^Cracking in ear, like the breaking of a bladder full of water. — Excoria- 
tion behind ears. — Ears very red with children. 

5, Nose. — Boring in root of nose. — (Itching and) burning in nostrils. — 
'Inflammatory swelling (redness) of nose, chiefly at extremity, or in alae nasi 
« in r.). — Tip of nose red and shiny. — R. ala nasi and entire septum in- 
flamed and painful to touch. — Inflammation, ulceration, and scabies in nostrils. 
— Cracking in nose, like the bursting of a bladder full of air. — Ephelides and 
black pores in nose. — Herpes across nose, like a saddle. — Obstruction of nose, 
sometimes semilateral. — Great dryness of nose. — Dry coryza, or fluent coryza, 
with copious secretion of mucus. — Burning coryza in open air, obstructions of 
nose in room. — Discharge of burning mucus, or secretion of a thick, yellowish, 
and puriform mucus in nostrils.-»Blood or sanguineous mucus is blown from 
nose. — (Discharge of watery fluid from nose tinged with blood, and syn- 
chronous with prascordial pain, severe headache and pains in soles of feet, 
high-coloured urine and confined bowels : symptoms followed on a severe 
wetting.— R. T. C.) — Bleeding of nose, esp. in morning, and sometimes with 
vertigo (at 3 p.m., afterwards it feels sore when touched). — Frequent, even 
spasmodic sneezing, sometimes preceded by nausea. — Smell increased or 
diminished, and also entirely lost. — Offensive odour of nasal mucus on blowing 
nose.— Smell of inveterate coryza, of burnt horn or of smoke.— Offensive 
odour of nasal mucus, as of an old catarrh. 



SULPHUR 


1312 

6 . Face.--Face pale or yellowish, with sickly complexion ; an4 eyes 
deep sunken, surrounded by a blue circle.— Heat and burning sensation in 
face, with deep redness of whole face, circumscribed redness of cheeks, or 
else red spots, also on neck. — Pale or red swelling of face,— Swelling of 
checks, with lancinating pain.— Pain : tearing in r. half of face ; pressure on 
malar bone and beneath eye ; stabbing below 1 . zygoma with darting up side 
of head. — Pain in all three divisions of fifth nerve (1.) ; from exposure to cold ; 
draught of air ; worry ; beginning 5 p.m., lasts with slight intermissions three 
or four days ; besides sharp dartings every few moments ; extreme external^ 
sensitiveness. — Drawing, sharp pain, sensation as fron;.a bruise, pressive and 
burning sensation in cheek-bones. — Erysipelas of face (beginning on r, ear 
and spreading over face). — Phlegmonous erysipelas in face, chiefly in eyelids, 
nose, and (1.) car. — Roughness and redness of skin of face.— Eruption of 
pimples on face and on forehead. — Itching and moist tetters over whole face, 
chiefly above nose, round eyes, and in eyelids ; small white vesicles in groups 
and forming scabs. — Ephelides and black pores in face, chiefly on nose, lips, 
and chin.— Lips dry, rough, and cracked.— Burning sensation and continued 
heat of lips. — Yellowish hepatic spots on upper lip. — Tinea faciei. — Trembling 
and jerking of lips. — Swelling of lips. — Swelling of lower lip with eruption on 
it. — Scabious ulcer on red of lip. — Cancer of the lips. — Herpetic eruption in 
corner of mouth.— Painful eruption round chin.— Sharp, lancinating, and 
drawing pains, and painful swelling in jaws.— Swelling of submaxillary glands, 
with pains and lancinations When touched. 

7. Teeth. — Great tenderness of teeth. — Great sensitiveness of points of 
teeth. — Jerking, shocks, sharp or drawing pains ; shootings ; throbbing pains ; 
boring and burning sensation, both in carious and in sound teeth.— Tearing 
toothache on 1. side,— Pulsation and boring in teeth, < from heat. — The 
toothache often extends as far as cars or into head, and is sometimes accom- 
panied by congestion of blood in head, with shiverings and disposition to 
sleep, or with swelling of cheek. — ^Appearance or < of toothache, prin- 
cipally in evening ; at night ; or in open air ; also from a current of air ; from 
cold water ; when masticating, and sometimes when taking anything hot, — 
Toothache with congestions to head, or stitches in ears. — Brownish mucus on 
teeth.— Painful loosening, elongation, setting on edge, and easy bleeding of 
teeth. — Bleeding, sensation of unfixing, and swelling of gums, sometimes with 
throbbing (heating) pains.— Fistula dentalis,— Hard, round swelling of gums, 
with discharge of pus and of blood. 

8 . Mouth. — Dryness, heat, and burning sensation in mouth, some- 
times in morning with moist tongue. — Great dryness of palate with much 
thirst ; obliged to drink much.— Mouth dry, insipid, and sticky in morning. 
— Ptyalism^ from abuse of Mercury or during a fever. — Accumulation of 
saliva in mouth : sanguineous ; salt ; acid ; bitter ; or mixed with blood ; 
even after eating. — Fetid, sometimes acid, smell from mouth, esp. in 
morning or in evening or after a meal, — Vesicles, blisters, and aphthae in 
mouth and on tongue, sometimes with burning, or with pain of excoriation, 
when eating. — Exfoliation of membrane of mouth. — Burning sensation and 
tickling on tongue.— Pain, swelling, and inflammation of tongue for three 
days, — Tongue dry, rough, and cracked, of colour of cinnabar ; or loaded 
with a white coating, or covered with brownish, thick, and viscid mucus.-^ 



SULPHUR 


*313 


Stuttering when speaking, — ^Accumulation of saltish mucus in mouth. — ^Taste ; 
bitter ; pasty ; offensive ; of blood ; sweetish ; metallic.— Bilious taste in 
mouth when fating ; though food tastes right. — Bitter taste with dulness 
of head and ill-humour. — Acid taste all day. 

9. Throat. — Scraping, roughness (rawness), and dryness in throat 
(hawking and clearing throat).— Pressure as from a plug or from a tumour in 
throat, sometimes with difficult deglutition. — Stitches in throat on swallowing. 
— Sensation as if a hard ball were ascending throat, and would close pharynx 
and take away the breath. — Contraction and painful sensation of constriction 
in throat when swallowing. — (Sensation of contraction in throat. — R. T. C.) 
—Dryness of throat. — Pain as from excoriation, burning sensation and shoot- 
ings in throat, < during empty deglutition (soreness begins on r. side and goes 
to 1 . ; redness of tonsils). — Burning in throat as from sour eructations. — 
Sensation during empty deglutition as of swallowing a piece of meat. — Sen- 
sation as of a plug in throat, with empyreumatic taste. — Sore throat, with 
swelling of glands of neck. — Elongation of palate ; swelling of palate and 
tonsils. — Sensation of a hair in throat. — ^Angina gangrenosa. 

10 . Appetite. — Bad taste in mouth, mostly acid, bitter, or putrid and 
sweetish or mawkish, < in morning on waking. — Taste bitter or too salt or 
insipidity of food. — Complete anorexia and dislike to food, principally to 
meat, rye bread, fat, and milk. — Dislike to sweet and acid things, or craving 
for such things, with anorexia. — Continued thirst, even at night, often with 
desire for beer. — Craving (in drunkards) for wine and brandy. — Immoderate 
appetite and attacks of bulimy, sometimes with headache, lassitude, and want 
to lie down. — Ravenous hunger which obliges him to eat frequently, gets 
headache and has to lie down if he does not. — Hungry, but appetite vanishes 
at sight of food, feels full in abdomen ; when he begins to cat is averse to it. 
— Desire for sweets. — Complaints from eating sweets. — Complaints from 
farinaceous food. — Desire for raw food, — Great weakness of digestion, prin- 
cipally for meat, fat, milk, acids, and farinaceous food, all of which some- 
times cause great suffering. — Food sweetened with sugar < the pains in the 
.stomach and abdomen. — Milk produces sour risings, an acid taste in mouth, 

and even vomiting. — Beer is followed by a prolonged after-taste, and causes 
ebullition of blood. — Disgust for drinking wine. — After a meal oppression 
in chest, nausea, pressure, and cramps in stomach, colic, inflation of abdomen, 
flatulence, vomiting, great fatigue, shivering, confusion and pain in head, heat 
in face, burning sensation in hands, flow of water from mouth, and many 
other sufferings. 

11. Stomach. — Continued eructations, principally empty, or with taste 
of food, or acid and burning, bitter, or fetid, with taste of rotten eggs, csp. 
after a meal or at night. — Loud eVuctations as soon as he presses on stomach. 
— Heartburn. — Abortive risings. — The food rises into throat. — Regurgitation 
of food and drink, often with acid taste. — Pyrosis, often with burning and 
tingling in chest. — Hiccough. — Qualinishness. — Nausea, which sometimes 
even induces fainting, with trembling, weakness, and frequent eructations, 
esp. after a meal, in morning, at night, or when riding in a carriage. — ^Water- 
brash, < in morning or after a meal, sometimes with aching or digging in 
abdomen.— Retching and vomiting of food, and of acid or bitter substances, 
or blackish, or sanguineous> &c, ; csp. in morning, in evening, after a meal, or 

VOL. II. 84 



SULPHUR 


1314 

at night, and sometimes with nausea, pains in stomach, and cold perspu'ation 
on face.-— -After eating but little stomach feels completely full.— (Pains in 
stomach following a headache, < 10 p.m., causing him to bend forward to 
ease himself, with flatus and prostration at stool. — ^Tight crampy feeling in 
stomach on laughing and sneezing, preventing him rising from his seat. — 
R. T. C.) — Heaviness and fulness, or pressure and compression, or else con- 
tractive and spasmodic pains, or digging and shootings in stomach and 
praecordial region, < after a meal at night or in morning, often with nausea 
and vomiting, anxiety, and inflation of abdomen. — Uneasy, unpleasant feeling . 
in stomach as if several hard things were lying in it, and all in different direc- ^ 
tions (cured. — H. C.). — Pressure in pit of stomach during menses. — Sensation 
of coldness, or heat and burning sensation in the stomach. — Great sensitive- 
ness in the region of the stomach when touched (or pressing upon it — even 
the bed-cover causes pain). — Swelling of the prrecordial region. — Pulsation 
in the pit of stomach. — Swelling at pit of stomach. — Weak, empty, gone, 
or faint feeling in stomach, about ii a.m. ; and at other times. 

12. Abdomen.— Painful sensibility of hypochondria, as if they were 
wounded ; pressure of clothes disagreeable. — Drawing, pressure, tension, 
and shootings in regions of the liver and spleen, swelling and hardness in 
both regions. — Stitches in spleen, < when taking a deep inspiration and 
when walking. — Frequent shoots in splenic region. — Inflammation, swelling, 
and induration of liver. — Bile increased. — Fulness, heaviness, tension, and 
pressure, as from a stone in abdomen, chiefly in epigastrium and hypochon- 
dria. — Enlargement and hardness of abdomen. — Gnpings, or sensation of 
tearing or contractive and spasmodic pains in abdomen. — Intestines feel as 
if strung in knots. — Shootings (stitches) in abdomen, < on the 1 . side when 
walking (coughing) or taking a deep inspiration (about navel). — After food 
sensation of weight r. side of navel when he breathes (cured with three doses 
of Sul, I 111 in a case of mine). — The pains in the abdomen have generally a 
tendency to attack the 1. side, or to extend into stomach as far as chest and 
back, with obstructed respiration, nausea, anxiety, and hypochondriacf^l 
humour. — Pains in abdomen, chiefly at night, or after eating or drinking, 
or else periodical ; < by food sweetened with sugar ; > by bending for- 
wards. — Movement and digging in abdomen, or sensation as if something 
were pushed outwards. — Movements in abdomen as of the list of a child. — 
Pains as from contusion and bruising in integuments of abdomen, — Painful 
sensibility of abdomen when touched, as if all interior were raw, or formed 
one large wound. — Inflation of abdomen, with pressive pains from incarce- 
rated flatus, principally in 1 . side (with constipation). — Pressure : towards 
anus ; downward while lying in bed at night ; it woke her. — Borborygmi and 
rumbling in abdomen.— Frequent escape of* very fetid flatus. — Cutting in 
hypogastrium, with thin stool. — Griping in lower abdomen ; pain in small 
of back (and chilliness over body) during menses. — Between 4 and 5 p.m. 
boring, shooting pain now in r. groin, new in spermatic cord, extending to 
testicle, now within inguinal ring in abdominal cavity ; followed by sharp, 
cutting pain in r. great toe. — Painful swelling, and also suppuration of 
inguinal glands. — ^Violent protrusion of hernia, with incarceration. — Dropsy. 
— Portal stasis ; haemorrhoidal congestions ; indigestion ; constipation, &c. — 
Symptoms threatening peritonitis, terrible pains extending over entire lower 



SULPHUR 


1315 

abdomen followed a teaspoonful of SuL taken for constipation ; relief follows 
purgation by castor oil.--^R. T. C.) 

X3. Stool end Anus. — Constipation, and hard, knotty, and insufficient 
evacuations. — Frequent and often ineffectual want to evacuate, chiefly at 
night, and sometimes with pressure on rectum and bladder and pain in anus. 
— Urgent want to evacuate. — Looseness of bowels; redness about anus; 
obstructed evacuation, particularly if hard stools are retained. — Diarrhoea, 
particularly where there is the red line about the anus, and the patient can’t 
‘wait, must go immediately desire is felt ; also waking early in morning with 
diarrhoea, which drives one out of bed in a great hurry ; tenesmus in the 
same way, drives one in a great hurry ; rumbling and rolling in bowels. — 
Cholera asiatica ; as prophylactic, a pinch of the powdered milk of Sulphur 
worn in stockings in contact with soles of feet; diarrhoea commencing 
between midnight and morning, vomiting at same time ; numbness of limbs, 
cramp in calves and soles, blue under eyes, cold skin, indifference ; during 
convalescence, red spots, furuncles, &c. ; susceptibility to temperature, warm 
things feel hot ; nerve symptoms (Hering). — Diarrhoea with frequent evacua- 
tions, chiefly at night, and often with colic, tenesmus, inflation of abdomen, 
dyspnoea, shivering, and weakness to the extent of fainting. — Evacuations : 
mucous, watery, frothy, or acid, or of a putrid smell, or of undigested sub- 
stances. — Stools : nearly black, loose, viscid, greasy, with pungent odour of 
sulphuretted hydrogen. — Stool hard, as if burnt. — Stool, with sensation as if 
some remained, and as if the stool had been insufiicient. — Discharge of liquid 
from anus, followed by faeces at night during sleep. — Diarrhoea : painless ; in 
morning compelling one to rise from bed (at 5 a.m., one stool an hour till 
9 a.m.) ; undigested, involuntary ; diarrhoea in children, green, of bloody 
mucus, with crying and weeping. — Dysenteric stools at night, with colic and 
violent tenesmus. — Colic before every loose evacuation. — During stool, dis- 
charge of blood ; pain in small of back ; palpitation of heart ; congestion of 
h^ad; itching, burning, and stinging at anus and in rectum, — After stool 
tenesmus, constriction at anus. — Whitish, greenish, discoloured, or brownish- 
> red faeces. — Involuntary evacuations (when sneezing or laughing, with emis- 
sion of flatus). — Evacuations mingled with mucus, blood, and purulent matter. 
— Discharge of mucus, even with hard faeces. — Ejection of lumbrici, ascarides, 
and also of pieces of taenia from rectum. — Prolapsus recti, esp. when evacuat- 
ing (a hard stool). — Sharp and pressive pains, itching, shootings, stitches, and 
burning in anus and rectum, even when not at stool. — Burning in anus, 
before, during, and after stool. — Prostration follows stool. — Dull ache just 
inside coccyx, awful dead ache as if the heart would stop. — All pains seem to 
go to rectum, life-taking pains.— Blind piles with burning as if something 
were biting at anus, going awayVhen lying down, coming on when standing 
or walking about (produced. — R. T. C.). — Hcemorrhoids which protrude, ooze 
and bleed: — Anus inflamed, swollen, covered with red veins. — Excoriation 
and swelling of anus. — Much itching about anus ; itching runs back along 
perinaeum and adjacent parts. — Involuntary discharge of moisture from anus, 
with itching in it. — Suppressed hiemorrhoids, with colic, palpitation, conges- 
tion to lungs ; back feels stiff as if bruised. — Constant bearing down towards 
anus ; forcing down after sitting. 

14. Urinary Organs.— Violent pain in region of kidneys after stooping 



SULPHUR 


1316 

a long time.-— Aching in small of back all day, esp. < while urinating.— Sup- 
pressed or very scanty urine.— Frequent and sometimes very urgent want to 
urinate. — Frequent, profuse, and watery urine, sometimes gushing out with 
much force, esp. at night. — Retention of urine. — (Neuralgia of neck of 
bladder, aching and forcing down with smai*ting and burning in urethra.— 
R. T. C.) — Rigor when urinating. — Pressure soon after urinating, as from a full 
bladder. — Involuntary emission of urine (and stool), esp. when coughing,, or 
expelling flatus. — Wetting the bed (lie awake for some time, then fall into a 
deep sleep, in which they wet the bed). — Red ufine with sediment ; or else 
whitish, turbid, or deep -coloured. — Urine like yeast ; Auddy, turbid, scanty. 
— Oily pellicle over urine. — Fetid urine. — Urine smelling of chamomile tea 
(produced. — R. T. C.). — Discharge of (white) mucus from urethra. — 
Secondary gonorrhoea. — Whitish or thick or reddish sediment, like flour, in 
the urine. — Urine discharged by drops. — Painful emission of some 'drops 
of sanguineous urine after much effort. — Discharge of blood and mucus 
with the urine. — Itching, sharp pains, shootings, and burning sensation 
in (orifice of) urethra, chiefly when urinating. — Both flow of urine and dis- 
charge of fasces are painful to parts over which they pass. — Urine excoriating 
parts. — Redness and inflammation of orifice of urethra, and pain as at com- 
mencement of gonorrhoea. — Discharge of mucus from urethra. — Haemorrhage 
from urethra. — Shootings in bladder. — Dragging in bladder in morning after 
urinating. — Small and intermittent stream of urine. — Spasmodic pains in loins 
and inguina. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Affections of the genitals in general. — 
Itching about genitals on going to bed at night. — Fetid perspiration in parts. 
— Excoriation between thighs and in groins, chiefly when walking. — Shootings 
in penis and glans. — Prepuce stiff, hard, like leather, with copious secretion of 
fetid smegma. — Inflammation, swelling, and phimosis of prepuce (with dis- 
charge of fetid pus), with deep cracks, burning, and redness. — Deep (suppu- 
rating) ulcer with elevated margins in glans and prepuce (with puffed edges). 
— Aching, tension, and shootings in testes and spermatic cords. — Swelling and 
thickening of epididymis. — Excoriation and oozing in scrotum. — Increased 
sexual desire and voluptuous irritation of the parts, often without erection. — 
Weakness of the genital functions, often with icy coldness, Wuish colour of 
glans, prepuce, and penis, and retraction of prepuce. — Testes relaxed and 
hanging down. — Hydrocele. — Frequent pollutions, also at noon. — Watery 
semen. — Involuntary discharge of semen, with burning in urethra. — Too 
quick discharge of semen during coition. — Escape of prostatic fluid, chiefly 
when urinating and while at stool. — Impotence. — (Induration of testes.) 

16, Female Sexual Organs. — ^A weak feeling in genitals. — Sore 
feeling in vagina during an embrace. — Labour-like pain over symphysis. — 
Uterine pains running from groins to back. — Moroseness and apprehension 
with uterine pain.— Pressure on the parts.— (Bearing down with nightly 
enuresis. — R. T. C.)— Excoriation, troubleSome itching and burning sensation 
in genitals; with papular eruption around them. — Burning in the vagina; 
is scarcely able to keep still. — Ascarides of vulva, — Inflammation of labia. 
— Menses too late ; too short, — Delay of first menses.— -(Amenorrhoea, dread- 
ful depression and apprehension, head feels full and heavy, followed by 
violent headache, numbness of arms and legs, cramp and sick feeling 



SULPHUR 


1317 


at molimen. — R. T, C.)— (Imperfect development of the genital organs, 
menstruation does not appear at the usual age; breasts imperfectly 
developed; pj^ins about the shoulders, in the stomach after meals, in 
1 . side on inspiration ; anorexia and vertigo. — R. T. C.)— Catamenia pre- 
mature and too profuse; or too feeble or entirely suppressed (particularly 
in psoric individuals), with colic, abdominal spasms, headache, pains in 
loins, pressure at stomach, congestion in head, and nasal haemorrhage, 
agitation, and even attacks of epilepsy. —Menstrual blood thick, acrid, 
corroding thighs ; scanty," dark ; dark, putrid, clotted.— Before menses : 

. headache, itching in the parts ; spasmodic colic ; inquietude ; cough ; tooth- 
*ache ; pyrosis ; epistaxis ; leucorrhoea, and asthmatic sufferings. — Bearing 
down in pelvis ; congestion to uterus.— Sterility, with too early and profuse 
menstruation. — Prolapsus : from reaching high ; with pain in hypogastrium, 
esp.T. side; with metritis; with dropsy of uterus. — Promotes expulsion of 
moles. — Morning sickness of pregnancy not amounting to vomiting, faint, 
sickish spells forenoon, profuse salivation, taste of which = nausea ; aversion 
to meat ; craves beer or brandy. — Haemorrhoids during pregnancy and in 
childbed. — ^After menses ; itching in nose. — Menstrual blood too pale or of an 
acid smell. — Leucorrhoea sometimes corrosive ; gnawing and yellowish, pre- 
ceded by colic. — Cancer of uterus ; offensive, corrosive, ichorous leucorrhcca ; 
sensation of heat in crown of head ; coldness of feet ; flushes of heat pass off 
in a perspiration with faintness ; weak at pit of stomach ii a.m. to 12 ; violent 
burning in vagina, with painful soreness during coitus. — Hot flushes at 
climaxis, with hot head, hands, and feet, and great goneness in stomach. — 
Excoriation and itching in nipples. — Cracks in nipples, with burning sensa- 
tion, easily bleeding, and ulceration (the nipple smarts and burns very much 
as soon as the infant lets go of it). — Mammary glands engorged and inflamed. 
— Erysipelatous inflammation of mamnice ; they are hard, with red rays 
extending from nipple, and stitching pains. — Swelling of mammae. — Nodo- 
sities in mammae. — Scirrhus of breast. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Catarrh, with fluent coryza, cough, pain in 
chest, as if it were raw, and shivering.— Hoarseness, evening and morning, 
roughness, and scraping in throat, with accumulation of mucus in chest. — 
Pain as from excoriation, and tingling or tickling in larynx, with tendency to 
cough. — Coldness in throat during an inspiration. — Voice hoarse and low, or en- 
tirely extinct, generally in cold and damp weather. — Sensation as if larynx were 
swollen, or as if a foreign body were in it. — Short, dry cough. — Dry cough, some- 
times fatiguing and shaking, with retching, vomiting, and spasmodic constriction 
of chest, esp. in evening, or at night, in a recumbent position, or in morning, 
or after a meal. — (Constant cough with irritation of throat and wheezing. 
— R. T. C.) — Moist cough, with profuse expectoration of thick, whitisSh, or 
yellowish mucus, like that of a coryza of long standing. — Cough with expec- 
toration during day, without expectoration at night, — Short, dry cough, with 
stitches in chest, or stitches in 1 . shoulder-blade. — Spasmodic whooping-cough 
in successive double attacks, shortly following one another, from tickling in 
larynx as from dust ; only with expectoration during day of either dark blood 
or yellow-greenish, purulent matter, or of cold, milk-white mucus, generally 
tasting sour, of putrid, or salty, or like old catarrh. — Fetid expectoration of a 
greenish-yellow colour, like pus, and of a salt or sweetish taste, while cough- 



SULPHUR 


1318 

ing. — Febrile cough, with haemoptysis. — Cough in general with bloody 
expectoration ; esp. with heat in chest ; haemorrhage with the same sensation. 
— ^When coughing, pain as from excoriation, or shattering pains, or shootings 
in chest, pain as from a bruise, or shootings in head, pain in abdomen, cloudi- 
ness before eyes, pains in hips and loins. — Respiration and conversation 
sometimes excite the cough.— Feels suffocated, wants doors and windows 
wide open. — Oppressed respiration, particularly from congestion to the lungs ; 
if with a sense of heat all through the chest. 

18. Chest. — Congestion of blood to chest, with sensation of fulness in it. 
— Shortness of breath ; frequent chokings, obstructed respiration, dyspnoea, 
and fits of suffocation, esp. when lying down at night, and also during sleep, 
and sometimes also when speaking or walking in open air. — Dyspnoea ; short- 
ness of breath and oppression of breathing on bending arms backwards. — 
Asthma at night. — Asthma : attacks every eight days ; has rough, harshiiair ; 
following swelling of haemorrhoids ; alternating with fits of gout or psoriasis ; 
from suppressed eruptions or discharges. — Inability to take a full inspiration, 
with sensation as if chest were contracted. — Frequent, short, or wheezing 
respiration. — Snoring and rattling of mucus in chest. — Shooting pains in back 
and sacrum during an inspiration. — Painful sensation in chest, as of something 
falling forwards in it, when turning the body in bed. — Pain as from a bruise 
in thorax when the part is touched. — Painful obstruction in the 1 . side of 
chest, with anguish, and inability to lie on side affected.— Heaviness, fulness, 
and pressure as from a stone in chest and sternum, < in morning, also when 
coughing, sneezing, and yawning. — Pain when coughing and sneezing, as if 
chest were shattered or bursting. — Periodical spasms in chest, with sensation 
of constriction, spasmodic pains, shortness of breath, bluish colour of face, 
and inability to speak. — Pulsations in chest and sternum. — Weakness of chest, 
felt particularly when speaking, with great fatigue in lungs after speaking or 
sighing. — Shootings in the chest or sternum, or extending to the back, 01^ into 
the 1. side, < when coughing, lying on the back, during least motion, when 
, taking a full inspiration, or when lifting the arms (over the head).— Pain in 
chest from over-lifting or after inflammation of lungs. — Sensation as if lungs 
were touching (or scraping) the back.— Exudation after pneumonia.— S«/. 
acts in pneumonia a part analogous to that of Bell, in brain affections 
(Hartlaub, confirmed by Curie).— The pains in the chest chiefly affect the 
1 . side. — Sensation of coldness or burning in chest, sometimes extending to 
face. — Sensation as of a lump of ice in r. chest.— Red spots all over the chest ; 
also brownish or butternut-coloured spots. — Deep yellow spot began on 1 . 
breast and spread all over body (chloasma). — Cheloid on sternum. 

zg. Heart and Pulse. — Stitches and blows in region of heart. — Sharp 
pain at heart goes through to between shoulders ; esp. with dyspeptic symp- 
toms. — Cutting pains about heart, as with knives, which decrease or increase, 
last a few hours, with redness of face, followed by general coldness ; attacks 
only when waking up. — Great orgasm of blood with violent burning in hands. 
— ^Violent congestion of blood towards chest and heart, sometimes with 
ebullition in chest, uneasiness, faintness, and trembling of arms. — Sensation 
of emptiness in the cardiac region, or pressure and sensation as if the heart 
had not room enough. — Affections in general of heart ; also external chest.— 
Sensation as if heart were enlarged,- Frequent palpitation of the heart, some- 



SULPHUR 


1319 


times even visible, and with anxiety ; at night ; in bed ; on falling asleep ; 
when going up an ascent.— -Heart beats too rapidly and her throat felt as 
if a string weip tied round it ; and she did not sleep till 5 a.m. (produced. — 
R. T. C.). — Pulse hard, full, and accelerated. 

20. Neck and Back. — Stiffness of neck ; in nape, with paralytic, 
sprained pain. — Child cannot hold head up neck muscles so weak, — ^Tetters 
on nape.— Swelling and inflammation of glands of nape and of neck.— Fetid 
perspiration in axillae. — Swelling and suppuration of axillary glands. — ^Crack- 
ing in vertebrie of neck, esp. on bending backwards.— Weakness and wrench- 
ing pains, or pain a% from a bruise in loins, coccyx, and in back, esp. on 
walking, or rising from a seat. — Gnawing pain in small of back. — Pain in 
small of back not permitting one to stand erect. — Finds himself at night lying 
on 'back. — Cannot lie on back on account of rush of blood to head. — Pain in 
back' after manual labour. — Shootings in loins, back, and shoulder-blades, 
sometimes with obstructed respiration. — Sharp and rheumatic pains, drawing, 
tension, and stiffness in loins, back, and nape. — Pinching and burning sensa- 
tion between the shoulder-blades. — Tension and bruised pain between 
scapulae and in nape, which on moving head goes to shoulders. — Stitches 
beneath scapulae which take away the breath. — Drawing in r. scapula, even- 
ing on going to sleep. — Tearing in 1. scapula while sitting. — Needle-shoots at 
point of 1. scapula. — Sprained pains in back. — During whole day aching in 
small of back, < when urinating. — Distortion (curvature) of spine. — ^Vertebra 
softened. — Cracking of vertebra? on bending head backward. 

21 . Limbs. — Sharp and drawing pains, or shootings in limbs, esp. in 
joints, and sometimes with want of strength, stiffness, and sensation of torpor 
in the parts affected. — Wrenching pains, as from contraction of the tendons, 
cramps, and spasms in several parts. — Cracking in joints, esp. of knee and 
elbow. — Inflammatory swelling of joints, with heat and redness. — Tingling in 
limbs, esp. in calves of legs and arms. — Tendency of limbs to go to sleep. — 
JVeakness and trembling of limbs, esp. hands and feet. — Unsteadiness of 
joints. — Limbs ** go to sleep," esp. when lying down. — Bruised feeling, and 
drawing, tearing pains in limbs (in outer parts, in muscles and joints, from 
above downward). — Cramp-like pain in muscles of limbs on motion. — 
Arthritic swelling and heat. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pressure on shoulders as from a weight. — Rheu- 
matic pain in shoulders, esp. 1. — Stitches extending from shoulder into chest 
on motion. — Stitching beneath r. axilla. — Sweat on axillae smelling like garlic. 
— Jerking of shoulders, hands, and fingers. — Jerking, sharp pains (tearing), 
and shootings in joints and muscles of arms, hands, and fingers, and also in 
shoulders, chiefly at night in bed. — Nocturnal cramps in arms. — Tingling in 
arms and fingers. — Swelling bf arms, sometimes with heat, hardness, and 
lancinating or tensive pains. — Exostosis in arm. — ^Warts on arms, or itching 
miliary dr red, burning spots, which appear after washing. — Purulent vesicles 
in bend of elbow. — Sprained pain and stiffness in wi*ist, < in morning. — 
Ganglion.— Paralytic weakness of arms and hands. — Swelling of hands and 
thumbs. — Rigidity and wrenching pain in joints of hands and fingers. — 
Trembling of hands, esp. when occupied with fine w»ork.— Involuntary con- 
traction of hands, as if about to grasp something. — Coldness in hands and 
fingers. — ^Great burning in palms* — Perspiration on hands (in the palms) and 





SULPHUR 


between the fingers.— Eruption of small, red pimples on hands and fingers, 
with itching.— Warts on fingers.— Desquamation, hardness, dryness, and 
cracking of skin of hands. — Itching vesicles on backs of hapds. — Cracking 
and chapping on finger-joints. — Burning in balls and tips of fingers,— Cramps 
and jerks in fingers. — Contraction of tendons of hands and fingers. — Large 
and shining swelling (erysipelatous) of fingers.— Dead fingers.— Nodosities on 
fingers. — Ulcers about nails. — Flaws in nails. — Hang-nails. — Panaritium. — 
Chilblains (thick, red) on fingers, with itching in a warm temperature.— 
Swelling and inflammation of points of fingers, with subcutaneous ulceration 
and boring and pulsative pains at night. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pain, as from subcutaneous ulceration, in buttocks 
and in ischiatic tuberosities, esp. when touched, and after having been seated 
for a long time. — Purulent and painful swellings on buttocks. — Pain as from 
a wrench, and as from a bruise in hip, on least movement, with shooting 
pains at every step. — Pain in hip with contraction of leg. — Sharp and drawing 
pains in legs, esp. at night in bed. — Heaviness of the legs, sometimes with 
tension in thighs and knees, esp. at night. — Red, oozing, painful spots on the 
internal surface of thighs. — Middle of thigh as if broken. — Tension in hams, 
as from contraction of tendons. — Large (white, or) shining swelling of knee, 
with stiffness and painful weariness. — Phlegmasia alba dolens. — Cracking, 
drawing,, sharp pains, and shootings in knees. — Tetters on hams. — Restless- 
ness in legs and feet. — ^Torpor and numbness of legs. — Painful fatigue and 
paralytic weakness of legs, chiefly of knees, which yield frequently. — Sticking 
in knee and tibia. — Red spots and itching miliary rash on legs. — ^Transparent 
swelling of legs. — Erysipelas in leg and foot. — Bluish spots and swollen and 
varicose veins in legs. — Pain in calves when w’alking. — Cramps in calves and 
soles, esp. at night (in the soles at every step), — Tension in hollow of knee, as 
if contracted on stepping. — Painful sensibility of soles when walking. — Easy 
dislocation of foot when walking. — Stiffness of knee and ankle-joint. — Stiffness 
of malcoli. — Sprained pain in 1. ankle when standing and walking.— Ankles 
weak. — Stiffness and wrenching pain in instep. — Tingling in legs and calves. 
— Burning and inveterate ulcers on legs or feet.— Tetters on ankle. — Shoot* 
ings in feet. — Coldness in feet, esp. in evening, in bed, or burning sensation, 
chiefly in soles of feet. — Burning in feet, wants to find a cool place for them ; 
pats them out of bed to cool them off. — Burning in soles ; on stepping after 
sitting a long time ; and itching, esp. on walking ; wants them uncovered. — 
Cramp in soles at every step. — Soles cold and sweating. — Sweat on r, foot. — 
Sharp shooting, as from a blunt nail, in rapid succession at root of nail of 
great toe. — Swelling of feet, and esp. of the ankles. — Red, shining swelling of 
^the toes. — Itching in the toes that had formerly been frozen.— Chilblains ; 
redness and swelling with tendency to suppurate ; thick and red with cracks 
on joints ; itching < warm in bed. — Gnawing vesicles on soles. — Ulcer on 
instep. — Cramps and contraction of toes. — Coldness and stiffness of toes. — 
Tingling in ends of toes. — Large and shining swelling of toes. — Ulcerated and 
gnawing vesicles in toes.— Corns, with pressive or shooting pains. 

24, Generalities. — [Affections in general of any kind appearing in 1 . 
side ; hair of head ; external front of head ; inner belly, esp. 1. side ; back ; 
small of back ; axilla ; lumbar region ; upper extremities in general ; posterior 
and inner surface of thigh ; lower extremity in general ; of the nails. — Inflam- 



SULPHUR 


1321 


mation of mucous membranes in general ; swelling of the glands.— Affections 
of the brain from suppressed cutaneous eruptions.— Very often when rash in 
scarlet fever ^ill not come out, cannot bear to be washed. — Face pale, or 
reddish yellow. — Diminution of saliva.— Back is so stiff that one cannot rise 
from a stooping posture, and is always < before a storm. — Bleeding from 
inner parts in general. — Dropsy of inner parts, particularly in psoric persons, 
or resulting from a suppressed eruption. — Dryness of inner parts which are- 
usually moist. — < : On waking, after eating ; from exertion of body, un- 
. able to stand much exercise ; from leaning against anything ; after menstrua- 
.tion ; from taking rAilk ; during perspiration ; from suppressed perspira- 
tion ; from wet poultices ; from abuse of Mercury ; on rising ; from any quick 
motion, as running ; during sleep ; after a long sleep ; during stool ; in chil- 
dren whose bowels are regular but who suffer great pain at every passage 
(when bowels are moved causing much pain, stools hard and lumpy, Vz/r. ac.) ; 
on stretching limbs, esp. the affected limb ; when swallowing food ; from 
talking ; from water and washing ; ascarides ; worms in general ; from 
suppressed menstruation ; from vomiting ; on getting warm in bed. — > : 
From drawing up the affected limb — can't bear to have it extended. — 
H. N. G.] — Muscular palpitation. — Jerks and shocks in certain parts or 
throughout body, esp. when sitting or lying down. — Attacks of spasms. — 
Epileptic convulsions ; excited by a fright or by running, and sometimes with 
cries, rigidity of the limbs, clenching of the teeth, and sensation as if a mouse 
were running over the back or arms. — Fainting fits ; or hysterical or hypo- 
chondriacal uneasiness, sometimes with vertigo, vomiting, and perspiration. — 
Is very nervous, can't bear to be spoken to, could cry at anything (produced. — 
R. T, C.). — Trembling of limbs, esp. the hands. — Sensation of trembling in 
interior of body. — Sensations of : heat in chest ; of heat anywhere ; with any 
trouble ; of sudden and frequent flushes of heat all over the body ; of contrac- 
tion oi inner parts, chiefly in abdomen, wdth feeling as if it should be bandaged 
up or supported ; of a hoop or band around the parts ; buzzing or vibration in 
the body ; of knocking or throbbing in outer parts ; as of a lump in inner 
parts ; of roughness in inner parts ; of tightness or stiffness in outer parts ; of 
sometimes being very small and then again being very large. — Attacks of 
uneasiness in whole body, which do not permit the continuance of a sitting 
posture, with desire to stretch and to contract the limbs alternately. — Great 
nervous agitation ; towards night ; could not sleep. — Great uneasiness and 
orgasm of blood. — Violent ebullition of blood, sometimes with burning heat 
in hands. — Great exhaustion, with great fatigue after the least conversation or 
the shortest walk, disposition to remain always seated, and profuse perspira- 
tion, even when sitting, reading, eating, lying down, or walking. — The sensa- 
tion of fatigue is sometimes reinoved by walking. — Muscular weakness, esp. 
in knees and arms, and also in legs, with unsteadiness of gait. — Stooping gait. 
— Cannot *walk erect ; stoop-shouldered. — Standing is the most disagreeable 
position ; every standing position fs uncomfortable. — Extraordinary emacia- 
tion, sometimes with weakness, fatigue, and burning sensation in hands and 
feet. — Great sensitiveness to open air and to the wind ; with pains in limbs 
on a change of weather, disposition to take cold, and many sufferings pro- 
duced by exposure to open air. — ^The affections of head and stomach are 
those wtdeh are chiefly ^ in open air. — The majority of the sufferings are < 



1322 


SULPHUR 


or appear at night, or in evening, and also during repose, when standing for 
a long time ; and on exposure to cold air ; they disappear on walking, on 
moving the parts affected, and also in warmth of a room ; but-the heat of the 
bed renders the nocturnal pains insupportable. — Several symptoms appear 
periodically. — ^When carefully selected remedies fail to produce a favourable 
effect, esp. in acute cases, Sul, will frequently excite reaction and clear up the 
case. — Complaints that are constantly relapsing. 

25. Skin. — [The greatest general psoric remedy for almost every kind of 
itch, sore, ulcer, &c. ; very colicky babies with pimples, itch, or eruption on 
skin, or roughness of skin. — Troubles of very long standing resulting from 
suppressed eruptions — Sul. will very often bring these out and cause their 
cure. — Exanthema in general on any part of the body which is < by any 
heat, from getting warm at work, in bed, &c. ; freckles ; cancerous ulcers. — 
Skin dry; rough; scaly; voluptuous itching— feels so good to scratch” ; 
ecchymosis ; chapping of the skin, esp. when it ulcerates ; chapping of the 
skin after being wet ; soreness of the skin in children (soreness in folds of 
skin) ; brown sphacelus. — Tetters in general ; chapped ; scurfy ; painful ; 
tearing ; pulsating, &c. — H. N. G.] — Itching in skin, even of whole body, < 
at night, or in morning, in bed, and often with pain as of excoriation, heat, 
itching (soreness), or bleeding of the part which has been scratched. — Erup- 
tions, like those which often follow vaccination. — (Eczema rubrum. — Gouty 
eczema with much oozing.— R. T. C.) — Seborrhoea of scalp (used locally. — 
R. T. C.). — Scabious eruptions and tetters of a greenish yellow colour, com- 
mencing with small itching phlyctenae, with a red areola. — Herpetic, red, 
irregular, furfuraceous spots, or covered with small phlyctenje, discharging 
a serous lymph. — Scabious eruptions. — Ecthyma with itching day and 
night.^Miliary eruptions, principally on limbs. — Nettle-rash. — Burning itching 
of the eruptions. — Hepatic spots of a yellow or brownish colour (on the body). 
— Erysipelatous inflammation, with pulsative and shooting pains. — ^Weals, 
even from the slightest contusion. — Bright scarlet redness over whole body. — 
Tingling in the skin throughout the body. — Red, swollen, and ulcerated chil- 
blains, with itching in heat of a room. — Callous warts, esp. round the fingers. 
— Skin cold, pale, dry. — The skin cracks easily, esp. in open air ; cracks, with 
pain, as from excoriation. — Rhagades after washing. — The nails crumble offi 
— Skin of hands hard and dry. — Desquamation and excoriation of skin in 
several places. — Pityriasis of head and chest. — Unhealthy skin ; slightest 
injuries are followed by inflammation and ulceration. — Ulcers with elevated 
margins, surrounded by itchy pimples, red or bluish areola, sharp, lancinat- 
ing, and tensive pains; bleeding readily, and secreting a fetid and sanious 
or yellow and thick pus. — Ulcers with itching in the sore. — Proud 
flesh in the ulcers. — Fistulous ulcers. — Furiinculi. — Encysted swellings, or 
pale, tense, and hot swellings ; inflammatory abscess. — Inflammation, swell- 
ing, and induration or suppuration of the glands. — Nodosities bn skin of 
whole body, but principally in the breasf, from swelling of the subcutaneous 
glands, — Dropsical, burning swelling of external parts. — Inflammation, swell- 
ing, and painful sensibility of the bones. — On the bones sensation of constric- 
tion, or as if a band were around them. — Repugnance to ablutions. 

2 d. Sleep. — Unconquerable drowsiness, esp. in afternoon and in evening 
by candle-light. — Irresistible drowsiness by day, wakefulness by night; in 



SULPHUR 


1323 


bed every place appeared hard for his head and he keeps moving it hither 
and thither.-— Goes to sleep late.— Sleeps with his eyes half-open.— Fre- 
quent yawning — Retarded sleep at night, or sleeplessness, sometimes caused 
by a great flow of ideas or from over-excitement. — Sleep too light ; or agitated 
with frequent waking, often with starts, and in a fright. — ^Waking too early 
with inaliility to go to sleep again. — Morning sleep too much prolonged; 
sometimes deep and lethargic, with difficulty in rising in morning. — Un- 
refreshing sleep. — Waking frequently during night when one becomes wide 
awake suddenly. — Pains, uneasiness, and tingling in limbs, anxiety and heat, 

’ colic at night ; gastAlgia, vertigo, headache, visions and illusions of senses, 
palpitation of heart, asthmatic sufferings, hunger and thirst. — Inability to 
sleep otherwise than on back, with head high. — When sleeping, agitation and 
tossing, shocks in body and jerks in limbs, starts and fright, talking (talks 
loudly while asleep), cries, murmurs, wanderings, delirium, lamentation, and 
moaning, snoring, eyes half-open, lying on back with the arms above head, 
nightmare, and somnambulism. — On waking, illusions of senses, frightful 
visions, and fear of ghosts.— Frequent, fantastic, anxious, frightful, and 
horrible, anger-exciting, disgusting, and agitated dreams ; dreams of fire, of 
dogs which bite, of being possessed of fine clothes, of falling, of danger, of 
death ; dreams, with a presentiment concerning the events of the morrow. — 
Vivid, beautiful, pleasant dreams. — Singing during sleep. — Happy dreams 
when one wakes up singing ; busy all the time ; wishing to touch something 
with inability to do so. — Vivid dreams, remain impressed on the memory. — 
After waking mind long confused. — Immediately after closing eyes, horrible 
strange grimaces appeared to her, could not banish them.— Lay in a reverie 
and talked of whatever vision appeared to him, with open eyes, for three 
nights in succession. — Voluptuous dreams with seminal emissions. — Vivid 
dream that she is seated on the chamber, w^hich causes her to wet the bed. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness from want of natural heat. — Chilliness, coldness, 
shivering, and shuddering, < in evening or at night in bed (followed by heat 
and profuse perspiration), as well as in afternoon, and when walking in open 
air.— Chilliness in forenoon ; heat with cold feet in afternoon. — Chilliness 
externally with internal heat and a red face. — Chilliness, beginning in the 
toes. — Slight chill, 10 a.m., continues till 3 p.m., followed by heat lasting two 
hours, mostly in head and hands, with desire for beer. — Partial shiverings, 
principally in back, chest, and arms, coldness in hands, feet, and nose.— Chill 
constantly creeps from small of back up back.— Chill and fever ; no reaction ; 
constantly sinking. — During the shiverings paleness or heat in face, headache, 
and sometimes flushes of heat.— Frequent flushes of heat. — Heat, < at night 
or in evening or in morning, and also in afternoon, and often with (circum- 
scribed) redness of cheeks, ardfent thirst, burning sensation in hands and feet; 
partial shiverings, partial sweats, principally in head, face, and hands ; fatigue 
and painful weariness in limbs, hoarseness and cough, anxiety, &c. — Heat at 
night without thirst, preceded by cliilliness with thirst. — Febrile attacks both 
in forenoon and afternoon, or in evening, manifesting themselves by heat, 
which is preceded by shiverings, and followed or attended by perspiration, or 
else by heat in face, followed by shiverings. — During the fever palpitation of 
heart, delirium, weakness, obstruction, and scabs in nose, with violent thirst, 
which last symptom may also occur before the shiverings. — Swollen veins. — 



1324 SULPHUR—SULPHUR HYDROGEN. 


Pulse hard, quick, and full (at times intermitting). — Perspiration in general of 
single parts ; on back part of the body ; great disposition to perspire ; per- 
spiration, with anxiety ; compound or intermittent fevers. — ^Thirst. — Want of 
perspiration. — Frequent and profuse perspiration, day and night, evening and 
morning, in bed, aptness to perspire during labour, partial perspiration, chiefly 
on head, nape of neck, hands, &c., acid perspiration. — Perspiration very 
debilitating, pungent smell, very seldom offensive, at times cold. — Sweat 
smelling of sulphur. — Perspiration only on one side of body ; < at night and 
in morning. 


Sulphur Hydrogenisatum. 

Hydrogenium sulphuratum. Sulphuretted Hydrogen. HaS. Solution 

of the gas. 

Clinical. — Asphyxia. Asthma. Convulsions. Delirium. Mania. Tetanus. 
Typhoid fever. 

Charaoteristics. — Sul, h. is a colourless, inflammable gas, having 
a sweetish taste and an exceedingly fetid smell resembling rotten eggs. 
It is extremely poisonous when inhaled. It is evolved when animal 
or vegetable tissues containing Sulphur decays ; and it also occurs in 
mineral springs, being liberated by the reduction of gypsum or other 
sulphates through the action of a microbe {Cent, Diet,), Stih h, is one 
of the agents which give rise to blood poisoning when bad smells 
are encountered. Asphyxia, tetanus, delirium, low continued fever 
have been observed as resulting from the gas. J. Wigles worth 
July i6, 1892) has recorded two cases of insanity, one 
certainly, and both probably, due to inhaling the gas : R. H., 32, 
engineman at chemical works, had been kept at home with an 
attack of bronchitis for ten days. A few days after his return to work 
he became “ gassed {i,c,^ accidentally inhaled Sul, h,). This caused 
headache, stupor, prostration, compelling him to stay at home for a 
few days, when he became wildly delirious. He passed rapidly into 
a very excited state, shouting and gesticulating ; said he was Jesus 
Christ, &c. ; tried to bury his head in the floor and to raise his feet 
above his head. Three days later he was admitted to Rainhill Asylum, 
and was there still very violent and excited, gesticulating and talking 
incoherently, chiefly on religious subjects. At the end of a month 
there was some improvement, and he was discharged, recovered, 
five months after admission. In the other case, that of a labourer at 
chemical works, Wiglesworth is not quite certain that SuL k was 
the poison inhaled. This patient was greatly excited ; threw his 
arms about ; shouted and laughed by turns ; was excited and talka- 
tive. He remained permanently insane. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Loss of consciousness.^ — Coma ; commencing as natural 
sleep.-— Three days after exposure became delirious ; passed rapidly into a 



. SULPHUR lODATUM 1325 

violent excited state, shouting and gesticulating ; said he was Jesus Christ, 
&c., tried to bury his head in the floor and raise his feet above his head.— 
Gesticulating acid talking incoherently on religious subjects (the mania lasted 
three weeks ; complete recovery in five months). 

2. Head. — Headache ; and prostration. 

3. Eyes.— Eyes sunk with darks rings round them. 

6. Face. — Face pale. — Lips blue. 

II. Stomach. — Nausea. — Sickness and debility. — Vomiting and diarrhoea, 

* both very painful. 

• 12. Abdomen.— Diffused pains in abdomen. 

17, Respiratory Organs. — Respiration : rapid and irregular ; laboured ; 
spasmodic attempts to get air into lungs. — Immediate asphyxia. 

ig. Heart. — Pulse : rapid ; at first weak then hard and rapid ; irregular ; 
a -feeble flutter. 

24. Generalities. — Blood brownish black. — Muscular system flabby 
and emaciated. — Convulsions. — Spasms. — Tetanic spasms, sometimes pre- 
ceded by delirium, sometimes by pains in stomach, faintness and difficult 
breathing, and the mouth fills with white froth, while the pulse sinks. — 
Trembling. — Sudden weakness and loss of motion and sensation. 

27. Fever. — Skin cold ; deathly. — Low fever and delirium. 


Sulphur lodatum. 

Iodide of Sulphur, Sglg. Trituration. 

Clinical. — Acne ; punctata. Barber’s itch. Coryza. Ears, noises in. Eczema, 
weeping. Gonorrhoea. Hay asthma. Influenza. Kidneys, pain m. Lichen planus. 
Wp, upper, eruption on. Parotid glands, hypertrophy of. Prostate, affections of. 
Scalp, soreness of. Spine, weakness of. Stricture, urethral. Tongue, thickening 
of. Tonsils, chronic hypertrophy of. 

Characteristics. — S^^/. iod, was proved by Kelsall on himself and 
some others. Hale has used it in obstinate skin diseases, notably 
barber's itchy for which it is almost a specific.’’ The provings indicate 
this in pustular eruption on upper lip ” and erythema on chin.” 
Hale used the 3X trit. internally and applied a cerate (of one or two 
grains of SuL iod. to an ounce of Cosmoline). It is also useful, Hale 
says, in large and painful suppurating acne. Dr. Berlin (quoted 
H. W.y xxxi. 216) treated with Sul. iod. two cases of ^Sveeping eczema” 
associated with varicose veins of the leg and pronounced itching. Also 
a child with eczema of arms. The keynote in all is: “dark red, 
swollen, and weeping eczematous surface which itches terribly.” The 
3X trit. was given. The symptoms of Sul, iod. are < in morning ; lean- 
ing forward ; stooping ; rising ; ascending stairs. > By expectoration. 
Peculiar Symptoms are .* Hair feels as if erect. As if heat in heart. 
Desire for acids. As if a band across forehead. Hansen mentions 
among the therapeutic uses of Sul. iod. Thickness of tongue remaining 
after parenchymatous glossitis. H ypertrophy of parotids after parotitis. 



1326, 


SULPHUR lODATUM 


Chronic hypertrophy of tonsils. Lichen planus, chronic and simple. 
Bradford {H. A/., quoted Org. iii. in) reports the following cases : (i) 
Burning at end of penis ; dull pain in prostatic region ; weakness 
across kidneys : frequent desire to urinate with slight flow ; eats very 
little ; does not go out of doors ; is much discouraged about himseli. 
SuL iod. 3x cured. (2) Violent attack of pain in renal region, with 
shootings down ureters ; pain and weakness about kidneys ; constant 
desire to urinate ; urine thick and whitish with creamy sediment : 
Sul. iod. 3X and 6x cured. (3) Stricture after gonorrhoea ; chordee ; 
very painful urination, twisted stream. Yellow discharge : SuL iod. 
cured. 

Relations* — Compare: Band across forehead, Mane. Difficult 
expectoration, K. bi. Heat in heart, Lachn., Rhod. Sleepy by day, 
restless at night, Staph. Acne, Beilis, K. bro., Arct. 1 . 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Doubtful. — Anxious. — Unsteadiness of ideas. — Apathy and 
inaptitude for business. — Dread of exertion. 

2. Head. — Headache; frontal, tightness. — Shooting and throbbing in 
temples ; when stooping. — Sides of head ached ; as if squeezed in a vice. — 
Scalp sore ; on vertex. — Hair feels as if erect. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes bleared ; esp. 1. — Inclination to close eyes, as if to 
press out tears. — Lids heavy. — Eyes : water much ; dim. 

4. Ears. — Itching, tingling, and buzzing in ears. — Singing in ears ; with 
feeling of tightness above eyes, as if a band was drawn tightly over forehead ; 
with sore throat, with heat above pit of stomach. 

5. Nose. — Coryza. — Thick green mucus in nostrils. — Acrid discharge.— 
Burning tickling in r. nostril every time handkerchief is used ; strong odour 
of Iodine perceived. — All the agonies of '' grippe.” — Excoriation of nostrils. — 
Acuteness of smell. 

6. Face. — Face dry, hot and yellowish. — Erythematous eruption in 
upper lip witli yellowish pustules, painful, sore and tender, quickly disap- 
pearing ill dry scabs. — Erythema on chin. 

8. Mouth. — Teeth felt soft to tongue and were coated with dark fur, — 
Tongue dry and hard, furred at root, red at point. — Taste ; bitter ; nasty and 
fetid breath. 

g. Throat. — Throat dry and painful to touch, feeling as if swelled. — 
Sore throat in morning. — Drawing, creeping sensation at back of throat. — 
Uvula and tonsils slightly enlarged and red. — Constant disposition to 
swallow saliva : throat and gullet parched ; ‘ the saliva did not allay the 
dryness. 

II. Stomach. — Anorexia ; desire for acids, pickles, lemonade.— Thirsty. 
— Sensation of heat about pit of stomach.— Soreness and sinking in epigas* 
trium. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Itching in rectum. — Bowels constipated. 

14. Urinary Organs.— Itching in urethra.— Frequent micturition, 
esp. mornings. — Ardor urinae. — Urine smells like raspberries. — (Stricture. — 
Pains in kidneys shooting down ureters. — Urine thick, whitish, creamy.) 



SULPHURICUM ACIDUM 


1327 


15* Male Sexual Organs. — (Chordee and yellow discharge.) 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Accumulation of dark, purulent mucous in 
trachea, continued inclination to swallow saliva, which does not moisten it ; 
mucus removed with difficulty and by violent, hacking, coughing and 
straining. — ^Tickling in larynx. — Sensation of dryness in trachea ; thick, hard 
clots of mucus collected about top of windpipe difficult to detach, and which 
caused tickling and irritation of larynx and cough. — Much troubled with 
cough during early part of night, accompanied by a nasty taste in mouth and 
.fetid breath, — Inclined to expand chest, and take a deep inspiration ; leaving a 
fluttering sensation. — ^Hay asthma, with sneezing, catarrh, &c. — R. T. C.) 

18. Chest. — Tightness across chest ; difficulty of expanding it ; with 
prostration. 

zp. Heart. — Boring pain as if in heart, with some difficulty of respira- 
tiqn.-7-Sensation of heat in region of heart. — Palpitation. 

20. Back. — Weakness of spinal column witli pain in loins as if bruised, 
with weakness of spine. 

23. Lower Limbs. — 'Weakness of knees and joints. — Legs ache and 
feel weak. — Tickling in calves and feet. — ^Trembling and aching of ankle- 
joints. — Soles of feet ache and burn and are sore when standing. 

24. Generalities. — Prostration, with difficulty of expanding chest on 
inspiration. — Weakness as from influenza. — Faint and sick. — Much < on 
waking in morning ; sleepy ; leaning forward ; rising or ascending stairs. 

25. Skin. — Pustules on upper lip. — Erythema on skin. — Itching rash, 
like nettlerash on arms. — Acne punctata (specific in dilution. — R. T. C.). 

26. Sleep. —Sleepy by day, restless at night. — Sleep unrefreshing ; 
confused dreams ; awakened by fright ; sleep with mouth open. 

27. Fever. — Occasional chills. — Febrile excitement. — Dry heat. 


* Sulphur Terebinthinatum. 

Terebinthiiiated Sulphur. [One part of purified Sulphur is dissolved 
by heating in one hundred parts of Turpentine.] Dilutions. 

Clinical* — Chorea. Chronic rheumatic arthritis. 

Characteristics. — Sul, lereb, is referred to in the Hon. Robert 
Boyle’s works (Shaw’s edition, vol. iii 584) . A 1 x dilution cured a 
most obstinate case of St. Vitus’s dance, and has often relieved pain 
in chronic rheumatic arthritis (Cooper). 


Sulphurioum Acidum. 

Sulphuric acid. HaSO^. Dilution. 

Clinical.— -<4 aWt/y. Alcoholism, chronic. Aphthae. Back, stiffness of. Bowels, 
looseness of. Brain, concussion of. Breath, offensive. Cancer. Cancrum oris. 
Chafing. Chilblains. Climaxis, sufferings of. Constipation. Corns. Diabetes. 



1328 SULPHURICUM ACIDUM. 

Diarrhoea. Diphtheria. Dyspepsia. Erythema nodosum. Flushing. Gangrene. 
Gastralgia. Glossitis* Hair, grey ; falling out. Heartburn. Hernia, inguinal. 
Hiccough. Impotence. Intermittents. Irritation. Liver, affections of. Menorrhagia. 
Metrorrhagia. Myopia. Nightmare. (Esophagitis. Paralysis^ lead. Perspiration, 
excessive. Phthisis. Pneumonia. Pregnancy, sickness of. Purpura. Rheumatism. 
Scurvy. Spleen, affections of. Sterility. Ulcers. Uterus, prolapse of. Vagina, 
prolapse of. Varicosis. Warts. 

Charaoteristios. — SuL ac.^ according to Teste, was a favourite 
remedy of the Middle Ages, being used extensively in dilution in the 
treatment of scrofulous, phagedenic, cancerous, and venereal ulcers ; 
as a gargle and mouth-wash for aphthae, ulceratioh of the gums, and 
diphtheria. It was given as “ Mineral Lemonade in cases of lead 
poisoning. [This use I have verified, giving water acidulated with 
the 3X. — J, H. C.] The ^^Acid Soap’^ of Achard was prescribed 
as a dissolvent in scirrhus of the breast and calculous nephritis, 
obstinate intermittent fevers, visceral obstructions, dropsy, jaun- 
dice, cachexia, and certain tumours of the feet.^’ Elixir of 
vitriol (a mixture of the acid, alcohol and water) is a popular 
remedy for nervous weakness in women at the present day. Dippel, 
Haller, and others each had an Elixir,^’ differing only in the 
proportions of the chief ingredients. The elixirs were used in : 
Intermittent, putrid, malignant, contagious fevers ; comatose and 
petechial fevers, scarlatina, confluent and malignant variola ; dysentery ; 
plague, lepra, itch, and other cutaneous diseases ; nocturnal emissions ; 
suppression of menses and piles, calculous nephritis, and gout ; 
pituitous phthisis ; chorea. Hahnemann proved SuL ac,y and says 
that it has cured affections characterised by : ^Hension in the eyelids in 
the morning, shortsightedness ; hardness of hearing ; inguinal hernia ; 
chronic looseness of the bowels ; profuse menses ; metrorrhagia ; 
roughness in the throat ; asthma ; swelling of the feet ; coldness of 
the feet ” (Chron. Dis,). Teste gives this experience of his own : Two 
or three times I have used this drug with success against round 
syphilitic spots, of a bright red colour, of the size of a penny, rather 
itching, running into each other, secreting a humour sometimes, and 
generally seated at the upper and inner surface of the thighs, between 
the shoulders, on the face, and at the posterior surface of the forearms 
and hands. The subjects on whom this acid seemed to act best were 
lymphatic, ate a good deal, and were disposed to a constant looseness 
of th^ bowels, so that their evacuations were rarely in shape.^’ 
Hahnenaann’s proving with homeopathic experience has confirmed 
many of the old uses of Sul. ac. and brought out characteristic 
indications. Weakness is a keynote to SuL ac. The patient is weak 
and exhausted. SuL ac. is suited to cases where the weakness is out 
of proportion to the disease. Weakness which seems to come from 
deep-seated dyscrasia. There is as well a sense of general internal 
trembling ; as if trembling from head to foot, but without visible 
trembling. It is useful for inebriates who are on their last legs,^^ 
long after Nux had ceased to help, Hering says the craving for 
liquor has been subdued by taking for two or four weeks, thrice daily, 
ten to fifteen drops of a mixture of one part of SuL ac. with three 
parts of alcohol. The indications are : “ Vomiting in morning ; 



SULPHURICUM ACIDUM 


1329 

acidity in stomach ; burning in cjesophagus and stomach ; sour, acrid, 
or foul eructations/’ Sul. ac. has this characteristic ; in spite of great 
thirst, water is not tolerated ; unless qualified with alcohol it chills 
the stomach.^ This is a common symptom with hydrogenoid patients. 
Sul. ac, has a keynote symptom in the mental sphere. Hurry — ^hasty, 
quick, sullen, impatient ; angry because things move so slowly. Like 
Sw/., Sul, ac. is periodic and has an important place in agues and 
periodic neuralgias. Cooper with reason contends that many ague 
cases, supposed to have been cured with Chi. sul. (Sulphate of Quinine), 

* were really cured Ijy the Sulphunc acid used in dissolving it. More- 

v.*\over,’’ says Cooper, in all epidemic diseases — influenza, cholera, 

small-pox, &c. — St/l. ac, is often called for by the concomitant 
symptoms. In the neuralgia of influenza it has cured very severe 
pain over the whole left side of the head, face, and neck, coming on 
fjpom exposure to draught; in the diarrhoeas of cholera times it 
certainly arrests mischief; in the diarrhoeas of emaciated children 
it is often called for. A chemist in Covent Garden used to use a 
lotion of Sulphuric acid, well diluted, for all the cases of itch that 
came before him, and they were many.” There is a keynote 
of Sul. ac, in respect to neuralgias which is of great service ; the 
pains increase gradually and end abruptly ; the most characteristic 
kind of pain is dull pressure — as of a plug thrust in. There is external 
soreness and sensitiveness. The piles of Sul. ac. are external, sensitive 
to touch and accompanied by itching. Sul. ac. is a great luemorrhagic ; 
there is bleeding from every orilice ; bleeding under skin (purpura) ; 
the menses are too early, too profuse, and sterility may be a conse- 
quence of this ; oozing of dark thin blood. Many sufferings of 
Sul. ac. seem to arise from the generative organs, especially of the 
female. With Sul. ac. 30, a dose every night, I gave great help 
to a delicate woman who had nightmare^ waking in a fright^ before 
each 'menstrual period. The local ** weakness ” of Sul. ac. may amount to 
prolapse of vagina and uterus. Trauma is another indication for Sul. ac.; 
it follows Arn. in bruises of soft parts. Con. in bruises of glands, Ruta. 

* in bruises of bones. It also removes long-lasting black and blue spots 
with soreness and stiffness of the parts. Flushing is another feature (as 
at climacteric), and with the flushing there is sweating. Easy sweating 
is a note of Sul. ac.^ and the swetit affects mostly the upper part of 
the body. The body odour of Sul. ac. is sour and cannot be washed 

, off. This is especially observed in children. Heartburn with sour 
eructations that set the teeth on edge. Sul. ac. is Suited to : (i) Old 
people ; especially women. (2) Light-haired people. {3) Pains at 
climacteric. (4) When some deep-seated dyscrasia prevails, the child 
is weak with no other symptoms. (3) Sour babies. Sensations 
are : As if brain were loose and falling from side to side. As if 
one side of head filled with smoke. As if a plug were thrust quickly 
into head. As from subcutaneous ulceration in scalp. As of a foreign 
body on right outer canthus. As of a leaf lying before ears. As if 
white of egg had dried on face. As if skin of cheek and chin were 
pinched. As of want of elasticity of vocal organs. As if there were 
a lump in throat. As if menses would come on. As if hernia would 
protrude. As if rectum were torn to pieces during stool. Many 
VOL. 11. 85 



^330 


SULPHURICUM ACIDUM 


symptoms appear on right side, but the left cheek and left parotid are 
most affected. Pain travels from left to right round hypochondria. 
Other Peculiar Symptoms are : Pains felt during sleep and disappearing , 
on waking. Jerkings on falling asleep. Seriousness alternating with 
buffoonery. Pain in bladder unless call to pass water is immediately 
attended to. The symptoms are : < By touch ; pressure ; chafing ; 
mechanical injuries. Open air <. Warmth >. Cold <, , Rest >. 
Lying on affected side > gnawing in face. Motion ; lifting arms ; 
rising ; walking ; riding <. < Morning ; (also evening and night). 

< Drinking cold water. Wine <. Warm food ss: sweat. The 
cauterising property of SuL ac, is of the phagedenic order, which • 
makes it suitable to many gangrenous conditions. 

Relations. — Antidoted by: Puls. Antidote to: Lead poisoning. 
Complementary: Puls. Follows well: In injuries, Arn., Con., Rut. 
Compare: Cough followed by belching wind from stomach, Am‘B?., 
Ver. Dyspepsia of drunkards, Carb. v. (Carb. v. is a putrid remedy ; 
Sul. ac. more sour). Acidity sets teeth on edge, Rob. Weakness 
and giving way of ankles, Caust, Sul., Sil. Scarlatina, blue spots, 
diphtheritic membrane, Mur. ac. (Mur. ac. has > uncovering). 
Sprains, Am. c. (hot and painful). Falls easily, Nat. c., Caust., Sul. 
Pains increase gradually, end suddenly (Bell, Lyc., pains begin and 
end suddenly; Stn., pains begin and decline gradually ; Col, begin 
suddenly and end gradually). Aphthae, Sul. ac., Borax, Nat. m,, 
K. chi. Piles, Nit. ac. Drinks chill the stomach, Flaps. Flushing at 
menopause, Lach. (Sul. ac. with sweating). Throbbing headache at 
menses, Lach. (Sul. ac. with sweating). Inguinal hernia, Lyc. (Lyc. 
right, Sul. ac. left). Sour children, spite of washing. Hep., Mg. c., 
Rhe. Sensation of brain loose in forehead and falling from side to 
side, Bell., Bry,, Rhe., Spi. Prostration, Acet. ac. Haemorrhages of 
black blood from all outlets, Crotal., Mur. ac.. Nit. ac., Tereb. Weak 
and exhausted from deep-seated dyscrasia, no other symptoms, Pso,, 
Sul. Weakness, Pic. ac. Sensation of white of egg on face, Aim. 
Sensation of subcutaneous ulceration, Puls. Alcoholism, Querc. 
Prolapse of vagina, Staph. Larynx sensitive, Lach. Warmth of 
genitals (Sul. coldness). 

Causation. — Lifting arms. Falls. Bruises. Concussion (of 
brain). Chafing. Surgical operations. Sprains. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Mental excitability ; and exaltation. — Melancholy dejection. 
— Inclination to weep.— -Anxious apprehensiou and mistrust. — Despondency. 
— Agitation, precipitation, and impatience. — One feels in a very great hurry, 
feels that everything must be done in a hurry (also Arg. nit). — Restlessness. 
—Irritability, nervous fatigue, and tendency to< take fright. — Peevish morose- 
ness, and dislike to conversation. — Disgust to life. — Seriousness, alternating 
with buffoonery. — Extraordinary absence of mind. — Dulness of intellect 

2. Head. — Semilateral confusion of head, as if the part contained 
smoke.— Vertigo when seated, disappearing in the open air. — Sensation as 
if brain were loose in forehead, and was falling from one side to the other ; 



SULPHURICUM ACIDUM 


1331 

< when sitting quiet in the room.— Headache, which at first increases, then 
suddenly disappears.— Sensation of weakness in head.— Headache, as if 
brain were laqg rated. — Rush of blood to head. — Throbbing headache during 
menses, with sweating. — Pressive headache. — Sensation of heaviness and 
fulness in brain, as if head would burst — Sensation of constriction in head. — 
Painful shocks in forehead and temples, < in forenoon and evening.— Head- 
ache as if «, plug was thrust quickly by increasingly severe blows in head. — 
Shocks and blows in the head. — ^Violent jerk beneath 1. frontal eminence, 
. suddenly disappearing. — Headache, with dull lancinations, or drawings and 
.tearings. — Sensation Si wavering of the brain. — Sensation in exterior of head 
as if suppurating, or ulcerated, painful to touch. — Itching and eruption in 
scalp. — Hair turns grey and falls off. — Pimples on forehead and side of nose. 

,3. Eyes. — Burning aching in eyes, in open air, or when fixing eyes on 
an. object in a room. — Tension in lids in morning. — Smarting, burning 
sensation in eyes, and lachrymation, esp. when reading. — Sensation of a 
foreign body in r. outer canthus, in morning when walking. — Eyes red, with 
photophobia. — Chronic inflammation of eyes, — Difficulty in opening eyelids, 
— Myopia. 

4. Ears. — Tearing in ears. — Tearing and shaking in r. ear. — Violent 
tickling in concha. — Dysecoia, as if there were a band over the ears, or as if 
a leaf were before them. — Rhythmical roaring in cars. — Ringing of bells 
before* ears, — Humming in ears, in evening. 

5. Nose. — Epistaxis in evening. — Dry coryza, with loss of smell and 
taste. — Coryza : thin, lemon-coloured discharge. — Pimples on side of nose. — 
Flow of water from nose, with obstruction of one nostril. 

6. Face. — Paleness of face. — Contusive pain in zygomatic process. — 
Tearing of bones of face. — Dry shrivelled spots on face. — Sensation as if face 
were swollen, and as if it were covered with the white of eggs dried. — Lips 
are cracked, and exfoliate. — Lips swollen, red, painful to touch. — Pain, as 
from excoriation, in commissures of lips. — Inflammation and swelling of 
sAmaxillary glands, 

7. Teeth.— Toothache, more violent in evening, in bed, < by cold air, 
' > by warmth, generally with tearing digging, or gnawing. — Bluntness of teeth. 

— Toothache with tenderness and pain along side of head and down spine 
(R. T. C.). — Teeth on edge. — Swelling and easy bleeding of gums. — Ulceration 
of gums. 

8. Mouth. — Aphthae in mouth ; in children. — Sensation of dryness in 
mouth. — ^Tongue dry. — ^Tongue ; horribly swollen ; swallowing impossible ; 
covered with wrinkled white skin ; tip and edges red ; denuded at tip and 
intensely red. — Ulcers on inflamed tongue. — ^^falking difficult as from want of 
elasticity in parts. — Breath very offensive. — Profuse salivation. — Haemorrhage 
from mouth. 

g. Throat.— Sore throat during deglutition, with lancinating pain, 
esp. in evening (swollen as if a luftip were in it ; < on I. side). — Thick 
yellow g;iembrane on f^ces, sticks like glue. — Swelling of uvula and roof of 
palate.-^welling and inflammation of submaxillary glands. — Roughness in 
throat — Mucous membrane of palate and pharynx swollen, injected and 
ulcerated.— Stringy, lemon-yellow mucus hangs from posterior nares, in 
diphtheria, 



SULPHURICUM ACIDUM 


^ 33 ^ 


10. Appetite.— Putrid taste.— Bread has a bitter taste, and is heavy on 
stomach. — Bulimy, with rumbling and borborygmi in abdomen. — Desire for 
fresh fruits (plums) ; brandy. — Loss of appetite and great debility. — Chronic 
alcoholism ; vomiting in morning ; acidity of stomach ; burning in oesophagus 
and stomach ; sour, acrid or foul eructations. — After eating ; pain in stomach 
and rising of food by mouthfuls. — After warm food, sweat. — After a meal, 
agitation, gripings, and digging in abdomen, or excessive inflation of stomach. 
— Cold perspiration, immediately after hot food. — Lassitude and flatulence 
after drinking milk. — ^All drinks chill the stomach, if a little spirit is not added 
to them. 

11. Stomach. — Empty or bitter risings. — Acid, bitter, salt, or else' 
sweetish regurgitations. — Sour eructations, violent heartburn. — ^Violent hic- 
cough. — Pyrosis. — Nausea in the stomach, with shivering, — Vomiting, first of 
water, then of food. — ^Vomiting of drunkards. — Very painful sensitiveness of 
region of stomach. — The water (or every drink) causes cold of the stomach ; 
if not mixed with some alcoholic liquor. — Fulness and pressure in stomach. — 
A contracting sensation in stomach in evening, as from a chill. — Contraction 
in stomach and scrobiculus « from hard food). — Cuttings round stomach, — 
Sensation of coldness or burning in stomach. — Cold, relaxed feeling in 
stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Lancinations in spleen. — Spleen enlarged : hard and 
painful ; hurts when coughing ; after intermittent fever. — Stitches in liver and 
spleen. — Shootings in the hepatic region. — Shooting in loins. — Colic in 
abdomen, like labour pains, extending into hips and loins. — Movements, 
gripings, and pinchings in abdomen, sometimes at night. — Sensation of heat 
in umbilical region. — ^Jerking throughout hypogastrium, esp. at surface. — 
Throbbing, tearings, and shootings, in inguina. — Smarting in inguinal region. 
— Inguinal hernia, much protruded. — Flatulent colic in the hypogastrium, 
with grumbling and borborygmi, and sensation as if a hernia were about to 
descend. — Weak feeling as if menses would appear. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Tenesmus. — Ineffectual urging to go to stool. — 
Evacuations retarded, hard, knotty, and black. — Freces of a very large size. — 
Chronic relaxation of abdomen. — Loose evacuations, of consistence of pap 
(yellowish-white ; partly solid, partly liquid), greenish, and watery. — ^Watery 
diarrhoea, very offensive. — Diarrhoea, of frothy slime only, with burning 
sensation in rectum. — Diarrhoea, with great debility. — Soft stool, followed by 
a sensation of emptiness in abdomen. — Evacuations of mucus, streaked with 
blood. — ^The child frequently has a stool as if chopped, saffron yellow, stringy, 
slimy. — Very fetid stools of a putrid smell. — Discharge of blood during 
the evacuation. — Sanguineous congestion in rectum. — Haemorrhoidal excres- 
cences in anus, with shootings, burning sensation, itching and oozing. — 
Haemorrhoids feel damp and are painful to touch ; itch violently ; pain at 
stool as if rectum were torn to pieces ; stools like sheep's dung ; piles in hard 
drinkers. — Pressing in anus during and alter pasty stool, 

14. Urinary Organs. — Diabetes ; lassitude ; exility ; despondency. — 
Diminished secretion of urine, with burning sensation when urinating. — 
Emission of urine at night. — Urine watery (brown, diminished secretion of) 
and as if it contained earth (or loam). — Slimy sediment in the urine.— 
Sediment like blood in the urine, which is covered with a fine pellicle.— ^Pain 
in the bladder, when the want to urinate is not immediately satisfied. 



SULPHURICUM ACIDUM 


1333 


15 * Male Sexual Organs. — Excessive heat in genital parts and testes. 
—Emission of semen, without voluptuous sensation. — Itching pain in upper 
margin of glans.— Scrotum relaxed. — ^Orchitis (r.). 

16 . Feni^le Sexual Organs. — Strong desire for coition, from irritation 
of the external genital organs (in females). — Catamenia premature and too 
profuse, — Catamenia of too long duration. — Metrorrhagia.-— Nightmare 
before menses. — During menses, lancinations in abdomen and vagina. — After 
menses ; great desire for, or else great aversion to, coition. — Sterility, with 
catamenia premature and too profuse. — Acrid and burning, or milklike 
leucorrhoea. — Discharge of sanguineous mucus from vagina. — Prolapse of 
vagina ; parts look greenish and smell badly. — Climacteric age with constant 
hot flushes, and a feeling of tremor all over body, with great debility, and as if 
everything must be done in a hurry ; spitting of blood ; constipation ; 
symptoms are < by smelling (not drinking) coffee. — Nausea and vomiting 
during pregnancy ; never vomited food, but could not eat because of 
increased distress in stomach and vomiting of mucus. 

17 . Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness, with dryness, and roughness 
in throat and larynx. — Pain in larynx, with embarrassed speech, as if the 
parts were not sufficiently elastic. — Larynx excessively sensitive ; to 
pressure. — Cough, excited by open air. — Cough < from walking, riding, 
cold water, and when smelling coffee. — Dry, short, panting cough, some- 
times in the morning, after rising, — Moist cough, with slimy expectoration. — 
Long-continued haemoptysis. — Cough, with haemoptysis. — Cough with expec- 
toration in morning, without expectoration in evening. — Cough from irritation 
in the chest, with expectoration in morning of dark blood, or of a thin, 
yellow, blood-streaked mucus, generally of a sourish taste. — After the cough, 
eructations. — Profuse hxmorrhage from the lungs. — Risings and regurgita- 
tion of food after coughing. 

1 8 . Chest. — Dyspnoea.— Great weakness in the chest, with difficult 
speech. — ^Aching in the 1. side of chest, and in scrobiculus.— Cutting pain 
lb front of 1. axilla, — Pains along sternum ; beneath sternum ; cutting, 
burning,— Sternum sore as if beaten. — Dull stitches in 1. side of sternum by 
costal cartilages. — Dull tension in 1. side of chest. — Stitches from chest to 1. 
scapula. — Pneumonia 1. side of chest and in pit of stomach. — Dulness of base 
of r. lung, pneumonia, collapse, death, — (Many cases of poisoning by Sul. ac, 
are followed by pneumonia.)— Slight pulsating, twitching beneath 1 , side.— 
Lancinations ini chest. — Violent sticking in r. breast; frequent and continuous ; 
when pressing on it pain extended deeper. 

ig. Heart. — Palpitation of heart (with or without anxiety). — Lancina- 
tions across heart.— Prascordial region very painful. 

80. Neck and Back. — Neck swollen. — L. neck painful on pressure. — 
Large suppurating swelling 1. side of neck.— ^Sensation, as from excoriation, 
and as of a fracture, in the back and loins. — Drawing in the back and loins. — 
Pain in small of back. — Boring ia small of back. — Furunculi on back.— 
Stiffness of back several mornings ; on rising. — Painful sensibility and swelling 
of axillary glands. 

21. Limbs.— Convulsive movements of arms and legs.— Pains in joints 
felt during sleep, disappear on waking.— Tearing in all limbs during menses, 
esp, in evening.— Inclination to cramp in hands and feet. — Wrists and other 



1334 SULPHURICUM ACIDUM 

large joints painful and swollen, but not red. — Limbs livid. — Twitching of 
tendons. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Heaviness of the arms. — Spasmodic, paralytic 
contractions in arms. — Shootings in joint of shoulder, on lifting arm. — ^Tensive 
pain in elbow-joint. — Bluish spots on forearm, as from ecchymosis. — Cramps 
in hands. — Shocks and blows in bones of hand, when writing. — Eruption on 
hands, and between fingers. — Lancinations in joints of fingers. — Chilblains oti 
fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Inner surface of thighs red, sore, excoriated after 

riding. — Heaviness of legs. — Torpor and numbness of legs. — Want to stretch 
and retract limbs. — Tearing in varices of legs. — Painful weakness of knees, * 
with dull lancinations, shocks, and blows in those parts.^Red, itching spots 
on tibia. — Stiffness of ankles. — Coldness in feet. — Swelling of feet. — Tearing 
and lancinations in corns and feet. — 

24. Generalities. — For any affections arising from general debility, as 
prolapsus uteri, retroversion, any uterine trouble whatever, the patient having 
a sense of tremulousness all over. — Burning darting pains in muscles ; shocks 
as from pain ; black and blue spots in body ; in a bruise (esp. if an old person) 
when the injured part gets black and blue, and seems as if it would mortify. — 
Haemorrhages of black blood from all the outlets of the body. — Affections in 
general occurring in r. abdominal ring ; sexual organs r. side ; r. upper side ; 

1 . lower side ; inguinal hernia, — < Afternoon and evening ; from surgical 
injuries in general ; in the open air ; from smelling coffee. — Tearing pains 
throughout body, also in face. — Stitches in joints. — Cramps in limbs. — Pains, 
felt during sleep. — Icteric sufferings. — Jerking of the tendons. — ^Appearance or 
< of symptoms, morning and evening. — ^The patient feels < in open air.— The 
1 . side seems to be more particularly affected. — Slowly increasing but suddenly 
ceasing pain, as if a blunt instrument were pressed against the part. — Sensation 
of soreness as if bruised over the whole body. — Weakness of the whole, body, 
with sensation of trembling. — Extreme weakness and exhaustion, with 
sensation of tremor all over the body, without trembling. — Sour odour of 
body. — Great weakness and emaciation with backache in young girls 
(R. T. C.) — General weariness in a plethoric woman and pain in lower back, 
chiefly l.-sided, with weakness in lower abdomen, < at menses, furred tongue 
and constipation. 

25. Skin. — Bad effects from mechanical injuries, as from bruises, falling, 
knocking, pressure of blunt instruments, and contusions (esp. in old women), 
— Gangrenous tendency after a bruise. — Itching over whole body.— Red, 
itching spots on skin, or small, red, livid, and bluish spots, as from ecchymosis., 
— Excoriation of skin, also with ulceration like gangrene (becomes easily 
chafed when walking or riding). — Furunculi.— Gnawing (eating pain in the) 
ulcers. — Painful sensitiveness of glands. — Chilblains. — Corns in feet, with 
tearings and shootings. — Warts. 

26. Sleep. — Retarded sleep and eariy waking. — Sleepiness. — Sleepless* 
ness from mental excitement, — ^Jerkings during sleep. — ^Anxious dreams.— 
Jerking of fingers during sleep. — Nightmare before menses. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness during the day, < in room, > when exercising in 
open air. — Frequent chills running down body. — Heat in evening and after 
lying down in bed.— In evening frequent flushes of heat, esp. when exerdsitig 



SULPHUROSUM ACIDUM 1335 

— Flushes of heat with perspiration (in climacteric years). — Heat predominates. 
—Small, feeble (accelerated) pulse.— Perspiration on least movement (which 
continues for^ long time after sitting down). — Profuse perspiration in morning. 
— Perspiration at night.— Cold perspiration as soon as one eats warm food. 


S^phurosum Acidum. 

Sulphurous acid. HaS03. Sulphurous anhydride. SO,. Sulphurous 
acid gas dissolves in water and constitutes] 9*2 per cent, by 
weight of the solution. 

Clinioal. — Acne rosacea. Colds. Constipation, scybalous. Croup. Diphtheria. 
Eczema marginalis. Favus. Hands^ chapped. Influenza. Nipples, sore. Pity- 
riasis versicolor. Pyrosis. Stomatitis, ulcerative. 

Charaotepistics. — Some forty years ago, when the germ theory of 
disease in its present form was in its infancy, Dewar, of Fife, conceived 
the idea that Sulphurous acid was an innocent and at the same time 
universal germ destroyer, and consequently universal remedy. His 
views met with cordial acceptance, and inhalations of Sulphurous acid 
given off from burning Sulphur became the fashion. DewaFs method 
was simple. A few red cinders were put in a kitchen shovel ; this was 
placed in the centre of a room and flowers of sulphur sprinkled thereon. 
In a very short tiipe every person in the room was sneezing violently, 
coughing and wheezing, and running at the eyes and nose. Dewar 
also used the ordinary solution and a spray. Among the special 
diseases arrested by Suls. ac. Dewar named : Chilblains ; chapped 
hands ; diphtheria ; scarlatina maligna j erysipelas (a local applica- 
tion of equal parts of the B.-P. acid and glycerine) ; cold in the 
head, influenza, asthma, bronchitis, croup, clergyman's sore throat, 
chronic phthisis ; typhoid fever. Wounds, sore nipples, bruises 
were also amenable to its local use. As one who has undergone the 
fumigation process (it was supposed to prevent all sorts of maladies, 
as well as cure, and I suppose it was with that object that I was made 
to **prove^^ Suls. ac. in my boyhood), I can testify to its homoeopathicity 
in the cold, coughs, asthma, and influenza ” part of Dewar’s recom- 
mendations. Suls. ac. doubtless shares the antiseptic properties of 
Sulph. The symptoms of the Schema are from observations of the 
effects on wortmen in mines, from air contaminated with Suls. ac.j with 
a few additions of my own.* Milne sums up its virtues thus : Anti- 
septic, disinfectant ; a powerful deoxidiser and destroyer of vegetable 
life.” As a gargle it is used in the strength of one to six. In para- 
sitic skin affections the B.-P. solution is used and is effective. 
Internally, says Milne, it does good in sarcina ” in doses of iH^xxx. 
to lx., well diluted with water. Finger (who endorses most of Dewar’s 
reconwnendations) says that ten to fifteen minims taken ten minutes 
before each meal will remedy pyrosis in most instances, and prevents 
flatulence and fermentations ; and that ‘‘ the solution, either strong or 



1336 SULPHUROSUM ACIDUM 

diluted, in varying proportions, speedily removes thrush/^ 
touches a homoeopathic characteristic of Suls. ac , — ulcerative inflam- 
mation of the mouth. It has cured this in the attenuations. The 
headache of Suh, ac. is > by vomiting. C. Wootton tasted the acid 
{H, W., xxvi. 204) with this result — it at once stopped the mucous 
secretion of the bowels, producing scybalous motions. The constipa- 
tion was so severe that he was in misery for nine months, till he took 
HydrasLy which cured. The use of Suls. ac, as a hair-wash at a later 
time produced the same result. 

Relations. — Antidoted by: Hydrast. (constijp-tion). Compare: 
Sul. In ulcerated sore mouth, Nat. m., Caps. The effects on the 
back recorded by Hahnemann as from the fumes of burning Sulphur 
were antidoted by Electric shock. 


SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Quite furious. — Disposed to fight. — Extreme terror and 
efforts to escape ; imagine every one wants to lay hands on them. — Listless. 
— Singing and praying. — As if intoxicated. — Great anxiety. 

a. Head. — Giddy, lost recollection, as after spirits. — Violent pain and 
beating in head, with ringing in ears. — Insufferable headache, somewhat > 
after vomiting. 

4. Ears. — Ringing in ears with pain in head. 

5. Nose. — Sneezing and coryza. 

8. Mouth. — (Ulcerative stomatitis.) 

IT. Stomach. — Many vomited, others had inclination but could not. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Severe constipation, scybalous motions, lasting 
nine months ; complete dryness of intestinal tract ; (Hydst, cured at last). — 
Some evacuated contents of rectum ; others had the desire but could not. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Persistent choking cough, with copious 
expectoration of thin mucus. — A difficulty, of breathing and frequent involuntary 
deep inspirations. 

18. Chest .— Extreme tightness of the chest. 

IQ. Heart. — Heart palpitated violently. — Pulse : quiet, feeble ; or slow, 
feeble and irregular. 

20. Back. — [Stiffness (painful) of spine between scapulae, during and 
after movement, with pain as though it were broken. — Painful stiffness in 
the junction of sacrum with base of pelvis ; in morning there occurred very 
painful jerks. (From the fumes of burning Sulphur),'] 

23. Lower Limbs.— Lower limbs weak, very painful immediately above 
the knees. 



SUMBUL 


1337 


SumbuL 

Ferula sumbul. SumbuL Musk-root. N, 0 . Umbelliferae. Tinc- 
ture of the powdered root. 

. Clinical . — Acne. Asthma. Breasts, pains in. Chorea, Diarrhoea. Epilepsy. 
Fainting. Heart, palpitation of, nervous ; affections of. Pneumonia. Hysteria. 
Infra-mammary pains. Neuralgia. Porrigo capitis. Spermatorrhoea. Throat, 
catarrh of ; spasm of. Typhoid fever. Worms. 

CharaoteFisti&. — Sumbul^ as its name, ‘^Musk-root,’’ implies, has 
an odour resembling that of musk. The resemblance is so close that 
Sumbul is used to adulterate musk. Sumb, was proved by Lembke, 
Cattell, and others, and the symptoms are as like to those of Moschus 
as the physical resemblance would imply. Hysterical mood ; easy 
fainting ; nervous palpitation ; are common to both. Hale gives the 
following indications : (i) Nasal and pharyngeal catarrh, with nervous- 
ness, sleeplessness, and tendency to spasms (especially in children) ; 
discharge of tenacious, yellow mucus. (2) Ascarides, with bloated, 
drum-like abdomen and constipation, picking nose (cured with Sumb. 
^5)* (3) Oily pellicle in urine. (4) Pain in left uterine region. (5) 
Asthma : catarrhal, spasmodic, or cardiac. (6) Climacteric flushings. 
(7) Neuralgia : facial or ovarian, in women of quick and lively nervous 
constitutions. (8) Neuralgia of left hypochondrium, simulating angina 
pectoris ; with palpitation ; in nervous women. (9) Insomnia of 
chronic alcoholism. Peculiar Sensations of Sumb, are : Tongue as if 
scraped. Like a string pulling in right breast. Corkscrew pains in 
(left) uterus and appendages. Clogged sensation in left chest. As if 
heart beating in water. The left side was more affected than the 
right. The symptoms are < by motion. < After sitting. < By 
inspiration. < By cold. > By warmth. < Thinking of symptoms. 
tC In morning. Music = faintness. 

Relations. — Compare : General symptoms, Mosch., Asaf. Porrigo, 
Melit., Medor., Mez. Oily pellicle on urine, SuL, Pul, Petr. 
Tenacious, yellow mucus. Hydras. Infra-mammary pain, Act. r., 
Pul., Lil. t. < Thinking of symptoms, Ox. ac., Pip. meth. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Intellect dull in morning ; inability to study ; clearer in 
evening and in warmth. — Happy disposition with continued smiling ; expres- 
sion idiotic ; fear of becoming insane (choreaV — Hysterical mood even in 
men ; alternate laughter and tears ; easily excited ; emotional ; irritable, 
fidgety, at* first spirits are exalted, then depressed. 

2. Head. — Vertigo : on stooping ; using warm water ; moving about or 
rising from a seat ; feeling a want of security. — Hysteria, with tendency to 
faint from slightest cause. — Fits with falling forward. — Ebullition of blood in 
head, lightness and exalted feeling. — Cold in the head, < morning. — Porrigo 
in infants, 1. side of scalp ; spots round and dry, slightly raised and reddened 
at edges with bran-like scales in centre. 



SUMBUL 


1338 


3. Eyes. — Sensation of foreign body in eyes. — Tight feeling in eyes. — 
Quivering and swimming before eyes, 

4. Ears. — Loud surging and hissing in both ears ; in r. 

5. Nose. — Cold in bead, < morning. — Coryza : watery ; of yellow 
mucus. — ^Alae nasi sore at edges. — Stuffing in nose. — ^Tenacious yellow mucus 
in nose ; < 1. nostril. — Loss of smell. 

6. Face. — ^Acne punctata, black pores on face. 

8. Mouth. — Brown (or white) coating on tongue, morning. — Tongue 
feels rough as if scraped, with heat in throat. — Increased saliva. 

9. Throat. — Erosion, burning heat and rawness in throat, with 
tenacious mucus. — Catarrhs of children with great nervous irritation and 
spasms. — Choking constriction at top of gullet, constant swallowing. 

11. Stomach. — Appetite increased. — Eructations ; empty. — Nausea and 
salivation. — Pressure ; rumblings ; slight shootings in stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Tension, pain, and gnawing in r. hypochondrium.— 
Abdomen feels distended, painful. — Gnawing in r. hypochondrium. — Glands in 
groins painful. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Ascarides with bloated, drum-like abdomen and 
constipation; pricking at nostrils. — Chronic diarrhoea, from inert condition 
of intestinal canal ; discharges cause alarm ; diarrhoea in typhoid fever. — 
Rectum protrudes. — Haemorrhoids excited. 

14. Urinary Organs.— -Urine : clear ; yellowish-red ; clouded at 
bottom, and an oily pellicle on surface. — Frequent desire. — Stitches up 
urethra. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Absence of erections and all sexual 
desire. — Itching in genitals with increased desire. — Erythema of ^scrotum. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Leucorrhoea, white, esp. after sitting, 
— Menses : premature ; of short duration, with deficient quantity ; 
retarded. — Corkscrew pains in 1 . region of uterus and appendages, — Tensive 
pain like a string in r. breast. — Tensive pains in 1. breast, evening. — Lancina* 
tions and biting pains in 1 . breast, < deep inspirations. — Flushings at 
climaxis. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness. — Asthma : catarrhal ; but more 
esp. spasmodic, hysterical. — Hacking cough. 

x8. Chest. — Tightness in chest with diminished secretion. — Paroxysm of 
dull pressure under sternum. — Tightness, tensive, stretched feeling across 
chest, between 1. breast and sternum and in 1. breast, < on inspiration, 

19. Heart. — Pulse : very irregular, compressible ; want of elasticity in 
vessels. — Nervous affections of heart ; rheumatic carditis ; heart* s> impulse 
strong, jerking, esp. after exertion or during digestion ; action of heart full 
and sharp, strokes at times irregular, rapid, then slow ; bellows murmur ; 
flushings of heat in Hoods from back ; sharp pains like a knife in chest ; 
oppression in 1. chest, clogged sensation ; < on stooping ; 1. arm numb, 
heavy, weary, with sharp, wiry shooting in fingers ; hysterical mood.--« 
Nervous palpitation in hysterical subjects; or at climaxis.— Heart beats 
softly, as if in water, with sinking of heart and sickliness and faintness all 
over.— Palpitation on least excitement, < on paying attention to it. 

20. Neck and Back. — Cannot keep warm ; least draught is felt down 
spine.— Nape of neck, r. side, swollen. 



SYMPHORICARPUS RACEMOSUS 1339 

21. Limbs. — L. arm and foot easily chilled.— Fulness of arms and feet.— 
Tremulous tingling, dry, in palms and feet. 

22. Uppgr Limbs.— Weakness, beaten sensation, and numbness in 
arms. — L. arm numb. — Hands red, veins distended. — Fingers swollen. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Aching, rheumatic pain, weakness of lower limbs. 
—Pain in knee, with stiffness, impeding walking.— Felt as if her legs were not 
her own. — ^Trembling of feet. 

24. Generalities. — Chorea : constant jerking of head and limbs, with 
protusion of tongue ; voracious appetite.— Dropsy dependent on impaired 
nervous vitality. — Clsgged sensation in body, esp. in head and stomach. — 
Hysteria.— Epilepsy; falls forward, foaming at mouth. — ^Tendency to faint 
from slightest cause. 

25. Skin. — Acne punctata ; black pores on face. — Porrigo in infants, 1. 
side of scalp. — Skin cold, white, shrunken, and dry, as if washed in acrid 
water. — Miliary spots on back, r. shoulder-blade, and hip. — Reddish spots on 
forehead, chin, and cheeks, containing either water or thick, white, curdy 
matter.— Itching. 

26. Sleep. — Drowsy in the cold. — Drowsy during day. — ^W^akefulness at 
night. — Sleep interrupted by startings of limbs. — Dreams ; of falling ; vivid ; 
of coitus, followed by profuse sudden emission. 

27. Fever. — Coldness. — Chilliness, esp. down spine ; sensitiveness to 
least draught. — Too easily chilled ; want of elasticity in the vessels. — 
Numbness and coldness of tips of fingers. — Dry, transient heat all over body. 
— ^Typhoid fever with cerebral excitement; low and nervous fevers suc- 
ceeding typhus. 


Symphoricarpus Racemosus. 

Symphoricarpus racemosus. Snow-berry. N, 0. Caprifoliaceae. 

Tincture of fresh ripe berries. 

Clinioal* — Pregnancy, sickness of. 

Charaoteristios, — An account of Smpho, r, by E. V. Moffatt is 
quoted int ATiJw, OW, and Forgotten Remedies, S. P. Burdick gave the 
tincture to a lady, who said its effects were ** precisely like the morn- 
ing sickness ” she used to have during pregnancy. On other women 
it produced effects varying from qualmishness to intense vomiting. 
Moffatt gives these as the leading indications : Qualmishness and 
indifference to food. Deathly nausea ; vomiting continuous, violent 
retching. One patient was > lying on back. (No particular morning 
< was observed.) Moffatt gives this case : A young lady, three months 
advanced in her first pregnancy, iiad deathly nausea, with vomiting and 
retching so prolonged and violent as to produce hjematemesis. The 
smell or thought of food was repugnant in the extreme. Moffatt gave 
Smpho. 200 (obtained from Dr. Burdick) in the middle of a violent 
parokysm. In a few minutes she stopped vomiting, and said she felt 
soothed and quieted all over. In half an hour nausea began again, 



1340 SYMPHORICARP. RAC-SYMPHYTUM 


but a few pellets checked it promptly and she fell asleep. A few 
more doses completed the cure. A relapse following over-exertion a 
month later was speedily remedied by Smpho. 


Symphytum. 

Symphytum officinale. Bone-set. Healing «Herb. Comfrey. 
N. 0, Boraginaceae. Tincture of fresh root-stock collected 
before flowering and in autumn. Tincture of fresh plant. 

Clinical.— Abscess. Backache, from sexual excess. Bone, cancer of ; injuries 
of. Breasts, sore. Eyes, pains in ; injuries of. Fractures; non-union of ; nervous. 
Glands, enlarged. Gunshot wounds. Hernia. Menses, airested. Periosteum, 
sensitive, painful. Psoas abscess. Sexual excess, effects of. Sprains. Stump, 
irritable. Wounds. 

Charaoteristio 8 « — Symphytum may be considered the orthopaedic 
specific of herbal medicine. The roots of Comfrey stamped, and the 
juice drunk with wine, helpeth those that spit blood and healeth all 
inward wounds and burstings. The same bruised and laid to in 
manner of a plaister, doth heal all fresh and green wounds, and are 
so glutinative, that it will solder and glue together meat that is 
chopped in pieces, seething in a pot, and make it in one lump 
(Gerarde). Peter Squire (Squirc^s Companion to 6 th ed.) gives as 
the medicinal properties of Symph. : Astringent, mucilaginous, 
glutinous ; useful to form cases for injured limbs. The black rind 
^f root) is scraped off and the mucilaginous root is then scraped care- 
fully into a nice even pulp ; this spread of the thickness of a crown- 
piece upon cambric or old muslin is wrapped round the limb and 
bandaged over ; it shortly stiffens, and forms a casing superior to 
starch, giving support and strength to the part,^^ P. Squire knew a 
bone-setter who practised fifty years ago, and rendered himself 
famous for setting compound fractures with this root, which he kept 
secret, and he never removed the bandage after the first dressing until 
the limb was well (R. T. C.). Symphytum has not received its names 
for nothing. Consolida is one of them ; and Comfrey is derived 
from Conjirmare. The glutinous juice of the root seems, according 
to Gerarde, to have given the key to its action as a vulnerary. 
H. C. Allen (Med. Cent,, quoted Ind, H, Rev,, v. 6 o) refers to the 
following indications for Symph, given by Lippe ; (i) When the 
bone or periostenm bas been injured* and tbe soil parts* baVe 
recovered irom the bruised soreness under Arn., the remaining pain 
and soreness of periosteum may be promptly relieved by Symp, 

(2) In traumatic injuries of bone or periosteum (as from a snowball or 
an^hing else on the face), Symp, was the only remedy Lippe has seen 
efficient. He cured many cases after others had used Am, and failed. 

( 3 ) Here is one of his cures : More than a year ago fell and struck 
knee on a stone ; wound healed and scarcely left any trace, but there 
remained an acute stitching pain at point of injury, felt when the part 



SYMPHYTUM 


1341 

was touched by clothing as when knee was bent.” Allen also gives the 
following cure reported by Fowler : Mrs. J. stepped on the edge of a 
scantling, wt^ich rolled, and she turned her ankle. In a few minutes 
the ankle began to swell and become painful, pain increasing rapidly, 
so that in an hour or two patient was in great agony. She declared 
her leg was broken, she ‘‘ could feel the rough ends of the broken 
bones jagging into the flesh ” ; could not bear any one to approach 
her for fear of being hurt. No discoloration whatever. Symp, promptly 
relieved, so that she went about her usual duties in forty-eight hours. 
Allen regards priding pain as a guiding symptom. Next to bone 
injuries in importance are injuries to the ball of the eye, as distinguished 
from injuries to the soft parts around. I have long since ceased to 
use Arti, in injuries of the globe of the eye, Symp, having given such 
prompt and permanent relief ” (H. C. Allen). [I have, however, seen 
Arn, speedily clear up haemorrhage into the vitreous from a blow of a 
cork from a soda-water bottle. — ^J. H. C.] Allen gives these indica- 
tions ; Severe pain in globe of eye after an injury by a blunt instrument 
(snowball ; cane ; point of umbrella ; infant's list), the soft parts remain- 
ing intact. Croserio (New^ OliU and Forgotten Remedies) was one of the 
first to use Symp. in the potencies for fractures. P. P. Wells trans- 
lated Croserio's Connection of Homoeopathy with Surgery^ in which this 
passage occurs : Injuries of the bones are healed most promptly with 
Symp, 30, internally, once a day.” Wells gives these cases of his 
own : (i) Boy, 14, broke bone of forearm at junction of middle and 
lower thirds, two years before. Had twice repeated the fracture by 
slight falls. Ends now slightly movable on each other, arm of little 
use. Three doses of Symp, made a perfect cure, and the boy became 
robust and much better in health than he had ever been before, 
(2) Boy, 8, fractured humerus near junction of condyles and shaft. 
Arn,^ 30 immediately arrested the spasmodic jerks of muscles of 
jnjured arm. Arn. was continued three days, by which time all 
traumatic fever had subsided. Symp. 3, one drop in half a tumbler 
of water ; a teaspoonful morning and evening. The splints were 
removed the ninth day, and the bone found consolidated. The cure 
was entirely without pain. F. H. Brett (H. W.^ xxv. 304) cured himself 
of inguinal rupture by rubbing the part with tincture of the root. On 
another occasion a blow on the lower part of the back from a fall 
resulted in a secondary affection of the spine in the mid-dorsal region, 
a protuberance as if from a slight dislocation appearing at the spot. 
Again Symp. ^ was applied. The tenderness at the point subsided 
after three applications, and in a few days the protuberance dis- 
appeared. Brett mentions, (16., 379) a pase he had heard of: A 
diseased arm which had begun to mortify was dressed with a poultice 
of Comfrey root, and this “ drew off the mortilied substance, and the 
arm became sound again.” Syr Wm. Thomson, of Dublin (Lancet^ 
Nov. 28, 1896) relates a case of malignant tumour of the antrum which 
had extended to the nose. Microscopical examination proved it to be 
round-celled sarcoma. The patient, a man, was advised to have the 
jaw removed. This advice was refused at the time, and was repeated 
mr Felix Semon, who saw the man later. After still further delay 
^omson performed the operation in the month of May, 1896. A 



1342 


SYMPHYTUM 


month later the growth began to show again, increased rapidly, closed 
the right eye, was blue, tense, firm, lobulated, but did not break* 
Thomson declined to operate again. Early in OctobfT the man 
walked into Thomson’s study well : “ The tumour had completely 
disappeared from the face, and I could not identify any trace of it in 
the mouth/^ The man had applied poultices of Comfrey root, and the 
swelling disappeared. Cooper {H. W.f xxxii. 403) gives this experience 
of a patient of his : Just before her marriage she had a dangerous 
attack of scarlatina, leaving abscesses on both sides of the neck and 
great internal swelling, so that she could swallow only liquids, and 
that with great difficulty. The external swelling extended from ear 
to chin, and was hard and very painful. Poultices of Comfrey root 
were applied. The pain was immediately relieved and her abscesses 
decreased rapidly until they were entirely absorbed, without exterhal 
opening so far as the patient could remark. Hering (from whom I 
have taken the main part of my Schema) says Symp. has had a 
fragmentary proving by Macfarlan. Gerarde adds to the uses of 
Symp, quoted from him above that it eases pains in the back from 
violent motion as wrestling, or from excessive sexual indulgence, 
even when spermatorrhoea has been induced thereby. Am, has an 
analogous use. Peculiar Sensations are : As if upper lid passed over 
an elevation on closing eye. As if ears were stopped up. The 
symptoms are : < By touch. Sitting = pain about navel. Stooping 
s weight in forehead. Walking ss pain opposite spleen. 

Relations. — Follows well : Arn. (for pricking pains ; and after the 
bruising of the soft parts is healed). Compare : Fractures, Calc. ph. 
Injuries, Arn. (Arn., soft parts, Symp., hard ; Arn., painful swelling 
with discoloration, Symp., without discoloration ; Arn., sore, bruised 
lame ; Symp., pricking, stitching, jagging pains), Calen., FI. ac., Hep., 
Sil., Stp., Led., Rhus, Hyper, Effects of sexual excess, Arn. Antidote 
to Canthar. (Green's Herbal), 

Causation. — Fractures. Injuries (to eye ; bone ; periosteum). 
Falls. Blows. Sexual excess. 


SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head.— Headache in occiput, in top of head, in forehead, changing 
places. 

3. Eyes. — Pain in eyes after a knock or contusion of an opaque body. 
— ^After being struck upon eye with a cane by a child, no visible injury, but a 
sensation on closing eye as if upper lid passed , over an elevation on bulb of 
eye,* on waking eye could not be easily opened, seemed spasmodically 
closed. 

4. Ears. — Cannot hear well ; feels, as if ears were stopped up, — 
Inflamed ears. 

5. Nose— Pain comes down bone of nose, and sometimes down both 
sides of nose (produced. —R. T. C.). 

6 . Face.— (Malignant tumour of r. antrum.)— Inflammation of inferior 
maxillary bone ; hard, red swelling. 



SYMPHYTUM 


1343 


XI. Stomach. — Pains across epigastrium from one side to other, < 
opposite spleen, in walking ; when sitting < about navel ; griping pain. 

13. Stoat, and Anus. — (Dysentery. — Inflamed and bleeding piles.) 

14, Urinary Organs. — Stricture of urethra (curative in some forms. — 
R. T. C.). 

15* Male Sexual Organs. — Testicles become painful and tender and 
prevent walking (produced. — R. T. C.). — (Backache from excessive sexual 
indulgence ; with spermatorrhoea. — Gerarde.) 

x6. Female Sexual Organs.— Menses stopped ; headache, weight in 
.forehead when she strops ; has it almost all time ; a good deal of fever every 
other hour ; cold all day, cramp and diarrhoea ; nose sore inside alae, wants 
to pick it ; wants to rub her eyes ; inflamed ears ; feels as if something were 
in them, stopped up, cannot hear well. — (Lcucorrhoea. — Sore breasts.) 

. 20. Neck and Back. — Pain in back from a fall ; from sexual excess. — 
Pott's disease from fall. — Psoas abscess. — Much used among herbalists in 
caries of spinal and other bones (R. T, C.). 

2X. Limbs. — Seems to act specially on the joints ; a woman, 50, after 
single dose of ^ complained of loss of power in the large joints, they seemed 
to get fixed, being particularly painful on turning in bed ; and then followed 
great working in all the joints, esp. in feet, with prickings and shootings in 
toes of both feet (R. T. C.). 

23. Lower Limbs. — More than a year ago struck knee upon a stone ; 
wound healed and left scarcely any trace, but there remained an acute 
stitching pain in the place, felt when clothing touched part, or when knee was 
bent. — Man suffering from a spontaneous luxation of thigh since childhood, 
fell and received a fracture of affected thigh ; after two months fragments 
were quite movable, and as union was despaired of, an apparatus was made 
which allowed him to sit on a chair during day; Symp, 4, four globules 
every six hours, brought about complete union in twenty days. 

24! Generalities. — Bruises, sprains; sore breasts. — Inflammation of 
Sones; diseased spinous processes. — Psoas abscess. — Facilitates union of 
fractured bones and lessens peculiar pricking pain ; favours production of 
callous. — Pricking, sticking, jagging pains. — “A conserve of the roots cures 
the whites, and a decoction of them is excellent in coughs and soreness of the 
breast. Dried and powdered they are good against fluxes of the belly 
attended with griping pains and bloody stools. [Sy is also serviceable 
in defluxions of the lungs, spitting of blood, and other disorders of the chest. 
-^Bruised and applied to foul ulcers it cleanses and disposes them to heal. 
It removes the inflammation and stops the bleeding of piles ; and is of con- 
siderable efficacy in ulcerations of the kidneys and urinary passages, 
particularly if occasioned by the use of Cantharides " (Thos. Green's Herbal), 



<* 

1344 


SYPHILINUM 


Syphilinom. 

Luesinum. Lueticum. Syphilitic virus. A nosode. Attenuations. ' 

ClinicaL— Abscess ; succession of abscesses. Alcoholism ; hereditary craving 
for alcohol. Anus, fissure of. Aphasia. Asthma. Breasts ; sensitive. Bubo. 
Constipation. Crying of infants. Deafness. Deltoid rheumatism. Dentition. 
Diplopia. Dysmenorrhoea. Epilepsy. Headache ; syphilitic. Hoarseness ; before 
menses. Iritis. Leucorrhoea ; infantile. Mouth, ulcerated. Myopia. Neuralgia. 
Night-sweats, Ophthalmia. Otorrhoea. Ovaries, affections of. Ozcena, Pemphigus 
Psoas abscess. Ptosis. Rectum, stxicture of. Rheumatism. Sciatica. Sleepless- 
ness. Spine, caries of. Strabismus. Stricture. Sunstroke. Syphilis. Teeth, carious. 
Throat, ulcerated. Tibia, pains in. Tongue, cracked, ulcerated. Dicers. 
Whitlow. 

Characteristics. — 1 learnt the value of this nosode from Skinner, 
who has made with it some very brilliant cures. It has been 
proved by Swan in the potencies, and Hering’s Schema, from which 
mine is taken, comprises also disease symptoms — marked (n) — 
and cured symptoms, which have generally the name and the disease 
appended. Cured cases of secondary syphilis I have marked 
(s.s.).^^ The widespread distribution of syphilis, acquired and 
hereditary, and the virulence and persistence of the virus, give this 
nosode a high degree of importance in homoeopathic practice. It 
has been mainly, almost exclusively, employed by those who are 
familiar with the use of high attenuations. I have used no potency 
lower than 200, and rarely repeat the dose oftener than once a week. 
The leading features of the disease are the keynotes for the use of 
the remedy, and (i) first in importance is the Night < : “Pains from 
darkness to daylight; begin with twilight and end with daylight.^* 

“ All symptoms < at night.^^ “ Terrible dread of night, on account 
of mental and physical exhaustion on awaking.^* This night 
aggravation will be found in a large proportion of the cases needing 
Sypk ; in ophthalmia, the pains are < at night, and during the night 
the lids growtogether. Neuralgia, and headache, asthma, coughs < from 
sunset to sunrise, whether syphilitic or not, will be benefited by Syph. 
Sleeplessness is itself a leading indication for Syph.f which vies with 
SuL as a sleep restorer. (2) Next to the Night <, is Ulceration : this 
may affect mouth, nose, genitals, or skin, and the ulcers have 
greyish bases ; in the nose they produce the most offensive form of 
ozaena with discharge of fetid clinkers. In such cases I have found 
Syph, of the greatest service. Fetid discharges from the ear come in 
the same category. (3) Abscesses with foul secretions. (All pus- 
formations of Syph. are fetid.) Succession of abscesses is one of the 
grand keynotes of the materia medica. Eyes, teeth, and skin give 
other leading indications. In ophthalmia neonatorum the lids adhere 
during sleep ; pains < 2 to 5 a.m. ; pus profuse ; > cold bathing. 
Iritis, syphilitic or rheumatic, has been cured with SypH. Ptosis ; 
sleepy look from drooping lids. Diplopia, one image seen below the 
other. Teeth decay at the edge of the gums and break off ; are cupped, 
have serrated edges ; dwarfed in size and con verge, at their tips. The 
typical eruption of Syph, is copper-coloured spots, bit it covers many 



SYPHILINUM 


1345 


other forms, including pemphigus. The glandular system is affected 
throughout and nutrition impaired, leading to extreme emaciation. 
Burnett h^ recorded in his book on Delicate Children many 
instances oT the power of Syph, to free stunted children from this 
constitutional blight. Further indications for Syph, are : Pains < and 
> gradually; are shifting, and require frequent change of position. 
Leucorrhoea ; profuse, soaking through napkins and running to heels. 
Craving for alcohol in any form. Hereditary tendency to alcoholism. 
{Bacchus and Venus are close allies). The orifices of the body are 
all affected by sypjiilis, and Syph. has a great sphere in rectal pain 
*and constipation. ^‘Obstinate constipation for years ; rectum seems 
tied up with strictures ; when enema was used the agony of passage 
was like labour.” Bones are affected, and especially bones of head 
and tibiae. Nodes on the head. H. C. Allen says : Syphilitics, or 
patients who have had chancre treated by local means, and as a result 
have suffered from throat and skin troubles for years, are nearly always 
benefited by this remedy at commencement of treatment unless some 
other remedy is clearly indicated.” Thomas Wildes (H. P., xi. 267) 
gives his experience with Syph, In chancre he gives Syph, im (Swan) 
— according to Skinner’s calculation this is much lower than im of the 
centesimal scale — one dose every night. The chancre increases for the 
first two weeks and then gradually fades away, not being followed 
by secondaries. Where the edges of the chancre assume the appear- 
ance of proud flesh in the third or fourth week, and become everted, 
jagged, and angry dark red, he gives Lac can. cm (Swan) every night 
for ten to fourteen days, until the sore takes on a more natural appear- 
ance, when Syph, im is again given to finish the case. For any 
remaining induration Nit, ac, 30, four times a day, is given. Head- 
aches in great variety he cured with it ; aphasia ; ptosis ; paralysis of 
tongue ; facial paralysis ; hemiplegia ; persistent pains in any part 
of the body ; ” catarrhal and nerve deafness ; itching of nostrils ; 
*dark purple lines between alac nasi and cheeks. Itching scabby 
eruptions on face or breast ; singly or in clusters, looking like herpes. 
Pain and pressure behind steinum. Epilepsy. Wildes cured with 
Syph. im a bookkeeper who for many months had had a piercing, 
pressing, excruciating headache over right eye extending deep into 
brain. It was so severe, he was losing continuity of thought and 
memory. Under Syph, every night the headache disappeared entirely in 
ten days and the mental faculties were fully restored ; but in six 
weeks the whole eyebrow on that side broke out into a sickly, yellow, 
syphilitic eczema with a red, angry, and oozing base extending under 
the arch to the lid from canthus to canthusup into forehead and down 
the side of the nose. The cure of this was tedious, because, Wildes 
thinks, he did not stick to Syph,^ but changed the remedy. This man 
had had syphilis a few years before. In 1879 a lady, 26, extremely 
bright and intelligent, came to \t^ildes wdth a dreadful ozaena. She had 
also curvature of the spine and congestion of right ovary. Always 
delicate from a child. Syph. cured the ozaena and improved the 
health, but it ^Mrove out a saddle to which the Sepia saddle 
is but a shadoVjT^' — a furious inflammatory mass of syphilitic sores, 
scabs, and eczeifia, red and angry, with a fiery base extending from 
VOL. II. 86 



SYPHILINUM 


1346 

one malar prominence to the other, across nose up to eyes and fore- 
head. This took eighteen months to cure. The ozaena never returned. 
A boy, 4, had an obstinate rash, a combination of prurigo and herpes, on 
chin, lips, cheek-bone, forehead, and hairy scalp; on arms, chest, back, 
bends of joints and on the joints, and on fingers and hands, nowhere 
profuse. In spite of authorities to the contrary, Wildes maintains 
that syphilitic rashes may itch, and that prurigo is infectious and is one 
of the initial stages of leprosy. This boy had a spot of eruption on 
the left thigh the size of the top-joint of a man^s thumb. This was 
distinctly a leper spot. SypL im caused the rash to come out strongly 
all over the body in patches, the face was one-third covered with a 
thick, yellow, scabby eruption. The remedy was continued and the 
boy got well, wonderfully improved in health, no longer nervous, 
growing well ; sleeping well ; appetite good. Girl, 16, had measles 
a year before which did not come out properly. A year and a half 
prior thereto subject to neuralgic headaches. Ailing about two years ; 
very despondent, wants to die, headaches growing more violent. 
During the headaches the temple veins stand out, has pains all over 
the body, is very irritable, restless, walking about much of the time^ 
does not wish to be soothed, violent on being opposed^ has tremors 
and seems on the verge of convulsions^ dazed, absenUminded^ and almost 
insane. Always washing her hands. Was formerly constipated, but 
now subject to a kind of diarrhoea.’* Menses never have come on 
properly, and for the past year have been very irregular, much delayed, 
scanty, and always extremely painful. Often feverish. Sleep anxious, 
distressed, and often wakeful and violently restless. The italicised 
symptoms indicated Syph.^ and under this she steadily recovered. A 
young lady contracted lepra-syphilis” from vaccination. She had 
an immense blood-boil on her arm which would not heal. Face 
broken out with a lumpy fiery rash. With Syph. im at bedtime she 
recovered rapidly ; the arm healed quickly and her face became" free 
from eruption. Boy, 3, had cluster of yellow blotches on fingers 
and roots of nails, distorting the nails. The boy’s father was epileptic. 
The boy was helped with Fluor, ac. and cured with Syph.j the nails 
becoming straight. Many persons, says Wildes, after taking Syph. for 
a few days, complained of heavy, crushing, cutting pains across the 
base of the cerebellum ; others of heavy aching and stiffness from 
base of neck up through muscles and cords of neck and into the 
brain ; others of a heavy, clouded, dull feeling at base of brain with 
physical lethargy, and sometimes with dizziness, sometimes with 
confusion of thoughts and often a feeling as if going insane or about 
to be paralysed. Sometimes a far-away^ feeling, with a feeling of 
Indifference to the future. Accompanying these there may come a 
heavy, dragging, dull feeling in lumbar region, with stiffness and want 
of elasticity. Peculiar Sensations are : A seething feeling as if hot 
water or hot oil running through all veins of the body, all night long. 
As if going insane or about to be paralysed. Tongue feels as if 
paralysed. A far-away feeling with apathy. As if head were pulled 
back by a weight. As if blood went to right inner canthus and 
temples and could get no further. As if sand in eyes. As if right 
eye were wide open and cold air were blowing in it. Fluttering as of 



SYPHILINUM 


1347 


something alive in teeth. As if a worm in tooth. As if teeth had got 
out of place. Distress as if in omentum. As if rectum were tied 
up with strictures. As if urethra had been stuffed up and clogged. 

► As if sternum was being drawn towards dorsal vertebrae. As if she 
would suffocate with cough. As if skin were drawn up in centre of 
chest on drawing back head. Coccyx as if swollen. As if toes on 
right foot were disjointed. Like growing-pains in limbs. As if bones 
were sawed. Palms and soles as if pricked by needles. As if throat 
.tearing to pieces. As if top of head were coming off. As if teeth 
were loose. As of «a nervous chill commencing in anus and running 
down legs. As if bitten by bugs. A number of linear pains have 
been observed in cases. G. H. Carr (il/. .<4., xvii. 162) relates 
this case : An old man had been troubled two or three winters with 
an intense cold pain in both legs ; it came on every night on lying down ; 
and lasted all night, the only relief being by getting up and walking. 
Magnetic leggings had given most relief. Syph, mm, one dose daily, 
was given. He lost the pain for six weeks, when it returned in 
milder form. Syph. cmm was given, and he had no more pains all the 
winter. This medicine, he said made his genitals ache so that he 
couldn^t sit still/^ This lasted over a month. Syph, cm cured (ibid,) 
a lady of asthma ’’ that she had had for twenty-five years, the 
attack coming on only at night after lying doivn^ or dining a thunder- 
storm. Swan {M. xxviii. 239) says he gave crying infants, when 
they developed the propensity immediately after birth and did not 
cease, one dose of Syph, cmm, and it was difficult to make them cry 
after that. Yingling (M. A,^ xxix. 135) reports this case : Rev. D., 
30, dark, free from venereal taint, had a constant dull, heavy ache above 
inner angle of right eye, very distressing, with an occasional thrust as 
of an iron rod from the same spot through to lower part of occiput. 
This .thrust was excruciating. He was due to preach next day, but 
the pain quite incapacitated him, hence his appeal for help. Haggard 
look. Syph, cm, one dose, was given. He was free from pain before 
. he reached home, next morning was perfectly well. The symptoms 
are < by touch (tibia ; os uteri). Pressure =: pain in spot middle of 
thigh ; > throat ; pressing teeth together > toothache. No position 
suits. Motion <. Raising arms laterally <. Walking > pain in 
hips and thighs. < At night. Warmth and cold < and >. Warmth 
> headache ; of stove > pain in swollen wrist and big toe. Hot or 
cold things < toothache. Cold water > ophthalmia pains. Damp 
weather ; warm, damp weather ; thunderstorm ; seaside <. > In 

mountains. < Winter. 

Relations. — Compare : In bone diseases and syphilitic affections, 
Aur., Asaf., K, iod., Merc., Nit. ac. < At night, Aur., Merc., Sul. (Med. 
and Sycotics < early morning). < At sea-shore ; > inland (Med. 
opp), < At seaside ; averse to consolation, Nat. m. Dysmenorrhoea, 
Med. Deep-in headache, Bac. Pains increase and decrease slowly, 
Stn. Ozeena with offensive clinkers. Sep., Pul., Pso., K. bi. Succes- 
sion of abscesses (Anthrac., succession of boils). Syphilitic stomatitis, 
Lach., Lac c., Merc. Nodes, K. iod., K. bi., Mang., Merc. Emacia- 
tion, Abrot, Iod. Lancinating pains in heart (from base to apex), 
Med. (from apex to base), Spi. (from base to clavicle or shoulder). 



SYPHILINUM 


1348 

Fears suffering from exhaustion on awaking, Lach. Ptosis, Caust., 
Graph. Hereditary tendency to alcoholism, Asar,, Pso., Tub., Sul., 
Sul. ac. Constipation with labour-like pains. Lac d., TXib. Fissure 
in anus, Thuj. Shoulder rheumatism < raising arm laterally, Rhus, ' 
Sang. (r. shoulder), Fer. (left), Urt. ur. Dentition troubles < night 
(Med. < early morning). Hereditary syphilis ; dentition, Kre. Vertigo 

< looking up (Sul., looking down). As if teeth out of place (Tub. 
as if jammed together). Thunder, effect of, Pho. 

Causation.— Sun. Damp weather. Thunderstorms. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.— Loss of memory (n). — Loses remembrances of passing occur- 
rences, names, dates, &c., while all occurrences previous to inception of 
disease are remembered as distinctly as ever (n). — Very nervous, weeping 
without cause. — Cross, irritable, peevish. — Irritable, excited, walking much 
of the time, does not want to be soothed, violent on being opposed, has 
tremors, seems on the verge of convulsions, dazed, absent-minded, always 
washing her hands. —Periodical neuralgia in head (neuralgia). — ^Very des- 
pondent, does not think will ever get better (s.s.). — Terible dread of night ; 
always < as night approaches ; leaves her about daylight, which she prays 
for (spring cough). — Feeling as if going insane, or about to be paralysed. — 
A far-away feeling, with apathy and indifference to future. — Crying infants, 
who begin immediately after birth. 

2. Head. — Vertigo on looking up, seems to be caused by heat. — 
Headache : linear, from or near one eye backward ; lateral ; frontal ; from 
temple to temple ; deep into brain from vertex ; as from pressure on vertex ; 
in either temple, extending into or from eye > by warmth ; in bones of head ; 

< by heat of sun ; after sunstroke. — Sick-hcadache, pains intolerable, arteries 
of head full and pulsating violently ; high fever, frequent retching on trying 
to vomit; menses regular, but very scanty. — Lancinating pain in occiput, 
invariably < at night (n). — Neuralgic headache causing sleeplessness or 
delirium at night, always commencing about 4 p.m. ; < at from lo to 1 1 and 
ceasing at daylight. — Bursting sensation in vertex as from severe cold. — Pain 
from eyes through to occiput, with sensation of weight in occiput drawing 
head back ; or as if it were pulled back ; eyes ache and smart. —Constant 
linear headache, commencing at both angles of forehead and extending in 
parallel lines backward — a precursor of epileptic attack.— Heavy, crushing, 
cutting pain across base of cerebellum. — Heavy, clouded, dull feeling 
in base of brain. — Headache through temples, thence vertically like 
an inverted letter T. — ^Coronal headache (s.s.). — Headaches accompanied 
by great restlessness, sleeplessness and general nervous erethism. — 
Syphilitic headache for many months, piercing, pressing excruciating 
over r. eye ; extending deep into Brain ; losing continuity of thought 
and memory; makes repeated mistakes in figures, — Suffusion and full 
feeling in face, throat, and head, with innumerable small enlarged cervical 
glands. — Sore, one and a half inches in diameter, on occipital bone, covered 
with a thick, yellow-white scab. — Dirty eruption on scalp.— -Great loss of 
hair (n). 



SYPHILINUM 


1349 


3 . Eyes,— Red papulous eruption round 1. inner canthus, with isolated 
pimples on side of nose, cheek and eyebrow ; these pimples were red, with 
depressed esntre, circumscribed areola, became confluent where they were 
most dense ; pimples bleed when scabs come off ; agglutination of lids. — 
Myopia (n).— Sharp, pulsating pain, occasionally at outer end of superior 
border of r. orbit, apparently in periosteum.— Upper lids swollen.— Ptosis ; 
paralytica ; eyes look sleepy from lowering of upper lid.— Diplopia, one image 
seen lower than the other.— Strabismus paralytica, eye turning inward, and 
pupil can only be turned outward as far as median line.— Chronic recurrent 
phlyctenular inflamrflation of cornea ; successive crops of phlyctenules and 
abrasion of epithelial layer of cornea ; intense photophobia ; profuse lachryma- 
tion ; redness and pain well marked ; delicate, scrofulous children, esp. if any 
trape of hereditary syphilis remains. — L. eyeball covered with fungus-like 
growth, pain intense, < at night. — Acute ophthalmia neonatorum (n). — 
Redness and swelling of outer, half of both lower tarsal edges. — Syphilitic 
iritis, intense pain steadily increasing night after night ; < between 2 and 5 
a.m., coming almost at the minute and ceasing same way (s.s.).— Pain in r. 
inner canthus as if blood went there and could go no farther, also in r. temple 
(rheumatic iritis). — Both eyes glued in morning ; conjunctiva injected ; 
photophobia, constantly wears a shade. — Eyes dull. — Infantile syphilis. — 
Ophthalmic pains, < at night, > by cold water. — R. eye alone affected 
congestion of conjunctiva and sclerotica, with some chemosis ; lids inflamed, 
esp. at outer canthus; sensation of sand in eyes; lids agglutinated in morning; 
great photophobia (hereditary syphilis). — Neuralgia every night, beginning 
about 8 or 9 p.m., gradually increasing in severity until it reached its height 
about 3 or 4 a.m., and after continuing thus for two or three hours gradually 
decreased and finally ceased about 10 a.m. (rheumatic ophthalmia). 

4. Ears. — Intense earache in r. ear, incisive pains thrusting into ear ; 
purulent watery discharge from ear with pain.— Gathering in 1. ear which 

♦discliarges a great quantity of pus (hereditary syphilis in a child). — Deafness 
gradually increasing until she could scarcely hear at all.— Complete deafness ; 
nothing abnormal to be seen.— Catarrhal or nerve deafness with marked 
cachexia.— Calcareous deposit on tympanum.— Small, acrid, watery discharge 
occasionally from ears, no deafness (ozaena). 

5. Nose.— L. side of nose, inside ala, itching.— Nose stuffed up and 
burning.— Attacks of fluent coryza.— Offensive, thick yellow-green nasal 
discharge; during sleep dry scabs form in both nostrils; following an 
application of salve for sore eyes ; 1. submaxillary gland, which had been 
swollen and indurated, softens, discharges and, after forty-five days, begins 
to heal slowly. — Ozaena syphilitica ; {Syph, brought out an eruption of sores 
with a fiery-red base on nose ahd over frontal sinuses).— L, side of nose inside 
and out very sore, likewise lips and chin ; sores itching and scabbing over.— 
Itching in nostrils. 

6. Face.— Face drawn to orife side, difficulty of speaking, masticating, 
blowing (n). — Spasmodic twitching of many muscles, esp. in face (paralysis 
agitans), with great melancholy and depression of spirits.— Facial paralysis r. 
side, thick speech, hemicrania, jactitation of r. eye and lid.— An old gentleman 
has had for some years cancer on r. malar bone ; no rest, his agony excrucia- 
ting in extreme (relieved).— Face pale, — Itching, scabby, eczematous eruptions 



1350 


SYPHILINUM 


singly or in clusters, looking like herpes. — Nose and cheeks covered with 
eruptions and scabs in layers rising to a point.*— Dark purple lines between 
alae nasi and cheeks. — Lips and teeth covered with bloody muoas. — Sores on 
lips and chin, esp. 1. side scabbing over. 

7. Teeth. — Single small lunaj cleft in upper incisors, permanent set, 

which incisors are dwarfed in their general dimensions, and converge at their 
tips; inherited syphilis (n). — Children’s teeth are cupped. — ^Teeth decaying 
at edge of gum and breaking off (n). — Felt like a worm in tooth, could not 
tell which tooth. — Singular feeling as if teeth had all got out of place, and on 
closing jaws teeth do not come well together. * 

8. Mouth. — Tongue red and thick ; two deep cracks running length- 
wise in it ; one on each side of median line. — Aphasia, difficulty of finding 
words; debility.— Tongue feels as if paralysed. — Fetid breath.— Tongue 
coated; white, edges indented by teeth. — Putrid taste in mouth before 
epileptic fit. — ^Tongue very red and thick ; covered with herpetic eruption, 
two deep cracks running lengthwise on each side of median line, making it 
difficult to swallow (s.s.). — Tongue thickly coated, dirty, edges indented or 
serrated by teeth (n.). — Twenty ulcers in mouth, every part involved, top and 
under side of tongue, lips, buccal cavity, fauces and nose ; septum of nose 
threatened, both alas nasi very painful, smarting with burning as if on fire ; 
pains and burning prevented sleep ; hungry but could eat nothing but fluids 
as mastication was impossible ; tongue heavily coated white, large quantities 
of stringy, viscid, saliva running from mouth of a sweetish taste j a putrid, 
sickening odour filled whole house ; all symptoms < toward night (s.s.).— 
Herpetic eruption in mouth, tonsils, hard palate and fauces, completely covering 
inside of mouth and throat, making it very difficult to swallow even liquids. — 
Syphilitic destruction of hard and soft palates. 

9. Throat. — Chronic hypertrophy of tonsils (hereditary syphilis). — 

Chancrous ulcer extending across velum palati to 1. pillar of pharn3rx (s.s.). 
— Acute pharyngitis (s.s.). ^ 

10 . Appetite. — Appetite indifferent and capricious (psoas abscess). — 
Total loss of appetite for months, little or nothing satisfies him ; formerly was 
generally ravenous. — ^Thirst. — Tendency to heavy drinking ; alcoholism. — 
Aversion to meat. — Dyspepsia ; flatulence, belching of wind ; nervous 
dyspepsia. 

11. Stomach.— Nausea. — Heartburn with pain and rawness from 
stomach to throat-pit, often with cough. — ^Vomiting for weeks or months due 
to erosion from superficial ulceration of lining of viscus, herpetic, of syphilitic 
origin. 

12. Abdomen. — Pain or distress deep in abdomen as if in omentum. — 
Feeling of heat internally in hypogastric region. — Pain in r. groin followed by 
swelling of glands. — Large painless bubo in r. groin opened and discharged 
freely (s.s.).— Slight lancinating pain in one groin, < at night.— Inguinal bubo. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Bowels torpid for five weeks (periodical 
neuralgia in head). — Obstinate constipation for many years ; rectum seemed 
tied up with strictures, when injections were given agony of passage was like 
child-bearing. — Chronic constipation, with fetid breath, earthy complexion, 
gaunt appearance. — Stools very dark and offensive (infantile S3^hilisj. — Bilious 
diarrhoea at seashore, painless, driving her Out of bed about 5 a.ni. ; stools 



SYPHILINUM 


1351 

during day, later causing excoriation ; face red, suffers from heat ; occasional 
painless, whitish diarrhoea when at home, always > by going to mountains.*— 
Fissures in%nus and rectum . — Tvio indurated ulcers at mouth of anus some- 
what sore ; slight itching of anus (primary syphilis). 

14. Urinary Organs. — Itching in orifice of urethra. — sensation, in 
morning on going to urinate, as if male urethra were stuffed up or clogged, 
about an inch from orifice.— Scalding urine.— Urination difficult and very 
slow ; no pain, but a want of power, so that he has to strain. — Urine infre- 
quent, not oftener than once in twenty-four hours, scanty, of a golden-yellow 
colour. — Profuse urftiation after chill ; passed during night nearly a chamber- 
ful. — Rich lemon-yellow scanty urine. — Frequent urging to urinate all night, 
at least from 7 p.m. until 5 a.m. 

» 15. Male Sexual Organs. — Chancre on prepuce. — Buboes. — Burning 
in chancre size of a split pea, on prepuce above corona glandis; edges 
raised, bottom covered with lardaceous deposit ; glans purple, on 1 . side 
covered by an exudation. — Chancre on penis, third in two years, all on same 
spot (s,s.).— Aching of genitals, could not sit still for over a month. — ^After 
suppressed chancre, disease attacked testes and scrotum, which became 
painful and swollen ; this was supposed to be cured, but ever since, every 
few weeks, if exposed at all to damp weather would be seized with pain as if 
in kidneys, seemingly traversing ureters, but instead of passing into bladder 
followed spermatic cord, down groins and into testes ; pain agonising, chiefly in 
cord, in present attack in r. ; pricking in chancre. — Chancroid, phagedaenic, 
spreading rapidly ; buboes commencing in each groin. — Inflammation and 
induration of spermatic cord. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Uterus and all surrounding parts loose, 
soft and flabby; profuse, thick, yellow leucorrhoea; constant pain across 
small of back. — Yellow offensive leucorrhoea, watery or not, so profuse it 
daily soaks through napkins and runs to heels of stockings if much on her 
feet.— Profuse yellow leucorrhoea, < at night ; in sickly, nervous children 
(inherited syphilis). — Soreness of genitals, and niuco-purulent discharge, in a 
child. — Acrid discharge causing violent itching and inflammation of external 
organs, < at night from warmth of bed, parts very tender ; itching and 
inflammation > during menses. — Nocturnal < of r. ovarian pain, preventing 
sleep. — Sore on r. labium majus, extending to 1. (s.s.). — Menstruation 
painful, two weeks too soon ; pink-red, bright, profuse, running free for some 
days ; napkins wash easily. — Painful menstruation. — Sensitiveness of os uteri, 
< to intolerable pain at menses, or on introduction of finger or penis ; 
frequently causes abortion (n). — Sharp zigzag shooting pains in region of 
uterus. — Ovaries congested and inflamed ; tendency to ovarian tumours. — 
Sore aching in 1. ovarian regies, extending to r. with darting pains. — L. ovary 
swollen, during coitus, at moment of orgasm, a sharp cutting pain like a 
knife, arid twice there was smarting as of a sore ; ovary swelled so much that 
its size and shape could easily be felt through abdominal walls (caused by 
Buboin ). — ^Uterine and ovarian diseases with pronounced nervous disorders, 
esp, in married women. — Mammae sensitive to touch, feeling sore ; during 
menses, and at other times. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarse, almost complete aphonia, day 
before menses. — Diseased cartilages of larynx (tertiary syphilis). — Chronic 



SYPHILINUM 


1352 

asthma, in summer, esp. when weather was warm and damp ; most frequently 
in evening, passing off at daybreak.— Pain and oppression at bifurcation of 
bronchia and in larynx, it hurts her to breathe.— Attacks os? spasmodic 
bronchial asthma for twenty-five years ; they come on only at night after 
lying down or during a thunderstorm, producing most intense nervous 
insomnia, entirely preventing sleep for days and nights.— Violent attacks of 
dyspnoea, wheezing and rattling of mucus, from i to 4 a.m. — Cough ; hard 
cough < at night, when it is continuous, preventing sleep. — Hard, constant 
cough, with thick, yellow, tasteless expectoration. — Dry, racking cough, with 
thick, purulent expectoration, caused by a sensation of rksping or scraping in 
throat, always at night. — Whooping-cough with terrible vomiting. — Cannot 
lie on r. side, as it causes a dry cough. — Muco-purulent expectoration, greyish, 
greenish, greenish-yellow, tasteless. — Expectoration without cough, quite 
clear, white, feels like a round ball and rushes into mouth. 

18. Chest. — Rattling in chest and throat. — Soreness of chest, with great 
anguish and inability to retain a recumbent position ; in winter, severe 
bronchial cough succeeded asthmatic attacks ; a regular type of chills and 
fever developed ; suffered from this many years ago. — Pain in centre of chest 
as if skin were drawn up, on drawing the head back. — Lack of sleep produces 
a sudden faintness and sinking sensation in chest ; three spells succeeded 
each other during a single night. — Oppression of chest to such an extent as 
almost to arrest breathing ; asthma caused by sensation as if sternum were 
being ^adually drawn towards dorsal vertebrae ; expansion of chest difficult ; 
confusion of mind as if unconsciousness might follow. — Sensation of pressure 
under upper part of sternum, — Pain and pressure behind sternum. — Angina ; 
ptosis 1. eye ; facial paralysis 1. side, slight aphasia ; impotence (relieved), — 
Eczematous herpetic eruptions on chest. 

19. Heart. — Lancinating pains in heart at night, from base to apex 
(Medor. has reverse). — Valvular disease of heart. 

20. Neck and Back. — Heavy aching and stiffness from base of neck up 
through muscles and cords into brain. — Caries of cervical spine with great 
curvature in same region, directly forward ; pain in curvature always < at 
night (no proof of syphilis). — Enlargement of cervical glands and a number of 
pedunculated pin-head warts on neck ; cured by Syco-syphilinum (hereditary 
syphilis ; girl, 10). — Enlargement of glands in different parts of body, 
particularly abundant about neck ; indurated and slightly painful, causing a 
sensation of fulness and suffusion in face, throat and head (n). — Enormous 
swelling of glands of head and neck (Hodgkin’s disease). — Rigidity of 
muscles,— A heavy, dragging, dull feeling in lumbar region, with want of 
elasticity. — Great pain in back in region of kidneys, < after urinating (s.s.). 
—Pains commencing in sacral regions internally, and apparently coming 
around to uterus. — Pain at coccyx at its junction with sacrum, sometimes in 
lower sacral vertebrae ; < on sitting, with a sensation as if swollen, though 
it is not, — Caries of dorsal vertebrae with' acute curvature, for five months, 
every night most intense neuralgic pains, commencing generally from 5 to 7 
p.m., and never terminating till about 5 a.m, ; < by least motion, and slightly 
> by warm poultices.— Psoas abscess first 1. then r.— Nocturnal < of pains in 
back, hips and thighs. 

2X. Limbs. — ^Aching pains in limbs like growing pains, — Gradual 



SYPHILINUM 


1353 


rigiSity of all joints after eruption ; flexors seem contracted. — Rheumatic 
swelling of 1. wrist and big toe, bluish red, with pains as if somebody sawed 
at his bon^ with a dull saw ; > by heat of stove ; < from sundown to 
' sunrise ; no appetite ; has lasted two weeks (rheumatism). — Feeling of numb- 
ness in palms and soles, at times a prickly sensation as if numb parts were 
punctured by a great number of needles.— Excruciating arthritis ; swelling, 
heat, and redness intense.— Rheumatism, muscles are caked in hard knots or 
lumps. 

22 . Upper Limbs. — Rheumatism of shoulder-joint or at insertion of 
• deltoid, < from raising arm laterally. — Can only raise arms to a right angle 

with axilla ; trying to force them higher causes muscles to suddenly become 
paralysed and they drop pendant (n). — Lameness and pain of arm on 
motion, < on raising arm up in front as if reaching ; pain located about 
insertion of deltoid in upper third of humerus, not painful to pressure. — 
Fingers and thumbs have runarounds (infantile syphilis). — Always washing 
the hands. — Hands badly ulcerated on backs (s.s.). — R. second finger swollen 
and stiffened (s.s.). 

23. Lower Limbs. — Swelling of legs from knees down, soles painful 
when standing on them ; swelling goes down in morning, comes back at 
night,— Pains in lower extremities, excruciating, completely banish sleep ; < 
from hot fomentations ; > pouring cold water on them (n). — Cannot sit in 
a low chair, or squat down, owing to loss of control over knee and hip- joints 
(n). — Pains in long bones of lower extremities, also in joints (n). — Dull pain 
over backs of feet to toes, began soon after getting into bed, lasting until 4 or 
5 a.m. — For two or three winters intense cold pain in both legs, < in 1 ., came 
on every night on lying down, lasting all night ; > by getting up and walking, 
and in warm weather. — Pain in three toes of r. foot as if disjointed. — Slight 
contraction of tendons beneath r. knee (psoas abscess). — Tearing pains in hip 
and .thighs, < at night, > about daybreak, > by walking, not affected by 

■I weather (improved).— Redness and rawness with terrible itching between 
toes (s.s,). — Bubo with pain in spot on middle of r. thigh in front, only when 
standing and on deep pressure, which seemed to touch spot, which was 
apparently on periosteum. — Two ulcers larger than a crown piece, dirty 
stinking, sloughing, with jagged, elevated edges, one on thigh above patella 
another on head of tibia ; two large pieces of bone came away from head of 
tibia (s.s.). — Osteosarcoma in centre of r. tibia the size of half an ostrich egg, 
pains agonising at night, growth irregular, spongy, partly laminated, very 
hard (s.s.). — Contracted, painful feeling in soles, as if tendons were too 
short. 

24. Generalities. — Utter prostration and debility in morning. — 
Epilepsy. — Dwarfed, shrivellftd-up, old-looking babies and children. — 
Epileptic convulsions after menses. 

25. Skin. — Pustular eruption on different parts of body ; in patches on 
certain places, particularly on wrists and shins, where bones are nearest 
cuticle, and isolated other large pustules on other parts, these break, dis- 
charging an ichorous fluid for one or two days, then heal, leaving characteristic 
pockmark cicatrice ; patches take longer to heal, discharging same fluid till 
healing process commences. — After healing of chancre a fresh pustular 
eruption appears on different parts erf body, which, when pustules have 



1354 


SYPHILINUM— SYZYGIUM, 


discharged an ichorous liquid and healed up, leaves fresh coppery pockniarks ; 
Medorr. removed it permanently, causing it to turn yellow-brown, dry at edges 
and scale off, leaving skin permanently clear and free. — Bitingf sensation in 
different parts of body, as if bitten by bugs, at night only. — Syphilitic rash, * 
very prominent on forehead, chin, arms and front of thorax, an abundance of 
fine scales peeling off ; large prominent spot on centre of forehead, filled with 
fluid, as also are some smaller patches (s.s.). — Syphilitic bullae discharging 
freely on cheeks, under chin, on back of shoulders, on scalp and other parts 
of body (infantile syphilis). — Maculae; copper-coloured (s.s.). — Pemphigus, 
looking like a pock, often confluent and persistently reappears. — Skin 
bluish. 

26. Sleep. — Great restlessness at night, impossible to keep leg in one 
position. — ^Absolute sleeplessness (vies with Sul in producing quiet, refreshing 
sleep). — Wakes soon after midnight and cannot sleep again till 6 a.m, 

27. Fever. — Great pains in head, whole body extremely cold, looked 
blue ; wanted to be covered with blankets or couldn’t get warm ; no appetite ; 
sleeping almost continually, could not be roused (s.s.). — Nervous chills pre- 
ceded by pains in head, esp. occiput and scalp of that part ; pains below 
waist, in pelvis, legs, esp. tibia, which is sensitive to touch ; bowels torpid ; 
cross, irritable, peevish ; pains begin every day 4 p.m., culminate at midnight, 
disappear at daylight. — After retiring nerve chill beginning in anus, running 
down legs ; desire for stool, > by profuse urination and by eructations. — 
Fever : dry, hot, shortly after going to bed, parted lips, great thirst ; 1 1 to i 
daily. — Sweat : profuse at night, sleepless and restless ; esp. between scapulae 
and down to waist, with excessive general debility. 


Syzyginm. 

Syzygium jambolanum. Jumbul. N, 0 , Myrtaceae. Trituration of the 
seeds (fruit-stones). Tincture of the powdered fruit-stones. 

ClinioaL — Diabetes. Ulcers. 

Charaoteristios. — Syz, j. is a native of India, It has an edible 
fruit, the powdered stones of which have a popular use in India 
(J 3 . jF. H., xli. 275) as a remedy for diabetes. The dose is five grains 
of the powdered stones three times a day. Dudgeon used Syz, in the 
lower homoeopathic attenuations with marked success, which has been 
repeated by many others. Hansen menfions as having been cured 
with Syz, old ulcers of skin, probably of a diabetic foundation.^^ 
Dudgeon {H. IF., xxiv. 540) relates this case : A scientific man, 56, 
complained of prickly heat all ovfer upper part of body and arms. 
The skin was covered with small red papules, which itched so 
intensely he could get rio rest He felt very weaky which was perhaps 
due to his having abstained from all animal food, and confined himself 
to bread, farinaceous food, vegetables, and fruit. There was much 
thirst and great flow of urine, which he was obliged to pass every two 



SYZYGIUM 


1355 


hoil>s, night and day ; mouth very dry. Urine 1036, very saccharine. 
He was ordered chiefly animal diet, very little bread, and no sugar. 
Syz. mi»ed with three times the quantity of alcohol, was given ; 
of this two drops every three hours. The specific gravity of the urine 
steadily declined, sugar disappeared, and all the symptoms passed off ; 
and this in spite of the fact that the dietetic rules were relaxed. 



Tabacum. 

Nicotiana tabacum. Tobacco. N. 0 . Solanaceae. Tincture of the fresh 
leaves collected before the flowers are developed. 

ClinioiJ. — Amaurosis. Anaemia. Angina pectoris. Anus, prolapse of. Apoplexy. 
Asthma. Backache. Brain, anaemia of. Brain-fag. Catalepsy. Cholera. Cholera 
infantum. Colour-blindness. Constipation. Diarrhoea. Epilepsy. Freckles, 
Glands, enlarged. Heart, intermittent. Hernia. Hiccough. Idiocy. Leg, jerking 
of. Lip, cancer of. Masturbation, effects of. Meniere’s disease. CEsophagus, 
stricture of. Optic neuritis. Pregnancy^ pruritus of ; sickness of; toothache of. 
Prostatorrhoea. Pruritus. Pyrosis. Rectum, paralysis of ; stricture of. Sea- 
sickness, Speech, embarrassed. Strabismus. Tetanus. Toothache. Varicocele. 

CharacteristioB. — Nicotiana tabacum received its specific name 
from Jean Nicot, French ambassador to Portugal, who was the means 
of introducing the tobacco plant into France about 1560. When 
Columbus and his followers landed in Cuba in 1492 the practice of 
smoking tobacco was in common use among the natives throughout 
the island, and also throughout the continent of America. On their 
return to Spain the practice rapidly spread throughout the Peninsula. 
Sir Walter Raleigh and his companions introduced the practice into 
England in 1586, From that time the cultivation, manufacture, and* 
use of tobacco, either by smoking, snuffing, or chewing, rapidly 
became universal. The symptoms of the pathogenesis are composed 
partly of provings made by Lembke, Schreter, and others, and partly 
of poisonings and over-dosings. Several instructive articles on 
tobacco appeared in the Homoeopathic News of 1897, from the pen 
of M. E. Douglass, then practising at Danville, Virginia, in the midst 
of tobacco plantations. His third article (July, 1897) was devoted to 
the medicinal uses of Tobacco ; and it seems that it is regarded as 
a perfect panacea by the Virginians for diseases of men and cattle. 
One use he mentions is as a palliative for bee-stings and mosquito- 
bites, A portion of a leaf is moistened With vinegar and applied to 
the part. This is interesting, as Ipec.y one of the antidotes of Tab.f has 
a similar reputation. Strong tobacco-juice is the most effectual 
destroyer of the burrowing-flea. Chigoe. For headache leaves of 
Tobacco are moistened with vinegar or camphor solution, and applied 
to the forehead and nape. The pain is allayed and sleep induced. 
The local application over the pit of the stomach relieves nausea. 
Douglass made an involuntary proving on himself when about twenty. 
He was attending an evening writing-class, when a class-mate gave 



TABACUM 


^357 


hiii^d bit of tobacco to chew, and he put it in his mouth. In a few 
minutes the bell rang and he took his seat, after first removing the 
tobacco, ^e soon began to feel dizzy, and could not distinguish his 
copy ; the letters danced all over the page ; a cold perspiration broke 
out on the forehead, and extended all over the body. He felt a 
deathly nausea at his stomach ; his hands trembled so that he could 
not hold pen to paper. He felt so weak and faint he feared he would 
fall out of his seat. His desk- mate helped him out of the house into 
the cold aify and gave him a sour apple^ bidding him eat it. It did 
not seem possible, •but he finally tried, and was so much relieved that 
he ate it all. In half an hour he was able to return to the class, but 
was so weak and tremulous, he did not attempt to write. The nausea 
was the first symptom to disappear, then the cold perspiration. 
The dizziness, trembling, and excessive weakness did not entirely leave 
till next day. Since then Douglass has used small doses of vinegar 
in acute symptoms of nicotine poisoning, either chewing or smoking, 
with excellent results. Nothing, he says, relieves the sensation of 
constriction of the oesophagus (in his own case the symptom was a very 
disagreeable one, as of a hand clutching the throat ”) so quickly as 
vinegar. One of Douglass's patients, a young man in good health, 
who was very fond of cigars, was certain, if he smoked two in an 
evening, to have an emission on the same night, sometimes with, but 
oftener without, dreams. Next day he was prostrated, hypochondriacal, 
tongue furred with a thick, fuzzy, yellow coat at base ; and dull, 
occipital headache. Prostatorrhoea and impotence are also among 
the effects of Tab, The constrictive sensation is not confined to the 
throat ; it affects the rectum, bladder, and chest. There is violent 
rectal tenesmus ; and there is also paralysis and prolapsus ani. The 
vesical sphincter is paralysed, there is aebility of urine, and enuresis. 
Two of Lembke’s provers, students accustomed to smoke and drink 
^ coffee and beer, had incontinence of urine ; in one the quantity of 
urine was not increased, but it was ^‘passed more frequently, and 
dribbled away involuntarily, with slight itching of urethra ; in the 
case of the other the urine was increased, pale, and he “ had to pass 
it several times in the night, almost amounting to incontinence.^* The 
power of Tab, to paralyse sphincters and also morbid con- 
strictions accounts for its traditional use in cases of strangulated 
hernia and obstruction of the bowels, which has been confirmed in 
homoeopathic practice. Renal colic comes under the same heading. 
The same pair of opposites — relaxation and constriction — are seen in 
the weakness and paralysis on the one hand, and the convulsions on 
the other. All shades of nprvous tremors, faintings, cramps, jerkings, 
and restlessness are noted, and it is by its power of antidoting these 
conditions that Tab, holds its place in society. “ After an unusually 
vexatious day,** says Douglass, when I am in that unpleasant con- 
dition of mind when it seems as though the slightest word would 
cause an outburst of passion, nothing else does me quite so much 
good as a smoke.** This is a central nervous action, and if too much 
indulged leads to degeneration of nerve tissue, as seen in tobacco- 
blindness. Tab, also produces a condition like brain-fag ; inability to 
concentrate thoughts ; this may even go on to a state of idiocy. 



TABACUM 


U58 

Silly talking in boys. A curious state was induced in Mr. Hardson 
(C. D, ?.), who slept in the cabin of a sloop, the cabin being full of 
large packages of tobacco. His sleep was harassed by* 'wild and 
frightful dreams, and he suddenly awakened about midnight, bathed 
in a cold dew, and totally unable to speak or move. He knew per- 
fectly where he yras, and recollected what had occurred the day 
before ; but could not make any bodily effort whatever, and tried in 
vain to get up or change his position. ** Four bells ** was struck on 
deck, and he heard the sounds (though rather, it seemed, through 
their vibrating in his body than by the ears) ; and he was conscious 
of other things tliat occurred — so he was not dreaming. At length 
he became totally insensible for a time, till a roll of the ship roused 
him, and he awakened and got on deck. His memory was totally 
lost for a quarter of an hour ; he knew he was in a ship, but nothing 
more. While in this state he saw a man drawing water, and asked 
him to pour a bucket on his head. This was done, and all his faculties 
were instantly restored ; and he acquired a most vivid recollection 
of a vast variety of ideas and events which seemed to have passed 
through his mind, and that had occupied him during the time of his 
supposed insensibility. — The nutrition is profoundly influenced by Tab.^ 
and it probably retards growth in children. It produces a deathly 
sinking and craving at the stomach, and it is no doubt by virtue of 
this, acting homoeopathically, that Tab, enables persons who cannot 
have proper meals to endure starvation better than they otherwise 
would. Decaisne (C. D. P.) observed the effects of smoking on youths, 
aged from 9 to 15. Among the effects were : Bruit in carotids and 
diminution of red corpuscles of the blood. Palpitation. Deficient 
digestive power. Sluggish intellect. Craving for alcoholic stimulants. 
Epistaxis. Ulcerated mouth. ‘^The younger the boy, the more 
marked the symptoms ; the better fed suffer least.^^ Rapid emacia- 
tion, especially of back and cheeks has been noted among the 
effects. Tab, has a number of backaches, and some are peculiar. 
C. M. Boger (Hahn. A.j xxxviii. 41) cured this with Tab. cm : Backache 
persistent ; < lying down, > walking ; history of anginoid attacks. 
In cases of cholera, sea-sickness, sickness of pregnancy, renal colic, 
strangulated hernia, &c., the keynote symptoms are : deathly nausea, 
pallor, coldness ; icy cold surface, covered with cold sweat ; vomiting 
violent, as soon as he began to move, > on deck and in fresh air. 
Terrible faint, sinking feeling at pit of stomach, Terry cured a case 
of sea-sickness with heat along spine from nape down ; cold sweat ; 
then vomit. He also cured a case of Meniere^s disease with a feeling 
as if sea-sick. A keynote symptom of ijiuch importance in many 
abdominal cases is : > by uncovering abdomen. Child wants abdomen 
uncovered ; it > nausea and vomiting. There may be coldness of the 
abdomen at the same time. Tab. produ^ces a number of skin affections, 
notably pruritus. Teste cured with it several cases of freckles ; he 
repeated the remedy and gave it for weeks at a time : ** A country 
girl had her face and hands covered with freckles, two- thirds of which 
disappeared completely [under Tab.] in summer, the season in which 
they are most frequent and obstinate.’' Burnett told me that an infusion 
of tobacco is a popular German remedy for scrofulous glands. Cooper 



TABACUM 


1359 

an indication, ‘intermittent heart in old people.^^ E. T. Blake 
(H, R*y 4. 68) records a case of rheumatism with rigid joints and spinal 
insomnia ijj^ a lady, 40, who had been heavily drugged with narcotics 
before he saw her. “ Whenever she composed herself for sleep, just 
•as she was lapsing into unconsciousness, the knees would attempt to 
fly up towards the chest with an abrupt jerk, tearing painfully at the 
acetabular adhesions.” Other symptoms were : sweating, impaired 
memory, hypochondriasis, drumming in the ears, facial as well as 
crural clonus, white tongue, epigastric sinking, alternating with 
’ nausea and flatule^jce, heart action increased by day, diminished 
•down to severe fainting during the night. Tab, 12 gave three 
hours’ refreshing sleep the first night, more the second, and after the 
third the leg-jerk departed for good. C. W. (H. W,^ xxvi. 207) was 
troubled with spasm of lower jaw, < out of doors. No remedy did 
good till he remained one evening with two friends who were smoking, 
and got himself well saturated with the smoke. That cured him. 
Slight subsequent returns were always removed by Tab, J. W. 
Scott {H, P., xvi. 420) observed a case of epileptiform convulsions 
brought on by tobacco. For five months the patient had two attacks 
weekly, and they grew worse in spite of treatment till the tobacco was 
discontinued. Sensations are: Sensation of excessive wretchedness. 
As if struck by a hammer on right side of head. As if a band round 
head. As if brains were being bored out. As if black dots filled 
visual field. As if ears were closed. As of a plug in oesophagus. 
As if throat gripped by a hand. As if sea-sick. As if stomach 
were relaxed. As if chest too tight. As if a crowbar were 
twisted round heart. The symptoms are : > Uncovering abdo- 
men. < By pressure. < Motion of vessel. < Lying ; > walking. 
Lying on left side = palpitation. Motion (even least) <. Coughing 
s= hiccough ; stitches in pit of stomach. Rising <. < Morning: 

vomiting ; diarrhoea ; sickness of pregnancy ; cramps in fingers, 
thirst < night. Sight < evening. > In open air ; (ear symptoms <). 
> Cold affusion to head. < Indoors. Symptoms come in paroxysms ; 
are periodical. < By stimulants. Weeping >. Vomiting >. Music 
sa pains in ears. 

Relations* — Antidoied by : Vinegar, Sour Apples, Camph., Coff. ; 
Ipec. (primary effects ; vomiting) ; Ars. (effects of chewing tobacco) ; 
Nux (bad taste in mouth in morning, amblyopia) ; Phos. (palpitation, 
tobacco heart, amblyopia, sexual weakness) ; Spig. (heart affections) ; 
Ign., Puls, (hiccough) ; Clem, (toothache) ; Sep. (neuralgia in face and 
dyspepsia, chronic nervousness) ; Lyc. (impotence) ; Wine (spasms, 
cold sweat from excessive smoking). Plant, maj. has sometimes 
caused aversion to tobacco. *Gels. (occipital headache and vertigo) ; 
Tab. 200, or 1,000 for the craving when discontinuing its use. 
Antidote to : Cic., Stram. Compare : Nicotinum. Cold sweat, Ver. (Ver. 
on forehead ; Tab. all over). Coldness in abdomen, Colch., Elps., 
Lach. Spasmodic pains along 1 , ureter, Berb. Meniere’s disease, 
Salicin. Incarcerated hernia, Aco., Nux, Op., Sul. Chills or creeps 
precede headache (Chel, accompany headache). Sinking imme- 
diately after meals, Ars., Cin., Lyc., Sel., Stp., Ur. nit. Hair sensation, 
K. bi., Sil. (Tab., in eye). Blindness, optic atrophy, Carb. s., Benz.-din., 



TABACUM 


1360 

Filix. m. Emissions, heart, anaemia. Dig. Retraoted abdome^Vb. 
Jerking of legs in bed, Meny. As if a hand clutching throa| (Bell., 
intestines). 


SYMPTOMS. 

1 . Mind.— Gloomy melancholy.— Inclination to weep.— Anguish and 
inquietude, generally in the afternoon, > by weeping. — Restlessness, which 
prompts continual change of place. — Dislike to labour and conversation. — . 
Excessive vertigo ; mental faculties much impaired ; caanot read or study ; , 
sufferings from abuse of tobacco. — Difficulty of concentrating mind for any 
length of time on one subject. — Feels as if some one were coming to arrest 
him, or murder him ; always with singing in ears (produced — R. T. C.). — 
Suicidal tendency, gloomy forebodings, inclined to hang down head, breath 
becomes short, appetite goes (produced — R. T. C.). — Feels intoxicated, hands 
and feet tremble. — Over- excitement and great liveliness, with songs, dancing, 
and great loquacity. — ^The Mexican priests incite courage and bravery by 
means of an ointment of tobacco. — Abject cowardice, thinks he is going to 
die and is in extreme terror of death (from smoking many cigars. — J. H. C.). 
— Frequent laughter without cause.— Silly talk, cannot stop ; loss of memory. 
—(Attacks of silliness ; cannot help talking sillily and memory goes, blames 
himself for things, inclines to suicide and despair. — R. T. C.). — Idiotic ; 
epileptic idiocy. — Concourse of confused ideas. — Cataleptic state. — Stupor. 
— Coma. 

2. Head. — Emptiness and confusion in the head. — Dizziness. — ^Vertigo, 
which often produces loss of consciousness, with nausea « indoors ; > in 
open air), and pains in head and eyes. — Vertigo < on rising and looking up 
— brought on by immoderate use of cigars. — Giddiness in occiput. — Headache, 
with nausea and vertigo. — Excessive heaviness of head. — Pressivc headache, 
esp. above eyes, vertex, and temples. — Shootings in head. — Headache from ^ 
one temple to the other, involving orbits, or with shooting in 1. eye, > from 
cold. — ^While passing urine, suddenly attacked with pains in head, so severe 
he screamed for assistance ; immediately followed by vomiting. — Congestion 
of blood in head, with internal heat, and throbbing in temples. — Neuralgic 
headache, sensation as of sudden blows struck by a hammer. — Periodical 
sick-headache from fatigue or excitement. — Tightness in head as though a 
band stretched round it, disturbance of vision, tinnitus, and vertigo. — 
Headache > in the open air. — Burning and tingling sensation in exterior of 
head. — Trembling of head. — Hair falls out. — Formication above 1. temple. 

3. Eyes.— Pain in eyes, as from much weeping. — ^Aching in eyes, 
extending into bottom of orbits. — Sensation, as if there were a hair in eye. — 
Smarting in eyes. — Heat and burning sensation in eyes, With redness.— Con- 
traction of the lids. — Pupils : dilated and insensible ; irregularly dilated ; 
contracted. — Amblyopia with intolerance of light. — Loss of sight on looking 
steadily at an5rthing white.—Confused sight, in evening, as if looking through 
a veil. — Sees as through a fog, and hears as through cotton wool (produced — 
R. T. C.). — Squinting when trying to read. — Insufficiency of internal recti. — 
Sparks and black specks before eyes. — ^Central colour scotoma. — ^White or 
grey atrophia of optic nerve.— Optic neuritis. — Sudden failure of vision. — 



TABACUM 1361 

Tobabi^-blindness commences in one eye, generally r. ; sight < evening. — 

]photO]^bia. 

4. £^8. — Shootings in ears, esp. in open air, and when listening to 
music. — Hypearsesthesia to music and loud talking. — Jerking tearing in r. ear, 
andinfront of it externally .—Burning heat and redness of the ears.— Hard 
reddish swelling behind ( 1 .) ear, with shootings. — Ringing ; roaring ; rushing ; 
humming in ears, < by loud noise or going into open air.— Tinnitus and 
vertigo.— Fluttering in r. ear both heard and felt. 

5. Nose. — Burning sensation and tingling in the nose, — Diminished 
power of smell, whidi, however, is very sensitive to odour of wine ; fumes all 
but intoxicate her. — Frequent sneezing. — Dryness and obstruction of nose. 

6 . Face. — Deadly paleness of face (during the nausea ; face collapsed, 
cold sweat on). — Burning heat in face, with redness, sometimes of one cheek 
only, and paleness of the other. — Face covered with cold sweat. — R. cheek 
glowing, the other pale. — Red spots on face. — Tearings in bones of face 
(and teeth, in evening). — Pimples on cheeks, wings of nose, and corners of 
mouth. — Violent tearing in r. facial bones and teeth. — Granulated tuberosities 
on cheeks. — Emaciation of face. — Lips dry, burning, rough, and cracked. — 
Epithelioma of lip (27 per cent, in men ; in women). — Eruption on com- 
missures of lips. — Lancinating pains in maxillary joint, when laughing. 

7. Teeth, — Toothache, with drawing and tearing pains. — Lancinations 
in carious teeth, when masticating. — ^Violent tearing in r. teeth. — Throbbing 
or jumping pains in teeth. — Drawing pain in gums. — Gums pale and 
parched. 

8. Mouth. — Dryness df the mouth and tongue, with violent thirst. — 
Tongue feels swollen. — Tongue ; trembles; white; red; furred; dry and 
parched ; covered with blackish-brown crust. — Frothing from the mouth. — 
Profuse salivation. — Accumulation of white, tenacious mucus in mouth and 
throatj which must be frequently expectorated. — Swelling of glands under 

tongue. — ^Weak, interrupted speech. — Drawling, monotonous style of reading. 

9. Throat. — Roughness, dryness, and scraping in throat, as from a 
foreign body.— Dry, hot, sulphur feeling in throat, with dry, parched mouth, 
comes on after dose of 0 and remains for a week off and on, but generally < 
in morning after sleep (R. T. C.). — ^Throat dry, can hardly swallow. — 
Crawling and tickling in throat. — Swallowing very painful from spasms in 
throat. — Peculiar sensation of plug in oesophagus, with constant dull pressure. 
— Redness of fauces. — Burning in pharynx. — Accumulation of viscid mucus 
in throat. 

10. Appetite. — Mawkish and clammy, or bitter and sour taste. — Acid 
taste of all food. — ^Acidulated taste of water, as if it contained wine. — ^Adipsia, 
and dread of water, — Great thirst ; < at night. — Absence of hunger and 
appetite. — ^Constant hunger, with nausea if nothing is eaten. 

l|. Stomach. — Frequent empt^ and noisy risings.— Sour, burning 
risings. — Pyrosis. — Spasmodic hiccough. — Frequent nausea, esp. during 
movement, often inducing syncope, with deadly paleness of face, disappear- 
ing generally in open air. — Deathly nausea, with vertigo, in paroxysms, body 
covered with cold sweat ; sea-sickness. — Nausea, with inclination to vomit, 
sensation of coldness in stomach, or pinchings in abdomen.— Vomiting of 
water only, with yellow and greenish reflection before eyes. — ^Vomiting of 
VOL. n. 87 



1362 


TABACUM 


acid serum, often mixed with mucus.— Violent vomiting j easy, of sour J^uid ; 
watery, insipid, sometimes bitter in morning. — The vomiting is renjl^ed by 
the slightest movement,— Stomach-ache. — Squeezing, contractive'^ramps in 
stomach, sometimes after a meal, often accompanied by nausea, and an 
accumulation of saliva in mouth. — Shootings in the scrobiculus, which pass 
through back.— Relaxation, and sensation of coldness or burning in stomach, 
— Sinking at the pit of stomach. — Dreadful faint feeling in stomach, 

12. Abdomen. — Hepatic pain, when pressing on the part. — Hepatic and 
renal regions sensative to pressure. — Pressure in hepatic region, as from a 
heavy body. — Shooting in hepatic region. — Shootings in flie 1 . hypochondrium. 
— Great sensitiveness of abdomen to slightest touch. — Uncovering abdomen 
> nausea and vomiting — Painful distension of abdomen.— Pressive pains in 
abdomen, esp. in umbilical region, with spasmodic retraction of that parij^, — 
Violent burning in abdomen, horrible pains, must shriek. — Nocturnal tearings 
in abdomen. — Pinchings and borborygmi in abdomen. — Incarcerated hernia. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation. — Chronic constipation, great pain 
and tympanitic distension of intestines ; great dyspnoea. — Stools clay-colour 
or mottled grey and brown. — Habitual constipation ; paralysis of rectum ; 
spasm of anal sphincter. — Prolapsus ani ; great drowsiness during day when 
trying to study. — Frequent tenesmus.— Soft faeces of consistence of pap, also 
at night. — ^Violent pain in small of back during soft stool. — Shifting of flatu- 
lence, formed by sudden, papescent, yellow-green or greenish, slimy stools 
with tenesmus. — ^Violent diarrhoea, fetid or yellowish green slime ; also at 
night, accompanied and followed by violent tenesmus, and burning sensation 
in anus. — Cholera-like stools ; watery, urgent, painless. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Renal colic ; violent pains along ureters ; cold 
sweat ; deathly nausea, — Paralysis of sphincter, constant dribbling. — Enuresis. 
— Urine yellowish-red, with increased secretion. — Inflammation of the orifice 
of the urethra. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Frequent erections. — Flow of prdstatic^ 
fluid. — Nocturnal emissions ; until waking. — Genital organs flabby ; no 
erections or sexual desire. — ^Varicocele. — (Masturbation and its consequences. 
— R. T. C.) 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Retarded and profuse catamenia. — 
Leucorrhoea, like sanguineous water. — Leucorrhoea pf serous liquid after the 
menses. — In climacteric period, also during menses; subjective coldness; 
epigastric sinking, palpitation, severe diarrhoea, muscular relaxation, exces- 
sive sense of wretchedness. — Morning sickness of pregnancy; nausea and 
vomiting, patient dreads least movement. — During pregnancy, insupportable 
pruritus over whole body, pyrosis, toothache, and other gastric symptoms. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Dry cough? excited by a tickling in throat, 
in morning and towards evening.— Cough == in pit of stomach sensation as of 
a wound by some sharp instrument. — Cough, with hiccough (at same time), 
almost suffocating ; (or hiccough after c^Very paroxysm of whooping-cough). 
— Difficult respiration. — Paroxysm of suffocation, 

x8. Chest, — Oppression of the chest, with anguish.— Constriction of the 
chest. — Pressure on the chest and sternum. — Shootings in chest and sides of 
chest, sometimes when drawing breath. — Sticking under sternum with 
inability to take a deep breath,— (A trembling; frightened feeling across pit 



TABACUM 


1363 

of che^with sudden and irregular sinkings.— Nervous indigestion, constant 
sinking^ qj^est. — R. T. C.)— On taking a deep breath it seeniedi as if chest 
were too tight. — Sensation as if a crowbar were pressed tightly from 
•r. breast to 1. till it came and twisted in a knot around heart, which stopped, 
then leaped violently ; after the attack heart missed every fourth beat. — Pain, 
as from excoriation, in chest, during a meal. — Itching pimples on chest. 

ig* Heart and Pulse. — Sudden attacks of extreme faintness ; feeling 
of oppression around cardiac region. — ^Angina pectoris (single doses of ^ 

* relieved much ; not tc^be repeated often.— R. T. C.).— Feeble, irregular pulse, 
" • — Palpitation of heart, when lying on 1 . side. 

20, Neck and Back. — Stiffness of the neck. — Head drawn back in 
convulsions. — Neuralgic pains in neck and between shoulders. — Burning 
undW scapula. — Neuralgia of back with tightness of throat.— Contractive 
pains in the loins, esp. after a stool. — ^Violent pain in small of back and loins 
(renal calculi). — Throbbing in sacral region, evening. — Pain in small of back 
and loins, esp. after sitting. — Intolerable pain in small of back much < while 
sitting.— Pains in small of back, constriction; esp. after a stool.— Pressive 
pain in lumbar region on rising from a seat and beginning to walk, goes off 
on walking. — Emaciation of the back. — Red, itching eruption on the back. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Painful weakness of hands and arms, which are, 
as it were, paralysed. — Constant need to stretch arms. — Shootings and drawing 
in shoulders. — Red spots on shoulder, which burn when they are touched. — 
Tension in arm, esp. in elbow. — Pain and shootings in 1 . arm, which disable 
it and prevent its extension. — (Coldness and trembling of the limbs), trembling 
of hands. — Cold perspiration on hands. — Cramps in the arms and hands. — 
Cramps in single fingers, esp. while washing ; early morning. — Cramps and 
tingling in fingers. — Swelling of fingers. — Itching pimples on fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Burning pain in knee and soles. — Legs icy cold 
from knees down. — Shooting in knee and ham. — Flexion of knees, when 
talking.— Cramp in toes, extending into knees. — ^Jerking of legs in bed. — 
Tingling, crawling, from knee to toes. — ^Tension in leg when walking, from 

• knee to foot. — ^Trembling and paralytic weakness of feet. 

24. Generalities. — Pressive pains, with agitation throughout body, and 
anxious perspiration. — Sudden breaking out of cold, clammy sweat ; with 
much nausea ; feeble, irregular pulse ; collapse.— Cramps and tingling in limbs, 
— Restlessness, wants to change place continually. — Gait slow and shuffling, 
difficulty in ascending stairs. — Excessive emaciation. — Anaemia of boys and 
girls, particularly with brain symptoms (cured with dilutions. — R. T. C.). — 
Paralytic and painful weakness of limbs. — Trembling of limbs.— Great 
general lassitude.— Jer kings throughout body, with pulsation and palpitation 
of the heart. — Convulsions, head ‘firmly drawn back, with rigidity of muscles 
at back of neck ; constantly recurring rigid uterine spasms, muscles of back 
being principally affected, till death a^week after he chewed the tobacco. — 
Epileptiform convulsions.— Symptoms*< on 1. side ; from great heat or great 
cold, and esp. in stormy weather ; from walking, riding in a carriage, and jar 
of a railway train. — > In the open air ; from vomiting. 

25. Skin. — Itching in skin, as from flea-bites, — Itching over the whole 
body.— -Eruption of itching pimples, or vesicles, with yellow serum and red 
areola, 



1364 


TABACUM— TANACETUM. 


26, Sleep.— Urgent inclination to sleep, esp. after a meal, and^^ards 
evening, with frequent yawnings. — Retarded sleep in evening, and ^fficulty 
in waking in morning. — Stupefying sleep at night. — Disturbed sle^p af night, 
with fright. — Nightmare. 

27. Fever.— Pulse full, hard, and rapid, or small, imperceptible, inter- 
mittent, slow. — Coldness and shivering, sometimes with chattering of teeth. — 
Coldness of legs from knees to toes ; warm body, cold hands. — Chilliness 
after eating and drinking. — Frequent attacks of shuddering, sometimes with 
flushes of heat. — Permanent shuddering, from morning till evening. — Per- 
spiration at night. — Viscid cold sweat, with intermitting pulse. — Cold sweat, 
in hands, on forehead and face. 


Tamus. 

Tamus communis. Black Bryony. Ladies* Seal. N. 0, Dioscoreaceae. 

Tincture of fresh root. Tincture of the berries. 

Clinical.— Chilblains. 

Characteristics. — Tamus is the only European representative of 
the Dioscoreaceae. There are two species, T. communis and T, cretica. 
The Greeks use the young suckers of both like asparagus, which they 
much resemble. J. communis is the Black Bryony of our hedges. 

The root is veiy great and thick, oftentimes as big as a man*s leg, 
blackish without and very clammy or slimy within ; which having been 
scraped with a knife, it seems to be a matter fit to be spread upon 
cloth or leather in manner of a plaister of sear-cloth** (Gerarde). 
Dioscorides, according to the same authority, says the fruit or berries 
take away sun-burns and other blemishes of the skin ; and Gerarde 
adds that these very quickly waste and consume away black and, 
blue marks that come of bruises and dry beatings : which thing also 
the roots perform being laid upon them.** The fruits steeped in gin 
are a popular remedy for chilblains, and the only use that Tamus has 
been made of by homoeopaths is as a paint for chilblains. Gerarde 
says of the root-plaister that it removes scars and deformities ; breaks 
hard apostems, draws forth splinters and broken bones, dissolves 
congealed blood, and if laid on hip or knuckle-bones or any other part 
where there is great pain, it takes away the pain speedily. 


Tanacetum. 

Tanacetum vulgare. Tansy. N, 0. Compositse. Tincture of the 
fresh plant in flower. Attenuations of the oil. 

Glinioal. — Abortion. Amenorrhoea. Chorea. Dysmenorrhoea. Epilepsy. 
Eyes, sclerotica inflamed. Hydrophobia. Labia, abscess of. Paralysis. Strabismus 
(right inward). Worms. 

Charaoteristios. — The common Tansy (the word is derived from 
i^davatnuf immortality), with its deep-yellow button-like flowers, a 



TANACETUM 


1365 

close, companion of the Rag-wort {Senecio Jacobca) on our commons 
and ii^ur hedgerows, takes a not unimportant part in giving colour 
to th<Maiidscape. In olden times puddings were made containing 
Tansy leaves, and these puddings were called “ tansies also. In the 
springtime are made with the leaves hereof newly sprung up, and with 
eggs, cakes or tansies, which be pleasant in taste and good for the 
stomach. For if any bad humours cleave thereunto, it doth perfectly 
concoct them and scour them downwards ” (Gerarde). Gerarde also 
says that the seeds kill and expel worms of every sort ; the root is 
good in gout ; and being drunk with wine Tan. relieves pain in the 
bladder, and dysuria when a man is only able to urinate by drops. 
Like Senec,, Tan. has an action on the female generative organs, and 
a large proportion of the observations with it have been on women 
who have taken it to procure abortion. Other effects are from its 
use as a vermifuge, and in addition to these are provings by Burt and 
others. In Russia Tan, has a reputation as a remedy for hydrophobia. 
M. Pcyraud (C. D. P.) has even used Tan. as a substitute for Pasteurian 
vaccinations, '' and reports success. Experiments on animals show 
that Tan. induces all the cardinal features of rabies : convulsions, 
frothy, bloody mucus in the air passages, hallucinations, convulsions 
without loss of consciousness, opisthotonos, spasms of pharynx, 
larynx, and thorax, abundant salivation, sensual excitability, tendency 
to bite, hoarse cry, diminished sensibility and mobility, momentary 
paralysis, sub-pleural ecchymoses, infarctions of the liver — rabies 
tanacetica, simili-rabies being the name suggested by Peyraud for this 
drug-disease. Whether the convulsions of Tan. be rabic or epileptic, 
they are sufficiently similar to render the drug useful in either condi- 
tion. W. H. Pierson (//. W., xxx. 488, quoting N. A. y. H.) observed 
a woman who took two drachms of the oil to procure abortion. The 
atteinpt failed, but throughout her pregnancy she suffered from mixed 
tonic and clonic convulsions, frothing at the mouth, clenched hands, 
thumbs turned in, followed by exhaustion and a short coma. Since 
then Pierson treated every case of epilepsy which came to him with 
drop doses of the fluid extract of Tan. four times a day, and with 
marked success. Hale mentions as having been cured with Tan. : 
Amenorrhoea, dysmenorrhoea, menorrhagia, uterine cramps, and 
metritis. In one instance it caused a large abscess of the labium 
majus. Hale says a crystallisable acid identical with Santonin has 
been isolated from it. Suddenness is a characteristic of a number of 
the symptoms. Peculiar Sensations are : As if something closed the 
ears very suddenly. His own voice sounds strange in his ears. As 
though arms and legs suddenly swollen. Sensation like a thrill all 
through body. The symptoms were < at night, and at 4 a.ni. 

Relations. — Compare : In uterine symptoms, Sabi., Tereb., Hedeo., 
Ruta. In convulsions, Stram., Qicut., Cupr. Worm symptoms, con- 
vulsions, paralysis, Sant., Cin., Chenop. Abscess on labium majus 
(Sfrych., abscess of scrotum). 



1366 


TANACETUM 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Exhilaration. — Nervousness. — Confusion. — Mind fatigued 
after least mental exertion.— Indifference and incoherence. — Unable to fix 
attention on anything ; it seemed next instant my reason would leave me. — 
Uttered a shriek and fell senseless to the floor; continued in comatose state 
over an hour, when she vomited again and recovered consciousness. 

2. Head. — Dizziness. — Weariness in head. — Strange fulness and pres- 
sure in head amounting to pain. — Dull, frontal headache with cutting in 
temples. — Occipito-frontal headache, backache, and pains in limbs. 

3. Eyes. — Sclerotic congested, dark purple glassy-looking, swollen so 
that cornea appeared sunk. — Eyes open, very brilliant, pupils equal, widely 
dilated, immovable; sclerotics injected. — Pupils contracted. — Slight inward 
squint ; r. eye. — Occasionally slow, lateral, rolling motion of eyeballs. — Lids 
agglutinated in morning. — Dull aching in eyeballs. 

4. Ears. — Stitches in internal ear.— Sensation as if something closed 
ears very suddenly. — Her own voice sounds strange in her ears. — Roaring ; 
ringing in ears. 

5. Nose. — Profuse secretion of mucus in nose with fluent coryza. — 
Dryness of nostrils. 

6. Face. — Features seemed fixed, giving an expression of deep 
solemnity. — Fulness of head and face. — Face : dusky ; flushed, cheeks bright 
red. — Mouth and nose drawn a little to r. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue white coated, feels rough. — Mouth, blood-stained ; 
frothy. — Flat, insipid taste. 

9. Throat. — Roughness of throat. — Feeling in throat as if I would 
cough all the time, without being able to cough through the whole proving. — 
Unable to swallow. 

11. Stomach. — ^Thirst. — Constant eructations tasting of the oil.— Eruc- 
tations of sour air at night. — Nausea; and vomiting. — Faint and sick at' 
stomach. — In stomach : slight glow, burning ; great heat (immediate), and in 
bowels ; weight.— Drawing cutting pains in epigastrium many times. 

12. Abdomen. — Dull pains in r. hypochondrium ; sharp in 1. — Sharp 
sticking pains in whole umbilical region ; csp. 4 a.m. — Bowels feel as if full of 
fluid from taking a cathartic. — Frequent spells of sharp, cutting, colicky pains 
< night, esp. after midnight. — L.-side pain extending from ribs to hip. 

13. Stool. — Stools : soft, papescent, preceded by colic ; two loose, with 
feeling he would have more. — Constipation (secondary). 

14* Urinary Organs. — Urine caused slight scalding. — Constant desire. 
— Marked diuresis, must rise in night to prinate. — First suppression, then 
profuse flow. — Urine ; very fetid ; high-coloured ; increased, smelling of 
the drug. 

i6. Female Sexual Organs. — Heat and fulness through hips, in- 
creasing as the drug is persisted in until a “ show ” appears. — Inflammation 
of vaginal walls, of internal and external labia, which resulted in an enormous 
abscess in one labium. — (Dysmenorrhoea, bearing-down pains, tenderness, 
drawing in groins.)— Abortion in early months of pregnancy.— Brought back 
menses after suppression of several days, not nkturally but very profusely, 



TANGHINIA 1367 

With severe labour-like pains. — At full term a child was born not larger than 
a cat^he child lived three weeks. 

Itespiratory Organs.— Collection of much (frothy) mucus in 
larynx and fauces impeding respiration.— Tickling in larynx and fauces 
causing desire to cough, but no coughing. — My voice had a strange sound 
in my ears. — Breathing laborious.— [Frothy, sanguineous mucus in trachea 
and bronchi as in rabies; all other symptoms of rabies also (in poisoned 
animals)]. 

19. Heart. — Feeble heart-action and all signs of impending dissolution. 
-—Pulse : increasediin force and frequency ; feeble, frequent ; extinct. 

20. Back. — Severe attack of lumbago all one evening. — Constant dull 
ache in loins. 

^ 21. Limbs. — Numbness and sensation as though arms and legs were 
suddenly swelling. — Cold numbness over limbs, going on to paralysis. — 
Prickling, coming and going, over limbs and along spine ; with flashes of 
heat. 

22. Upper Limbs. — L. wrist very lame and sore in morning. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Great weakness of legs with general prostration of 
strength. — Unsteadiness of step with an indescribable feeling far worse than 
pain. 

24. Generalities. — Trembling. — Convulsions. — Clonic spasms ; not con- 
vulsive, coming instantaneously and lasting a minute ; slight tremor of arms, 
they were thrown forward, and at right angles to the body, forearm supinated, 
hands bent at right angles, fingers straight, slightly bent on hands, points of 
fingers nearly in contact ; respiratory muscles strongly affected, air forced 
from chest slowly but steadily making a hissing noise at lips ; in the intervals 
muscles relaxed, except the jaws. — Great irritability, makes extraordinary 
movements and curious gestures, stretches himself, draws up his legs, stands 
on his head ; when remonstrated with says, ** Leave me alone, it does me 
good ; I can’t help doing it ; ” when he draws up his legs and the muscles 
will not go farther he pulls them up with his hands and then suddenly 
stretches them out again ; all the time has no pain ; lasts half an hour and 
occurs with each repetition of the medicine (boy, 12, took one and a half 
ounces of extract for worms).— Bites tongue in convulsions. — Sensation like 
a throb through whole frame. 

26. Sleep. — Drowsy. 

27, Fever. — Surface cool and moist. — Feeling of warmth diffused over 
whole abdomen.— Cold, clammy sweat. 


Tanghinia. 

Tanghinia venenifera. N. 0. Apocynaceae. Trituration of the seed. 
Oialaal.— Paralysis. Vomiting. 

OhapaoteristioB. — Tanghinia (the Tanghin or Tanquen of Mada< 
gascar) is the only representative of its genus of the Apocynaceae. 
The fruit of the tree.«i«Uip8oid, between two and three inches long, 



1368 TANGHINIA^TANNIN 

having a smooth, purplish skin tinged with green, containing a hard 
stone surrounded by a thick fibrous flesh. The part used as an^rdeal 
is the seed, which is pounded, and a small piece is swallov^d(^3^ the 
person to be tried. Those in whom it causes vomiting escape. Those 
whose stomachs retain it are quickly killed, and their guilt is held 
proven. General weakness, even complete paralysis is produced, 
death being preceded by spasmodic movements of fingers and toes. 
Numbness is a common symptom ; especially numbness of the hands. 
The vomiting is intense and distressing, and is accompanied by anxiety 
and weakness. The Schema comprises symptoms ol^served on persons 
undergoing the ordeal. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Conscious to the last, without delirium. — Delirium occasion- 
ally occurs. — Stupor. — Lies as if asleep, and when roused answers like a 
drowsy man and then relapses into former condition, — Anxiety with the 
vomiting. 

2. Head. — Giddy; staggers. 

8. Mouth. — Numb tingling in mouth and fauces. 

II. Stomach. — ^Vomiting, intense, distressing and repeated, first of 
contents of stomach, then of bile and mucus. 

13. Stool. — Purging and urination (purging is a bad symptom, and the 
worse the more urgent it is). 

21. Limbs. — Death preceded by spasmodic movements of fingers and 
toes. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Hands numb. 

24. Generalities. — Great debility and anxiety with the vomiting, — 
Numb feeling over whole body, esp. of hands. — Staggers if attempts to walk, 
is unable to support his own weight, and falls down helpless and paralysed. 


Tannin. 

Tannic acid. C,^H,o09,2HaO. [There are two forms of tannic acid, 
Gallo-tanmc acid, derived from nut-galls, and Querci-tannic 
acid, derived from healthy leaves and bark of the oak. The 
former is the most used.] Trituration. Solution in rectified 
spirit. 

Olinlcal. — Constipation. Ileus. 

Gharaoteristios. — Tannin or Tannic acid^ of which Gallic acid 
(CyHeOj) is a derivative, has produqpd effects on healthy persons, 
and on several taking it for diarrhoea. The chief effects were the 
production of a state of leathery dryness of mouth and intestinal 
canal ; a condition like ileus ; and a very aggravated state of 
constipation. 

Selatioiis.— ; Querc., Gall, ac., Op., Pb. 



TARAXACUM 


1369 


SYMPTOMS. 

f 

8r ./MDUth.-— Tongue white, dry. — Leathery dryness of mucous mem- 
brane of mouth and intestinal canal. 

11. Stomach. — Loss of appetite. — ^Thirst.— Vomiting. — Obstinate vomit- 
ing of bilious substances. — Painful sensation in epigastric region and abdomen. 
— Violent pains in stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — The intestines could be felt like cylindrical enlarge- 
ments through walls of abdomen. — Ileus. — Colic. — Abdomen : distended ; 
sensitive to pressure but not distended. 

13. Stool. — Painless and bloody discharge from bowels. — Obstinate 
constipation ; lasted eight days ; only dissipated on the ninth day by two 
drpps of Croton oil — Foul stools. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine scanty, dark-coloured. 

19. Heart. — Palpitation. 

24. Generalities. — Weakness. 


Taraxacum. 

Leontodum taraxacum. Taraxacum Dens-leonis. N. 0 . Compositae. 

Tincture of whole plant just before the perfection of the flower. 

Clinical. —Ague. Bilious attacks. Debility. Diabetes. Gall-stones. Head- 
ache, gastric. Jaundice. Liver, affections of. Neuralgia. Night - sweats. 
Rheumatism. Tongue, mapped. Typhoid fever. 

Characteristics. — The young leaves of the Dandelion are some- 
times eaten in salads. They have a bitter chicory-like taste, as also 
has the root. Children eat the flowers, although they are supposed by 
them to cause bed-wetting. This has given rise to one of the popular 
names of the plant. Its chief traditional uses are as a remedy for 
jaundice, liver obstruction, in dysentery, involuntary emissions, and in 
difficulties in passing water. Hahnemann^s provings brought out 
these leading symptoms : Painless urging to urinate ; and “ fre- 
quent urging to urinate with copious discharge of urine.^^ Hahnemann 
points out that this, w’ith the thirst, may indicate Trx, in some cases of 
diabetes. Trx, has caused pains in both splenic and liver regions, and 
has cured jaundice with enlarged indurated liver. Cooper gives me 
the following case : An old Indian officer, when in India, suffered 
much from gall-stones, anej was advised to take dandelion infusion 
every day. This he did, and soon tlie symptoms left him, and he 
remained free from them for. over twenty years. A symptom in 
connection with disordered digestion, which has proved a good guide 
for Trx, in some cases, is the mapped tongue.^^ The tongue is coated 
white, and clears off in patches, leaving dark red very sensitive spots. 
Treas, of BoL points out that the bright-yellow flowers of Trx, open 
in the morning between 5 and 6 o'clock and close in the evening 
between 8 and 9. Hence this was one of the plants selected by 



1370 TARAXACUM 

Linnaeus to form his floral clock/' The symptoms of Trx. are < at 
night Hands and nose cold at 8 p.m. Cold finger-tips” is a guiding 
symptom. Peculiar Sensations are : As if brain was Constrkctedi. As 
if teeth were set on edge. As if larynx were compressed. As if 
bubbles were forming and bursting in abdomen. As of rolling and 
gurgling in right scapula. As if limbs were bound or powerless. 
Some leading indications are : Gastric and bilious attacks, especially 
gastric headaches ; the headaches are generally pressive. Pressure in 
lower occiput after lying down is characteristic. Debility, loss of 
appetite, profuse night-sweats, especially when (convalescing from 
bilious or typhoid fever. Restlessness of limbs in typhoid. Sweat 
between toes. The symptoms are : > By touch (jerking in right calf). 
Rest<. (Almost all symptoms appear when sitting; lying down; 
resting.) Motion >. > In open air. Burning in throat is > by drinking. 
Hahnemann's dosage was a single drop of the 0 tincture (Af. A/. P.). 

Relations. — Compatible : Ars. (night-sweats). Compare : In gastric 
and bilious affections, Bry., Chel., Hydr., Nux. Mapped tongue, Ars., 
Nat. m., Ran. s. Restlessness of limbs with tearing pains, Rhus. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Irresolution and dislike to labour. — Loquacity and inclina- 
tion to laugh. 

2. Head. — Vertigo, with giddiness and staggering when walking in the 
open air. — Drawing pain in 1. temple while sitting, ceasing when walking or 
standing. — Tearing pain in occiput. — Pressure and heaviness in lower part of 
occiput, after lying down. — Headache, as from contraction or expansion of 
brain. — Heaviness and pressure in head. — Lancinations in forehead and 
temples. — Violent headache, felt only when standing or walking. — Tension 
of scalp. 

3. Eyes. — Pain in eyes, as if a grain of sand were in internal canthus. — 
(Aversion to light) burning sensation, and burning shootings in eyes. — Burn- 
in 1. eyeball. — Inflammation of eyes with lachrymation and photophobia.-— 
Nocturnal agglutination of lids. 

4. Ears.— Shootings in ears. — Drawing pain in external ear. — Dysecoia 
in evening. 

6. Face. — Purulent pimples on face, cheeks, alae nasi, and (r.) commis- 
sures of lips. — Sensation of heat and redness in face. — Shootings and pressure 
in cheeks. — Upper lip cracked. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache, with drawing p^in in carious teeth, extending 
to eyebrows. — Pressive pains in teeth. — Teeth set on edge as from acids.— 
Flow of acid blood from carious teeth. — Bluntness of teeth. — Hawking up of 
sour mucus, causing teeth to feel dull. ^ 

8. Mouth. — ^Accumulation of acid saliva in mouth (with sensation as if 
the larynx were compressed). — Tongue loaded with a white coating, with 
exfoliation (it cleans off in patches, dark red, and they are very sensitive).— 
Tongue dry, loaded with a brown coating on waking in morning. 

g. Throat. — Sore throat, with pressive painii as from internal swelling. 



TARAXACUM 1371 

^Dryness, shootings, and bitter mucus in the throat. — Hawking up of acid 
mucu% 

Xir. Appetite.— ‘Bitter taste in mouth, with natural taste of food.— -Salt 
or acid taste of food, principally of butter and of meat. — Tobacco-smoke is 
disagreeable, causes pyrosis, and interrupts respiration. — Great chilliness after 
drinking, or eating. 

11. Stomach. — Bitter risings (eructations and hiccough). — Empty risings, 
esp. after drinking. — Nausea (with inclination to vomit or vomiting) from very 
fat food, with anxiety and pressive headache, > in open air. 

12. Abdomeif. — Pinching in abdomen. — Pressive shootings in abdomen, 
and sides of abdomen, chiefly in 1. side ; in hypogastrium. — Grumbling and 
movements (sudden sensation) in abdomen, as if bubbles were bursting in it. 

. 13. Stool and Anus. — Inefficient urging to go to stool. — Evacuations 
several times a day, but accomplished with difficulty (even if stool is not hard). 
— Faeces of the consistence of pap, followed by tenesmus. — Voluptuous itching 
in perinasum (compelling one to scratch). 

14. Urinary Organs.— Frequent want to urinate (pressure without 
pain), with profuse emission. — Enuresis somni (?). 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Pain in testes. — Permanent erections. — 
Frequent pollutions ; on alternate nights. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Suppressed menses. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Sensation as if the larynx were pressed 
together. 

18. Chest. — Pressure at chest. — Shootings in chest and sides of chest. — 
Jer kings in muscles of sides. 

20. Neck and Back. — Pressive jerkings and shootings in muscles of 
neck, (throat), and nape. — Tearing from ear downward to the neck. — Pressive 
pains in loins. — Pressive and tensive shootings in back and loins, when lying 
down, with obstructed respiration. — Pressing-stinging in spine and sacrum 
with dyspneea, — Gurgling and swelling in shoulder-blades and shoulders, 
with shivering over whole body. — ^\’ibration and quivering in r. scapula. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pulsativc throbbing and jerking in shoulders and 
arms. — ^Jerkings of muscles of arms. — Twitching in muscles of 1. forearm. — 
Shootings in arms and elbows. — Drawings and tearings in forearm and wrist. 
— Eruptions of pimples on hands and fingers. — Icy coldness of ends of fingers. 
— Pressive pain in three last fingers of r. hand. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Shootings in thighs, knees, calves, soles, and toes. 
— Stitching pain in 1. thigh. — Pressive pain in 1. calf. — Jerking pain in r. calf, 
ceasing quickly when touched. — Drawing pain in dorsum of r. foot ; when 
standing; stitches when sitting. — Severe or fine stitching pains in r. sole. — 
Burning sensation in knees,, legs and toes,-— Profuse perspiration between 
toes. 

24. Generalities.— This remedy acts well in all affections of the liver ; 
sour taste ; darting pains in outer parts. — Affections in 1. upper side ; r. lower 
side ; back of foot ; sole of foot. — < While lying down ; from fat food ; while 
resting. — > From moving; when walking. — Painful tenderness of all limbs, 
esp. when touched, and when they are in a false position.— The limbs are 
movable, but it feels as if the power to move them were impeded.— Sensation 
of weakness and uneasiness throughout body, with constant necessity to lie 



1372 TARAXACUM— TARENTULA 

down or to sit. — ^Almost all symptoms appear while the patient is seated^ and 
are dissipated by walking. ^ 

25. Skin.— Unhealthy, pimply, sycotic skins. — Stinging on shin.— -?Srup- 
tion over body and limbs itching severely, and appears to be a mixture of 
lichen and urticaria, — Biting in skin with sweat. 

26. Sleep.— Sleepiness, and going to sleep while listening to a scientific 
discourse. — Sleepiness in daytime, and yawning while sitting. — ^Vivid unre- 
membered dreams ; frequent waking and tossing. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness, esp. after eating and drinking. — Chilliness, 
shiverings, all over, with pressive headache. — Chill in»'Open air. — Heat at 
night on waking, esp. on face and hands. — Violent night-sweats, mostly 
before midnight, when just going to sleep. — Very debilitating perspiration, 
causing biting on the skin. 


Tarantula. 

Lycosa larentula. Tarantula. N, O. Araneidese. Tincture of 
the living spiders. 

Clinical. — Angina pectoris. Callosities. Chorea. Coccygodynia. Cornea, 
opacity of. Cystitis. Depression of spirits. Diphtheria. Dysmenorrhoea. Epistaxis. 
Erotomania, Fibroma. Headache. Hiccough. Hysteria, Intermittents. Klepto- 
mania. Levitation. Locomotor ataxy. Mania. Meniere’s disease. Migraine. 
Onanism. Ovaries, enlargement of. Paralysis ; agitans. Physometra. Proctalgia. 
Pruritus pudendi. Quinsy. Septic diseases. Spinal irritation. Spinal sclerosis. 
Tumours. Uterus, cancer of ; neuralgia of. Vertebii'e, tumours of. 

Characteristics. — The name Tarentula covers a number of 
poisonous spiders, but in homoeopathy, unless otherwise distin- 
guished, it refers to Tarentula hispanica, Lycosa tarentula. Nunez is 
our chief authority. He instigated the proving and collected much 
outside information bearing on the action of the poison. Tarantella 
is a dance named from the city of Tarentum. Tarantism is a 
dancing mania, set up in persons bitten by the Tarentula^ or in those 
who imagine themselves bitten. The cure is music and dancing. 
Here are two illustrations from C. D. P: (i) Girl, three months old, was 
bitten by a tarentula. She appeared at first uneasy, then exhibited 
dyspnoea, and complained, showed signs of suffocation, vomited, was 
agitated and much convulsed. Music was played ; movements of 
the limbs were set up, whence resulted profuse sweat, followed by 
sleep and complete recovery. (2) Francis Mustel, a peasant, was 
bitten by a tarentula on the left hand, about the middle of July, as he 
was gathering corn. He went home with his companions but on the 
way fell as if struck by apoplexy. Dyspnoea followed, and face, 
hands, and feet became dark. Knowing the remedy, his companions 
fetched musicians. When the patient heard their playing he began 
to revive, to sigh, to move first his feet, then his hands, and then the 
whole body ; at last getting on his feet he took to dancing violently, 
with sighing so laboured that the bystanders were almost frightened. 
At times he rolled himself on the ground and struck it vehemently 



TARENTULA 


1373 


with his feet. Two hours after the music began the blackness of his 
face and hands went off, he sweated freely, and regained perfect 
health, tivery succeeding year at the same season the pain and 
attending symptoms returned, but less violently ; and they could 
always be averted by music. But if the imminent paroxysm was not 
averted in time, he was found by his friends struck down as at 
first and was restored in the same way. These cases bring out 
some of the cardinal features of Tm. (1) Dark red or purplish 
coloration and swelling of skin and tissue. (2) Apparent imminent 
choking. (3) Chareic movements ; restlessness. (4) > By music : 
music at first excites and subsequently relieves. (5) Periodicity ; 
deep action returning annually on the date of the bite. Trn. is a 
remedy of synalgias and concomitants : Neuralgia of inferior maxillary 
nerve accompanying pain with irritation in pit of stomach. Snapping 
and pain in ear associated with hiccough. Throat and eye. Heat of 
face with heat of palms. Faint feeling in stomach with frontal 
headache. Many symptoms take their rise from the generative 
sphere, which is profoundly affected. Desire is excited in both 
sexes to the point of mania. Coitus only < the sufferings of 
both. In one male prover the semen was bloody and caused 
a sensation of heat in its passage. The sexual desire was so excited 
in one woman that when playing or dancing with men she hugged 
them before everybody ; and was angry when reproved, but did it 
again. The periods were scanty and pale with severe pains in teeth 
and buttocks ; at times she had a desire to take things which did not 
belong to her ; the Tarantella played on the violin produced no 
effect on her,;but as soon as she took in her arms a little girl, she 
began to cry until it was taken away. Cuttings and contractions in 
uterus ; shootings in vagina ; swelling and induration of uterus ; ex- 
pulsion of gas from uterus ; pains in other parts associated with uterine 
pains ; restlessness, hysteria. The restlessness is particularly noted in 
the lower extremities, with desire to cry : must keep moving about 
though walking < all the symptoms. Many of the mental symptoms, 
which almost exhaust the protean range of hysteria, were in connection 
with sexual disorders ; sighing, yawning ; laughing and crying ; joking 
and profound melancholy. The unceasing movements — twitching, 
jerking, dancing — are the most constant features. There is hysterical 
hyperaesthesia : the least excitement irritates, followed by languid sad- 
ness ; great excitability of nerve endings ; tips of lingers extremely 
sensitive ; feels sore and bruised all over, < moving about ; spinal 
irritation, slightest touch along spine = spasmodic pain in chest and 
heart regions. Farrington gives among the mental symptoms : When 
there are no observers there is no hysteria ; when attention is directed 
to her she begins to twitch ; and cunning attempts to feign 
paroxysms of wild dancing.*^ The chorea of Tm, is most marked on 
right side. The neuralgias of* Trn, may be anywhere ; in the head 
they are of great intensity : as if thousands of needles were pricking 
to the brain. They are < by noise, touch, strong light, > by rabbing 
head a^nst pillow. (** > By rubbing '' is a keynote Condition of 
Tm. Termini of nerves become so irritated that some kind of friction 
' is necessary in order to obtain relief.”) Constrictive headache with 



1374 


TARENTULA 


pain in uterus. P. C. Majumdar {Ind. H. J?., v. 43) reports this case : 
Girl, 18, had oppression of chest, suffocating sensation, continued 
jerking and movement of hands, foam at mouth, complete insensibility, 
profuse and delaying menses ; very sleepy. Hystero-epilepsy was 
diagnosed. Ign, 30 d^id nothing. TriUj high, brought her out of the 
fit and restored her completely in a few minutes. But Tm, is not a 
hysteric remedy only. C. M. Boger {Hahn. Ad.y xxxviii. 40) cured a 
case of irritative cough with Trn. 30 : Mr. B., 41, sore all over, throat 
feels dry, cough lying down at night and in morning after rising ; 
dry with tearing pain in chest ; excited by pressy;re of phlegm in 
chest ; feels short of breath for at least an hour after each coughing 
attack ; only > from smoking. Bad taste evening. Three doses 
cured. Diphtheria ; tonsillitis of an intensity to threaten suffocation ; 
cystitis ; septic and intermittent fevers have been successfully met in 
Tm. on its indications. In M. i 4 ., xvii. 568 a case of hyperaesthesia of 
finger-tips is mentioned. The patient, a lady, 33, could not dress 
herself without gloves. The irritation caused at once a sensation in 
the teeth as if set on edge by a strong acid. The pain was not in 
the fingers. Trn. gave relief after Asar., Gels.^ and Sul. ac. had failed. 
Among peculiarities of Trn. are : Stools occur immediately the head is 
washed. Wetting hands in cold water s= symptoms. Snapping and 
cracking in right ear with pain and hiccough. One pupil dilated, the 
other contracted. Farrington relates a case of typhoid in a child 
cured by Trn. The child rolled its head and bit its nightgown. 
Apis, and Agn. improved. Tm. slightly aggravated at first, then rapidly 
improved. Peculiar Sensations are : As if head were knocked, in 
morning. As if thousands of needles were pricking into brain. As if 
occiput were struck with a hammer (this sensation as if hammered 
occurs in many parts and may be considered a general indication). 
As of a hair in eye. Singing like a tea-kettle in left ear. As if 
lower teeth were going to fall out. As if a living body in stomach 
rising to throat. As if body were bruised. As if there were not suffi- 
cient space in liypogastrium. Painful uneasiness in coccyx. Motion 
in uterus as of a foetus. As of something crawling up legs under 
skin from feet to uterus. As if heart turned and twisted round. 
Heart as if squeezed and compressed. As of needles sticking into 
muscle of neck when touched. As of insects creeping and crawling. 
Tickling, burning, scorching, and numbness are prominent sensations. 
Tm. is suited to nervous, hysterical patients subject to choreic affec- 
tions ; to persons of foxy, mischievous, and destructive tendency ; to 
choreic affections when whole body or right arm and left leg are 
involved. The symptoms are : < By touch. Rubbing >. ^ Pres- 
sure >. Music > ; s excitement. Re§t <. Must walk about 
but walking < all symptoms. Can run better than walk. Motion 
> headache, < uterine pains and pains in coccyx. < At night. 
< Washing head < Wetting hands *m cold water. Fresh air >, 
Warm water >. Coitus <. Light < ; =s to scream. Cough » 
headache ; involuntary urination. < After sleep. > Riding in 
carriage ‘ (pain in spermatic cords). Epistaxis > throbbing in 
carotids, &c. 

‘ RelatioilB * — Antidote to : Lach. (Hering), Partial antidotes: Puls., 



TARENTULA 


1375 


Mg. c., Mos., Cup., Chel., Gels., Bov., Carb. v. Compare : Irritation of 
periphery of nerves > exercising and rubbing, K. bro. Chorea, Myg., 
Act. r.. Agar*, Stram. Desire to jump, Stram., Croc., Nat. m., Sticta., 
Asar., Agar., Hyo., Cic. Bores head in pillow, Bell. (Tm. is more 
rubbing. Hysteria, alternation of moods, sensation of something alive, 
epistaxis black clots, Croc. As if occiput struck with a hammer, Naj. 
Deep-in headache, Bac. Extreme joy, Coff, Unfortunate love, 
Ph. ac. Meniere^s disease ; ague, Chi. sul. Sees faces, Sul. Fidgety 
feet, Caust, Zn. Satyriasis, Pic. ac. Bloody semen, Merc., Led. 
Angina pectoris, Lat. mac., < after coitus, K, ca.,Stph. Physometra, 
Bro. Crawling under skin, Coca. Callosities, Ant. c. Heart as from 
fright or bad news, Gels. Septicaemia, Pyro. 

, Gaasation. — Fall. Unrequited love. Bad news. Scolding, 

Punishment. Sepsis. 


SYMPTOMS* 

1. Mind. — Paroxysms of insanity ; presses her head and pulls her hair ; 
repeated after intermissions, threatening manners and speech ; restlessness of 
the legs; mocking laughter and joy expressed in her face ; comes out of the 
attack with severe headache, eyes staring and wide open, sees small figures 
hovering before her eyes, and moves her hands. — Great excitement caused by 
music, one hour after it general and copious sweat. — Hysteria : with bitter 
belching ; < by moaning, > by sighing, with repeated yawning ; ludicrous and 
lascivious. — ^Visions : monsters; animals ; faces ; insects ; ghosts.— The colours 
red, yellow, and green, and particularly black, produce heavy mist before the 
eyes, — Sees strangers in the room. — Great taciturnity and irritability ; desire 
to strike himself and others.— Excessive gaiety, laughs at slightest cause ; 
maniacally happy mood. — ^Joy and strong emotion with trembling when seeing 
beloved persons. — Sings until hoarse and exhausted. — Fits of nervous laugh- 
ing; followed by screams. — Profound grief and anxiety. — Desire to take 
things which do not belong to her. — Indifference, disgust, and sadness from 
morning to 3 p.m. were marked, < after midday; from 3 p.m. to evening 
the gay disposition returned. — Wants to be without any light and without 
being spoken to. — Irritability, rage, fury. — Mischievous, destructive. — Ennui, 
— Fear of impending calamity. — Little intelligence and poor memory. 

2, Head. — Vertigo : on walking; after breakfast, with bad taste in 
mouth ; sudden, in air, on coming downstairs ; transient during the night ; 
preceded by gastric symptoms, < by carrying anything heavy on head ; 
causing falling without loss of consciousness; when fixing sight on any 
object, with headache, severe ,pain in cerebellum, accompanied by incom- 
plete erection of penis and formication of soft palate. — Contortions and 
extraordinary movements of head and hands, with rage and nervous agitation. 
-—Must move head from r. to 1, and hit it against some object, with crossness. 
— Head heavy, difficult to open eyes ; tendency to incline head backward. — 
Headache on waking compels her to lie down again. — Headache with giddi- 
ness when fixing the sight on any object. — Pain in head and heart with 
cough and nausea, morning on waking. — Deep, intense headache, with restless- 
ness, compelling to move from place to place ; the pain flies to forehead and 



TARENTULA 


1376 

occiput with photophobia ; a strong light compels to complain and swear.— 
Compression; hanlmering; lancinating; burning pains in head. — Great 
burning in head, the hair troubles to the point of wanting to fbmove it ; 
continually tossing head without finding a place where to rest it; un- 
easiness, impatience; ill-humour, oppressive breathing and desire to pull 
out her hair.— Headache < by touch.— Inclining head forward < frontal 
pain ; inclining backward < occipital pain ; inclining to either side < 
pain in that side.— Frontal headache, pain in vertex and parietal bones, 
as if cold water was poured on the head, with great noise internally. — 
From 3 to 7 p.m. pain in forehead, esp. r. side. — Neuralgia of temples. 
— Pain in upper and middle part of head extending to cheek-bones, with 
nausea and desire to vomit. — Headache particularly affecting 1. eye. — 
Lancinating pain 1. side of head ; with itching of r. car.— Pains extending 
to occiput, with necessity of shutting the hands, which >. — Headache on 
occiput and temples when coughing, as if striking it with a hammer. — Pain in 
occiput ; as if struck with a hammer ; burning, scorching ; with burning 
thirst ; as if a nail driven in ; compression, extending towards neck. 

3. Eyes. — Blue circles round eyes. — Eyes glassy, red. — R. pupil much 
dilated, 1. contracted. — Feeling of a hair in 1. eye, which pricked it ; pricking 
caused her to rub it, < on waking. — Pain in 1. eye as if cold water poured 
into it. — Sensation : of splinter ; sand ; eye-lash ; pin pricking eyes. — Shoot- 
ing, lancinating, stinging pains in eyes. — Light irritates eyes ; company 
annoys him. — Itching of eyes and very thick tears. — Pain in eyebrows. — Lids 
agglutinated on waking. — Itching of lids ; herpes. — Photophobia. — ^Vision ; 
weak, obscure ; sees ghosts, faces, flashes. 

4. Ears. — Profuse mucous secretion from r. ear. — Violent pain at 
external meatus, < by touch, which as sensation as if a nail were driven 
through head, or a general shaking. — On rising snap in r. ear followed by 
thick, brownish discharge. — Snapping cracking in r. ear with pain and 
hiccough. — Deafness with buzzing, whizzing, and vertigo.— Noise in ears ; 
in night < waking ; in r. with mucous discharge ; in r. of clear bell on waking, 
vanishing on getting up.— When a snapping or cracking is felt the hearing 
is >. 

5. Nose. — Sneezing and coryza (r.). — Profuse epistaxis, with a flow of 
black, quickly coagulating blood. — Great itching in 1. nostril and frequent 
sneezing. — Epistaxis > throbbing carotids and fulness in head. 

6. Face. — Face : expression of terror ; pale, earthy, strongly contrasting 
with purple neck ; flushed with burning heat, also heat and sweat of palms. 
— Burning and scorching sensating on lips as after a fever. — Pain in angles of 
lower jaw, so severe he thinks he is going crazy. — Pain in lower jaw as if all 
teeth going to fall out. — Pain in direction of r# lower maxillary nerve, with a 
tickling sensation in stomach, dizziness, vanishing of sight, buzzing in ears. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache : with sense of formication ; with hiccough ; as 
if loose, and electric sparks passed through them ; throbbing ; < coming in 
contact with the air. — Great dryness of mouth and teeth. — Painful aphthae on 
tongue ; with fetid breath.— Tongue drawn backward preventing speech. — 
Patch of suspicious cancerous nature in mouth and on fauces.— Palate feels 
scalded. 

9. Throat. — Sore throat : when swallowing, at same time shooting in 



TARENTULA 


T377 


1. eye; when coughing; talking; yawning; with painful constriction when 
smoking. — ^Sensation when swallowing of constriction in throat.— -Throbbing 
sore throat! — Sensation as if cold water continually dropping down throat. — 
R, tonsil : painfully swollen ; painful constriction, extending to ear, < by 
swallowing. — Fauces inflamed purplish. — External swelling of neck so great as 
to cause danger of choking. — Constant throbbing pain in cervical and sub- 
maxillary glands, with occasional sharp stinging pains. — Tonsillitis ; high 
fever, delirium, red face, tonsils so swollen, suffocation feared. — (Diphtheria 
with same symptoms.) 

xo. Appetite.-^Loss of appetite, intense thirst ; general prostration ; 
vomiting after eating ; and getting out of bed ; craving for raw food ; disgust 
for meat. — (Disorders of pregnancy.) — Opium habit. — Taste of food : flat ; 
bitter ; salty : piquant. — Flat or sweetish taste in mouth. 

II. Stomach. — Hiccough ; with toothache. — Nausea ; with dizziness 
compelling to lie down. — ^Vomiting : acid ; mucous ; with intense burning 
pains in stomach and oesophagus. — Pain in stomach < by drinking water. — 
Gastric “symptoms with slight pains in roots of teeth, esp. when touching each 
other. — (Many digestive symptoms are peculiar on account of accompanying 
sympathetic neuralgic pains, in sides of head, face, ears, teeth, malar bones.) 

12. Abdomen. — Swelling of hypochondria. — Lancinating pain in 
spleen, with pain In stomach and uterus. — Hepatic region painful to touch. — 
Sharp pain in umbilical region ; violent burning in abdomen and rectum ; 
stools profuse, dark, fetid, with violent urging ; constipation. — Bloating. — 
Borborygmus. — Fibrous tumour in hypogastrium compressing genitals, and 
causing uterine discharges. — Burning in hypogastrium with great weight, 
interfering with walking and causing pruritus of vulva. — Pain in hj'pogas- 
trium, hips and uterus, as if these parts were compressed ; at same time un- 
conquerable drowsiness. — Pain in groins ; with relaxed sensation ; as from 
rupture, esp. r., < by cold water. 

13. * Stool and Anus. — Pain and burning in anus after stool. — Repeated 
shooting in anus. — Violent effort to have a passage ; hard stool with blood. — 
Tenesmus. — Constipation ; with involuntary passing of urine on coughing or 
any effort. — Profuse diarrhoea with prostration, nausea, vomiting, fainting. — 
Stools : three or four times daily, very dark, fetid, partly formed, containing 
much mucus, expelled with difficulty, and followed by smarting and burning 
in anus ; stools occur immediately on having head washed. — Weakness of 
sphincter, faeces appear natural but are passed as fast as accumulated. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Pain in kidneys ; with prostration. — Cystitis ; 
with high fever, gastric derangement, excruciating pains and inability to pass 
a drop of urine ; bladder seems swollen and hard ; great tenderness and 
spasmodic action, debilitating patient, who passes only by drops a dark-red 
brown, fetid urine, with gravel-likc sediment. — Pain in region of bladder ; 
urixtktion frequent, very painful ; extiemely nervous ; could get no relief in 
any position ; < night. — Urine : hot^ thick, much sediment ; difficult micturi- 
tion; incontinence and pain in kidneys. — Diabetes. — Incontinence when 
laughing, coughing, &c. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Extreme sexual excitement, lasciviousness 
almost to insanity. — Onanism followed by prostatic ailments and h3rpochon- 
driasis. — Painfulness of genitals ; testes relaxed, painful to touch ; pain in 

VOL. n. 88 



TARENTULA 


^378 

groins and stricture of urethra. — Erections. — Emissions. — Indolent tumour 
developed in each testicle. — Heaviness, pain and great swelling of (r.) testicle 
and cord. — Drawing pulling in left cord. — During emission of semen a sensa- 
tion of heat is felt in its passage, it is rose-coloured containing some blood. — 
Difficult coitus, followed by fatigue and cough. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.—Extreme sexual excitement ; menses too 
early and profuse ; pains and spasm of uterus ; pruritus vulvas ; leucorrhoea. 
— Violent nymphomania ; < from coitus. — Nymphomania ; reflex chorea ; 
hyperaemia and hyperaesthesia of sexual organs. — Sexual desire in a woman 
who had a shining callosity on 1. index finger. — Fibreus tumour of uterus 
with bearing-down pains. — Discharge of blood alternately with leucorrhoea. 
— Uterine discharge with pain in groins. — Spasmodic pains < when trying to 
walk. — Expulsion of gas from uterus. — Anguish, malaise in sexual organs; 
impossible to walk ; seems as if a living body moving or tingling in stomach 
with tendency to rise to throat. — Sensation as if uterus had not room enough 
and were pushing away intestines. — Pain in uterus with constrictive headache. 
— Shooting : in vagina ; in genitals followed by leucorrhoea. — Cutting in uterus 
or pain as if a heavy blow struck on it. — Pruritus vulvae, after menses. — Pro- 
fuse menstruation : with erotic spasms ; crossness ; ennui, and deep dissatis- 
faction ; < after sleep.— Menses seven days too early. — (Uterine neuralgia.— 
Dysmenorrhoea.) — Sensation of motion in uterus, like a foetus. — Disorders of 
pregnancy. — Swelling of breasts with itching of nipples. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Roughness in larynx and trachea with 
some dry cough, and smarting in eyelids. — Aphonia with increased difficulty 
of breathing. — Hoarseness. — Cough : painful ; dry ; gagging ; fatiguing ; ss: 
distensive pains in head, chest, and uterus with sadness and anxiety ; but when 
walking in open air a sensation of happiness. — Cough when getting out of 
bed, with vomiting and involuntary emissions of urine. — Chronic suffocating 
catarrh. — Loose cough followed by tickling in larynx and bronchial tubes 
which renews cough. — ^Attacks of suffocation, with crying, screaming, and 
restlessness. 

18. Chest. — Great oppression in chest ; panting respiration. — Sensation 
as of a blow at base of 1. lung. — In chest, pains ; stinging ; pressive ; cramp- 
like ; shooting. 

19. Heart and Pulse.— Diseases of heart < by wetting hands in cold 
water. — Priscordial anxiety, tremulous beating of heart. — Pain in heart as if 
squeezed, also in aorta. — Nervous spells with pain in 1. ovary, — Sensation as if 
heart turned or twisted round. — Palpitation, stitches interfering with breathing. 
— Painful throbbing of carotids, with fulness in head, esp. region of medulla, 
> by epistaxis.— Trembling and thumping of heart as from fright or bad news. 
— Pulse : hard, infrequent ; irregular. 

20. Neck and Back. — Neck stiff ; cannot move it without pain. — Pain 
1. side of neck when turning head to r. — Mole on neck with sensation as of 
needles sticking into it when touched. — pain in neck and back followed by 
general paralysis, — Swelling (or tumour, or rheumatoid prominence) on 
spinal column with laboured breathing. — Tabes dorsalis. — Scapula : pain 
in; shooting pain under 1.— Shooting in 1. loin above hip. — Acute convulsive 
pains in 1. lower part of vertebral column on appearance of menses, ceasing 
with them, — Repeated lancinating, shooting pain in coccyx.— (Coccygodynia 



TARENTULA 


^379 


after confinement; burning, smarting leucorrhoea, painful uneasiness in 
coccyx > standing, < slightest movement, sitting, lying in bed, or least 
pressure). 

21. Limbs. — Rheumatism checked by putting extremities in cold water, 
panting respiration, anxiety, cramps in heart or twisting pains ; arm feels 
tense, stretched ; morning and night cold extremities.— Weakness, numbness, 
and dulness. — Necessity to move legs extends to hands with desire of taking 
something and throwing it away ; to roll something between fingers ; followed 
by general fatigue.— Great pain in knuckles and toes, can scarcely bear the 
weight of lightest linen. 

22 . Upper Limbs. — Heaviness in arms (soon). — Squeezed pain in 
1. arm and hand (forenoon). — Pain and swelling in wrists. — Restlessness of 
hartds. — Unbearable pains in thumbs, esp. r., > pressure. — Burning and 
sweating of palms. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Uneasiness of legs, must keep moving them. — 
Weakness of legs, cannot plant them firmly; do not obey will.— Numbness of 
legs followed by paralysis. — Convulsive shaking and twitching in r. leg. — Pain 
in r. internal malleolus. — Shooting : in r. tendo Achillis ; r. great toe ; r. little 
toe. — Painful ci'amp in r. sole. — Itching in soles of feet. 

24. Generalities. — A state like apoplexy or asphyxia comes on ; if 
music is brought the patient revives, sighs, commences to dance vigorously, and 
so the symptoms pass off with perspiration ; but they are apt to be renewed 
the following year in the same season. — Trembling of all limbs. — Intense 
restlessness. 

25. Skin. — Ecchymosed spots. — Hepatic spots. -Furfuraceous spots. — 
Miliary eruption. — Indolent pimples. — Vesicular eruption like crusta lactea. — 
A sm^l callosity, whitish, indolent, in r. palm between middle and index 
fingers, increased, with heat and pain, extended, broke, leaving an ulcer with 
callous edges, healed leaving a small scar. — Painful callosity at end of r. thumb 

► fell off. — Callosity in 1. index fell out. — Every year intense pain in toes from 
re-opened wound. — Formication ; pricking ; itching over whole body. 

26. Sleep. — Yawning. — Sleeplessness. — Dreams ; of business ; of drown- 
ing ; sad with weeping. — Wakes up cross. 

27. Fever.— Constant chill and coldness during four days. — Scorching 
heat on whole body alternating with icy coldness. — Intermittent febrile 
attacks ; during heat continued coldness of feet.— Chills and fever with 
choreic convulsions ; shakes almost continuously with involuntary move- 
ments in limbs, abdomen^ chest, back and face, < 1. side ; could not speak 
(after a severe scolding or punishment). — Toxaemic fevers of a typhoid or 
intermittent form ; chilliness or burning heat, chilliness predominating. — 
Scorching heat of skin, which is*scarlet. — Debilitating sweats, — Night-sweats. 
— Cold sweat. 



1380 


TARENTULA CUBENSIS, 


Tarentula Gubensis. 

Mygale Cubensis. AraRa peluda. Cuban Tarantula. N. 0 . 

Araneideae. Tincture of whole spider. 

CliAieal* — Carbuncle* Chorea. Intermittents. 

Characteristics. — “ The Mygale Cubensis, which may be called the 
Cuban Tarentula, also found in South Carolina and Texas, is a 
larger spider, of a dark brown colour, less poisonous, and covered 
with more hairs than the Tarentula Hispanica (Bering). The chief 
uses to which Trn* c. has been put are : (i) Carbuncle, even, to 
sloughing; with great prostration and diarrhoea. (2) Intermittent 
fever, with evening exacerbation. A keynote symptom is atrocious 
pains.” A case of chorea in a girl of twelve is reported (H. M*, 
March, 1901) cured with Trn, c, 6. The movements were confined 
to the left side, and occurred chiefly at night, when Trn. c. was pre- 
scribed. 

Relations. — Compare : In intermittents, Aran. d. Carbuncle, 
Anthrac., Lach., Sil. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.— Anxiety.— Delirium. 

2. Head.— Headache. 

X3. Stool.— Diarrhoea. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Retention of urine. 

24. Generalities.— Toxiemia. 

25. Skin. — The bite is painless ; the person is not sensible of it till next 
day, when an inflamed pimple is found surrounded by a scarlet areola ; from 
the pimple to some other part of the body a red erysipelatous line is seen, 
marking the line followed by the spider over the skin after biting. — This 
pimple swells, the inflamed areola spreads, chills and fever set in with 
copious sweat and retention of urine; the pimple becomes a hard, large, 
exceedingly painful abscess, ending by mortification of the integuments 
over it, and having several small openings, discharging a thick, sanious 
matter containing pieces of mortified cellular tissue, fasciae, and tendons; 
the openings by growing run into one another, forming a large cavity; 
at this period the fever takes the intermittent type with evening exacerba- 
tions. — In two cases, in delicate children, the bite proved fatal; but the 
majority recover in from three to six weeks. 

27. Fever.— Chills followed by intense burning fever supervene on 
second or third day ; with great thirst, anxiety, restlessness, headache, 
delirium, copious perspiration and retention of urine. — Later the fever takes 
the intermittent type, with evening paroxysms, accompanied by diarrhoea 
and great prostration. 



TARTARICUM ACIDUM 


1381 


Tartaricam icidum. 

Tartaric acid. C4H6O6. Trituration. Solution. 

Clinical.— Gastritis. Heels, pain in. 

CharaotaristiOB. — A proving by Nenning and some poisonings 
have furnished the pathogenesis of TarL ac. One of the most marked 
symptoms was intense burning in throat and stomach, feeling as 
it on fire/^ Tongue brown and dry. Almost constant vomiting ; 
vomited matter of deep green colour. Fccces coffee-ground colour. 
Difficult respiration. Paralytic debility : Weakness in the evening, 
cari scarcely drag himself along.” This should prove useful : 
‘^Tearing pain on the soles of the feet, near the heel, which 
prevents him putting his foot on the ground, after luncheon.” All 
the symptoms were > in open air. The pasty taste is > after 
eating. 


SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Confusion in head ; dizziness. 

6. Face.— Face instantly became red as fire, and having exclaimed that 
he was poisoned, became speechless ; died on tenth day (drank 2 oz. in 
solution).— Lips turn brown and blackish on their inner edges.— Constant 
dryness of lips, must moisten them continually. — Burning of lips. 

8. Mouth.— Teeth set on edge.— Brown and dry tongue.— Taste, pasty, 
in morning, ceases on eating. 

9. Throat. — Burning sensation in throat and stomach as if on fire. 

iij Stomach. — Very urgent thirst.— Eructations.— Nausea.— V omiting, 
repeated and almost continuous. — ^Vomited matter, deep green. 

12. Abdomen.— Pain in umbilical region.— Pinching below navel with 
emission of flatulence ; cold feeling in abdomen. 

13. Stool. — Many stools during night. — Stools of colour of coffee 
grounds. 

17, Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness and scraping in larynx.— 
Respiration : accelerated ; then laborious and slow. 

XQ. Heart. — ^Very weak action of heart. — Feeble pulse. 

20. Back.— Sharp pain in region of loins. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Paralysis of thighs and legs.— Tearing pains at 
soles, near the heel, which prevents him setting his foot on the ground, after 
luncheon. 

24. Generalities.— Convulsions just before death. — Extreme weakness, 
—In evening feels very tired, can^ scarcely drag himself along.— General 
bruised sensation, esp. of lower limbs. 

26. Sleep.— Yawning and stretching, — Frequent yawning. 

27. Fever.— General cold feeling, evening in bed. 



1382 


TAXUS BACCATA 


Taxus Baccata. 

Taxus baccata. Yew. N, 0 . Coniferae. Tincture of the fresh young 
shoots. (Tincture of the berries.) 

ClinioaL —Ciliary neuralgia. Cystitis. Digestion, too rapid. Dysuria. Ear, 
polypus of. Eruptions. Fainting. Gout. Hair, falling out. Headache, with photo- 
psia. Heart, affections of. Kidneys, affections of. Knees, abscess of. Lachryma- 
tion. Nose, eruption on. Rheumatism. Purpura. Spermatorrhcea. Strangury. 
Vision, dim. 

Charaoteristios. — The poisonous properties of the Yew have 
been recognised and disputed from ancient times. Gerarde says that 
in his schooldays he and his companions ate their fill of the berries 
of the Yew and slept not only under its shade, but on its branches, 
without any ill effect. But there is plenty of evidence on the other 
side. Recently {Med, Prcss^ May 29, 1901), a patient of Mullingar 
Asylum died suddenly from eating Yew leaves. Some years ago a 
correspondence in the Times brought to light instances of the lethal 
effects of Yew leaves on cattle. One correspondent, Mr. James 
Simmons, of Haslemere, mentions an observation made by himself 
and others, that Yew leaves are more poisonous some time after they 
have been cut than when fresh : Yew cropped green from the tree 
has no fatal effect, and animals do not eat it fresh, they prefer 
grass ; but if Yew has been cut and allowed to wither cattle will eat 
it in large quantities, and in that state it is deadly poison.” “ My 
people,” says Mr. Simmons, ^^once buried some Yew cuttings deep 
in the dung of a farmyard ; a number of large hogs dug it up, ate it, 
and all died.” — The symptoms of the pathogenesis are made up of 
poisonings by leaves and berries, and also of provings by Gastier. 
Fainting is a very prominent feature with Tax.y and the fatal cases 
end in convulsipns, collapse, and syncope. Death from Yew poison- 
ing, says Cooper, is remarkably painless. “ Empty feeling ” in the 
stomach was prominent ; and it was noted that the digestion was 
very rapid. ‘‘Must eat frequently” is a characteristic. Gastric catarrh 
is set up with vomiting of tenacious mucus. The saliva is increased, 
and it also is viscid ; and there is viscid sweat. An intense action 
on the skin was developed, and Tax, is indicated in pustular skin 
affections, the pustules being large, flat, and strongly itching. On the 
suggestion of Cooper, I once gave a single dose of Tax, 0 in a case of 
aur2i polypus (bright red) with catarrh, in a youth, with the result 
that the polypus shrivelled up to one-third of its former size. The 
shooting pains in the toes suggest the use of Tax, in gout. The 
kidneys and bladder were much irritated ; and the heart disturbed. 
Tax, has been recommended as a substitute for Dig,j being considered 
superior to the latter in having no cumulative effect. The symptoms 
were < by pressure. Rubbing > itching of eyelids. Coughing s 
headache. * Deep respiration = cough. < Before and after each 
meal. < By application of liquids. < After coitus. 

Relattons. — Antidoted by: Staph (prostration with oppression 



TAXUS BACCATA 1383 

after an embrace). Compare: The Coniferae. Load at stomach, 
Ab. n. Rapid digestion, Sul. Podagra, Urt. ur. 


STHPTOHS. 

1. Mind. — Impatience, which unfits the patient for mental application. 
— Delirium. — Stupor. 

2. Head. — Reeling sensation when at rest, on being seated, and when 
standing upright. — Headache above eyebrows, with brilliant and movable 
lines before the sight. — Pains in forehead, extending to face, with drawing 
pains in eyes, and lachrymation. — Heavy pain in region of r. temple and 
eyebrow, with a sensation of lachrymation, and < from slightest cough. — 
Squeezing in sides of head. — Aching, esp. in temporal bone. — Burning 
headache, — Lancinating pain in frontal region. — Heat in forehead. 

3. Eyes. — In the eyes : drawing with lachrymation and pressure, and 
headache below the eyebrows. — Itching of external angle of 1. eye. — 
Burning itching in eyelids, disappearing after scratching them. — Abundant 
lachrymation when eyes are used, even but a little, esp. in females. — Lachry- 
mation of 1. eye. — Pupils widely dilated. — Vision dim. 

4. Ears. — (Polypus of the cars.) 

5. Nose. — Round spot of a reddish-brown colour, on the end of nose, 
with desquamation of skin. 

6. Face. — Looks ill. — Face : pale ; livid ; convulsed. — Lips ; purplish ; 
livid ; blackish brown, esp. upper. — Frothing at mouth. 

8. Mouth. — Sensation of coldness in (upper incisor) teeth. — Burning 
pricking on tongue. — Tongue : excoriated ; moist ; tremulous. — Mouth dry. 
— Saliva : increased ; extremely viscid ; acrid.—Bittcr taste, like that of 
Cinchona. 

11. Stomach. — Violent hunger, soon after breakfast, with general un- 
easiness, and weakness in region of stomach. — Frequent want to eat, with 
activity of digestive functions. — Nausea with accumulation of saliva. — Sensa- 
tion of emptiness, without hunger, in stomach. — Retching. — ^Vomiting ending 
in death. — ^Vomit : tenacious, containing bile ; Yew leaves embedded in 
mucus. — Pain in pit of stomach, when touched. — Tension in epigastrium, 
which is painful to touch. — Aching, burning, and pinching in region of 
stomach. 

12. Abdomen, — Tension'in abdomen, as if the stomach were overloaded. 

— Squeezing and tension across abdomen. — Aching in umbilical region. — 
Borborygmi. ^ 

13. Stool. — Hard, difficult, dry evacuations. — Occasionally a stool which 
is soft, or of a natural consistence, — Diarrhoea, with insupportable tenesmus, 
and burning at every evacuation. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Cutting pain at base of kidneys which allows 
him neither to sit still nor stand up, and even prevents turning in bed. — 
Urinary tenesmus. — Frequent want to urinate, with difficult emission in a fine 
stream. — Strangury, urine red. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Flow of semen without erection or sexual 



1384 


TAXUS BACCATA 


pleasure for several successive nights.— Great excitement during coition.— 
After coition, weakness and great oppression. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — ^Violent and fatiguing cough. — Sl;ort cough, 
after every meal, excited by full inspirations, with oppression. 

18. Chest.— -Oppression, esp. when stomach is either too full or too 
empty, or else with pain below xiphoid cartilage. — Lancinating pain in 1. side. 
— Lungs engorged. — Chest full and hot. 

19. Heart. — Irregular action of heart. — Pulse ; rapid ; slow ; feeble ; 
small, wiry ; almost imperceptible. 

20. Neck and Back. — Drawing pain in muscles of neck (1.).— Sacral 
pains, which allow no rest either in a standing or sitting posture, and which 
compel the patient to remain in bed. — Incisive pain in sacrum. — Constant 
pain in back. — Pain in shoulder-blade, which subsequently removes to loins. 

21. Limbs. — Numbness of limbs and paralysis ; esp. after several sweats. 
— Sharp, transient, wandering pains. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Aching pain in elbow near humerus, affecting the 
bone, felt during motion and rest, but < by movement. — Violent itching in 
forearm, followed by an eruption of red and hard pimples round wrist, which 
itch chiefly in evening, and at night, and afterwards occasion a tickling 
sensation. — Lancinations in hand. — Burning dryness of palms of hands. — Dull 
pain in joints of fingers. — Rheumatic pain in r. forefinger, renewed by least 
contact with even warm liquid. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pain in hip and knee, with tearing pain and cold- 
ness in thigh ; > at night, — Pain in 1. hip, with internal heat. — In thighs, 
distressing coldness of skin, esp. of fore-part. — Tingling in 1. thigh. — Painful 
tingling round patella. — Lancinating pain in knee, with weakness of the 
joint. — Abscess at r. knee. — Contusive and incisive pain, which hinders 
walking. — Incisive pain, esp. in 1. knee, which awakens patient at night. — 
Violent pinching in 1. calf, with itching in a small circumscribed place. — 
Large suggillation on sole of 1. foot. — ^Tingling crawHng sensation in whole 
1. foot. 

24. Generalities. — Pains in the knees, elbows, and back. — Trembling. 
— Slight tremor over whole frame. — Convulsions. — Faintness. — Fainting and 
collapse. — Relaxation of muscles. 

25. Skin. — All hairy parts became denuded (after a month). — Black 
jaundice. — Skin red. — Body covered with pustules. — On waking, body covered 
with miliary eruption ; disappeared on third day and abscess formed at right 
knee. — Large suggillation on 1. sole followed by dark petechise over nearly 
whole body, great swelling of face and lips, esp. upper lip, exhaustion and 
death (boy 5, poisoned by berries). — Eruption of large pimples, slightly 
elevated, like red spots, on the upper part of J)oth arms. — Dry tetter, red at 
the base ; and causing much itching, at external angle of 1. eye. 

26. Sleep. — Sleeplessness during whole night, yawning without inclina- 
tion to sleep. 

27. Fever. — Commencing with general shivering at 2 a.m., followed by 
dry heat of hands and feet, and general uneasiness, dryness of mouth, without 
thirst, afterwards profuse perspiration on forehead ; shaking after breakfast, 
with general uneasiness, and dryness of mouth, without thirst.— Perspiration 
attends the least exertion, with great prostration of strength. Profuse night- 



TELLURIUM 


1385 


sweats.— Offensive viscid sweats, with smart itching and redness in the 
glandular parts at the surface of the body.— Peculiarly offensive sweat with 
eruption 8f vesicles. 


Tellurium. 

Tellurium. An element ; (generally considered non-metallic). 

Te. (A.W. ^25). Trituration of the precipitated element. 

Clinical. — ^Axilla, offensive sweat of ; tumour of. Barber’s itch. Cataract. 
Conjunctivitis. Coryza. Eczema. Entropion. Eyes, inflammation of. Foot- 
sweat, fetid. Gleet. Herpes. Hoarseness. Levitation. Pityriasis versicolor. 
Post-nasal catarrh. Ringworm. Sacrum^ pain tn. Sciatica. Spinal trrifation. 
Worms. Yawning. 

Charaoteristios. — Tellurium occurs in the native state and in 
combination with gold, silver, lead, and antimony. It resembles 
Sulphur and Selenium in its chemical reactions. It was proved and 
introduced into homoeopathy by Hering in 1850. The most notable 
feature of the proving was the irritation of the skin, including skin 
of eyelids and ears, of spinal column and of some nerves. The most 
characteristic form of the skin irritation of Tell, is herpes circinatus, 
and it has probably cured more cases of ringworm, especially of the 
face and body, than any other remedy. (I cured with Tell an Indian 
officer home on furlough whose body was covered over with a ring- 
worm-like eruption.) The odour of the body and of the sweat is 
offensive and garlic-like. The prover had to sit apart from the rest 
ofthe class during a whole session on account of this. In parts where 
the skin forms openings, as the ear, the effect of Tell, is intensified. 
The. characteristic odour of the ear discharge is that of fish brine. 
The discharge is so acrid it vesicates any part of the skin it touches. 
Tell, is one of the most important remedies in otorrhoea. Nash cured 
several cases of post-scarlatinal otorrhoea, using the 6th, higher 
attenuations having failed. Eyelids are inflamed, and the vesicating 
property extends to the eye itself, setting up phlyctenular conjunc- 
tivitis. Other parts of the skin affected by Tell, are the hair-roots, the 
breasts, the perinasum, and the anus. There is itching in the rectum 
after stool. Tell, has caused expulsion of threadworms. The offen- 
siveness of Tell, appears in the breath and in the flatus ; and it is a 
leading remedy in offensive foot-sweat. In addition to the inflamma- 
tion of the eyes caused by Tell.y it has pains over the eyes. Skin and 
nerves are closely allied, *ind Tell, is a remedy in many neuralgic 
conditions, notably sciatica. The right side is most affected, and 
these are characteristic Conditions : the pain is < coughing, sneezing, 
or straining at stool ; < lying on painful side. Many of the pains 
and symptoms of Tell, come and go suddenly. The ears are suddenly 
stopped. There are sudden rushes of blood to the head. Tell, has 
great sensitiveness to touch. This is shown in the neuralgic hyper- 
aesthetic state of the spine. It has also a vulnerary action as shown in 
a case of Kent^s (quoted A. if., xxiii. 439). A boy, 4, slid down 



1386 TELLURIUM 

banisters and struck his head on a tiled floor. He became uncon- 
scious and a surgeon was summoned, who found him in that^tate 
and with a clear, watery discharge from the ear, which the burgeon 
pronounced to be cerebro-spinal fluid. This condition lasted three 
days, and the case had been pronounced hopeless when Kent first 
saw the boy, Kent noticed that the discharge was acrid, and red- 
dened whatever part it came in contact with. One dose of Tell, was 
given. In two hours the child vomited, a sign of reaction, and in 
two weeks was well. Shelton (H, R., vii. 103) relates three cases : 
(i) Widow, 50, had pain and soreness upper part of^back for a long 
time. She shrank from the slightest touch on the part. The sen- 
sitiveness was so acute that when touched the pain extended into the 
occiput and all over the upper region of the back. Tell, 6 cured in 
eighteen days. (2) Miss X., 45, had a fall, striking a severe blow on 
the sacrum. She suffered for some weeks from concussion, with one 
point of great soreness in the sacral region, just above the spot where 
the blow was received. She was kept in bed for some weeks and 
improved generally, but the painful spot remained and sensitiveness 
appeared over the back, especially its upper third. Tell, 6 cured* 
all completely. (3) Miss Y., 29, who had had severe spinal meningitis 
ten years before, consulted Shelton for a burning, pressing pain at 
base of brain. He diagnosed the condition as pachy-meningitis. 
The patient grew worse, and gradually ptosis, and then right and then 
left hemiplegia set in. Finally hyperaesthesia of the back became so 
distressing that it was a question of finding any support that did not 
intensify the pain. She could not bear the slightest touch, com- 
plaining that tt not only hurl her at the point of contact^ but she felt it in 
the head and in remote parts of the body. Tell, cleared up the case. 
Sldnner (if. W.y xviii. 535) cured two sporting dogs of ringworm 
with Tell, im F.C. The irritating property of Tell, is shown again 
in the coryza, post-nasal catarrh, tickling in larynx, hoarseness, and 
cough. There is a good deal of drowsiness with Tell, ; yawming after 
retching ; drowsy after eating. I once gave TclL to a child for an 
eruption, and cured it incidentally of constant yawning, with which it 
had been troubled. The eruption improved at the same time. 
Peculiar Sensations are : Fear of being touched on sensitive places. 
As if in air on going to sleep. Brain as if beaten. As if lashes were 
turned in. As if air whistled tiirough left Eustachian tube. As if 
strapped together in epigastric region. As if fluid wanted to dis- 
charge in lobe of right lung. There is periodicity about some of the 
symptoms. One prover has a return of them every Tuesday for 
several weeks. More symptoms appear on the left than on the 
right side. The syniptoms are : < By fouch ; touch = bleeding 
from ear ; spine sensitive to touch. Pressure ss lump in axilla to 
be painful. Rest <. L3nng: > vertigo ; on left side ss throbbing 
over right ribs and vice versa ; on left side s pain in heart. > Lying 
on back. Lying on affected side < sciatica. While sitting up : 
vertigo ; face red. Stooping, coughing, laughing, straining at stool <. 
Many symptoms are < in morning, on being wakened, and at night ; 
eating = drowsiness. Eating rice = vomiting. Eating and drinking 
> sore throat. 



TELLURIUM 


1387 


Relations. — Antidoted by : Niix (epigastric oppression). Compare : 
Tetradymite, which contains Tellur. Restlessness ; garlicky odour, 
Ars. Cofyza, Cepa. Otitis, Puls., Bell., Ter. Ringworm, Bac., Sep., 
Nat, m. Ringworm in clusters Sep., Calc. Threadworms, Teucr. 
Pains come and go suddenly, Bell, Lyc. < Laughing, Pho. < 
Straining at stool, Indm. Cough and skin, Osm. 

’ Causation. — Falls. Rice (vomiting). 

SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Forgetful. — Fear of being touched in sensitive places. — 
Excitable, disposed to fly into a passion. — Rough, angular disposition. — Mind 
depressed. 

’ 2 . Head. — ^Vertigo ; when going to sleep ; morning after rising ; 
< walking, sitting up, or turning head ; > lying perfectly quiet. — Brain 
feels as if beaten on slightest movement. — Heaviness and fulness of head in 
morning. — ^Violent linear pain in small spot over 1. eye ; pain, short, sharp, 
and defined. — Congestion to temples and forehead on waking in morning. — 
Sudden rush of blood to head. — About 10 a.m. pain above 1. eye, came and 
went suddenly. — Sensation of numbness in occiput and nape. — Red spots 
and fine blisters on occiput, neck, and behind ears, and on posterior surface 
of ears. 

3. Eyes. — Deposit of ch alky-looking white mass on anterior surface of 
lens (cataract). — Pterygium. — Herpes conjunctivas bulbi ; phlyctenules near 
edge of cornea; < from crying. — Pustular conjunctivitis with eczema 
impetiginodes on lids and much purulent discharge from eyes; offensive 
discharge from ears. — Scrofulous inflammation : < 1, upper lid ; lachryma- 
tion, itching, and pressure in lid. — Eyelids : thickened, inflamed, covered 
with pustules ; pale red, oedematous, oozing. — Feeling as if lashes of lower 
lid vnere turned in. — Palpebral swelling of 1. upper lid ; ulceration on outer 
surface of lid, near outer canthus ; pain < at night. 

4. Ears. — L. ear began to itch, burn, and swell ; aching and throbbing 
pain in meatus, followed by a copious, watery, acrid discharge. — Dull, throb- 
bing pain in cars, day and night ; thin, \vatcry, excoriating discharge. — Ears 
suddenly stopped in forenoon ; < 1.— -Sometimes, for an instant, sensation 
as if air catches itself in, or whistled through 1. Eustachian tube ; when 
snuffing or belching air passes through. — Vesicular eruption on raembrana 
tympani ; suppurating and perforating. — Itching and swelling, with painful 
throbbing in external meatus ; in three or four days discharge of watery 
fluid smelling like fish-pickle, which s: vesicles wherever it touches ; ear 
bluish red, oedematous ; hearing impaired.— Waked during night with dull 
aching deep in r. ear, contiifued three days with depression of spirits. — 
Eczema behind ears, with formation of thick crusts ; scrofulous conjunctivitis, 
blepharitis, and catarrh of middle ear. 

5 . Nose. — Fluent coryza, laefirymation and hoarseness when walking 
in open air, with short cough and pressure in middle of chest under sternum ; 
> after being in open air some time. — Nose dry, then becomes fluent with 
relief of headache; r, eye becomes hot with profuse lachrymation. — Nose 
obstructed, must breathe through mouth. — Hawks from posterior nares dried 
yellowish -red phlegm tasting salty, mornings. 



TELLURIUM 


1388 


6, Face.— Sudden flushes of redness over face.— While sitting, face red. 
— ^Twitching in 1. facial muscles, 1. corner of mouth drawn up when talking. — 
Burning in lips. — Ringworms on face ; barber’s itch. — Pimples on face. 

8. Mouth. — Gums bleed easily and profusely. — ^Tongue somewhat 
swollen, furred white, shows print of teeth.— Breath has odour of garlic. — 
Coldness of mouth and pharynx on drawing in air. — Copious saliva. — 
Tenacious mucus runs from mouth (dog). — Taste earthy, metallic. 

9. Throat. — Painful dryness of fauces. — In morning hawks from back 
of nose pieces of yellowish-reddish phlegm tasting salt. — Rough, scratching 
sensation in throat j < towards evening. — Throat feels sore with a prickly, 
rough sensation evening and morning ; throat sore on simply swallowing ; 
> after eating or drinking.. — Pain in throat extends into ear. 

11. Stomach. — Hungry at night ; wants an apple in middle of nights— 
Longs for beer. — After meals, great drowsiness. — After eating rice obliged 
to vomit. — Belching with taste of food eaten. — Heartburn with warmth 
in stomach as from alcohol.— Sensation of weakness like faintness in stomach 
after local congestion of blood to head and nape, also with chest symptoms. 
— Fulness in pit of stomach, must, lie down after dinner. — Constrictive feeling 
in stomach as if strapped together. 

12. Abdomen. — Fulness and oppression in hypogastrium, her dress 
must be loosened. — Pressing first 1. then r. side as from wind. — ^When lying 
on 1. side, throbbing under r, ribs and vice versa* — Pinching in abdomen. — 
Frequent spasmodic pains in bowels as from incarcerated wind; mostly 
from S to 9 p.m. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Passes very offensive wind.— Passes a large 
quantity of threadworms. — Spasmodic pains with urging to stool, copious 
stool with feeling of flatulence in bowels. — Costive. — Tetter on perinaeum, 
itching. — Itching in rectum after stool. — Itching at anus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Pain and soreness in kidneys. — Increased 
urination. — High-coloured, acid urine. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Erections all night. — Increased desire, 
followed by long-lasting indifference. — A drop of viscid fluid glues meatus. 
— Secondary gonorrhoea. — Herpes on scrotum and perinaeum, 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Painful soreness in region ot kidneys, 
extending downward like a weight, mostly to r. and in sacrum ; < morning, 
making her irritable. — Shooting deep in pelvis across to 1, — Menses too early 
in climacteric years. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness in morning with fluent coryza ; 
a rough, pressing, tickling sensation in larynx. — Coughing on laughing < 
aching in small of back. — Cough towards morning ; after a few days looser. 

18. Chest. — Pain in region of clavicle. — P^in in middle of chest ; going 
through to back ; from dorsal vertebrae through to sternum ; in or behind 
sternum.— Shooting in 1. chest, fifth rib.— Feeling as if some fluid wanted to 
discharge, pressing downward in middlq lobe of r. lung. — Cutting around 
and in 1. nipple, through to scapula. — Eruption about nipple. 

19. Heart. — Dull pain in region of heart when lying on 1. side ; > lying 
on back.— Palpitation ^ heart, with throbbing through whole body and full 
pulse, followed by sweat. 

so. Neck aud Back. — ^With the pain above the eye, sensation along 1. 



TEPLITZ 


1389 


side of neck as if the blood there had suddenly been retained in one of the 
large veins, or had streamed backwards.— Numbness in' nape and occiput.— 
When l3fling on 1. ear sharp pressing pain from neck into ear. — Pressing 
ache in r. scapula, later in 1. — Painful sensitiveness of spine from last cervical 
to sixth dorsal vertebrae ; sensitive to pressure and touch. — Weak feeling in 
back, — Pain in sacrum, passing into r. thigh ; < pressing at stool, coughing, 
and laughing. 

21. Limbs. — Sharp, quick pains in elbows, ankles, and other parts. — 
Aching all over, mostly in limbs, < r. side and in walking. 

22. Upper Lihibs. — Offensive sweat of armpits, smelling of garlic. — 
Lump in anterior wail of 1. axilla, painful from pressure or motion. — 
near thumb-joint. — Finger-tips feel dead on stretching hand. — Rheumatism 
of - r. little finger, < moving it. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Sciatica, r. side ; < lying on affected side. — 
Sciatica with sensitiveness of vertebral column. — Tonic muscular contrac- 
tion of long standing. — Contraction of tendons of bends of knees. — 
Bruised pain in hip-joints after walking. — Feet sweaty, mostly on toes. — 
Fetid sweat of feet. 

24. Generalities,— Persistent fetid body odour. — Restlessness. — Las- 
situde. 

*25. Skin. — Ringworm: on face; barber’s itch; whole body, < lower 
limbs ; on single parts. — Stinging in skin. — Small red pimples, very bright 
red and very sharply defined, with minute vesicles upon them, first on lower 
limbs, then also on upper, most on 1. side ; they began first on calves, then 
on inside of forearms above wrist and spread from that part, caused very 
severe itching day and night, < night after going to bed. — Little stinging 
prickings in various parts, compelling him to rest ; circular vesicular spots 
appeared. — Body thickly covered with elevated rings of herpes circinatus. — 
Psoriasis. — Skin dry, hot, — Scrofulous eczematous eruption. — Itching < in 
cool* air. 

26. Sleep. — ^Yawning and belching. — Drowsy after a meal. — Sleepless ; 
restless turning from weariness and bruised feeling. — At night pains all over. — 
On going to sleep feels as if in air, quick drawing towards feet awakens him. 

27. Fever. — Chilly, with pains. — Skin hot and dry ; sensation as if over- 
strained, as if bruised, as if he had taken cold after severe exertion. — Heat : 
in sinciput ; in face. — Sweat : on face ; on spots with increased itching of 
these places ; often throbbing through whole body ; generally warm, while 
sitting in a cool breeze. 


. Teplitz. 

The mineral water of Teplitz in Bohemia. [Contains in 16 oz. 
Nat. c. gr. 2-28, Nat. m. -43, Nat. fl. sil. -13, K. sul. *43, K. 
mur. •!, Calc. c. *32, Sil. -31, &c.] Dilution. 

lUinie*!*— Amenorrhoea. Bones, affections of. Breast, tumours in. Epistaxis. 
Eruptions. Erysipelas* Flatulence. Gout. Haemorrhoids. Leucorrhoea. Me- 
trorrhagia. Paralysis. , Rheumatism. Sciatica. Scurvy. Speech, difficult. Spine, 
pains in. Tongue, paralysis of, Toothache. Ulcers, Vertigo. 



1390 


TEPLITZ 


Characteristics**— The waters of Teplitz are chiefly in repute for 
the treatment of gouty patients, especially those suffering from atonic 
gout. The springs are alkaline and hot, and the temperature forms 
a leading feature in their action. The symptoms of the Schema are 
Perutz^ who experimented on himself and several healthy individuals, 
together with symptoms by Hromada. Symptoms of NaU c. and NaU wi. 
appear throughout. Tearfulness, low spirits, and irritability were 
noted, and giddiness of much intensity. This symptom has been 
cured : “ Giddiness, when she walks all the houses seem to move too.^^ 
Some Peculiar Symptoms are : On moving head it &eems as if some- 
thing fell from one side to the other. Burning in stomach, > 
drinking cold water. > From haemorrhoidal bleeding. Burning 
sensation in many parts. Haemorrhage ; epistaxis ; piles ; with 
stool ; metrorrhagia. Vesicles in mouth and on tongue. Vesicular 
erysipelas. Paralysis of tongue ; of limbs. Cold feelings : in upper 
arm ; in foot. Increased sensitiveness to cold. The symptoms are 
< at night (bone pains). < Motion. > By friction. > Drinking 
cold water. 

Belations. — Compare : Nat. c., Nat. m., K. sul., Mang., Lith., 
Sil., Aim. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Anxiety. — Irritable, tearful. — Loud speech and absence of 
thought — Indisposition to work, — Weak memory. 

2. Head. — Confusion of head with aching over eyes. — ^Vertigo : with 
feeling of paraplegia ; with faintness; with noise in ears and dim vision ; with 
feeling, when she walks, as if all the houses moved too. — On moving head, 
sensation as if something fell from one side to the other, with weak memory. — 
Tearing in head with pain in throat so that he could not breathe freely. — 
Bursting headache. — Frontal headache with inclination to vomit. — Throb- 
bing headache in r. temple with swollen red face.*-Aching in occiput. — 
Hair falls out. — Large movable lumps on head with erysipelas of face. — 
Vesicles on scalp. — Soreness of hairy scalp, every hair causing pain when 
touched. 

3. Eyes. — Both eyes closed in morning with white viscid mucus. 
— Dryness in r. eye and dimness of vision. — Aching and burning in 
eyes. — Erysipelas of lids. — On r. lid two styes, which disappear without sup- 
puration. — Cramp pain in upper lids, cannot be opened except with the 
hand. — Lachrymation. — Inflammation of conjunctiva of eyelid and eye 
ball. 

4. Ears. — Swelling of 1. concha with erysipelatous inflammation. — 
Purulent discharge from ear. — Tearing pain in interior of r. ear as from a 
red-hot coal. — Tearing, shooting pain first in one ear, then in the other. 
— Dulness of hearing, with sensation as if sweat stopped ears. — ^Tinnitus. 

5. Nose. — ^Aching over root of nose.— Pricking and dryness in nose, — 
Frequent and profuse epistaxis. 

6. Face. — Face ; ^i«ollen, red ; swollen, pale. — Drawing and tearing in 
face ; in r. side from forehead to jaw, with drawing of the jaw awry and 
difficult speech* 



TEPLITZ 


1391 

8 . Mouth.—Raging toothache, r. cheek and lower jaw drawn to 1 . side, 
preventing proper speech.— Violent toothache as if all teeth suddenly pierced 
with a hot iron. — Boring in upper molars. — All incisors feel too long. — 
Frequent bleeding of gums with loosening of teeth. — Spasmodic protrusion 
of tongue with difficult speech. — Tongue : paralysed ; swollen ; moist ; coated 
white or yellow. — ^Vesicles on back of tongue with burning pain in throat. — 
Inside r. cheek several small vesicles which burst and form ulcers. — Dry 
mouth with burning on tip of tongue. 

9. Throat.— Pain in throat without redness.— Aching on swallowing.— 
Tearing-drawing i»' muscles of throat and stiffness of neck.— Swelling of 
uvula and tonsils with difficulty of swallowing. — Swelling of cervical glands. 

11. Stomach. — Canine hunger, soon satisfied, and followed by stomach- 
ache. — ^Anorexia : with sour taste ; with white, viscid coating on tongue ; with 
feeling of fulness in pit of stomach.— Heartburn with flow of much water 
on tongue. — Nausea, and faint feeling, and vomiting. — Aching in stomach 
extending through to back. — Pain in stomach, with burning rising up into 
throat as if a red-hot coal lay there ; > drinking cold water. — Sensation as if 
stomach full of water ; seems to splash about when walking. — Full feeling 
in stomach with much wind and eructation. 

12. Abdomen. — Shooting in r. hypochondrium, esp. on drawing a full 
breath. — ^Tearing in umbilical region. — Tense, swollen abdomen, with dis- 
charge of much flatus. — Rumbling. — Weight in abdomen and bearing down 
to genitals. — Cramp of recti muscles.— Swelling of inguinal glands. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Profuse bleeding of piles with > of symptoms. 
— Passage of whitish, acrid mucus by anus. — Painful piles and violent burning 
in anus. — Burning in rectum with evacuation of viscid, blood-streaked secretion. 
— Itching in perinasum, with production of eruption. — Frequent urging 
without stool. — Discharge of bright red blood by stool, with colic. — Stool : 
thin, frothy, with burning in anus ; hard with bright red blood. — Con- 
stipation : with nausea ; with pain in back and heaviness of lower limbs, 

14. Urinary Organs. — In urethra : flying shooting ; burning in anterior 
part. — Urine : copious*; scanty ; retained ; slimy ; brick-dust sediment. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Vesicles on glans becoming speedily sore. 
— Suppurating eruption on glans and scrotum leaving blue marks. — Painful 
swelling of testes.— Drawing in r. testis and cord. — Increased desire and 
dreams. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Milk-white leucorrhoea like boiled 
starch. — Violent tearing pain in abdomen. — Menses a fortnight before time. 
— Often pain in hypogastrium as if everything would be forced out below ; 
menses, which had never appeared, occurred very copiously. — Metrorrhagia 
with frightful pains in abdomen ; blood black and coagulated. 

17. Respiratory OrgaAs. — Aching in larynx > when swallowing, — 
In larynx ; dryness ; roughness ; tickling. — In trachea : catarrh, with expec- 
toration of viscid mucus ; rawness. — Hoarseness to aphonia.— Cough : short, 
dry ; suffocative ; at night. — ExpeAoration : viscid, yellow mucus ; copious. 
— ^Violent cough with enormous expectoration of grey colour, which only 
disappears when an eruption appears. 

18. Chest.— Oppression, as from great rush of blood to chest.— Cramp- 
like contraction in chest. — Shooting in intercostal muscles, — Tearing in pec- 



1392 


TEPLITZ 


toralis major to shoulder.— Burning under sternum.— In r. breast two lumps 
as large as hazel-nuts with dull pain.— Fine pricking as with needle in r. 
breast, 

19. Heart.— Violent shooting in heart; with palpitation.— Action of 
heart: irregular, painful; intermitting.— Pulse : quick, hard; full. 

20. Neck and Back.— ^Bruised pain in nape and back.— Tearing and 
drawing in nape with stiffness.— Shooting pains along spinal column, from 
nape to lumbar vertebrae, preventing slightest motion.— Tearing drawing : 
down back to sacrum; in scapulae.— Shooting and gnawing between 
scapulaj.— Eruption of pimples on whole back,— In small of back ; pain 
< by every movement ; drawing into pelvis, to calves.— Aching and stitches 
in loins, extend to spine, with difficulty of breathing. 

21 . Limbs.— Weariness and heaviness.— Tearing, drawing, shooting in 
limbs, esp. joints. — Tearing in hands and feet. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Paralysis : of r. arm ; of both arms, with creeping in 
finger-tips.— Violent pains in both arms with raised spots like syphilis.— Tearing 
in whole arm with contraction of elbow-joint.— Stiffness in 1. shoulder-joint 
with difficulty in raising arm, esp. backwards.— Violent, ever-increasing pain 
in r. shoulder-joint.— Dislocation pain in shoulder.— Paralysis of shoulders.— 
Burning or shooting in axilla.— In upper arm : shiny red swelling ; cold 
feeling as if cold wind blew on it ; sore, bruised feeling ; boring, tearing ; 
cramp. — Elbow : swelling and tearing ; cracking, and in wrist ; shooting ; 
burning ; scab-like eruption round.— Tearing down forearm to fingers.— In 
wrist : redness, swelling ; violent pains ; stiffness ; sprained feeling in r.— 
Hands : tremble ; swelling of ; gouty nodes on fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Hip-joints : stiff ; tearing ; shooting ; bruised 
pains.— Aching in femur with cold feeling.— Numbness ; jerking; crampy 
swelling in thighs and calves.— Knee-joint : Swollen, stiff ; cracking in ; 
aching in patella.— Swelling and suppuration of bone in middle of 1. leg.— 
Sprained feeling in ankle.— Tension in tendo Achillis, preventing putting heel 
to ground.— Burning in heels.— Shooting-jerking in great toe. 

24. Generalities.— Weariness and heaviness on waking with congestion 
of head.— Increased sensitiveness to draughts. 

25. Skin.— Redness of skin.— Swelling and profuse perspiration.— Rash : 
like scarlatina; miliary; pustular; erysipelas,vesicular.— Ulceration.— Pricking 
as with needles. 

26. Sleep.— Sleepiness ; by day.— Frequent jerks on falling to sleep.— 
Dreams : incompleted ; lively with increased sexual desire. 

27. Fever.— Chilliness, shuddering.— Cold feeling in shoulder ; in thigh. 
—Prickly heat, followed by moderate sweat.— Copious sweat.— Sour and 
mouldy-smelling sweat. 



TEREBINTHINA 


1393 


Terebinthina. 

Oleum terebinthinae. Oil of Turpentine. Cxo Hig. The oil distilled 
from the oleo-resin (turpentine) obtained from various species 
. of Pinus^ purified by repeated rectification with water. Solu- 
tion in rectified spirit. Ozonised Oil of Turpentine (prepared 
by exposure of the common oil to sun and air in a half-filled 
bottle and shaking from time to time). 

ClinleaL — Albuminuria. Amblyopia potatorum. Asthma. Backache. Bladder^ 
irritable. Brachial neuralgia. Bronchitis. Chordee. Chorea. Ciliary neuralgia. 
Cystitis. Dentition. Dropsy. Dysentery. Dysmeiiorrhcea. Enteric fever. 
Epilepsy# Erysipelas bullosa. Erythema. Fibroma. Gall-stone colic. Glands, 
inguinal ; swelling of. Gleet. Gonorrhoea. Hcematurta. Haemorrhoids. Hernia ; 
strangulated. Herpes labialis pudendi. Hydrophobia. Hypochondriasis. Insanity. 
Intestines, ulceration of. Iritis. Jaundice. Kidneys^ congestion of; neuralgia of. 
Lumbago. Neuralgia ; supraorbital. Ovaries, pains in ; dropsy of. Pityriasis. 
Purpura hasmorrhagica. Scabies. Scarlatina. Sciatica. Spermatorrhoea. 
Strangury. Stricture. Tetanus. Tympanites. Uraemia. UrinCj suppression of; 
retention of. Worms. 

Gharacteristios. — Ter. was introduced to homoeopathy by Hart- 
laub. A proving of it appeared in Hartlaub and Trinks* Annalcn. 
Many symptoms have been added from poisonings and overdosings in 
old-school practice. According to Taylor, children are particularly 
sensitive to its action. Illness caused by sleeping in newly painted 
rooms is due in great part to the turpentine. “ A stimulant and tonic 
to the mucous membranes, especially of the bladder and urethra : 
it proves useful in gleet, leucorrhoea, and cystorrhoea.’* This is 
MUnes’ account of the old-school use of Ter. as an internal remedy. 
Brunton gives these points : (i) Applied to the skin Ter. acts as an 
irritant and rubefacient, causing a sensation of burning, and vesicles 
if applied for any length of time. (2) Inhaled it causes sneezing, 
tightness across eyes, and dyspnoea. (3) Given internally it causes 
burning in mouth and salivation ; in stomach, sensation of heat or 
cold ; gastro-enteritis, with vomiting and diarrhoea ; ulceration of 
intestines. The pulse is sometimes slowed, sometimes quickened. 
Respiration is quickened and spasmodic ; the drug is partly excreted 
by the lungs and acts on the mucous membrane, lessening its 
secretion. The temperature sometimes rises, sometimes falls. 
Voluntary movement is diminished ; retlex action lowered ; blood- 
pressure lowered, and vessels dilated. Diminishes the quantity of 
urine ; gives the urine an odour of violets ; causes lumbar pain, 
burning in urethra, painful , micturition, haeinaturia. Among the uses 
of Ter.y Brunton mentions the treatment of biliary colic. For this it is 
given in ether in the proportion of one part of the Oil of Turpentine 
to three of Ether. Homoeopatl^s have confirmed the value of this. 
Throughout this list of effects burning is a constant note, and gives the 
key to many cases calling for Ter. — burning in gums, tongue, tip of 
tongue, mouth, throat, stomach, rectum, and anus, kidneys, bladder, 
and urethra, uterus, air passages, chest, and sternum. The last was 
particularly noticed after warm drinks, the pain running along the 
VOL. II. 89 



1394 - TEREBINTHINA 

sternum with the drink and spreading in the chest. Burning extends 
from kidneys along ureters. Ter, is an irritative, sensitive remedy. 
Cooper has found it indicated in children (especially teething 
children) when they fly into passions. There is irritation of the 
meninges and often ascarides or other intestinal worms. In one 
case of maniacal fury in a man it did good. This irritability 
manifests itself in some cases of spasms and convulsions, and Lippe^ 
observed a case in point (H. P., x. 480). A woman had made her 
feet sore by walking, and applied turpentine to them. This was 
followed by a state like hydrophobia ; she had spasms whenever 
she saw water or heard it poured, or saw a bright object ; and 
also whenever she attempted to urinate. Ter, is a great hsemorrhagic 
and its haematuria is particularly characteristic : Smoky, turbid urine 
depositing a sediment like coffee-grounds. Dull pain, or burning 
pain in region of kidneys, burning during micturition are leading 
indications. Ter, corresponds to many cases of albuminuria and 
haematuria after scarlatina ; and also to the consequent dropsy. This 
last may indicate Ter, in many affections of the genito-urinary sphere. 

Burning in uterus ” is very characteristic. Peritonitis, metritis, 
metrorrhagia will probably need Ter. if the burning is present. The 
haemorrhages of Ter. are generally passive ; dark, and fetid. Purpura 
haemorrhagica calls for it if there are fresh ecchymoses in great 
numbers from day to day. The haemorrhages may occur from any 
orifice. Additional keynotes of Ter.j which will be decisive if com- 
bined with others, are : (i) Smooth, glossy, red tongue, as if deprived 
of papillae. (2) Excessive tympanites. (3) Drowsiness. In capillary 
bronchitis, the child is drowsy. Stupor and great weakness are 
found in many Ter, conditions, rendering it appropriate in cases of 
typhus, typhoid, and uraemic poisoning. Drowsy with retention 
of urine.^^ With the tympanites there is generally extreme sensitive- 
ness to touch. With cystitis and uro-genital and rectal troubles there 
is sensitiveness of hypogastrium and pains in symphysis pubis. Pains 
go from left to right across bowels and then shoot upward. From 
being exposed to turpentine odour, a lady, 35, got pain as from 
pinchings in the throat, with lifeless feeling in the tongue and dryness 
of the mouth, followed by pains in r. eyeball, which extended back to 
same side of occiput (Cooper). S. H. Roberts {B. M, y., Dec. 25, 1875) 
maintains Ter. has a specific effect in tonsillitis when applied externally. 
Marc Jousset gave Ter. i x with marked benefit in two cases of bronchial 
asthma. He was led to give it in the first case by coincident haematuria ; 
but this was not present in the second {VArt Med,, April, 1901). A 
remedy may be known by its antidotes and antidotal properties. 
Ter, antidotes and is antidoted by Phos, A young man who was 
badly poisoned by a low attenuation of Phos. got more relief from 
Ter. 3X than from any other remedy, Brunton says it is only 
Ozonised Ter, that is effective here. The preparation I used was the 
ordinary one. Hering says the ozonised oil is recommended as a 
prophylactic in malarial and African fevers, a few drops being given 
daily on a lump of sugar, George Royal {Med. Cent., ix, 70) gives 
three cases illustrating the action of Ter. : (i) Typhoid, third week, in 
man 34. Extreme distension, rapid, small, compressible pulse, cold 



TEREBII4THINA 139S 

sweat in lower limbs. Ter, 6x two drops in water every half-hour. OH 
of Ter, was applied locally to the abdomen mixed with lard, and later 
in the %vening, when there was already slight improvement, an 
injection containing turpentine was administered. This relieved the 
patient of a large quantity of flatus, and next morning he was on the 
high-road to recovery. (2) Pyaemia after abortion at third month, 
brought on by patient herself. Enormous distension ; lower limbs 
covered with cold sweat j lochia thin, scanty, offensive. Ter. given 
in another case brought about slow ' improvement for three 
days, when Chi. Jo was indicated and finished the cure. (3) Team- 
ster, 36, had severe nephritis after being out in cold rain. Constant 
desire to urinate, severe pain in back, down ureter, to bladder ; 
urine scanty, very high-coloured. Temperature 102®. Pulse weak, 
130. Ter. 6x every half-hour ; and hot fomentations on kidneys greatly 
relieved. After three days he was able to leave his bed. Royal 
considers cold sweat of lower limbs, and rapid pulse with the 
distension, as leading indications. A keynote of Burnett’s for Ter. 
is : “ Pains in the bowels which frequent micturition.” Peculiar 
Sensations are : As if he would pitch forward on walking. As of a 
band round head. As if sand thrown violently in eye. As of a sea- 
shell sounding in 1 . ear. In ear as of striking of a clock. As from 
hasty swallowing in epigastrium. As if he had swallowed a bullet, 
which had lodged in pit of stomach. Sense of anxiety and utter 
prostration about epigastrium. Umbilical region as if covered with a 
round, cold plate. As if intestines were being drawn towards spine. 
As if abdomen distended with flatus. As if diarrhoea would set in. 
As if inguinal hernia would appear. As if symphysis pubis were sud 
denly forced asunder. As if foreign body had entered windpipe. As 
from electric shocks. Twitching of limbs. Crawling tingling as if 
parts were asleep. As if hot water running through a tube in nerve. 
Sprained pains, contusive pains, and rheumatic pains appear in the 
pathogenesis, and notably pressure .and drawing pains. These show 
the suitability of Ter. to the effects of injury and rheumatic conditions. 
It is on tjiis property that certain popular embrocations containing 
turpentine owe their reputation. Ter. is specially Suited to : Children 
(dentition, nose-bleed, worms). Bleeders. Nervous women 
(amenorrheea ; dysmenorrhoea ; headache). Complaints of old 
people ; of people of sedentary habits. Chronic rheumatism and 
gouty complaints. The symptoms are : < By touch. < By pressure 
(in region of bladder it s= convulsions). Effects of falls and injuries. 
< Ljnng on left side, > turning to right. Sitting <. Stooping >. 
Motion >. (Pain in crest^of ilium < from motion and least jar.) 
Walking in open air <. < Night; 1-3 a.m. Damp dwellings <. 

Damp cellar ss diarrhoea. Damp weather rs neuralgia in legs. 
{Ter, is hydrogenoid.) Cold waiter > burning in anus. > Belching 
and posing flatus. Loose stool > nausea. 

Relaitons. — Antidoted by : Phos. Antidote to : Phos., Merc. 
Followed well by : Merc. cor. Compare : Botan., Thu., and other 
Coniferae, Haemorrhage in typhus, Alum. Melcena, Arn. Albu- 
minuria, Ars. Smoky urine, dropsy after scarlatina, diy, glossy 
tongue, Lach. (Ter. has more tympanites). Capillary bronchitis. 



TEREBINTHINA 


1396 

drowsiness, lungs clogged up, urine scanty, almost dark from blood, 
Ipec. Dropsy from kidney congestion, Hell. Renal congestion, 
smoky urine, Colch. Urticaria after eating shell-fish, Aps.,*^Urt. ur. 
Glazed tongue, K. bi., Lach., Pyrog. Haematuria, Pul. Burning tip 
of tongue, Mur. ac. Burning in anus and rectum, fainting and 
exhaustion after stool, Ars. Worms, with foul breath, choking, Cin., 
Spi. Purpura, fresh ecchymoses in great numbers from day to day, 
Sul. ac. Burning and drawing in kidneys, bladder, and urethra, Berb., 
Can. s., Canth, Passive haemorrhages, strangury, Camph. Metritis, 
peritonitis, bearing down, burning in hypogastrivvm, cloudy, dark, 
muddy urine, tongue dry, red, Bell. Catarrh in children, Pix. 
Umbilicus retracted, Pb. Kidney-ache, Santal. Warmth at heart, 
Kalrn., Rhod., Lachn. Pains = frequent micturition (Thuj., urging 
to urinate accompanies the symptoms). Rheumatism, Sul. ter, 

Caasation. — Alcohol. Falls. Strains. Tooth extraction. Damp 
cellars. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1 . Mind.— Stupefaction ; inability to fix attention (uraemia).— Mania.— 
Intense nervous excitement. — Children fly into tempers. — Intense irritability, 
with irritation of membranes of brain (csp. in teething children), — Anxiety on 
going to bed. — Facility of thought.— Fears apoplexy ; fulness and pressure in 
head.— Weary of life.— Suicide by hanging in two cases following washing of 
laces in turpentine and alcohol. — (Frightful maniacal temper, wanders about 
at night meaninglessly.— R. T. C.)— Intoxication.— Coma. 

2. Head. — Dizziness, with nausea. — Attack of vertigo, which nearly 
occasions falling, with cloudiness before eyes. — Headache, with pressivc pain 
and disposition to sleep, — Dull headache, with colic. — Sensation of a band 
round head. — Excessive lieaviness, and troublesome pressive fulness in head. 
—Tearing cephalalgia,— Rending, tickling pain in 1. temporal region, coming 
and going while in bed in evening ; rubbing removes it.— Erysipelas capitis. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes sunk. — Ciliary neuialgia with acute conjunctivitis. — 
Amblyopia potatorum. — When walking in open air, musca? volfiantes and 
transient dizziness. — Photophobia. — Rheumatic iritis. — Contracted pupils. — 
Half-opened, up-turned or rolling eyes. — Opened eyes only when swallow- 
ing. — Spots and black points before eyes. 

4* Ears. ^Voice sounds unnatural, ^ r. ear. — Sensation in ears as of 
striking of a clock. — R. ear hot, 1, cold.— Otitis. — Otalgia. — (Earache in 
children < in 1. ; and at night. — K. T. C.) — The internal use of Ter, prevents 
otitis after syringing Eustachian tube (Eugene Weber).— Deafness after 
measles with high vascularity of meatus and membranes (R. T. C.)— Eczema 
in front of ear. — Sudden stitch in r. mastoid process. — Tinkling in ears, — 
Cannot tell direction of sounds. — Loud talking is very painful. 

5. Nose. — Discharge of serum from nose, without coryza.— Violent 
nose-bleed. — Passive epistaxis in children. 

6. Face*' — Pale, earthy colour of the face. — Herpes on lips. 

7* Teeth. — Toothache, with drawing pain. — Gums detached, easily 
bleeding, with pain as from a burning wound, every morning.— Gumboils 



TEREBINTHINA 1397 

form in a child under Ter. (R. T. C.).— Dentition : suppressed urine and 
convulsions. 

8. *Mouth. — ^Tongue red, smooth, and glossy, as if deprived of papillae. 
—Coating of tongue peels off in patches, leaving bright red spots ; or entire 
coating peels off suddenly, leaving tongue dry and red ; burning on tip. — 
Tongue swollen hard and stiff even without fever. — Foul breath. — Burning in 
mouth, — Ulcers in mouth. — Mercurial ptyalism ; stomacace. — The child 
dribbles (R. T. C.). — In mouth and angles of lips ecchymoses which bleed. — 
Stomatitis from mouth to anus. 

g. Throat .-•-Scraping, scratching in throat, frequently with coughing 
in evening. — Burning in throat. — An agreeable coolness in throat. — No power 
over deglutition. 

• 10. Appetite. — Hunger and thirst with debility. — Loss of appetite, great 
thirst. — Desire to eat more ; after a satisfying meal. — Diminished appetite. — 
Aversion to animal food. — After eating : sick at stomach ; loud rumbling in 
bowels, while pain in hypochondrium disappears ; pressure in scrobiculus and 
distension of abdomen. — Warm drinks s burning in chest. 

11. Stomach. — Eructations : rancid ; flatulent, acrid. — (Continual loud 
eructations and belching up of much flatus. — R. T. C.)-~Belching and 
nausea. — Nausea and vertigo. — Vomiting : of mucus ; of yellowish mucus ; of 
fftod ; of blood, — Retching and vomiting of mucus. — Excessive sensitiveness 
of region of stomach to touch. — Pressure at stomach and in scrobiculus ; as 
from hasty swallowing ; as if he had swallowed a bullet, which had lodged 
there. — (Severe circumscribed flatulent pain below scrobiculus cordis, — 
R. T. C.) — Pressing in stomach : > by belching ; when lying on 1 . side, > 
turning on r. and passing wind. — Burning sensation in the stomach. 

12 . Abdomen. — Burning sensation and pressure in hypochondria. — 
Pressing below diaphragm, extending 1 . to r. — Colic from calculi ; chronic 
liver complaints. — Pressing and cutting in 1 . h3’‘pochondriac region while 
sitting, > moving about. — Pressure, burning sensation and drawing in renal 
region. — Abdomen very sensitive to touch. — Heaviness, fulness, and pressure 
in abdomen. — Slight pressing pain in small spot in epigastrium , > stooping, 
lying down, or taking a deep breath. — Distended abdomen ; frequent colic. — 
Meteorism. — Cuttings in epigastrium and hypogastrium, often extending into 
thighs.— Sensation of excessive coldness in abdomen, esp. in exterior of 
umbilical region, which is retracted. — Pains shooting across bowels from 1 . 
to r. and upward. — Inflammation of intestines. — Noise, gurgling, and 
borborygmi in abdomen. — Ulceration of bowels ; peritonitis ; with tympanites. 
— Great but obscure pains in lower abdomen. —Sensation of pressure outwards 
in inguina, as if caused by a hernia. — Painful swelling of inguinal glands. 

13. Stool and AnuSj— Constipation, with distension of abdomen. — 
Ineffectual urging. — ^Tenesmus, bloody stools. — Constipation ; with abdominal 
distension. — Hard, scanty faeces. — Dry, brown evacuations. — Faeces of the 
consistency of pap, with pinchiqgs in abdomen, and burning sensation in 
rectum and anus (^ter stool). — Stools consisting of mucus and water ; < in 
the morning.— Intestinal catarrh and diarrhoea, with nephritis.— Loose, liquid 
faeces, of a greenish yellow, with expulsion of taenia and lumbrici. — With a 
loose stool, immediate cessation of nausea. — Stools : frequent ; profuse ; fetid ; 
bloody. — Haemorrhages : from bowels ; with ulceration ; epithelial degenera- 



TEREBINTHINA 


1398 

tion ; passive.— Diarrhoea with tetanic spasms.— Piles, internal, bleeding.— 
Burning and tingling in anus > applying cold water. — Worms : with foul 
breath and choking sensation ; dry, hacking cough ; spasms, — Threadworms. 
— Burning sensation and tingling in anus (with the sensation as if ascarides 
would crawl out), during evacuations, and at other times. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Pressure in the kidneys when sitting, going off 
during motion. — Sensation of heaviness and pain in region of kidneys. — 
Violent burning drawing pain in region of kidneys. — (Nephritis that follows 
an irritation of the skin. — R. T. C.)— Frequent desire to urinate. — Transient 
movement in region of bladder during a stool as if blacJder were suddenly 
distended and bent forward. — Spasms from any attempt to urinate. — Sup- 
pressed secretion of urine. — Strangury, followed by soreness.— Diminished 
secretion of urine. — Secretion of urine considerably augmented. — Urine 
smelling strongly of violets ; deposit of mucus, or thick, muddy deposit. — 
Thick, slimy, yellowish white sediment in urine. — Hcematuria. — Much blood 
with very little urine and constant painful dysuria (produced in a child from 
poisoning. — R. T. C.).— Burning sensation in urethra, felt also when urinating. 
— Urethritis, with painful erections. — Stricture of urethral (Burnett, after 
Rademacher). — Urine scanty and bloody. — Burning sensation, incisive pains, 
and spasmodic tenesmus of bladder. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Spasmodic and incisive drawings in the 
testes (esp. 1 .) and spermatic cords.— Tearing in mons veneris. — Feels as 
if symphysis pubis were suddenly forced asunder. — Spermatorrhoea in man, 
25, no bad habits ; urine turbid, and had a yellowish mucous sediment. — 
Gonorrhoea ; chordee ; gleet, 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Catamenia retarded and scanty. — 
Drawing in thighs and colic as if menses would set in, a week after she had 
had them. — Uterus and ovaries very painful. — Ovarian dropsy. — Terrible 
burning in uterus, with great bearing-down pain ; caused great heat all 
over ; craves drink ; inward heat. — Uterine diseases after wearing pessaries. 
— Fibroids ; bloody leucorrhoea ; burning in uterus ; menorrhagia, black 
blood. — Herpes labialis. — Abortion. — Neuralgia during pregnancy. — Burning 
and bearing down in uterus during urination. — Metritis, lochia checked, 
burning in uterus. — Peritonitis after confinement from tight-lacing. ‘ 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Dryness of the mucous membranes of air 
passages; feel hot and congested. — Breath sliort, hurried, and anxious. — 
Choking sensation (worms). — Emphysema. — Cough as if a foreign body had 
entered larynx, spasmodic inspiration. — Dry, hacking cough. — ^Voice gone. — 
Expectoration streaked with blood. — Respiration impeded by congestion of 
lungs. — (Pulmonary hydatids with gangrene. — W. Begbie.) 

18. Chest. — Burning in the chest ; along the sternum. — ^After spasmodic 
cough, soreness of lower chest. — Pressing behind sternum. — Spastic con- 
traction of muscles of chest and neck. — Rales and grepitation through both 
lungs. — After warm drinks burning in chest along sternum, gradually spread- 
ing through whole chest, disappearing with stitches at both nipples. 

19. Heart. — Frightful oppression in praecordial region. — Warmth in heart 
while sitting in evening, obliged to yawn a great deal, with collection of water 
in mouth. — Palpitation. — Pulse : quick, small, thready, almost imperceptible ; 
intermitting ; irregular. 



TEREBINTHINA 


1399 


20. Neck and Back.— Drawing in nape, extending to occiput. 
—Drawing pain in the back and loins, esp. in evening, when seated.— Pain 
and incueased warmth in lumbar region. — Backache and soreness in kidney 
affections. — Pressive pain in back extended up between shoulders and there 
became a throbbing. 

21. Limbs.— Numbness of limbs.— Heaviness.— Nerves sensitive.— In- 
tense pains along larger nerves. — Dropsy. — Coldness. — Sudden twitching of 
limbs as from electric shocks.— Drawings in limbs.— Heaviness of limbs.— 
Sensation of stiffness in all the muscles, with difficult, slow, stooping gait, as 
in old age. • 

22. Upper Limbs. — Sprained pain in muscles of 1. upper arm. — Draw- 
ing in bones of upper arms.— No control over hand when attempting to write. 
— iTrembling of hands. — Fingers insensible.— Neuralgia brachialis or sub- 
scapularis. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Insensibility.— Staggering gait.— Infantile paralysis 
greatly ameliorated (J. Simon).— Drawing and tearing in hips and thighs.— 
Pain from hip to forehead ; or from kidneys. — Drawing along thigh. — Pains 
in groins extending to thighs. — Erythema in thighs and body resembling 
scarlet rash.— Contracting spasms of thigh muscles during remission of 
neuralgia.— Swelling and stiffness of r. knee with pain in calf and swelling 
of* vastus externus. — Profuse sweat on legs, evenings, in bed. — Intense 
neuralgia, esp. in damp weather. — Tearing in feet, now here now there ; 
chiefly in soles and heels.— Dropsy. 

24. Generalities, — Haemorrhage from the urethra. — Worms, particularly 
lumbrical.— Some forms of gonorrhoea. — Great prostration. — Occasional 
subsultus. — Spasms every time she saw water, or heard it poured, or saw a 
bright object, or attempted to urinate (from applying turpentine to feet; 
Cahih. relieved).— Violent convulsive paroxysms producing the most frightful 
opisthotonos. — (Chorea. — R. T. C.) — Shooting, lightning-like pains. — Neuralgia 
with sensation of coldness in nerve, occasionally like hot water running 
through a tube.— Has no power of balancing body, stands with feet apart. — 
Dropsy. — Natural heat increased. 

25. Skin. — Eruption like scarlatina. — (Scarlatina eruption slow in 
appearing!)— Purpura hiemorrhagica. — Skin warm and moist,— Pale-red 
elevated blotches becoming vesicles.— Erythema.— Erysipelas bullosa.— 
Violently itching vesicles.— Chronic jaundice. — Excessive itching, stinging 
burning of skin. — General increased sensibility. 

26. Sleep*~~Lethargy.— Retarded sleep.— Agitated sleep at night, with 
tossing, land frequent waking. — Many dreams. — Nightmare. — (Wakes 
frightened at night, looks ghastly and shrieks, is nervous. — R. T. C.) 

27. Fever.— Cold, clammy perspiration all over the body.— Fever, with 
violent thirst.— (The child is iross and irritable, temper changeable, has a dry, 
short cough and aching in limbs and head with feverishness. — The little girl 
is feverish and fretful, and bursts out crying and is very restless in sleep. — 
R. T. C.)— Profuse perspiration on 'the legs in bed in the evening. 



t4<x> 


TETRADYMITE 


Tetradymite. 

Rare crystals from North Carolina and Georgia, containing about 
6o parts of Bismuth, 33 of Tellurium, 6 of Sulphur, and traces 
of Selenium and Iron.” Trituration. 

Clinical. — Coccygodynia. Nails, ulceration of ; ingrowing. Tendo Achillis, 
pain in. Urticaria. 

Charaoteristios. — Hering proved TetradymiVCf taking about 
five grains of the ist trituration. The most prominent symptoms were 
pains occurring in small spots ; ulcerative pains about the nails, and a 
sharp attack of urticaria from eating shell-fish. Pains in ankles, heels, 
and tendines Achillis were also severe, and these were < rising from 
a seat. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — After waking in morning, made anxious by street noise. 

2 . Head. — Pains in r. temple ; in occiput. 

4. Ears. — Pains in 1. ear, afterwards in r., as if bones sore. ** 

5, Nose. — Repeated sneezing on going out ; with discharge of thin 
mucus. 

8. Mouth. — Toothache r. lower jaw, afterwards 1. — Coated tongue 
became clean. — Bitter taste. 

11. Stomach. — Great hunger in morning. 

12. Abdomen.— Disagreeable feeling in abdomen.— Colic and desire for 
stool. — Burning, pinching-pressive pain in last ribs. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Pasty, scanty, lumpy stool, light yellow, with 
biting burning in anus, — No stool second day ; third day, in morning, scanty, 
soft stool with much pressure and discharge of blood ; in evening another 
soft stool with much black blood. 

' 15. Male Sexual Organs. — Violent erections in morning. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness. — Oppression > by sweat. — 
difficult respiration in back part of throat and larynx. 

18. Chest. — Griping as with pincers, followed by violent sticking in 
upper chest, beneath 1. shoulder, repeated at intervals ; afterwards in 1. elbow, 

20. Neck and Back. — Pain in nape. — Pain in small of back on rising. — 
Severe pain in coccyx and lower extremity of r. ischium, esp. when sitting (an 
old symptom revived). 

21. Limbs. — Pain in 1. leg, and 1. elbow. — Frequent pains in margins of 
nails as if an ulcer would develop, painful on pressure, as if burning and sore 
in small spots, esp. r. middle finger. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Stiffness in 1. arm as if lame < about elbow-joint, 
at part where ulnar nerve is exposed, constant inclination to stretch, twist, 
or turn arm. — ^Violent pain in hands as if in bones or nerves. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Sharp pain through 1. leg. — Tendines Achillis 
(esp. r.) constantly painful as if sprained ; > walking ; < rising from seat. 
—Pain in ankles, violent while sitting, < rising from seat.— Cramp in r. side. 



TEUCRIUM MARUM 


1401 


24. Generalities. — Pains in small spots. 

25. Skin. — Nettlerash, esp. in face after eating crabs ; whole face stiff 
even while eating. — Burning pains as from hot needles. — Crawling itching in 
r. palm. 

26. Sleep. — ery sleepy, weary and ill-humoured while riding in carriage. 
— Awoke 3 a.m. from a dream that a steer was following him, and as though 
he had often had the dream before, which was not so. 

27. Fever. — Sweat, esp. on occiput and on nape ; at night, though the 
night was cool and windows open. 


Teucrium Marum. 

Marum verum. Cat Thyme. N.O. Labiatm. Tincture of whole 

fresh plant. 

Olinieal. — Anus^ Hchnt^ of. Eyelids, tumour of. Fibroma. Hiccough. 
Ingrowing toenail. Nose, catarrh of. Polypus. Psoriasis. Kheumatism. Urethra, 
excrescences in. Worms. 

• Characteristics. — The Germander group of the Labiatie, to which 
the Teucriums belong, had an important place in old herbal medicine, 
and homoeopathy has placed Tcnc, iil on a firm foundation. Stapf and 
others proved it. Marked symptoms of helminthiasis, irritation of 
anus and nose, were elicited, and Tenc, has well justified the labour 
of the provers in this respect. No remedy meets more cases of 
threadworms than Teucr, The nasal symptoms have led to the use of 
Teu^. in nasal polypus. Guernsey gives this as guiding : Polypus with 
stoppage of nose on side lain on; large red pimples under right 
nostril near septum, sore and smarting to touch. A snuff of Tone, has 
been used in some cases in addition to the internal use of the remedy. 
But Teuc. has a relation to new growth in general as well as of the nose. 
It has removed a fibrous tumour of the eyelid ; urethral granulations 
following, gonorrhoea ; and also uterine fibroids. Worms and polypi 
suggest a tubercular taint, and I have used both Teuc, m, and 
Teuc, scorod. in phthisical cases. I was led to think of the remedies by 
reading an article on the latter, and not being able to obtain it I gave 
Teuc, m, in five-drop doses three times a day, to a man of 44 who had 
phthisis affecting the right lung with severe recurrent haemorrhages. 
Teuc, helped him much, and with other remedies he got quite well, and 
has now been at his work for some years. But whilst taking Teuc, 
he noticed that he passed a lar^e quantity of threadzvormsj to which 
he was not at all subject. C. M. Boger (Hahn, Ad., xxxviii. 40) relates 
this case of cough : Patient had with the cough a mouldy taste in the 
throat when hawking up mucus. ^ Expectoration profuse. Rapid loss 
of weight and stren^h. Anorexia. A brother had died of phthisis 
four years before with very similar symptoms. Teuc, in, 3X helped, 
and 20X finished the cure. The italicised symptom is a keynote. 
Teuc. has the craving hunger of the antipsorics and worm remedies ; it 
prevents sleep at night. Nervous, irritable, sensitive. There are many 



1402 


TEUCRIUM MARUM 


rheumatic and gouty symptoms and scapular pains, both in the bones 
and joints. Limbs go to sleep with tingling when sitting. Peculiar 
Sensations are : As if air forced through mucus in ear. As if right 
nostril were partly stopped. As if nail had grown into flesh of right 
great toe. Chill as from abdomen. Sensation as from fleabites. 
Teuc, is Suited to : Old persons and children. When too much 
medicine has produced an over-sensitive condition and remedies fail 
to act. The symptoms are : < By touch. < Sitting. < Stooping. 
< On side lain on. Moving >. Disinclined for exertion. < Evening 
and at night. Desires exercise in open air, whicl\. does not fatigue. 
Warmth <. < Warmth of bed. Wet weather <. 

Relations. — Antidoied by : Camph. Compatible : Chi., Puls., Sil. 
Compare : Botan. Teuc. scorod. Sinking immediately after meals, 
Ars., Cin. Lyc., Sil., Staph. Hiccough, Ign. (Ign., < eating, smoking, 
emotions ; Teuc. after nursing, in infants). Loquacity, Lach. Hyo. 
Singing, Bell, Croc., Hyo., Spo., Strain. Worms, Scirrh., Cin., 
Spi. Phthisis, Bac. Polypus < damp weather, Lemn. Nervous 
phenomena, Nux, Val. Nasal catarrh, K. bi. Nasal polypus, Pho., 
Sang., Sil. Nails growing in, Mgt. aust.. Nit. ac. 

Causation. — Concussion (brain). Injuries likely to set up tetanus. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Slate of irritability, and irascibility, with sensitiveness so 
great that fatigue is produced by merely hearing the conversation of others. 
— Irritability < after eating (with pressure in forehead).->Moroseness. — In- 
dolence, and great aversion to exertion, cither mental or physical. — Excessive 
moral excitement and loquacity. — Irresistible inclination to sing. 

2. Head. — Headache, with dull, spasmodic pain. — Pressive pains in 
head, principally in eyes, forehead, and temples, < on stooping. — Skin of 
forehead feels sensitive to touch. — Tearing by paroxysms, in r. side of 
head (alternating with the same sensation in r. frontal eminence, and in 
1. temple). 

3. Eyes. — Pains in eyes with pressure, as if sand were in them. — Biting 
sensations. — Smarting in eyes, esp. in internal canthi, with redness of con- 
junctiva. — Eyes red and inflamed. — Fibrous tumour inside lower lid, one-third 
inch in diameter ; preventing closing lids ; bedimmed sight ; no pain. — Redness 
and puffiness of upper lids. — Profuse smarting tears in open air. — Eyes 
watery, with an appearance as after weeping. 

4. Ears. — Otalgia.— Shootings and tearings in ears. — Whistling in ears, 
when speaking, or when producing any sound whatever. — A hissing sound in 
ear when passing hand over it, when talking, *or when inhaling air through 
nose with force, — Eruption of scaly tetters on the lobe of ear. 

5. Nose. — Sensation of obstruction in nose. — Tingling in nose. — 
Frequent sneezing, with tingling in nose ; with crawling in nose without 
coryza. — Stinging, lancinating pain in upper part of the nasal cavity. — ^Violent 
crawling in r. nostril, with lachrymation of r. eye. — Sensation as if nostrils 
were stopped ; blowing nose or sneezing does not remove the obstruction ; 
nasal polypus.— Obstruction of nose.— Polypus, with stoppage of the nose on 



TEUCRIUM MARUM 


1403 

the side he lies on ; large red pimple under r. nostril, near septum, sore and 
smarting to touch. — Fluent coryza in open air. 

6 , Fi^ce.* — Sickly, pale complexion, with hollow eyes. — Flushes of heat 
on face, without redness. — On both sides of under lip, two deep furrows with 
elevated edges, — Pressive tearing in zygomatic process, extending to teeth. 

7, Teeth. — Toothache, with tearing pain in roots of teeth and gums (of 
the f. lower incisors). — Pain in teeth and gums during mastication. 

8, Mouth. — Mouth clammy. — Much mucus in mouth. — Smarting as 
from pepper, first on 1 ., later also on r. side. — Smarting and scraping in 
bottom of gullet, and in root of the tongue (esp. 1. side). 

g. Throat. — Sore throat, with shooting pain, and impeded deglutition. 
—Pressure or drawing and tearing in throat. — Frequent necessity to hawk, 
and hawking up of much mucus of a mouldy taste. 

10. Appetite. — Hunger in morning and evening. — Bitter taste in gullet 
after dinner. — Appetite increased. — Sensation of hunger, as if the food were 
unsatisfying, and which hinders sleep. — Cuttings or nausea, with inclination 
to vomit after drinking water. 

11. Stomach. — Regurgitation of food, with bitter taste. — ^Troublesome 
hiccough when eating, with violent blows in scrobiculus. — Little children, 
emaciated, jerking hiccough after nursing, and belching without bringing any- 
thing up. — ^Vomiting dark green mucus ; hiccough with a stitch through 
stomach to back. — Pain in stomach, as from emptiness, with gurgling. — 
Faintness in pit of stomach. — Pressure, and anxious oppression in scrobiculus. 

12. Abdomen. — Colic (cutting pain) after drinking beer or water. — 
Colic, with tearing drawings, under hypochondria. — Incarceration of flatus, 
with drawing, pinching, and gurgling in abdomen. — Pressure in abdomen. — 
Pressure towards inguinal ring, — Frequent emission of silent, hot, hepatic- 
smelling flatulence. — Expulsion of much flatus, having the smell of rotten eggs. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Copious fetid evacuations of the consistence of 
pap.-ir-Crawling in the rectum after stool. — Expulsion of ascarides (with 
creeping and itching, and nightly restlessness ; < from warmth of bed). — 
Frequent itching and tingling in anus, often after the evacuations. — Crawling 
and violent sticking in anus in evening, in bed. — Sw^elling, itching, and creep- 
ing at anus as from ascarides. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Increased secretion of watery (pale) urine. — 
Distressing sensation, as from excoriation, and smarting in the upper part of 
the urethra. — Burning sensation, during and after the emission of urine. — 
Diminished sexual desire. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — ^Sexual desire decreased. — Drawing pain 
behind 1. side of root of penis, extending to 1. side of scrotum, became sore to 
touch. — Pressive, drawing sensation from abdomen into cords and testes. — 
Burning, pressing, biting in fore part of urethra when not urinating. — 
Excrescences in urethra following gonorrhoea removed by injections of 
Teuc, ^ for a week. 

16. Female Sexual Orgarfs. — Smooth pedunculate, pear-shaped 
polypus of vagina, protruding three inches beyond hymen. 

17. Rest»iratory Organs.— Dry cough, excited by a tickling in trachea, 
as if dust had been inspired (which is < by coughing). 

x8. Chest. — Chest loaded, with sensation of dryness in trachea.— Squeez- 



1404 TEUCRIUM MAR.— TEUCRIUM SCOR. 


ing pressure in lower part of chest, with anxious uneasiness (without affecting 
the breathing). 

ig. Heart. — Suddenly In evening pulse begins to be felt, beats rapidly, 
with gout*like pains in fingers. 

20. Back. — Burning in 1. scapula.-— Rheumatic drawihg and tension in 
back. 

21. Limbs. — Rheumatism in the limbs, esp. in bones and joints. — ^Tear- 
ing in the limbs, esp. in the joints.— Jerking of the muscles. — The limbs 
go to sleep. 

22 . Upper Limbs. — Painful heaviness in arms and forearms. — ^Jerking 
of muscles of arms. — Drawing tearing (rheumatic pains) in bones and joints 
of arms, hands, and fingers. — Burning in the tips of fingers. — ^The finger*joints 
bend over easily. — Panaritium. — Painful pulsations and drawing in the fore- 
finger. 

23. Lower Limbs. — ^Jerking of muscles of legs. — Tearings in joints 
and bones of legs, feet and toes. — Pain in great toe, as if the nail were 
entering the flesh. — Nail of r. great toe grows in and ulcerates. — Ingrowing of 
toe-nails with ulceration. 

24. Generalities. — Great irritability and nervous excitement, with 
trembling (sensation in whole body), and dizziness. — Staggering when walk- 
ing ; when walking, placing one foot over another. — Numbness and tinglihgin 
limbs. — Great desire for exercise in open air. — Itching shootings in different 
parts. — [One of the strongest characteristics of this remedy is, patients can’t 
sleep at night on account of an intense itching at the anus (which may be 
produced by ascarides), causing him to toss and roll about all night, the 
itching lasts all night. — Hiccough ; flatus in general. — ^Very dry skin ; entire 
absence of perspiration. — ^Affections in general of the finger-tips ; joints of 
the toes. — H. N. G.] 

25. Skin. — Sensation as from fleabites. — Rash, burning itching. 

26. Sleep. — Sleep retarded in evening. — Unrefreshing sleep, and 
difficulty in waking in morning. — ^Agitated sleep at night, from excessive 
excitement (sleeplessness, esp. before midnight ; goes to sleep late), with vivid 
dreams and frequent starts, — Very vivid, most agreeable dreams. 

27. Fever.— Shivering and shaking, often with icy coldness in hands, 
and frequent yawning. — Chilliness after eating, and when talking about 
unpleasant things. — Heat < in evening, with exaltation and great loquacity. — 
Frequent feeling of flushing in face, without external redness. 


Teucrium Scorodonia. 

Teucrium scorodonia. Wood Germander, Wood Sage. AT. 0. Lal;>iatae. 
Tincture of wl^ole fresh plant. 

Clinical. — Bronchorrhoea. Phthisis. Testicle, tuberculosis of. Tuberculosis. 

GhttmetePistiOft. — T, scorodonia is an extremely bittfer plant with 
the smell and taste of hops, for which it has been substituted. Some 
have observed an alliaceous smell, and Cazin says that it gives a 



THALLIUM 


1405 


garlicky taste to the milk of cows, goats, and sheep which eat it. Dr, 
uriquclion, of Mons {Rev, Horn. Beige, June, 1895, quoted 2 ?. H, 
Fratifaisai Feb., 1896), tells how Dr. Martiny one day, in the Ardennes, 
had occasion to examine a man of thirty who was apparently in the last 
stage of consumption and had a cavity in one apex. Martiny gave 
his opinion that he had not long to live. A year later, being in 
the ^ame district, he called at the house and inquired of a man whom 
he saw there, apparently in perfect health, what had become of the 
invalid. ** / am was the reply. It was the fact, though it took 
some time to convince Martiny of it. An old woman had recom- 
mended him to make a tisane of the Wood Germander which grew 
abundantly about there. He had taken it daily, and got well. [“ A 
similar case,^^ says Cooper, “ was told me by a distinguished scientist. 
Teuc, s. is allied to Marrubium viilgarc (Common or White Horehound), 
a well-known cough remedy ; and to Nepeta glechoma (Ground Ivy), 
which was formerly much used with snail-jelly for chest affections/^] 
Martiny introduced Tcuc. s. into his practice and used a tisane of it 
with much success in bronchorrhoea and consumptive affections with 
tuberculous elements and muco-puruleiit expectoration. I have, 
myself, confirmed this, using the 0 tincture in five or ten-drop doses 
two or three times a day. Criquelion points out that Teuenne has been 
used as a subcutaneous injection in tubercular cases as a substitute for 
Koch^s Tubercuhn. Criquelion had a patient, a farmer of scrofulous 
habit, high colour, thick neck, who had had for ten years an enlarged 
testicle the size of a quince, which he diagnosed to be tuberculous. 
Teuc, s. 6 was given, one drop in four spoonfuls of water ; a spoonful 
three-quarters of an hour before each meal. After three months the 
testicle was softer ; in six months it had almost returned to its 
proper size. 

Relations* — Compare: Bac., Tub., Teuc. m., Helix. 


SYMPTOMS. 

15. M^le Sexual Organs. — Enlarged tuberculous testicle. 

Respiratory Organs. — Bronchorrhoea with muco-purulent ex- 
pectoration. — ^I'ubercular phthisis. 

18. Chest. — Cavity in apex. 


Thallium. 

Thallium. A Rare Metal, TI. (A. W. 2037), Trituration. Solution 

of the Sulphate. 

Clinical* — Baldness. Conjunctivitis. Locomotor ataxy. Paraplegia. 

Charaoteristios. — Thallium is a rare metal discovered by Crookes 
in the residtium left from the distillation of Selenium and named Thal- 
lium (BtnWoc, a green shoot) from the green it gives in the spectrum 
{H. W,, xxxiii. 242). It has been experimented with by Lamy and 



1406 


THALLIUM— THEA 


Marme. Some symptoms of Thai. $«/., which is an energetic poison, 
are included (and distinguished) in the Schema, The symptoms 
observed on animals were from the sulphate, with which Lamy 
experimented {H. xxxiv. 82). Combermale, of Lille, used That. 
with success in the night-sweats of phthisis, but this treatment had 
the effect of causing profuse falling of the hair, so serious as to 
contraindicate its use. Huchard had patients become quite bald in 
several days. Hansen says Thai, relieves the violent pains of tabes 
dorsalis.. 

Relations. — Thai, belongs to the Lead group* of metals, and 
approaches Plumb, closest in its symptoms. Compare : Baldness, 
Jabor., Pilo,, Petr. Baldness and phthisis, Pho. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Hair falls off with great rapidity. 

3. Eyes. — Very frequent conjunctivitis with abundant production 
of mucus. 

8. Mouth. — Ptyalism. 

11. Stomach. — Loss of appetite. — Nausea. — Vomiting. — Pain in stompch 
and bowels, terribly severe lancinations, following each other with the rapidity 
of electric shocks {Thai, sul,), 

12. Abdomen.— Gall-bladder distended (dog).— Coating of liver white 
and granular-looking (duck). — Pain in intestinal canal. — Retraction or 
depression of abdomen {Thai, sul,), 

13. Stool.— Diarrhoea ; bloody stools. — Constipation {Thai, sul,) 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Slow and difficult breathing. 

19. Heart. — Diminished frequency of pulse. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pain of tabes dorsalis. — Trembling and moye or 
less complete paralysis in lower extremities {Thai, sul,), — Great lassitude. — 
Paraplegia (dog). 

24. Generalities. — Emaciation. — Hyperaemia, swelling, and excessive 
secretion. — Anomalies of motion, chorea-like movements. 

27. Fever. — Remedies profuse sweating in some cases of severe illness, 
' — Night- sweats of phthisis. 


Thea. 

Thea chinensis. Tea. N, 0 . Ternstrouiiaceae (Genus, Camellia). 
Infusion. Tincture. Trituration of Theine. 

OUoical.— Delirium ; tremens. Mania ; suicidal ; homicidal. Megrim. Nervous- 
ness. Neuralgia. Paralysis. Sleeplessness. 

Characteristios. — The use of Tea has spread from the older 
civilisations of the East to the newer ones of the West. Tea contains 
an alkaloid, Thein^ which is by some considered identical with Coffein^ 
and both tea and coffee are used to stimulate jaded faculties and 



THEA 


1407 


enable persons to endure fatigue, and get more enjoyment out of 
themselves than they could obtain by mere food. But coffee and tea 
are diffei;^nt in their effects though they may be alike in their 
chemistry. The after-effect of all stimulation is reaction ; unless it 
is kept off by a repetition of the stimulant as the effect of the 
last dose wears off. The sign that the last dose of Tea is v/earing 
off is a nervous, restless, depressed, ill-tempered state, which is 
visible in persons who rely on tea, at about 5 p.m. Another 
symptom is an all-gone, sinking sensation at the epigastrium. Ex- 
cessive tea-drinking is a fruitful source of neuralgia and insomnia. 
It is often noticea in persons who have sensitive kidneys that they 
can never take tea when they are going anywhere, because they are 
compelled to pass water almost immediately after. The symptoms 
of the Schema are made up of observed effects of overdosing and 
some direct provings. In a woman who was addicted to eating 
tea, very pronounced delirium tremens resulted, indistinguishable 
from that caused by alcohol, though there was no alcoholism in the 
case. A woman who kept a pot of tea boiling on the stove and drank 
several bowlfuls every day developed both suicidal and homicidal 
mania ; impulse to jump out of the window ; to cut her baby’s throat 
and throw it downstairs (Jhca cm, Fincke, cured). A friend of mine 
wh(t had been many years in the East and was used to one-storey 
houses, on his return to this country had a curious impulse to jump out 
of the window, which he traced to tea-drinking, and which disappeared 
when he left it off. The homicidal impulse appeared in the dreams of 
one prover (Teste), who was so far from being horrified by his dream- 
murders that he even took pleasure in them after awaking. The talka- 
tiveness of Thea is one of its chief allurements. Among tea-tasters, 
who do not drink the tea they taste, but only hold it in the mouth a 
short time, yet long enough for the mouth to absorb some, there is 
sometimes developed what is known as tea-tasters’ paralysis, affecting 
mostly the lower limbs, with loss of sensation of both upper and 
lower. This case has been recorded : A man after drinking tea had 
pain in epigastrium going through to back, with feeling as if he wanted 
to be sick -and could not, > sitting down and stretching himself 
out. Thuja 30 cured. Guernsey gives these as indications for Thea * 
** Nervous sleeplessness; heart troubles, &c., of old tea-drinkers; 
palpitation of the heart, can’t lie down.” Peculiar Sensations of Thea 
are : As if a foreign body in throat. As if on the verge of fainting. 
As if the stomach hung down relaxed in the body like an empty bag. 
As if the weight of a sheet on the feet would crush the toes. Cold 
sensations are prominent ; cold, damp feeling at back of head ; with 
pain spreading thence to ey<is ; also dryness ; and swelling of mucous 
membrane. The symptoms are : < At night ; on walking in open 
air ; after meals, > Warmth, external (applying hand or warm 
clothes to occiput). < By cold, water. > Warm bath. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Thuj., Fer., Beer. Hering says Coffee- 
drinkers should drink wine, tea-drinkers should drink beer. Beer 
caused in one tea-drinker relaxation of bowels which was > by Port 
wine. But Beer relieved in others nausea; irregularity of pulse ; 
weakness ; sleeplessness ; nervousness and want of confidence. 



THEA 


1408 

Compare : Gone, faint feeling ; sick-headache radiating from one point 
and pain in left ovary, Sep. Averse to work, especially writing, 
Hydrast. Relaxed feeling in stomach, Ipec. Desire for aqds, Ver., 
Sul., Ant. c., Phos., Sbi. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Delirium; with ecstasy, laughed incessantly, talked in 
rhyme. — Delirium tremens (from eating tea). — Sensation as if impelled to 
suicide, to jump out of the window, put her baby in the boiler with the 
clothes, cut its throat while cutting bread, throw it downstairs (from excessive 
tea-drinking, cured with Thea cm, Fincke). — Temporary exaltation. — Dis- 
position to quarrel at the most harmless speech. — Great nervous excitability 
with exaltation of intellectual faculties. — Nervousness and want of con- 
fidence. — Peevish ; ill-humoured. — Nocturnal fright, suicidal thoughts. — 
During the sleepless nights the mind was in a state of most active and 
persistent thinking in spite of all attempts at forgetfulness {Thein, gr. 12). 

2 . Head. — Vertigo ; with darkness before eyes ; sudden in open air. — 
Rush of blood to head, with sensation of fulness, esp. in forehead over eyes. 
— Excessively disagreeable headache with throbbing of carotids. — 5 ijck- 
headache ; cliiefly at menstrual period ; pain seems to begin in 1. ovary and 
stomach and go to head. — Neuralgic pain in nape like a cold flat-iron between 
skin and skull passing over whole cranium to forehead region, excruciating. — 
Throbbing, shooting in temples extending to nose ; with great acuteness of 
smell. — Every heart throb felt at vertex. — In occiput ; tearing pain ; feeling 
of damp coldness; electric shocks; pain extends to r. shoulder; > 
application of hand or warm cloth. — Scalp tender ; on vertex ; can scarcely 
comb hair. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes : unusually bright, with dilated pupils ; glittering ; 
dry, with neuralgia of eyes. — Sight : dim ; dark before eyes ; fiery lines ; 
sparks. 

4. Ears. — Neuralgic pains in cartilages of ears, with icy coldness ; 
impossible to warm them ; pains extend to malar bones. — Hallucinations of 
hearing ; for four nights in succession waked thinking he heard the door bell 
distinctly. — Roaring in ears. 

5. Nose. — Nose-bleed before menses. — Sensation at root of nose as if 
epistaxis would occur. — Dryness ; soreness of nose. 

6. Face. — Wild, distressed expression. — Face: pale; with congested 
redness ; flushed. 

8. Mouth.— Teeth frequently decayed. — Tongue ; clean and pale ; red ; 
blistered ; painful as if scalded, — ^Whole buocal cavity dry and sensitive. — 
Much viscid saliva. — Bitter taste in mouth. 

9, Throat. — Diphtheritic sore throat. — Uneasy feeling in pharynx, as 
if obstructed by a foreign body. — Painless swelling of mucous membrane. 

II. Stomach. — Very hungry, but little satisfies. — Empty feeling,, and 
faintness.— Thirst ; but every mouthful of cold water affects the head like 
a shock. — Craves acids ; lemons. — Nausea ; and vomiting after eating (cured). 
— Vomits bile, never food, when pain at its height. — Weakness about stomach ; 



THEA 


1409 


it seems to hang in the body like an empty bag.— Empty, sinking, craving, 
gone feeling ; pressure ; tickling ; sensitiveness, at stomach. 

12. At>domen. — ^After lunch, stitch below ribs, r. to 1. side, in 
paroxysms, — Intestines relaxed. — Liability to hernia. 

13 Stool and Anus.— Swelling of lower end of rectum, with slight 
itching. — Chronic relaxed bowels < l3y beer, > by port wine. — Constipation. 

14. Urinary Organs. — V^ery marked increase of urine. — Must pass 
water immediately after drinking tea. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Erections. — Unnatural excitement. 

16. Female Sdxual Organs. — Soreness and tenderness of r. ovary. — 
Menses delayed, scanty, with severe cramp-like, uterine bearing down from 
beginning to end of period. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — CEdema of respiratory tract. — Scraping in 
larynx. — Hoarseness. — Cough : dry ; severe and bloody expectoration. — 
Respiration increased in frequency and amplitude. — Breathlessness on least 
exertion. — F^aroxysm of asphyxia. 

18. Chest. — Chest : oppressed ; constricted ; fluttering in 1. side with 
fulness about clavicles, and feeling- of suffocation ; tight across upper part 
compelling her to sit up in bed. 

19. Heart. — Anxiety in praecordium. — Anxious oppression, anguish. — 
Spaffem in region of heart. — As if on the verge of fainting. — Palpitation; 
violent. — Pulse : full, quick ; feeble, irregular, intermittent. 

21. Limbs. — Paralysed numbness of extremities. — Joints of hands and 
feet tender. — Nervous excitability in wrists, hands, and feet. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Violent pains inside arms under elbow wake her 
after half an hour. — Hand trembled violently, could not be held still more 
than a few seconds ; regular writing impossible {Them, gr. 12). 

23. Lower Limbs. — Sensation in under side of either or both thighs, 
as if circulation had ceased, causing great uneasiness and desire to kick out 
leg td restore sensibility. — Neuralgic pains in outer hamstrings. — Restless- 
ness of feet. — Sensation as if the weight of a sheet even would crush toes. 

24. Generalities. — Enormous indolent swellings or tumours appear 
successively on back, thighs, hands, scrotum and penis, each lasting two days 
(Teste). — ^Trembling. — Epilepsy (in a child from swallowing a concentrated 
infusion). — Convulsions. — Languor. — Faintness. — < Afternoon. 

25. Skin. — Skin dry as if pores obstructed. — Skin of finger-ends peels 
from excessive dryness. — Eruption ot red, indolent pimples. — Itching, 
crawling, prickling in different parts. 

26. Sleep. — Sleeplessness. — Awoke suddenly as from a struggle of 
incubus. — Nightmare (esp. from green tea).- -Horrible dreams, of murdering 
people; caused me no horror, and even after waking I found pleasure 
for a long time in the hideous remembrance. 

27. Fever. — Intense coldness passing over whole head. — Lowered tem- 
perature. — Hands and face cold as rnarble, and bedewed with clammy per- 
spiration. — ^Almost immediate increase of general heat. — Excessive internal 
heat, with flushes of heat on the surface, coming and going quickly. — Dis- 
position to perspire. — Bedewed with chilly moisture. 


VOL. IL 


90 



1410 


THERIDION 


Theridion. 

Theridion curassavicum. Orange spider. N. 0 , Arachnida. Tincture 

of the living spider. 

Clinical. — Angina pectoris. Anthrax of sheep. Bone, affections of. Caries. 
Climaxis. Cough. Dysmenorrhoea. Eye-teeth, pains in. Fainting. Headache. 
Hysteria. Liver, disorder of ; abscess of. Meniere’s disease. Nausea. Necrosis. 
Nose, catarrh of. Ozajna. Photophobia. Phthisis florida. Pregnancy, sickness of. 
Rickets, Scrofulosis. Seasickness. Spinal irritation. Tetanus.' Toothache. Vertigo. 

Characteristics. — Therid. was introduced and proved by Hering 
in 1832. The spider is found in the West Indies, chiefly in the island 
of Cura9oa. It is about the size of a cherry-stone, is found on orarige- 
trees, velvety black when young, with antero-posterior lines composed of 
white dots; on posteriorof body there are three orange-red spots, and on 
the belly a large square yellow spot. It is very poisonous. It produces 
a highly sensitive, nervous condition with weakness, trembling, cold- 
ness, anxiety, faintness, and easily excited cold sweat. There are two 
well-marked keynotes, one or other of which will be found in most 
cases calling for Therid. (i) Extreme sensitiveness to noise ; < by 
least noise ; sounds penetrate the teeth. The sensitiveness extends to 
vibrations of any kind, jar of a step, riding in a carriage or in a boat. 
The symptom also shows the relation Therid. has to bony structures 
as well as to the nervous organs they enclose : it meets cases of 
spinal irritation ; and also cases of disease of the spinal and other 
bones. Caries, necrosis, and scrofulous disease of bones have all 
been cured with it. “ In scrofulosis when the best remedies fail 
to relieve” (H. C. Allen). (2) “ < Closing eyes.” This applies to 
vertigo, and symptoms of the head and stomach. This forms the 
indication in many cases of seasickness, or sickness of pregnancy. 
The headaches are severe and affect the eyes, especially the left. The 
ears are highly sensitive. There are hallucinations of sight and hear- 
ing, luminous vibrations, and rushing sounds. Although there is 
< closing eyes,” there is also intolerance of light. A ^species of 
intoxication is induced, hilarity, talkativeness. “Time passes too 
slowly ” is a well-marked symptom. Therid. has a peculiar cough : 
frequent, convulsive, head spasmodically jerked forward, knees jerked up 
to abdomen. Chackravanti (if, IF., xxxvi. 345) relates a case of headache 
cured with Thcnd. : Mr. B., 35, well built, of bilious temperament, had for 
three months severe headache with nausea and vomiting, like sea- 
sickness, and shaking chills. Dulness and fulness in the head with 
throbbing beginning in occiput, preceded by flickering before the 
eyes. Head feels large and heavy. The pains begin in the morning, 
increase during the day, and last till evening. Excessive irritation, 
with loss of sustaining power. < Ffom least overwork and motion ; 
> by keeping quiet in horizontal position. Constipation, stools hard, 
small, dry. Therid. 3X was given, one drop in water twice daily. The 
pain was much better next day, and was gone in less than a week. 
Baruch (H. P., viii. 331) says of Therid. “ In cases of scrofulosis, where 
the best chosen medicines do nothing, I jilways interpolate a dose of 



THERIDION 


141 1 


Therid,j which must act for eight days, and I have seen the most 
surprising results from it, particularly in caries and necrosis. For 
phthisis norida Therid. is indispensable, and effects a certain cure if 
given in the beginning of the disease. In cases of rachitis, caries, and 
necrosis I depend chiefly on Therid.^ which, although it does not seem 
to q.ffect the external scrofulous symptoms, apparently goes to the 
root of the evil and effectually destroys the cause of the disease.*^ 
Peculiar Sensations are : As if her head was another strange head. 
As if vertex did not belong to her. Like a pressing pain in root of 
nose and about e^s. As of a veil before eyes. As if too much air 
passed into nose and mouth. Mouth as if furred, benumbed. As if 
some one tapped her on groin when raising leg. As if a lump were 
lying in perinaeal region. Like labour pains in lower abdomen. As if 
a child were bounding in body. As if something in oesophagus were 
slipping towards epigastrium. As if bones were broken and would 
fall asunder. As if dying. Burning pains and itching are common ; 
and a stitch high up in apex of left chest has proved a guiding 
symptom for Therid, in the cure of cases of phthisis. “ Burning in 
liver region ” has led to the cure of abscess and even cancer of that 
organ. The symptoms are < by touch ; pressure ; on ship-board ; riding 
in carriage; closing eyes; jar; least noise. Lying =: pain deep in 
brain ; > flickering before eyes. < Stooping ; rising ; motion ; 
exertion, going up or down stairs ; walking. After washing clothes, 
nausea and fainting. < Every night. Warm water > nausea and 
retching. Warmth >. Cold < ; cold water feels too cold. < By 
coitus (groin pains). < After stool (headache). Left side most 
affected. 

JRelations. — Antidoted by : Aeon, (sensitiveness to noises); Mosch. 
(nausea) ; Graph, (more chronic effects). Follows well : Sul., Calc., 
Lyc. (scrofula). Compare: Aran. d. and Spiders generally. Hemi- 
crani’a < closing eyes, < noise, Sep. (but Sep. < from noise is less 
intense). Vertigo ancl faintness on closing eyes, Lach. Headache, 
nervousness, hysteria, Trn. Stooping down, violent stitch high up 
in 1. chest, .thence to back, Myrt. com. (through to 1 . scapula), Fix (3rd. 
costal cartilage where it joins the rib). Illic. (3rd rib, generally r. side). 
Time passes too quickly (too slowly Can. i., Arg. n., Nux m.). Vertigo 
on closing eyes, Lach., Thuj, (on opening them, Tab. ; on looking up. 
Puls. Sil.). Headache < lying down, Lach. Nasal catarrh, thick 
yellow greenish discharge. Puls., Thuj. Spinal irritation, Chi. s. 
Bites tongue in sleep, Ph. ac. (Ph. ac. sides ; Ther. tip). Eflect of 
washing clothes, Pho. Lump in perinaeum, Arg. n. (Sep. in anus). 
Scrofulosis ; deep-in headache, Bac., Tub. As if a child bounding in 
body. Croc., Thuj. * 

Causation. — Sea-travelling. Riding. Washing clothes. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — ^Joyous ; he sings, though the head is internally hot ; oppressed 
and heavy. — Imaginative excitement in head at night with rushing in ears. — 
Talkative ; after spirituous beverages. — Inclined to be startled, — Time appears 



1412 


THERIDION 


to pass rapidly, although he does little.— Despair, want of self-confidence, he 
gives himself up. — Tries to occupy himself constantly, but finds pleasure in 
nothing. — Sluggishness, with disinclination to rising in morning. — ^Tninking is 
hard when it is of a comparative nature, but not when it is creative. 

2. Head.— -Vertigo : on turning around ; < stooping ; with blindness 
caused by pain in eyes ; with nausea increased to vomiting ; in sleep, waking 
her at II p.m. ; with slow pulse ; from every noise ; on board vessel. — ^When- 
ever she closes her eyCvS, nausea and vertigo < by noise and motion. — Head- 
ache : at the beginning of every motion ; evening when walking, with 
depression ; deep in brain, so that she must sit up or walk, it is impossible to 
lie. — Thick feeling in head: with nausea and vomiting on least motion, < 
closing eyes ; as if it were another head, or as if she had something else upon 
it. — Oppression and heavine^>s hindering his studies. — Painless, indescribable 
sensation. — Headache like a band in root of nose and around ears. — ^Violent 
frontal headache, with heavy, dull pressure behind eyes. — Headache on begin- 
ning to move. — Headache deep in sockets of eyes, < I. — Throbbing or pres.sive 
headache, sudden, over 1 . eye. — Aching behind eyes. — Stinging in 1 . temple. — 
Pressing together in temples. — Oppression behind ears, with fulness. — Itching 
on head and nape in evening. — Violent headache, with nausea, cannot bear 
the least noise ; a feeling as if vertex were separated from rest of head, or as 
if she would like to lift it off. — Effects of sunstroke, with most intolei'.int 
headache, nausea and vomiting. — Itching on scalp ; on head and nape, evening. 

3. Eyes. — Twitching in r. eye. — Burning pain internally above inner 
canthus on waking. — Sensitive to light, objects look double ; fluttering, 
nausea, cold hands. — Hard, heavy, dull pressure behind eyes. — Closing eyes 
< ; = nausea, vomiting, vertigo. — Nausea while closing eyes ; changed into 
nausea while opening eyes (which was > by Mosch.). — Vision lost, everything 
seemed very far, as if a veil were before her, with blazing and flickering, when 
closing eyes, then affection of head and weakness. 

4. Ears. — Least noise < ; every shrill sound and reverberation ‘pene- 
trates whole body, esp. teeth, < \crtigo, s: nausea. — Loud noises make tco 
strong an impression (> Aeon.). — Pressure above cars ; fulness behind ears. — 
Violent itching behind ears. — Roaring m cars. — Rushing in ears like a water- 
fall, with impaired hearing. 

5. Nose. — Nose dry, as if too much air passed in ; itching in nose. — 
Sneezing: in evening, with running coryza ; all day, with discharge of water 
from nose, but without coryza ; violent, with frequent necessity to blow 
nose. — Pressure in root of nose and heaviness, — Chronic, offensive-smelling 
discharge, thick, yellow, or yellowish green ; (nasal catarrh ; chronic ozaena). 

6. Face. — Face pule. — Froth before mouth with shaking chill. — Jaw 
immovable in morning on waking and at othei; times of the day, then opening 
involuntarily. 

7. Teeth. — Teeth feel as if cool water were too cold. — Burning and 
tensive pain in teeth, gums and palate^— Every shrill sound penetrates the 
teeth. — Raging pain in all teeth in afternoon and evening, causing weeping, 
but drawing particularly in roots of sound eye-teeth. 

8. Mouth. — Gums, mouth and nose dry, and feeling as if too much air 
passed into mouth. — There is no proper taste, her mouth feels furred, 
benumbed, — Salty taste, hawking of .salty mucus. 



THERIDION 


1413 


9. Throat.— Sore throat; chilly; bones sore; difficult swallowing; 
constipation ; urine scanty and high-coloured. — Pressure in lower part of 
oesophagus towards epigastrium, taking away the breath. 

10. Appetite. — Constant desire to eat and drink, he knows not what. — 
Appetite for acidulous fruit. — Craves oranges and bananas. — Increased 
desire to smoke tobacco.— Thirst : great after midday sleep ; for wine and 
brandy. 

11. Stomach. — Nausea : in morning ; on rising ; from vertigo on least 
motion; on closing eyes; on opening eyes (> Mosch.)] like seasickness; 
when looking ste^ily at an object ; on motion ; on talking ; from fast 
riding in a carriage. — Sensitiveness in region of stomach and epigastrium. 

12 . Abdomen. — ^Violent burning pains in hepatic region < from touch ; 
retching, bilious vomit. — Abscess of liver. — Anthrax of sheep. — Emission of 
more flatus than usual. — Pains m groins ; after coition : in region of groin on 
motion, when she draws up her leg it seems as if someone tapped her hard on 
the groin. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Stool : papescent, scanty, urgent, next day thin 
and scanty, omitted on third day. — Stool difficult towards the end, though not 
hard. — Bowels open twice with colic and flatulency, after winch headache is 
<. — Anus protrudes and is painful, < sitting. — Spasmodic contraction of 
rt^tum and anus. — Heaviness in pennaeal region, which he has had for a very 
long time, is now felt at every step, with feeling of a lump there. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine increa.scd.— Has to rise four or five times 
in night to micturate ; docs not pass much during day. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Red spots on glans. — Erections : strong 
in morning, without desire ; weak during coition ; absent ; desire vanished. — 
Scrotum shrivelled. — Violent and profuse emission during nap after dinner 
(had taken Anise during the day). 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Hysteria, during puberty; atclimaxis. — 
Meirses omitted in a woman at climaxis ; gave birth to a son the following 
year. — Bruised, sore pain 111 both ovarian regions ; < motion and pressure ; 
labour-like pain in lower abdomen, with sensation a^ if child bounding in 
body; tickling in both sides. — DysnicnorrhcDa, intense, in 1 . ovary, with 
intense headache, extreme sensitiveness of the cervix, chilliness, &c. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Cough at night. — Convulsive cough, With 
the peculiar vertigo. — Violent cough, with spasmodic jerking of head forw'ard 
and knees upward, — Increased inclination lo take a deep respiration, to 
sigh. 

18. Chest. — Violent stitches high in chest beneatli 1 , shoulder, felt even 
in throat. — Pinching in 1 . pectoral muscle. — Pressure as if something in 
oesophagus were slipping towards epigastrium, taking away breath for a few 
moments. 

19. Heart. — Anxiety about heart, sharp pains radiate to arm and 1 . 
shoulder.— Pulse slow with vertigo 

20 Neck and Back. — Itching on nape, at top of shoulder and on back. 
— Pain between the shoulders. — Spinal irritation ; great sensitivenessbetween 
vertebrae. — Sits sideways in a chair to avoid pressure against spine, — Could not 
bear least noise, and jar of foot on floor was so aggravating it made her cry 
out. — Loins affected after vomiting. 



1414 


THERIDION— THEVETIA 


21. Limbs.— Heaviness in all limbs after breakfast, necessity to lie down, 
internal chill so that he trembles. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Stinging from elbow to shoulder. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Peculiar drawing in r. hip, passing down thigh in 
evening when sitting and afterwards, with internal coldness below knee ; > 
external warmth. — Knees trouble her in afternoon. — Feet swollen. — Pain in 
little toe as if pressed in walking. 

24. Generalities.— Tetanus with trismus. — Every shrill sound and 
reverberation penetrates her whole body, < teeth, and increases the vertigo, 
which then causes nausea. — Pain in all bones, as if evo/y part would fall 
asunder, feeling as if broken from head to foot, then coldness.— Weakness : in 
morning, with sleepiness ; with tremulousncss and perspiration. — The sudden, 
violent symptoms were > by A coil ; later symptoms were > by Graph. 

25. Skin. — Hard pimple beside ball of thumb. — Itching : on back ; calf; 
nape ; at edge of shoulder in morning ; on nates with knots ; burning, on 
inner and upper part of 1. ring-finger, with redness. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepy in morning. — Sleeps all day. — Deep sleep at night. — 
He often bites tip of his tongue in sleep, so that it is sore next day. — Sleep 
long and dreamful at midday, dreams of journeys in distant regions and of 
riding on horses (in one who scarcely ever sat upon a horse). — Dreams that he 
broke off a tooth. 

27. Fever. — Shaking chill : with foam at mouth ; with headache and 
vomiting. — Sweats easily after walking and driving. — Icy sweat covering body, 
with fainting and vertigo, and vomiting at night. 


Thevetia. 

Thevetia nereifolia. Cerbera thevetia. Ahovai-baum (of the Antilles). 

N. 0 . Apocynaceae. Tincture or trituration of the seeds. 

Clinical. — Diarrhcea. Somnolence. Throat, affections of. Vomiting. 

Characteristics. — J. Balfour observed the effect of eating the 
seeds on two boys, 8 and 6^. This peculiar symptom was noted : 

A tendency to sleep, disturbed every three to four minutes by 
irritation in the throat, and the discharge of a mouthful of frothy mucus 
with a sort of gulp ; then the child would lie down and close his 
eyes until again disturbed.^' 

Relations. — Compare: Apocy. Stroph. Upas. 

STMPTOMSr. 

9. Throat. — ^Tendency to sleep, disturbed every three to four minutes 
by irritation in the throat and discharge ot a mouthful of frothy mucus with a 
sort of gulp ; then the child would lie down and close his eyes again until 
again disturbed. 

II. Stomach.— Vomiting. 

13. Stool. — Bowels moved twice or thrice. 



THIOSINAMINUM 


1415 


Thiosinaminum. 

Allyl sulphocarbamide. (Derived from Oil of Mustard-seed.) Tritura- 
tion of the crystals. Solution in alcohol. 

tilinical . — Adhesions. Cicatrices. Lupus. Lymphatic glands, enlarged. 
Rectum, stricture of. Strictures. Tinnitus aurium. Tumours. 

Characteristics. — Thios, belongs to the same chemical group as 
Urea. The colout less bitter crystals are soluble in water, alcohol, and 
ether. Thios. has been used externally and internally in cases of lupus, 
chronic glandular tumours, and for dissolving scar tissue ; and internally 
for resolving tumours of the uterine appendages. The usual internal 
dose in old-school practice is 4 to 8 grains once a day given hypoder- 
mically in a 15 per cent, solution. C. H. Pennoyer (quoted Pac. C. 
J. ofH. viii. 199) relates this case : Mrs. C., 69, had been several years 
ill with gastric distress, sciatica, pains in hips down to knees ; < by 
motion. Indigestion, flatulence of stomach and bowels, < after eating. 
Pain in back. Inability to walk ; much perspiration ; depression of 
spirits ; and subnormal temperature. Her father had died at 69 of 
stpmach trouble ; mother at 58 of stricture of the bowel. Examina- 
tion showed stricture of rectum two inches above anus, there being a 
tense fibrous band forming a ring opening, which would not admit the 
index linger. Bougies and mechanical measures failed to relieve. 
Weakness was so great, patient would faint at stool. Under general 
treatment nutrition improved, but the local condition was unchanged. 
A year later the stricture was slightly increased. Thios. was now 
given, gr. ii. twice daily. The following year the patient was found much 
improved. Examination showed that the iicatncial band had gonSj the 
speculum could be introduced, and the mucous membrane was normal 
in appearance, though not as distensible as a normal rectum should be, 
W. Spencer {H, il/., xxxiv. 55) has applied this property of resolving 
cicatricial tissues in cases of tinnitus aurium where the ossicles are 
bound down, and the function of the tympanic cavity so much 
impaired by fibrous bands or adhesions.’^ In such cases he has had 
encouraging success. Enlarged lymphatic glands have been reduced 
in the same way. A few symptoms observed on patients under treat- 
ment I have arranged in the Schema with some cured symptoms. 

Relations. — Compare: Bo tail., Sinapis and Cruciferaj. Uterine 
tumours, Thlasp. b. p. Diuresis (also chemical), Urea. Lupus, Tub. 
Cicatrices. SiL, FI. ac. Affections of rectum, Nit. ac., Graph., Scirrh, 

SYMPTOMS. 

4* Ears* — Tinnitus caused by fibrous bands. 

II. Stomach.—Appetite increased. 

13. Rectum.— Stricture of rectum resolved. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine increased in quantity ; no albumen or 
formed elements. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Tumours of uterine appendages. 



i4i6 THIOSINAMINUM— THLASPI B. P. 


17. Respiratory Organs.— Accelerated respiration. 

24. Generalities. — Sensation of heat and burning in affected parts. — 
Bodily weight increased. — Glandular swellings reduced. 

25. Skin. — Distinct local reaction in lupus cases after a few hours. — 
Urticaria. — Lupus. — Scar tissues. 


Thlaspi Bursa Pastoris. 

Capsella bursa pastoris. Shepherd^s Purse. N, 0 . Cruciferae. 

Tincture of fresh flowering plant. 

Clinical. —Abortion, haemorrhai^e after. Dropsy. Dysentery. Dysuria. Fibroma. 
Gall-stones. Gonorrhoea. Haematuria. Haemorrhages. Leucorrheea. Liver, 
affections of. Metrorrhagia. Ranula. Renal calculi. Strangury. Uric acid diathesis. 
Uterus, haemorrhages from ; affections of ; cancer of. Whitlow. 

Gharaoteristios. — Shepherd’s purse/^ says Gerarde, stayeth 
bleeding in any part of the body, whether the juice or the decoction 
thereof be drunk, or whether it be used poultice-wise, or in both, or 
any way else. In a clyster it cureth the bloody flux ; it healeth green 
and bleeding wounds ; it is marvellous good for inflammations new 
beginning and for all diseases which must be checked back and 
cooled.^’ Gerarde adds that the decoction will stop diarrhoea, blood- 
spitting, haematuria, and all other fluxes of blood. Thlasp, is the 
white-man’s faithful friend : “ A native of Europe, it has accompanied 
Europeans in all their migrations, and established itself wherever they 
have settled to till the soil ” {Treas. ofBot.), It does not refuse to grow 
in the poorest soils, but it luxuriates in the richest. Burnett noticed 
that it flourished best in the neighbourhood of dunghills, and the odour 
of the tincture is much suggestive thereof. Some have seen in the 
seed-vessel the signature of the shape of the uterus, and Burnett found 
in it an organ remedy of vast importance. The 0 tincture, he said, is the 
best thing to give for menses that have been checked ; for uterine haemor- 
rhages he preferred the attenuations. He has observed it cause sexual 
excitement like Cantharis, It aided Burnett in the cure of an 
inveterate case of gall-stones, the origin of which he traced to the 
uterus. Dudgeon (i/. H, i?., xxxii. 614) reports a case which reverses 
this. He had treated a lady for jaundice, from which she made a 
good recovery ; but there came on a peculiar discharge after the 
catamenial flux. It was of brownish-green blood and was attended 
with obscure abdominal pains. The cervix uteri was swollen and soft 
but not ulcerated. Dudgeon failed to cure this ; but Rafinesque, of 
Paris, after trying other remedies, succeeded with Thlasp, The 6th 
had immediate good effect. Rafinesque afterwards gave the ^ and 
then again the 6th, and in a few weeks the cure was complete. 
Dudgeon’s article on Thlasp. is the most complete we have. He 
quotes a case of Rademacher’s showing the action of Thlasp. on 
uric acid excretion. A woman whom Rademacher had relieved ten 
years before of a 'large quantity of urinary sand, again presented 



THLASPI BURSA PASTORIS 


1417 


herself ; her abdominal cavity was full of water, extremely swollen, 
an4 she was passing urine of a light red colour with bloody 
sedimeift. Thlasp. 30 drops five times a day, was given solely with 
the idea of stopping the haematuria. But the result was — a more 
copious discharge of urinary sand than ever before ; the urine 
increased, the dropsy disappeared, and the woman W’as cured. 
Dudgeon also quotes a case of Kind’s : A woman had strangury 
three weeks after confinement, she could not retain her urine, which 
dribbled away drop by drop. Thlasp. tp, 30 drops five times a day, 
removed the strangury at once, and in a few days the urine could be 
retained and became clear without sediment. “ Dysuria of old 
persons, when the passing is painful and there is at the same time 
spasmodic retention of it ” is an indication given by Heer. Dudgeon^s 
own cases are no less striking : (i) A lady, 76, had rheumatic muscular 
pains in various parts, and the most abundant secretion of uric acid, 
which passed away with every discharge of urine. Sometimes small 
calculi formed and then there was much paiu in their passage along 
the ureter, but generally it passed in the form of coarse sand, which 
formed a thick layer at the bottom of the utensil. This sand con- 
tinued to pass after the cessation of the rheumatic pains, which lasted 
sLx or seven weeks. Puls.^ Pic. ac.^ Lyc. had no effect. Thlasp. i 
diminished the sand to an insignificant amount. (2) A gentlemen, 57, 
in addition to other dyspeptic symptoms had unusually large dis- 
charges of coarse uric acid, coming away in muvsscs as large as a big 
pin’s head but without pain. Thlasp. i stopped this. (3) Lady, nearly 
80, was suffering from the presence of a calculus in left ureter. She 
had previously passed much sand. Thlasp. i caused a gieat discharge 
of sand and a speedy relief of her pain. Dudgeon also refers to a 
case of Harper’s illustrating the action of Thlasp. 011 the bowels. An 
elderly lady had suffered for years from a copious discharge of muco- 
pus; sometimes mixed with blood, sometimes nearly all blood, which 
passed from the bowels after each evacuation. She had been under 
high homoeopathy, oxygen treatment, and for a long time under 
Harper himself without effect, when he gave Thlasp. (j> in five-drop 
doses and cured the case in a few days. With Thlasp. ix I saved a 
lady who had been curetted several times with small success from 
a further curetting, which was advised as being essential to the cure. 
Thlasp. stopped the haemorrhages, restored the periods to their proper 
term, and the patient immediatcl} began to recover her strength, which 
had been drained to the last degree. There has been no return of 
the trouble. Peculiar Sensalions arc : As of needles or shocks from a 
battery between end of sternum and umbilicus. As if neck and left 
shoulder would break with pain. Symptoms are > bending over. 
Haemorrhages are profuse, periodic ; blood dark, clotted. The toes 
are affected along with cramping pain in stomach. 

Relations. — Compare : C?uciferce, especially Sinapis, Thios. 
(fibroma ; uterine tumours), Matthiol. (inspissated secretions ; 
grows near sewage stream). Renal calculi, Oc. can.. Uric acid; 
pain in shoulder, Urt. ur. Uterine haemorrhages, Trill., Vibur., 
Ustil., Senec. Haemorrhages from bowel, Merc., Nit. ac., Sul., 
Caps., Merc, c., Pho. 



1418 


THLASPI BURSA PASTORIS 


SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Slight headache. 

4. Ears. — Deafness and pain in I. ear. 

5. Nose. — Frequent epistaxis, passive. — Free discharge of blood and 
mucus from 1. nostril. — Dull pain at root of nose. 

8 . Mouth. — Teeth sore on closing jaws.— Gums sore ; neuralgic feeling 
in teeth. — Inside of gums feel as if full of blisters. — Ranula ; caused enlarge- 
ment of submaxillary duct. 

9. Throat. — Soreness of upper part of throat.— Sw^ling of throat and 
face, < 1 . side.— Tonsils swollen. — Throat dry on swallowing. 

11. Stomach. — Nausea. — Cramping pain in stomach ; toes hurt as well 
as stomach. — Sick, faint feeling in stomach. 

12. Abdomen.— Gall-stone colic; liver affection being secondary to 
uterine condition (Burnett).— Pain between end of sternum and umbilicus, like 
needles or an electric shock.— Severe cramping pain > bending over. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Passage of blood.— Obstinate and copious muco- 
purulent discharge from bowels, more like pus than mucus ; discharge never 
comes till freces have entirely passed (cured in a few days with ^ five drops, 
after years of other treatment. — Harper). 

14. Urinary Organs.— Hiematuna.— Urine burning, passing frequently, 
of strong odour, — Copious discharge of urinary sand, increased flow of urine, 
relief of dropsy. — Renal calculus. — Increased quantity of urine with brickdust 
sediment. — Strangury after accouchement ; dribbling of urine. — Dysuria of 
old persons ; with dribbling. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Sexual excitement.— Metrorrhagia ; with 
uterine colic ; in hremorrhagic chlorosis ; in sequelae of abortion or labour.— 
Premature menstruation ; first day she hardly had a show, second day a 
haemorrhage with severe colic and expulsion of clots, flow lasted eight to 
fifteen days, left a state of exhaustion which was not recovered from before 
the next period came on ; this proved very profuse, next less so. — Haemor- 
rhages : with violent uterine colic and cramps ; consequent on abortion ; at 
critical age ; with cancer of cervix ; or fibroids.— Too frequent apd copious 
menstruation, esp. in persons of a relaxed constitution.— Hemorrhages dark, 
with clots.— Suppressed or checked menses. — Menses delaying from inertia. — 
Leucorrhoea : bloody, dark, fetid, before and some days after menses, which 
were profuse and dark.— Haemorrhages after abortion.— Following an attack 
of jaundice, after menses a discharge of brownish-green blood, with obscure 
abdominal pains ; cervix swollen and soft but not ulcerated {Th» b, p, 6 gave 
immediate relief : 0 and again 6 completed the cure). 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Hoarse in morning with slight sore throat. 
—Haemoptysis. 

18. Chest, — Pulsative pain in 1 . chest. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Pain in 1 . shoulder so great, he thought neck and 
shoulder would break. — Strong, almost painful pulsation in r. radial artery ; 
pulse 84, uneven. — Pains in fingers ; felon on tenth day. 



THUJA 


1419 


Thuja. 

Thuja occidentalis. Arbor Vitae. N. 0 , Coniferae (Tribe, Cupres- 
sineae). Tincture of the fresh green twigs. 

Clinical* — Abdomen^ dhicndcd. Abortion. Angina pectoris. Anus, fistula in ; 
fissure of. Asthma. Balanitis. Cancer, Catalepsy. Chorea. Clavus. Con- 
dylomata. Constipation. Convulsions. Coxalgia. Diarrhoea. Disparunia. Dys- 
niienorrhcea. Ear, fblypiis of. Enuresis. Epilepsy. Epulis. Eyes, lumours of; 
gramdar titfiammation of. Fatty tumours. Feet, fetid. Flatus, incarcerated. 
Frontal sinuses, catarrh of. Ganglion. Gleet. Gonorrhoea. Ilaiinorrhage. Haemor* 
rhoids. Hair, affections of. Headache. Hernia. Herpes zoster. Ichthyosis. 
Intussusception. Jau\ g'oufth on. ]oinlb, cracking in. Levitation. Morvan's 
disease. Mucous patches. Muscaj volitantes. Myopia. Njcvus. Neck, cracking 
in. Onanism. Ovary, left, pain in Oznena. Neuralgia. Nose, chronic catarrh 
of ; polypus of. Paralysis. I’etnphigus. Polypus. Post-nasal catarrh. Preg- 
nancy, imaginary. Prodaic, disease of. Ptosis. Rannla, Rheumatism, gonor- 
rheeal. Rickets. Sciatica. Seminal emissions, nocturnal. Sycosis. Syphilis. 
Tea, effects of. Teeth, caiics of. Tongue, ulcers of ; Viiting of. Toothache. 
Tumours. Vaccination. Vacemosis. Vaginismus. Warts. Whooping-cough. 

Chapacteristics. — The American Arbor Vitie is a ^‘spiry ever- 
gften attaining a height of from 20 to 50 feet, though generally not 
above 40, and a diameter of about 10 to 20 feet through the greatest 
breadth of foliage.^^ It abounds in the upper zones of North 
America, from Pennsylvania northwards, where it “ often forms what 
are commonly known as cedar- swamps. It grows upon the rocky 
banks of rivers, and in low, swampy spots, blossoming from May until 
June and maturing its fruit in autumn. The Arbor Vitae assumes a 
conical form with such true lines as to appear ‘ clipped,^ thus form- 
ing one of our most valued high-hedge trees’’ (Millspaugh). Thuja 
was introduced to France from Canada in the reign of Francis I. of 
France, and it has now an honoured place in most of our gardens 
and shrubberies. The native h«ibitat of Thuja is not without its 
importance in relation to therapeutics. It loves swamps ; it is 
Hahnemann’s typical antisycotic and Grauvogl’s hydrogenoid. Thuja 
is one of Hahnemann’s discoveries. Most of the remedies of his 
materia medica had been known in a fashion before his time. Of 
the therapeutic properties of Thuja practically nothing w'as known 
till Hahnemann proved it. Subsequent observers have only confirmed 
or added to Hahnemann’s pathogenesis. Hahnemann found in 
Thuja the antidote to the miasm of the condition which he termed 
SycosiSj meaning thereby the constitutional disease resulting from con- 
stitutional gonorrhoea, and having as its characteristic manifestation 
excrescences, sometimes dry in the form of warts, more frequently soft, 
spongy, emitting a fetid fluid with a sweetish odour something like 
herring brine, bleeding readily apd having the coxcomb or cauliflower 
form. Teste remarks that in the period when the doctrine of Signa- 
tures prevailed the “ resinous callosities of the stems and leaves of 
Thuja occ. might have seemed an indication that the plant was the 
specific for sycosis and warts.” Teste dismisses this idea, but he asks 
whether resinous substances which have the power of modifying 



1420 THUJA 

vegetable juices in a peculiar way may not affect the animal fluids in 
the same manner. He includes Castor* in his Thuja group, and gives 
an instance in which it acted on lig-warts. Castor* is the piwduct of 
an animal which subsists on the bark of resinous trees.— Hering gives 
this as the action of Thuja (i) on the fluids : dissolution of fluids of 
the body, which become acrid, probably caused by Thuja perverting 
lymphatic secretions ; disturbs digestion and sangiiilication ; and this 
( 2 ) in the vegetative sphere : A surplus of producing life ; nearly 
unlimited proliferation of pathological vegetations, condylomata, warty 
sycotic excrescences, spongy tumours, and spongy pock exudates 
[which] organise hastily ; all morbid manifestations are excessive, but 
appear quietly, so that the beginning of the diseased state is scarcely 
known. Boenninghausen found Thuja both preventive and cura- 
tive in an epidemic of small-pox. It aborted the process and 
prevented pitting. In veterinary practice Thuja has proved cura- 
tive in farcy and in “ grease.’' These facts open up another great 
branch of Thuja's homoeopathicity — its anti-vaccinal action. This 
extension was made by Kunkel and Goullon following on Boenning- 
hausen’s experience with small-pox. On this subject no one has 
written more forcibly or lucidly than Burnett (Vacanosis and its Cure 
by Thuja)* Arbor Vita: nomen omenj' says Burnett on his title- 
page. And in his hands Thuja has proved indeed a tree of life to 
numberless sufferers from the vaccinal taint. By vaccinosis’^ 
Burnett means the disease known as vaccinia, the result of vaccina- 
tion, plus that profound and often long-lasting morbid constitutional 
state engendered by the vaccine virus.’’ To this state Thuja is 
homoeopathic, and therefore curative and preventive of it. Burnett 
makes the profound observation, which I can confirm, that the 
vaccine virus does not need to take ” (that is, to set up vaccinia) in 
order to produce the vaccinal dyscrasia : that not a few persons 
date their ill-health from a so-called unsuccessful vaccination.” So that 
vaccinosis may exist apart from vaccinia. The antivaccinal action of 
Thuja is part of its antisycotic action : vaccinia is a sycotic disease. 
Burnett gives the case of an infant ten weeks old, whom he was 
called to see as it was supposed to be dying. He found 'it ghastly 
white and in collapse. There was nothing to account for this except 
that the baby had had its wet-nurse changed two or three days before. 
The wet-nurse was questioned and declared herself quite well and 
looked it ; but her arm was a little painful.” She had been re- 
vaccinated in the Marylebone Workhouse the day before she took 
charge of the patient. Burnett found the vaccine eruption just turn- 
ing into the pustular stage. He concluded that the infant was sucking 
the vaccinal poison with its nurse’s milk. * He gave Thuja 6 to both 
infant and nurse. The baby gradually improved the same day, and 
next morning was, though still pale, practically well, and the vaccinal 
vesicles on the nurse’s arm had withered. Burnett quotes a case of 
vaccinal rash in an infant following the vaccination of its mother, who 
was nursing it. The effects of chronic vaccinosis are protean. 
Prominent among them are neuralgias (of which Burnett gives 
many examples), morbid skin disorders, indigestion, and constipation ; 
warts and new growths of many kinds. In these effects a favourite 



THUJA 1421 

method of feurnett's was to give a course of twenty-four numbered 
powders, only three or four of them medicated with Thuja 30 ; one to 
be taken at bedtime. With the same prescription he cured many 
cases of pajj^s, his indicatioBSi bein^ ; Left side of bqdyjj^eij 
< in mornings in wet weather, and in cold : with these indications 
present he also found enlargements of the spleen to dissolve. In 
1889 I was consulted by Mr. A., 38, about a lump, or rather two 
lumps, in the right breast, which was like that of a girl approaching 
puberty, the left breast being quite flat and normal. There 
was a hard, no<> sharply detined lump to the right of the nipple, 
and a smaller one to the left of it, but freely movable, the 
larger somewhat tender and irritated by the pressure of the brace. 
The tumours had existed eighteen months and came on at a time 
of much anxiety when his wife died of consumption. His paternal 
grandmother and two aunts had died of cancer. He had been twice 
vaccinated, but on the second occasion the arm did not “ rise.^^ As a 
small boy his hands were covered with warts. At eight he had 
shingles. On August 15th Thuja lom F.C. was given. October 2ist. — 
If anything tumours a little less. Thuja lom continued at intervals. 
February 4, 1890. — Tumours can only be felt with difficulty. No 
j>ain. The medicine was repeated and when next seen some time 
later the patient was absolutely well. A very much vaccinated lady 
developed at the climacteric indurations in both breasts, especially 
the right. Menses were accompanied by severe neuralgic pains. 
Thuja was given in im, lom, and cm F.C. potencies. The last set 
up attacks of angina pectoris of such intensity that I did not repeat 
it. The indurations disappeared, but in the course of the cure an 
eruption closely resembling sniall-pox developed over lier breasts on 
more than one occasion. The first case I treated honioeopathically 
was one of new growths — a cluster of small warts 011 the forehead of a 
boy which had lasted eighteen months and followed the scratch of a 
cat. Thuja ^ in fractional doses and Thuja (p painted on cured per- 
manently in three weeks. A gentleman, about 50, consulted me recently 
about a\Yart on the right side of his head. He was bald, and the wart 
was black and unsightly. It had been growing some months, and he 
was somewhat anxious about it as his father had had a similar wart 
develop in the same locality at the same age, and it had never left 
him. My patient had been twice vaccinated. Thuja 30, twenty-eight 
powders, one in seven medicated, one at bedtime. In one month there 
was much reduction ; Thuja was repeated, and in little over two 
months the wart was gone. Burnett says Thuja is the remedy for 
fatty tumours, which he regards as sycotic in nature. Thuja not only 
produces symptoms of thtf secondary stage of gonorrhoeal and vaccinal 
affections, it also produces urethritis and a variolous eruption. 
Dudgeon has reported acute urethritis with yellow discharge lasting 
altogether a fortnight as the result of chewing a T ia cone. Mersch 
(H, 3 f., XXX. 686) gave Thuja 3 to a patient as a prophylactic against 
small-pox. This patient and another who took it for the same 
purpose developed simple urethritis. Mersch proved Thuja ip on 
himself and some others : ‘(i) M, N. had rose-coloured blotches on 
the back, and several days after leaving off the medicine had warts 



1422 


THUJA 


develop on the outer side of the root of the thumb. These were still 
present three years after, though smaller and softer. (2) Mersch 
himself, who took Thuja for fifteen days, had heavy sensation in the 
head on waking, an eruption of desquamative annular blotches, 
and from the twelfth day a tearing along the right arm which 
compelled him to keep the arm flexed for eight days, < attempt- 
ing to extend the arm ; slightly > by heat. A small soft Wart 
appeared at the external portion of right middle finger. This 
disappeared a month after the proving was ended. (“ < By exten- 
sion^^ is a characteristic of Thuja; it ss cracking in joints. The 
arm symptoms are also < when the limb hangs down, which is 
also an extension.) Apropos of the annular scaly blotches, I had a 
case of psoriasis of the legs in a youth which was benefited by Thuja 
more than by any other remedy, though the Thuja was given for some 
other affection, A patient came to Raue {H, R., ii. 162) complaining 
that his semen had a very offensive smell. Raue did not know of a 
remedy producing the symptom, but selected Thuja, Two doses of 
the 200th and one of the 15th were taken. The man was at the time 
in the hands of an eminent dentist for his teeth, which for five years 
had been a great trouble to him on account of their extreme sensitive- 
ness to cold ; the gums were in a deplorable state and the teeth were 
encrusted with tartar. After receiving the Thuja the extreme sen- 
sitiveness of the teeth disappeared in one night ; then the offensive 
odour of the semen. In four days the patient again saw the 
dentist, who was amazed to find his gums quite sound. Moreover, 
the patient had lost an oppression of the chest which had been 
troubling him some time. Goulloii {Lcip. Pop, Zeii, f, //., translated 
Rev, H, BelgCj September, 1895) relates the cure of a mental state by 
Thuja 30X. He remarks that, following the advice of Kunkel, he gives 
only a single dose of Tliuja^ one or two drops of the tincture on sugar 
or milk, at bedtime. When he has given a second dose the following 
night he has observed new symptoms : Thuja in fact has a very 
marked action on sleep, and its symptoms appear by preference at 
night — the headache, for example.” This is the case : Miss R., 40, 
complained of her head, especially at certain moments, when ideas 
which did not concern her in the least came to her as if some one else 
was thinking by her side. Thuja produces a confusion in the thoughts 
which patients cannot rid themselves of on account of great weakness 
and pain in the head. This patient had for months been attending on 
a paralysed sister, frequently getting up in the night and worrying 
herself about numberless things. Her nervous system was very 
impressionable, and for weeks had reached a point of extreme over- 
excitement. She could no longer calm herself, and in addition she 
sneezed and coughed much. The problem was to give her sleep and 
take away the pain in the head. Even when she was not obliged to 
get up she could not get sleep. Her ey^s were also very much irritated. 
The patient afterwards described her condition thus ; I felt in the 
anterior part of the head, principally the forehead, a sensation as if 
lead were compressing njiy eyes ; these were inflamed, < by light, 
> in open air. Before going to sleep I felt a congestion in the head 
with headache ; at the same time queer, confused ideas which changed 



THUJA 


1423 


like a flash and fell upon the most odd things. These were > when I 
opened my eyes or sat up. Before my eyes images and statues arranged 
themselves. If I wished to think of something sensible, in the 
twinkling of an eye I lost the thread of my ideas. All this happened 
at night; during the day the wicked sprites did not appear. My 
head and eyes pained me when there was much movement, as when 
sevferal people were speaking at once.’^ The effect of the dose she 
described thus : After having taken the Thuja I' tasted a sweet 
repose ; the next morning a complete transformation had taken place 
in the head, the weight was gone, the eyes were more fresh, the brain 
free.” Goullon cured a lady who had had headache for a year ; on 
waking felt as if a tight hoop enclosed forehead, not passing away till 
noon. Eyelids heavy as lead. Thuja lox, one dose at bedtime, 
permanently cured. A. W. Holcombe (Med. I7s., xii. 225) relates 
experiences bearing on the sleep and dreams of TJmja. (1) Mrs. E., 
48, had a growth, wart-like, about the size of a sixpence, on left 
temple. It began as a slight roughness and itched at times. Also 
growth about the same size on a hard palate (left), very sore. Much 
headache, on left side of the head, throbbing in left temple, and the 
pains extend into left ear. Cannot sleep after 3 a.m. Dreams much oj 
falling. Feels smothering in a warm room. Thirsty, < noon and 
arternoon. Feet sweat much, offensive ; sweats much about groins. 
Thuja cm was given on October 25th. By November 15th the growths 
and all the rest of the symptoms had disappeared. (2) Led by 
this same symptom, “ almost every night, dreams of falling from a 
height,” Holcombe cured a man, 30, of tertian fever with Thuja cm 
when a large number of other seemingly well -indicated remedies had 
failed. Robert Farley (quoted A. //., xxiii. 446) relates the case of two 
children, set, 5, who had what he graphically terms urinary 
tantrums.” Two hours after being put to bed they w'ould wake kick- 
ing, ’crying, and refusing to answer a question. This lasted an hour 
or more. Asked if they wanted to urinate they would refuse to 
answer, strike at attendant, or even say “ No.” Finally it was found 
that if they were taken up and put on the closet they w'ould urinate 
and then *go to sleep readily. One of the children developed signs of 
incipient inflammation of the left hip-joint. The totality led to the 
selection of Thuja^ which was given in the 200th. After the first 
night there were no more “ tantrums,” and in two months the child 
was perfectly well. This child’s lather had had gonorrhoea, treated 
by injection, some years before the patient was born. But the other 
child’s father had not had gonorrhoea. In the latter case, which was 
exactly like the former, the cure was immediate ; in tlie former case 
relief occurred on the seoond night. C. W. Roberts (H. /?., xii. 137) 
found Thuja 0, in five- to seven-drop doses at bedtime, control noc- 
turnal seminal emissions better than any other remedy. ” Nocturnal 
seminal emission ” is an emphasised symptom in M.M.P, Epulis is 
probably a malignant kind of sycotic hyperplasia. Percy Wilde 
(H. xxi. 199) records the case of a young married lady who had a 
large epulis on the lower jaw, rapidly increasing in size, ulcerating on 
the surface, very painful, and filling the mouth with an ill-smelling 
secretion. The entire tumour was removed by operation, and also 



1424 


THUJA 


the subjoined bone. Three weeks later the tumour was as large as 
before and increased daily. Thuja ix was now given. The growth 
stopped immediately ; ulceration ceased ; the^pain disappeared. In 
three weeks the gum was healthy and remained so permanently. 
Villers (quoted ^4 . jF/., xxi. 421) relates a case of scalp tumour in a youth 
of seventeen. The tumour had existed two years, and had somewhat 
the appearance of a bean. It was situated about the posterior edge 
of the parietal bone, was devoid of sensation, and the hair had dis- 
appeared from it, making it very conspicuous. Thuja 30 was given, a 
dose every twenty days. In four months the youth was almost cured, 
in live months entirely so, the hair having grown again completely over 
the spot. George Royal (quoted A, xxiii. 387) relates a case of 
persistent cough cured with Thuja. Miss X., 19, fair, had for three 
months a painless, dry cough. The irritation was only in the throat. 
There were six small growths at the back of the throat, and one near 
the vocal cord. She never had a cough before. Has leucorrhoea 
green and excoriating ; menses a little too early. Thuja 30 cured the 
growths and the cough in about three weeks. Old-school observers 
(AT. A. J. H., XV. 63) have found in Thuja an efftcient haemostatic, 
locally applied, especially after tooth extraction. R. B. Johnstone 
{H. P., ix. 257) gives some indications for Thuja in hernia : (i) 
Women of sycotic history who have a tendency to lefl-side inguinal 
hernia after labour {Thuja^ high). (2) When babies cry much the 
umbilicus protrudes, growing red and sore ; especially when the 
father has a sycotic history. (3) Left inguinal hernia in infants ; 
child cries all the time, and is only quiet when the left inguinal region 
is relieved from pressure, or the thigh is flexed on the abdomen. 
Boenninghausen observed this symptom of Thuja^ which bears on the 
action of Thuja on the sides and roots of teeth (a sycotic symptom), 
rather than on the crowns : “ on blowing nose, a pressing pain in the 
hollow tooth, at the side of it.^^ The left ovarian pains of Thuja are 
remarkable. They are severe, sometimes burning, extend down 
thigh, any attempt at exercise and especially walking < ; they occur with 
every menstrual period, and are generally < before and during the 
flow. The pain compels the patient to lie down ; but lyirig on left 
side <. A keynote of Thuja is : Frequent micturition accompany- 
ing pains.’^ For example : ** In evening, when in bed, terrible ham- 
mering and tearing in the ear, accompanied with micturition every half- 
hour and coldness of the legs up to the knees. The desire of Thuja is 
sudden and urgent, it seems impossible to reach the vessel or make 
the necessary preparations, but the patient can control it if compelled. 
There is severe cutting as with a knife at the end of micturition after 
the last drop has passed. Thuja also has chronic incontinence from 
paralysis of sphincter vesicae. This is related to the general paretic 
weakness of Thuja, The patient feels she “ could not go on exerting 
any longer.^^ Burnett {H. IF., xxv. 487) records a case of lichen urti- 
catus in a boy of fourteen, which came into his hands after a long course 
of treatment, external, internal, and dietetic, at the hands of allopathic 
specialists without result. The rash came periodically in warm 
weather ; patient literally tore himself because of the irritation. The 
rash was < on the left (vaccinated side). Thuja 30 was given in 



THUJA 


1425 


infrequent doses. The spots continued to appear for a week and 
then disappeared. The skin remained clear in spite of the patient 
indulging in all kinds of previously forbidden foods. Among the 
skin effects of Thuja the marks and stains must be borne in mind. 
The skin is mottled and discoloured ; brown or red mottled spots ; 
discoloration of the backs of the hands and feet. — Villers of 

Hcs.j iv. 408) treated a girl of twelve, who had had headaches going 
from front to occiput and sometimes in temples. Pains mostly came 
towards night, and were accompanied with an awful state of fear. 
The only account she could give of her fear was that she saw green 
stripes. Alone or in company, in the dark or in a well-lighted room 
the dread was always the same. Three years before, the child had 
liad an abortive attack of scarlatina, treated with cold compresses. 
The urine had been abnormal all through the illness, but contained 
no albumen. Thuja 200, every tenth day. No more headache, nor 
fear. Patient slept well from the first dose, and in a few days the 
urine became clear. Floating stripes before the vision is a 
symptom of Thuja. Peculiar Sensations are : As if a strange person 
were at her side. As if soul and body were separated. As if under 
the influence of a superior power. As if whole body were very thin 
and delicate ; as if its continuity would be dissolved ; as if frail and 
easily broken ; as if made of glass. As if a nail were pressing into 
verfex. As if vertex were pressed with a needle. As if a nail were 
driven from within outward in vertex. As if a nail were driven into 
right parietal bone and left frontal eminence. Lightning-like headache. 
As if a convex button were pressed on left ear. As if head weie 
screwed asunder. As if forehead would fall out. As if bones of 
head were being knocked to pieces. Foreliead, ears, and eyes as if 
stabbed. As if knives went tearing around in brain. Scalp as if 
beaten. As if insects on occiput and temples. As if eyes were 
swollen and would be pressed out of head. As of hue sand in eyes. 
As if a cold stream of air were blowing through eyes. As if a foreign 
body in eye. As if flesh were being torn from bones in left side and 
back. As if abdominal muscles were being pushed out by arm of a 
child. As if a living animal were in abdomen. Sudden bounding in 
right iliac region as if something alive. As if blood could not circulate 
in back opposite pit of stomach. As if boiling lead were passed 
through rectum. As if anus would tly to pieces during stool. As if 
skin of anus were cracked and chapped. Bladder as if paralysed. 
As if moisture running in urethra. As if a tape prevented urina- 
tion. As of a single drop running aFmg urethra. As if testicles 
moved. As if something were grown fast in region ot left lower 
ribs. As of falling dropfi m chest. Legs as if inatlc ot wood 
when walking. As if lower limbs were elongated. As if muscles 
of thigh would break down. Lightness in body when walk- 
ing. As if flesh were beaten fmm bones. As if skiii were pricked 
with needles. As from Ileabites. A keynote of Cooper’s for Thuja is, 
its pains keep extending from their original site.” Another indica- 
tion of his is, pains > by wrapping up,’^ Thuja is Suited to : (i) Hydro- 
genoid constitutions (possessing ‘*an increased capacity to conbiin 
water ; hence rain, cold, damp weather, beds, and food that increase 
VOL. II. 91 



1426 THUJA 

the number of molecules of water in the system < the symptoms 
(2) Stnimous and sycotic pains. (3) Lax muscles ; light hair ; 
children. (4) Lymphatic temperament, in very fleshy persdns, dark 
complexion, black hair, unhealthy skin, (s) Ailments from vaccina- 
tion or from suppressed or maltreated gonorrhoea. Thuja is a 
strongly left-sided medicine (the left arm is usually vaccinated). The 
symptoms are : < By touch (scalp ; vertex ; eruption ; anus ;'xohdy- 
lomata ; := fingers to bleed) ; but > pain in eyebrow and in left 
malar bone. Pressure >. Rubbing >. Scratching >. Closing 
eyes <. Fall rz wart-like growth in labium. Ov<«rlifting < head- 
ache. Rest > headache. Bending head backward > headache. 
Lying on left side = anxious dreams. Lying on affected side > 
asthma. Motion <. Extension <. Letting arms hang down ^ 
Walking <. Looking up > headache. Throwing head back > 
headache. Talking < asthma. Ascending rr palpitation. Riding 
ss; incontinence of urine ; < pain in ovary. < 3 a.m. ; early morning 
(the sycotic time). < Night. < Cold water ; cold ; damp weather ; 
change ; draught ; overheating ; sun’s rays. < Bright light. < 
Warmth of bed. Warmth <. Cold > rheumatism. < After 
breakfast, after eating ; after tea ; coffee ; fat food ; onions. < By 
coitus. < Blowing nose (pain in side of teeth). < Increasing 
moon. < Sun ; bright light. 

Relatione. — Antidoted by : Cham, (nightly toothache) : Coccul. 
(fever) ; Camph., Merc., Puls., Sul. Teste found Colch. the best 
antidote in his experience. Antidote to : Merc., Sul., lod., Nux. 
Complementary : Med., Sabi., Sil. ; Nat. s. in sycosis. Compatible : 
Nit. ac., Sabi. Follows well : Med., Merc., Nit. ac. Followed well by : 
Merc., Sul. (these follow best. — H. N. G.) ; also Calc., Ign., Lyc., 
K. ca., Puls., Sil., Vacc. Compare : Constitutional polychrests, ^Ied. 
Syph., Pso., Sul., Merc. Bad effect of vaccination, Apis, Ant. t., Vacc., 
Var. Aversion to touch or approach, Ant. c. (Thuja on account of 
fixed ideas). Illusions of shape, Bapt., Petr., Strain. Imaginary con- 
ditions (Saba., imaginary diseases). Ozaena with thick green discharge ; 
gleet ; gonorrheeal rheumatism ; orchitis ; prostatitis ; Puls, (the 
discharge of Puls, is thicker than that of Thuja). Ozaena in sycotics, 
K. bi. Condylomata, balanorrhoea, greenish leucorrhcea, Nit. ac. 
(Nit. ac. has more aching in bones, especially when not covered with 
muscles). Long filiform condylomata, Staph. (Staph., especially after 
Mercury, system generally depressed). Balanorrhoea, Jacar. Red 
chancroid sores, Coral. Iritis ; green discharges ; rheumatism ; 
sweating, Merc. (Merc. < warmth of bed ; sweating more excessive ; 
Thuja, sweat on uncovered parts only). Condylomata, Sabi, (itch 
and burn, especially in women). Condylomata large, like cock’s- 
comb, Euphras. Syphilis and sycosis, fig-warts fan-shaped, much 
itching, especially about joints, Cinnab. (‘^ Cinnab. is preferable for 
warts on prepuce.” — H. C. Allen). ' Sycotic eruptions, Sars. Ciliary 
neuralgia, Spi. (Spi. pains radiate downward ; Thuja, upward and 
backward). Nails grow soft, FI. ac. (rapidly). Diarrhoea, &c., after 
vaccination, Sil. Affections of tea-drinkers, Sep. Urinary affections, 
Canth. Effects of fat food, Ipec., Carb. v., Puls. Fissure about anus, 
Nit. ac. Graph. Dry, whitish scales on skin, Ars., Calc., Dulc., Lyc., 



THUJA 


1427 


Sep., Si\. Vaginismus, extreme sensitiveness, Sil. Hissing or singing 
ol kettle in right ear, Lyc. Violent movements of foetus, Op., Croc., 
Sil., SuP. Sense of levitation, Calc., Can. i., Con., Gels., Sil., Sti. p.. 
Tic douloureux, Spi., Coccin. Phimosis, Cann. s., Merc., Sul., 
Nit. ac., Sep., Rhus, Sabi. Left ovarian pains, Colo., Bry., Phos. 
Yellow-staining, leucorrhcea, Agn. c., Carb. a., Chel., Kre., Nit. ac., 
Nux, Pni. s., Sep. Tongue : Ulcer on right border, Sil. (on left, 
Apis) ; semilateral swelling of, Calc., Sil., Lauro. (Lauro, left half with 
loss of speech), Semp. t. Piles < sitting, Lyc. Ph. ac. (> Ign.). Vertigo 
when closing eyes, Lach., Ther. Headache as if a nail being driven in, 
Coff., Ign. Headache from tea, Sel. Teeth decay at roots, Mez. (on 
edges, Staph.). Teeth crumble, turn yellow, Syph. Ranula, varicose 
veins on tongue, Amb. On blowing nose, a pressing pain in the 
hollow tooth or at the side of it (Culex, vertigo every time he blows 
his nose). Abdomen protrudes here and there as from the arm of a 
foetus, Croc., Nux m., Sul. Left ovarian pain when walking or riding, 
must sit or lie down. Croc., Ust. (Thuja, < at each menstrual 
nisus). Stool recedes after being partly expelled, Sanic., Sel. Early- 
morning diarrhoea expelled forcibly with much llatus, Alo. Coition 
prevented by extreme sensitiveness of vagina, Plat, (by dryness, Lyc., 
I^dfb., Na. m.). Large, seedy, pedunculated warts, Staph. Feeling 
as if flesh beaten off bones, Phyt. (scraped oft’, Rhus). Severe cutting 
at close of urination, Sars. Sweat : all over except head (opp. Sel.) ; 
when he sleeps, stops when he wakes (opp. Samb.). Nails deformed, 
brittle, Ant. c. > Bending head back, Seneg. (Thuja, headache ; 
Seneg., eye symptoms > bending head back and closing eyes ; 
Thuja has < closing eyes). Fluids roll audibly into stomach, Cup. 
Enuresis when coughing, Caust. Desires cold things, Pho. Swelling 
and sensitiveness of breasts at menstrual period, Con. Calc. < Walk- 
ing, .^sc. h. Discoloured skin, Adren. Cracking in cervical verte- 
brae (K. iod., grating). Cretinism, Bac., Thyr. 

Oausation, — ^Vaccination. Gonorrhcea, badly treated or sup- 
pressed. Sunstroke. Sexual excess. Tea. Coffee. Beer. Sweets. 
Tobacco. , Fat meat. Onions. Sulphur. Mercury. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Fixed ideas : as if a strange person were at his side ; as if 
the soul were separated from the body : as if the body, esp. the limbs, were 
of glass and would break easily ; as if a living animal were in the abdomen. — 
Sensation as if whole body very thin and delicate and could not resist least 
attack ; as if continuity of body would be dissolved. — Insane women will not 
be touched or approached. — Imbecility after vaccination, restless, drivelling. 
— Mental dejection. — Anxious apprehensions respecting the future. — Disquiet, 
which renders everything troublesome and repugnant, — The merest trifle 
occasions pensiveness. — Music causes him to weep, with trembling of the 
feet. — Hurried, with ill-humour, talks hastily. — Indisposition to any kind of 
intellectual labour. — Mental depression after childbirth.— Very depressed, sad, 
irritable. — Scrupulous about small things. — Feels she cannot exist any longer ; 
quiet, shunning everybody. — Aversion to life. — Moroseness and peevishness. 



1428 THUJA 

— Overexcited, quarrelsome ; easily angered about trifles. — ^The child is 
excessively obstinate. — In reading and writing he uses wrong expressions. — 
Talks hastily and swallows words.— Thoughtlessness ; forgetfulnesi?. — ^Slow- 
ness of speech and of reflection ; seeking for words when in conversation.— 
Incapacity for reflection. — Cretinism. 

2 . Head. — Head feels empty, as in intoxication, esp. in morning, with 
nausea. — Weakness and confusion of head, as from torpor, or paralysis of 
brain, — ^Vertigo, as from motion of a swing. — ^Vertigo when rising from a scat, 
or when lying down, or else when looking into the air. — Vertigo on closing 
the eyes, disappcai-s as soon as he opens them ; or on stooping ; or on looking 
upwards or sideways. — Headache in morning, as after stooping, or after too 
profound a sleep, with redness of the face. — The headache is > from looking 
upwards, and when turning the head backwards. — Headache : < from sexual 
excess, overheating, overlifting ; > exercising in open air. — Dull, stupefying, 
headache. — Headache, < by stooping, > by bending head backwards. — 
Heaviness of head, esp. in morning on waking ; in occiput (cerebellum), with 
ill-humour and dislike to conversation. — Headache, as if forehead would 
split, with internal shivering, > by walking in open air. — Pressive headache, 
with shocks in forehead and temples. — Compressive headache, esp. in temples. 
— Pain as if a tight hoop encircled forehead, on waking. — (Headache, as if a 
tight hoop encircled forehead up till noon ; eyelids heavy as lead. — Goullon.)— 
Pain in head as if a nail were driven into vertex (afternoon and 3 a.m. ; < 
when at rest, > after perspiration). — As if a nail driven in r. parietal bone 
and 1 . frontal eminence. — Boring pressing in head. — Headache on 1 . side as if 
a convex button were pressed on part. — Neuralgia going from before back- 
ward. — Nervous, .sycotic, or syphilitic headaches. — Meningitis of sycotic 
children.— Sunstroke : everything seemed jumping, < from sitting up, or 
from talking a long time, or closing eyes. — SemilateraJ tearing in the sinciput 
and face, extending into zygomatic process, principally morning and evening. 
— Tearing jerking in occiput. — Lancinations across brain. — Congestion of 
blood in head. — Pulsation in temples. — Excessively painful tenderness of 
1 . side of head, and also of the hair, at night, when lying down, and when 
touched. — Hair becomes hard, dry, and lustreless, and falls out. — Hair thin, 
grows slowly, splits ; brittle, looks crimped. — Pressive drawing in the 
temporal muscles, esp. during mastication. — Shootings in temples. — Swelling 
of veins in temples. — He wants to have head (and face) wrapped up warm. — 
Itching and gnawing in scalp. — The scalp is very painful to the touch, and 
the parts on which one lies. — Cannot bear a hat on his head (agg. — R. T. C.). 
— Dry herpes on the head, extending to eyebrows ; dandruff. — White, scaly, 
pecling-off eruption over the scalp, extending over the forehead, temples, 
ears, and neck. — (Flat black wart on r. parietal region. — J. H. C.)~Tingling- 
biting, stinging-itching on the scalp, > by scratching. — Perspiration, smell- 
ing of honey (sweetish), on uncovered parts of head (face and hands), with 
dryness of the covered parts, and of those on which one lies, mostly when 
first going to sleep ; > after rising.— (Pityriasis affecting forehead, face, ears 
and neck, < after washing in warm water.— R. T. C.) — Eczema comes out on 
glabella (after Thuja 30) — R. T. C.). 

3. Eyes. — Pressure in eyes, and smarting, as if sand were in them. — 
Teai'ing in eyebrows.— Shootings in eyes, in a bright light, or in a keen air.— 



THUJA 


1429 


Painful stitch through centre of 1. eye, commencing in centre of brain. — 
Malignant balanorrhoea. — ^Wart-like excrescence on iris. — Inflammation of 
cornea.— Vascular tumour of cornea. — Small brown spots on cornea. — Epi- 
scleritis ; sclero-choroiditis ; staphyloma. — Ophthalmia neonatorum. — Phlyc- 
tenular conjunctivitis. — (Conjunctivitis of 1. eye, with violent pain across 
forehead and in outer side of eyeball, constantly recurrent from childhood 
and due to suppressed eruption. — R. T. C.) — Fungous tumour in orbit. — 
Burning sensation in eyes. — Sclerotica inflamed, and red like blood. — Pupils 
dilated. — Inflammatory swelling of lids, with hardness. — Burning eruption 
on lids. — Granular lids with wart-like granulations. — Epithelioma of 1. lower 
lid. — Feeling as if lids swollen, and a foreign body in eye. — Ptosis ; lids fall 
down several times a day.— Lids heavy as lead. — Inflammatory softening of 
inner surface of lids. — Red and painful nodosities on margins of lids. — (Tinea 
ciliaris ; dry and branny lids. — R. T. C.) — Styes ; tarsal tumours ; chalazae ; 
thick and hard knots. — Verrucae and tumours like condylomata. — Purulent and 
itching pimples between eyebrows. — Condylomata in eyebrows. — Sensation of 
heat and of dryness in external canthi. — Lachrymation, esp. in 1. eye, when 
walking in open air (the tears do not run off, but remain standing in the eye). 
— The eye must be warmly covered, when uncovered it pains at once, and it 
feels as if cold air were streaming out of the head through the eye. — 
Nocturnal agglutination of the lids. — Weakness of the eyes ; obscure sight. — 
Clouded sight, when reading, with sensation of drowsiness. — Sight confused 
as if directed through a veil. — Diplopia. — Myopia. — Black dancing specks 
before the eyes. — Floating stripes. — (Secs green stripes which frighten her.)— 
Flames of light, mostly yellow ; looking into light of day sees spots like 
bottles of water moving ; a luminous disc shining like a fireflv. — Sensation of 
dryness in eyes, — In the dark it seems as if falling down of luminous lights or 
sparks alongside of the eye, during the day and in the light it is as if dark 
drops were falling down. — The objects appear smaller before the r. eye. — 
Short-sighted. 

4. Ears. — Otalgia, wtth squeezing compression and violent shootings, 
esp. in evening.— Stitches into ear from the neck. — Sensation as if inner ear 
were swojlen, with increased difficulty of hearing. — (Vascular deafness with 
scurfy head.— R, T. C.) — Oozing from the r. ear, smelling like putrid meat. — 
Spasmodic pain in external ear. — Noise in the ear as from boiling water. — 
Roaring in 1. ear, with cracking when swallowing saliva. — Hammering and 
tearing in ear, in evening, in bed, with frequent emission of urine, and 
coldness in legs and feet. — Pressive pain behind ears. — Orifice of 1. meatus 
blocked up by a polypus, of raspberry-cellular vessels ; pale red, bleeding 
readily when touched ; muco-purulent discharge ; deafness ; shooting pains. 

5. Nose. — Nose red and hot. — Red eruption on nose, at times humid. — 
Swelling in the alae nasi, with hardness and tension. — Drawing tension in 
bones of nose, — Painful scabs in nose. — Painful pressure at root of nose. — 
Blowing of blood from nose. — Frequent epistaxis, esp. after being over- 
heated. — Dry coryza, which becomes fluent in open air, with continued head- 
ache. — Fluent coryza, with cough and hoarseness. — Greenish and fetid dis- 
charge from the nose.^Blowing from the nose of a large quantity of thick 
green mucus, mixed with pus and blood ; later of dry, brown scales, with 
mucus, which comes from the frontal sinuses and firmly adheres to the 



H30 


THUJA 


swollen upper portion of the nostrils.— Accumulation of mucus in posterior 
nares. — Chronic catarrh after measles, scarlatina, variola. — (Ozsena. — Ussher.) 
— ^Warts on the nose. — Smell in nose as from brine of fish, or of ferhienting 
beer. 

6 . Face. — Heat in face, sometimes only transient, or else with burning 
redness. — Heat and redness of whole face, with fine nets of veins, as if 
marbled. — Circumscribed burning redness of cheeks. — Dropsically bloated 
face. — (Edematous erysipelas of face. — Greasy skin of face. — Light-brown 
blotches (freckles) on face. — Faceache, originating in 1. cheek-bone near the 
ear, extending through teeth to nose, through eyes to templ& into head ; the 
painful spots burn like fire, and are very sensitive to the rays of the sun.— 
Neuralgia of trigeminus after suppressed gonorrhoea or eruption on ear. — 
Facial pains tending to spread to neck and head, chiefly 1. side (many cases 
cured. — R. T. C.)— Large, hard, dark wart with large base. — Perspiration orf 
face (esp. on side on which he does not lie). — Scabious, itching eruption on 
face. — Red and painful nodosities on temples. — Boring and digging pain 
in cheek-bones, > by touch. — Twitching of the lips. — Jerking sensation in 
upper lip, near corner of mouth. — Upper lip sensitive. — Wart on upper lip. — 
Thick upper lip with pea-sized tumour on its parenchyma, enlarging when 
taking cold. — Lips pale, swollen, peeling. — Flat ulcers on insides of lips and 
corners of mouth. — Eruption of pimples on lips and chin. — Shootings in 
lower jaw, which seem to pass outwards through the ear. — Cracking of 
articulation of jaw.— Fungus on 1. lower jaw, more angry in damp weather 
— Swelling of submaxillary glands. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache after drinking tea, with prcssivc pain extending 
into jaw. — Toothache with acute drawing pains, esp. during mastication. — 
The roots of the teeth become carious ; or the teeth become carious from.the 
side ; the crown of the tooth remains sound. — On blowing nose, a pressing 
pain in hollow tooth at the side of it.— The teeth crumble off,— Teeth crusted 
with tartar ; extremely sensitive to cold water.— Dirty-yellow teeth.— Gnawing 
in (carious) teeth, with painful sensibility of whole side of head, greatly < by 
contact with cold things, or by mastication.— Gums swollen (inflamed, with 
dark red streaks on them), with pain of excoriation. — Alveolar periostitis where 
the pains come and go suddenly at short intervals (R. T. C.).— Epulis. 

S. Mouth.— Flat, white ulcers on the inside of the lips, and on the 
corners of the mouth. — Aphthaj in mouth (ulcers ; mouth feels as if burnt). — 
Considerable swelling of salivary glands, with increased saliva in mouth. — 
Sanguineous, or bitter saliva. — Pain as of excoriation in tip of tongue, when 
touched.— Swelling of tongue (esp. on r. side; bites tongue frequently), 
painful when touched. — Condylomata under tongue. — ^Varicose veins under 
tongue. — Ranula, on both sides of tongue, transparent, bluish red, grey, and, 

as it were, gelatinous.— Ranula and epulis with excess of venosity everywhere 

(Ussher). — ^I'aste in mouth sweet as sugar, with gonorrhoea. — Slowness of 
speech. 

9. Throat.— Roughness and scraping in throat, — Pressure and pain as 
from excoriation, in throat and palate, during deglutition.— A feeling of upward 
pressure in soft palate.— Necessity to swallow. — Shootings from gullet to 
ears. — Swelling of tonsils and throat. — Ulcers in throat and mouth, like 
chancres. — Accumulation of a large quantity of tenacious niucus in mouth, 



THUJA 


X431 

which is hawked up with difficulty.— Painful swallowing, esp. empty swallow- 
ing, or that of saliva. — ^Throat feels raw, dry, as from a plug, or as if it were 
constricttfcd when swallowing. — Hawking up of mucus of red colour, like 
blood.— (Exophthalmic goitre.— C. Sargent, of Chicago.) 

10 . Appetite. — Mawkish and sweetish taste in the mouth, in the even- 
ing, and after a meal. — Taste : sweet ; of rotten eggs, mornings. — Bread has 
a dry and bitter taste. — Craves salt. — Food never seems sufficiently salt. — 
Thirst only at night, and in morning. — Appetite for cold drinks and food. — 
Unable to cat breakfast (a keynote of Burnett’s). — Aversion to fresh meat and 
potatoes. — Speedy •satiety, when eating. — Disagreeable sensations after eating 
fat food or onions. — While masticating food mouth becomes very dry. — 
After a meal great indolence, or dejection, with anguish, and palpitation of 
the heart, or great inflation and sufferings from flatulence. 

. II, Stomach. — Risings of food, after a meal. — Bitter or putrid risings. 
— Continuous eructations of air while eating. — Vomiting of mucus or of 
greasy substances. — Induration of stomach. — Swelling of pit of stomach. — 
The fluid which he drinks falls into the stomach with a gurgling noise. — 
Rancid risings, esp. after fat food. — Nausea and uneasiness in region 
of stomach. — Vomiting of acid serum and of food. — Cramp in stomach, 
with excessive < towards evening. — Pressure in scrobiculus after a 
ifteal, with pain when touched. — ^Throbbing in scrobiculus.— Anguish in 
scrobiculus, which extends upwards into head. 

12. Abdomen. — Painful pressure in hepatic region. — After a dose of 
30th headache comes on, and he feels on stooping forward as if liver over- 
lapped the ribs (agg. — J. C. B.) — (Old rheumatism attacking bowels, liver, and 
kidneys. — R. T. C ) — Pressure in lumbar region. — (Soreness with swelling in 
hepatic region and violent pain under r. shoulder going through to breast 
and down to elbow < on getting out of bed in morning. — R. T, C.) — 
Inflation of abdomen, often with contractive and spasmodic pains. — 
Flatulence, as if an animal were crying in the abdomen. — Pot-belly. — Con- 
strictive tension in abdomen. — Induration in abdomen. — The upper part of 
abdomen is drawn in. — Soreness of navel. — Pressive pains in abdomen, esp. 
towards the side (before evacuation). — Stitches in the hypochondria. — Sensa- 
tion as if* something alive were in hypogastrium (as if the abdominal 
muscles were pushed outward by the arm of a foetus, but painless). — Soreness 
of navel. — Pain in abdomen, as from conbtriction of the intestines. — Grumbling 
and borborygmi in the abdomen. — Depres.'jing pain in groins. — Drawings in 
groins, when walking and standing, with shootings along thighs when sitting. 
— Painful swelling of inguinal glands, sometimes with drawing as far as 
knee. — Intussusception of intestines. — Yellow or brownish spots on abdomen. 
— ^Zona. 

13, Stool and Anus,*— Constipation which continues several days 
(obstinate, as from inactivity or from intussusception of the intestines), some- 
times after pollutions. — Tenesmus, with rigidity of the penis.— Stool in hard 
balls. — Difficult evacuation of hard, large fteces, covered with blood. — Dis- 
charge of blood, during the evacuation. — Diarrhoea : pale-yellow water is 
forcibly expelled, with much noisy discharge of wind ; with colic ; < after 
eating j watery, painless ; bright yellow, watery ; streaming out with much 
gas, as if the cork were pulled out of a full jug, excessively exhausting, short 



1432 


THUJA 


and difficult breathing, anxiety, intermitting pulse, acute pressive pain in back 
opposite pit of stomach, with feeling as if no blood could circulate there, 
rapid disappearance of fat. — In morning (after breakfast), periodically return- 
ing diarrhoea, always at the same hour. — Stools oily or greasy. — With stools, 
sensations in rectum as if boiling lead were passing through. — Burning 
soreness in anus, lasting all day. — Much flatus hard to expel, anus feels con- 
stricted, incarcerated flatus behind r. side of diaphragm. — Pains in anus < 
from motion. — Painful contraction of anus, during the evacuation. — Burning 
sensation in anus, and between buttocks. — Condylomata at anus. — Hsemor- 
rhoidal tumours swollen, paining worse while sitting. — Swelling of haemorrhoidal 
veins. — Pressing, itching, and burning in the haemorrhoidal vessels, with 
dragging. — Offensive perspiration at anus and in perinreum. — Fistula in ano. 
— Fissure of anus. — Tearings along rectum. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Kidneys inflamed ; feet swollen. — Diabetes.— 
Stitch to bladder from rectum. — Violent burning in fundus of bladder. — 
Urging to urinate frequent and hasty. — Stream interrupted. — Frequent want 
to urinate, with profuse emission of a watery urine, also at night. — The urine 
foams ; the foam remains long on the urine. — Involuntary secretion of urine ; 
at night ; when coughing ; in drops after having urinated. — The bladder (and 
rectum) feels paralysed, having no power to expel. — Sediment of brojvn 
mucus. — The urine contains sugar. — Boring in region of bladder, with painful 
drawing up of testes. — Urine yellowish or wine-coloured. — Orifice of urethra 
agglutinated by mucus. — Cloudy sediment in urine. — Bloody urine. — Pro- 
longed trickling of unne, after having urinated. — Sensation as if a drop were 
flowing into urethra, after emission of urine, and at other times. — Burning 
sensation in urethra, esp. in morning and during day ; also after and during 
emission of urine.— Shootings in urethra, during emission of urine, and at 
other times. — Jerking, voluptuous formication in fossa navicularis. — Smarting 
in sexual part of females, during emission of urine. — Itching in urethra. — 
Stream small and split, next day yellowish discharge from urethra, with 
chordee. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Venereal diseases. — Affections in general 
appearing in male or female genital organs, particularly on the external 
organs ; affections on 1 . side particularly. — Profuse perspiration on genitals, esp. 
scrotum ; sweet-smelling, like honey ; staining linen yellow. — (Relaxed scrotum 
with sexual weaknc'ss and lethargy ; untit for strain. — R. T. C.) — Pseudo- 
gonorrhoea. — Painful spermatic cords from suppressed gonorrhoea. — Feeling 
in testes as if they moved. — Condylomata on glans and prepuce, moist, itch- 
ing and suppurating, esp. while the moon is increasing. — Ulcers, like chancres, 
on prepuce.— Swelling of prepuce. — Red excrescence on inner side of 
prepuce ; like fig-warts.— Smooth, red excrescence behind glans. — Many red 
pedunculated condylomata surrounding glans. — Round, unclean, elevated 
ulcers with red margins, moist and painful. — Sycotic cauliflower excrescences ; 
fig-warts smelling like old cheese or herring brine. — Shootings in scrotum, 
in penis, and along spermatic cord, as far as navel, — Drawing in testjes, with 
retraction of one of them (1,). — Continued painful erections, esp, night and morn- 
ing, with lancinations in urethra. — Nightly painful erections causing sleepless- 
ness. — Irresistible inclination to onanism even during sleep. — Nocturnal 
emissions ; wake him ; followed by heaviness and ill-humour. — Pollutions 



thuja ,4j3 

with sensation of stricture in urethra.— Seminal emissions cured with 5-drop 
doses of ^ (C. W. Roberts). — ^The semen has an offensive smell. — Flow of 
prostatic* fluid. — Prostatic affections from suppressed or badly-treated 
gonorrhoea.— Blenorrhoea along with otorrhcea ; penis constantly erect and 
prepuce inflamed (cured in boy, 12. — R. T. C.). — Gonorrhoea : scalding when 
urinating, urethra swollen ; urinal stream forked ; discharge yellow ; green ; 
watery ; with warts ; red erosions on glans ; subacute and chronic cases, 
esp. when injections have been used and prostate is involved. — Gonorrhoea 
with a soft lump having an abrasion on it on 1. side of fraenum praeputiae, 
lump small and painless. — Profuse and watery discharge from penis, — 
Renewed gonorrhoea after coitus. 

i6. Female Sexual Organs. — Affections appearing on external organs, 
esp. 1. side. — Warts, condylomata, and other excrescences about vulva. — 
Ulcers on internal surface of vulva ; vulva has a sore, smarting feeling. — Itch- 
ing and burning smarting, as from excoriation, in genital organs. — Burning 
and biting in vagina. — Vagina extremely sensitive during coition. — Recto- 
vaginal fistula (cured. — J. C. B.) — Pressure on genital organs. — Contractive 
and spasmodic pain in genital organs, extending to hypogastrium. — Ovaries, 
affections of. — Swelling and excoriation of labia. — Warts on orilice of 
uterus, with shootings and burning sensation when urinating. — Uterine 
pSlypus. — Cauliflower excrescences. — Prolapse. — L. ovary inflamed, < at 
each menstrual nisus ; distressing pain, burning when walking or riding ; 
must lie down ; pain extends through 1. iliac region into groin, and 
sometimes into 1. leg, pain sometimes burning. — Cutting, squeezing, shooting 
pains in region of 1. ovary. — Pain, located in ovaries or duct, from over-physio- 
logical action. — Menses : too early and too short ; scanty, wath terrible distressing 
pain m 1. ovarian and iliac region. — Before menses : excitement and pulsation 
of arteries, back of head, headache and toothache ; labour-like abdominal 
pains, tenesmus and fainting ; much perspiration. — During menses : tiredness, 
palpitation, spasmodic weeping ; restlessness in legs ; retching, pressing in 
stomach, distension, pain in abdomen and back ; bearing down out of genital 
organs ; burning in varicose veins of genitals ; sensitiveness and swelling of 
breasts ; gqperal coldness. — After menses : tiredness ; rush of blood upward ; 
toothache ; sleeplessness ; nightmare. — Bleeding fungus of breast (completed 
cure after Phos ,). — Sycotic excrescences ; moist, bleeding and offensive. — 
Leucorrhoea *. mucous ; is almost green. — Abortion at end of third month, com- 
mencing with a scanty discharge of blood for five days, then more and more 
profuse. — Bright red or clotted blood with bearing down in third month of 
pregnancy (cured with Thujopsis dolabraia. — R. T. C.). — During pregnancy 
child moves so violently it wakens her, causing cutting in bladder with 
urging to urinate ; pains in 1^ sacro-iliac articulation, running into groin. — 
Labour : pains weak or ceasing ; contractibility hindered by sycotic com- 
plications ; pains in sacro-iliac articulation running into 1. groin ; pain from 
walking, insupportable, must lie do^n. 

17. Respiratory Organs.—Voice low.— Sensation of a skin in the 
arynx. — Polypus of vocal cord. — Condylomata.— Hoarseness, as from con- 
traction of larynx. — Shortness of breath from mucus in trachea. — Shortness of 
breathing from fulness and constriction in hypochondria and upper abdomen. 
—Asthma < at night, with red face; coughing spells, with sensation of 



1434 


THUJA 


adhesion of lungs. — Asthma with gonorrhoea, without having been exposed to 
contagion. — Asthma with little cough, but with sensation of something 
growing fast in region of 1. lower ribs. — Asthma of sycotic children (tjoullon). 
— Respiration short and quick, < from deep inspiration and talking; > 
from lying on affected side, but pains compel him to lie on back. — Con- 
vufsive asthma. — Shooting and tingling in trachea. — Cough in morning, 
excited by a tickling in trachea. — Cough, excited by a choking sensation. 
— Sputa : green ; taste like old cheese. — Expectoration of small grey, yellow, 
or green gobbets, when coughing. — Cough, with expectoration of yellow 
mucus, and pains in scrobiculus in afternoon. — Cough only during day, or 
in morning after rising, and in evening after lying down. — Cough as soon 
as one eats. — During evening cough after lying down, the expectoration 
becomes loose ; easier when he turns from 1. to r. side. 

18. Chest. — Obstructed respiration, with violent thirst for water, and 
great anxiety. — Spasms of lungs from drinking cold water. — Stitching in chest, 
from drinking anything cold. — Hot rising into chest. — Pain in 1. pectoral 
region extending to innominate bone. — Dyspnoea, with need to take full 
inspirations. — Oppression, at one time of 1. side of chest, at another, of 
1. hypochondrium, with irritation which excites coughing. — Pain in chest, as 
from internal adhesion. — Pressure on chest, sometimes after a meal. — Agita- 
tion, and sensation of swelling in chest. — Hasmorrhage from lungs ; quantity 
very great and terribly offensive. — Blue colour of skin round clavicles. — 
Brown spots on chest. 

19. Heart. — Cramp in heart. — Ebullition of blood in chest, and violent 
and audible palpitation of heart, esp. when going up stairs. — Palpitation of 
heart, with nausea. — Painful sensibility in region of heart. — Anxious palpita- 
tion of heart when waking in the morning. — Visible palpitation without 
anxiety. — Stitches in region of heart. — Pulse slow and weak in morning, in 
evening accelerated and full. — In evening violent pulsations. — Swelling of the 
veins. 

20 . Neck and Back. — Uneasiness in nape of neck and chest. — Tension 
in skin on nape when moving head. — Greasy brown skin on neck. — 
Tension and stiffness of nape and 1. side of neck. — Cracking \n cervical 
vertebrae on making certain movements with head. — Small red pimples on 
neck close together. — Swelling of glands of neck. — Swelling of veins of neck. 
— Spinal curvature. — Boils on back. — Stcatomatous tumours. — Pressing pain 
in region of kidneys. — Burning extending from the small of the back to 
between shoulder-blades. — (Pains from middle to lower back with tenderness 
of muscles on each side. — R. T. C.) — Painful drawing in sacrum, coccyx, 
and thighs, while sitting ; after long sitting prevents standing erect. — Pain, 
as of a fracture, and stiffness in loins, back, and nape, esp. in morning, after 
rising.— (Weakness from injury to lower back followed by abscess, vesical 
weakness, enuresis with a clear gleet and balanitis. -*R. T. C.) — Drawing in 
back and loins, when seated. — Boring in^ back. — Pulsation in spine. — Furun- 
culi on back, — Violent stitch between cocc5rx and anus 7 p.m. when walking. — 
Itching burning in hollow below coccyx. 

21. Limbs. — Cracking of joints when extended.— Trembling of hands 
and feet. — Limbs go to sleep. — Frozen limbs. — One-sided complaints ; 
paralysis. — Rheumatism with numb feeling ; < in warmth and on moving ; 



THUJA 1435 

> from cold and after sweating.— Nails crippled ; brittle or soft.— Hang- 
nails. 

22. upper Limbs. — Profuse perspiration under axillae. — Brown spots 
under the arms, like nsevus maternus. — Throbbing in should er-joint. — Sticking 
in shoulders. — Involuntary jerking of arm during day. — Atrophy of r. arm 
after revaccination. — Pain, as of ulceration, tearing, and throbbing, from 
shoulder to ends of fingers. — Wrenching pain in shoulder and arm, with 
cracking. — Digging drawing in arms, as if in bones or periosteum. — Sensation 
of coldness in arraj at night. — Lancinations in arms and joints. — Cracking in 
elbow-joint when stretching arms. — Tearing pain along r. arm compelling 
him to keep it flexed. — Herpes on elbow. — Red marbled spots on forearm. — 
Wrist and elbow of r. arm feel as if gripped by a hand (agg . — Thiijopsis doL — 
R. T. C.) — Trembling of hand and arms, when writing. — Ganglion of wrist (cured 
by local use. — R. T. C.) — Sensation of dryness in skin of hands. — Brown colour 
on back of hand. — White scaly herpes on back of hand and on finger. — Perspira- 
tion on hands. — Swollen veins in hands. — ^Warts on hands ; very numerous, 
esp. on dorsa ; horny, painful. — Brown colour of dorsum of hand. — Coldness 
torpor, and paleness in fingers and finger-tips, extending sometimes to fore- 
arms. — (Erysipelatous swelling and) tingling and shootings in finger-tips. — 
I^d and painful swelling m finger-tips. — Nails are crippled, discoloured, 
crumbling off. — Suppuration of finger-nails. — The pains in the arms are < 
when hanging down, or when exposed to heat ; they are > by movement, 
cold, and after per.spiration. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Lower limbs feel like wood when walking in open 
air.— Tension from hip-joint to groin, and along back of thigh to knee. — 
Sciatica, 1. side, leg atrophied. — Paresis and atrophy of r. leg with coldness. 
— Dr.awings in legs. — The hip-joint feels as if it were relaxed. — Coxalgia, the 
leg becomes elongated. — Brown skin on legs, esp. on inside of thigh. — 
Enlarged naevus on thigh of child, ast. five months. — Shootings in legs and 
joints. — Great weakness and lassitude in legs, esp. when going up stairs. — 
Heaviness and stiffness of legs, when walking (they feel as if made of wood). 
— Profuse perspiration on thighs and genital organs. — Itching in thighs. — 
Eruption of pimples on buttocks, thighs, and knees. — Ulcers on thighs. — 
Cracking in joints of knees and feet, when stretching them. — Suppurating 
pustules on knees. — Gonorrhoeal rheumatism in fibrous part of knee-joint. — 
Pains in feet and ankles after suppressed gonorrhoea, could not walk. — Pain 
in heel as if gone to sleep. — Stitches above heel in tendo Achillis. — White 
nodosities, with violent itching in toes. — Inflammatory red swelling in ends of 
toes, or instep, with pain and tension when treading, and during movement, 
— Numbness of 1. foot. — Nets of veins, as if marbled, on soles of feet. — Red, 
marbled spots on instep.— Perspiration (fetid) on feet, esp. toes.— Suppressed 
foot-sweat. — Chilblains on toes. 

24. Generalities. — Emaciation and deadness of affected parts. — All 
manifestations excessive ; their advent insidious. — Shootings in limbs (outer 
parts), and joints.— Burning darting pain. — Drawing in the blood-vessels.— 
Cracking in joints on stretching limbs.— Swelling of the veins in the skin.— 
Jerking of some of the limbs and of some of the muscles. — The flesh feels as 
if beaten off the bones. — Sensation of lightness of the body when walking.— 
(Edema about the joints ; affects prominently epUhelia, first causing harden- 



1436 THUJA 

ing, hypertrophy; then softening. — Stitches in various parts, changing to 
burning. — Tearing and pulsativc pains, as if the parts affected were ulcerated. 
— Inflammatory swellings, with redness. — Sufferings after being overheated, 
drinking tea, or eating fat meat, or onions. — Bad effects from beer, fat food 
acids, sweets, tobacco, and wine ; from the abuse of Sulphur and Mercury, — 
One-sided complaints — ^paralysis. — St. Vitus’ dance. — Trembling of some of 
the limbs. — Easy benumbing of limbs, esp. at night, on waking. — Symptoms 
generally < in afternoon, or in night, towards 3 a.m. ; they hinder sleep in 
evening. — Many of the symptoms are < during repose and by heat, esp. by 
that of the bed ; they are > by movement, cold, and perspiration. — Many of 
the symptoms manifest themselves chiefly on 1 . side. — ^Affections of the r. 
abdominal ring ; wings of the nose ; loins ; inguinal glands ; fingers, tips of 
fingers ; toes, — (Glandular cervical enlargements. — R. T. C.) — Stiffness and 
general heaviness over whole body, esp. in shoulders and thighs. — Physical 
weakness, with sustained mental powers. — Frequent jerking of upper part of 
body. — Violent ebullition of blood in evening, with pulsation in all the 
arteries, < by movement, > on sitting down. — Aneurism by anastamosis ; 
swelling of the blood-vessels. — Dreams anxious, esp. of dead persons; of 
falling; of accidents. — Flushes of heat. — < In the afternoon; after midnight ; 
while chewing; stretching the affected limb; while urinating. — > While 
drawing up the limb. 

25. Skin. — Painful sensitiveness of skin.— Itching shootings in skin, esp. 
in evening and at night. — Purulent pimples, like variola. — Warts on any part 
of the body, with little necks, called fig-warts, tubular warts, same size all the 
way out; mother's marks.’'— -Warts, hard, cleft, and seedy. — Black sessile 
warts ; on scalp. — Pustules. — Small-pox.— Eruptions only on covered parts. — 
The eruptions burn violently after scratching. — Universal psoriasis. — Sycotic 
excrescences, smelling like old cheese, or like the brine of fish. — White, 
scaly, dry, mealy herpes.— Sycosis of beard cured with single doses of ^ after 
failure of much other treatment (R. T. C.), — Condylomata (large, seedy, 
frequently on a pedicle). — Flat ulcers, with a bluish- white bottom. — Zona. — 
Corns burning.— Crippled nails on fingers and toes. — Furunculi. — Chilblains. 
— Dirty-brownish colour of the skin. — Brown or red (or brown-white) mottled 
spots on the skin. — The majority of cutaneous symptoms are > by touch. 

26. Sleep. — Urgent inclination to sleep in evening.— Sleep retarded, in 
consequence of agitation and dry heat. — Nocturnal sleeplessness, with agita- 
tion and coldness of body. — Unrefreshing nocturnal sleep. — Distressing, 
anxious dreams, of dangers and death, of falling from a height, soon after 
falling asleep, or else with starts and cries, esp. when lying on 1 . side. — ^When 
half asleep it suddenly seems as if a chair were standing in the middle of the 
bed; tries to move it but cannot stir, cannot utter a sound. — Continuous 
sleeplessness, with painfulness of the parts on which he lies. — Sleeplessness 
with apparitions as soon as he closes his eyes; they disappear on opening 
them. — Goes to sleep late on account of heat and restlessness, — Lascivious 
dreams, without emission of semen, with painful erections on waking, 

27. Fever. — Shivering, with yawning, after midnight. — The warm air 
seems cold, and the sun has no power to warm him. — Shivering, every morn- 
ing, without thirst. — Shivering and shaking, with internal and external cold- 
ness (and thirst), followed pimediately by perspiration.— Chilliness in attacks 



THYROIDINUM 


U37 


at various times in the day, but mostly in the evening. — Chilliness on L side, 
which feels cold to the touch. — Chill without thirst after midnight and in 
morningiH- Shivering every evening (at six o’clock), with external heat, dryness 
of the mouth, and thirst.— Heat in the evening, esp. in the face.— Dry heat of 
the covered parts. — Burning in the face without redness. — Perspiration at the 
commencement of sleep. — Perspiration on parts uncovered, with dry heat of 
covered parts. — ^Anxious, at times cold, sweat. — Perspiration after the chill, 
without any intervening heat.— Perspiration, at times oily (staining the clothes 
yellow), or fetid, or smelling sweet like honey. — General perspiration, but not 
on the head. — Wlien walking in morning profuse perspiration ; the most 
profuse on the head. — Perspiration only during sleep, disappearing at once as 
soon as he awakens. 


Thyroidinum. 

Thyroidin. Thyroid Extract. A Sarcode. Trituration of the fresh 
thyroid gland of sheep or calf. Attenuation of a liquid extract 
of the gland. 

^ Clinical. — Abscess. Acromegaly. Albuminuria ; of pregnancy. Amblyopia. 
Amenorrheea. Atuvmia ; /m/jc/awi.. Angina pectoris. Hackache. Chilblaitis. 
Constipation. Convulsions, puerperal. Diarrhoea. Diuresis. Dropsy. Dysmenorrheea. 
Kar, middle, affections of. Eczema. Fainting. Fibroma. PYactures, ununited. 
(Toitre ; e.xophthalmic. Hair, new growth of ; falling off. Heart, failure of ; valvular 
disease of. Hysteria. Hystero-epilepsy. Ichthyosis. Idiocy. Leprosy. Mania. 
Milk, deticicncy of. Myxevdema. Neurasthenia. Obesity. (Edema. Optic neuritis. 
Paralysis ; of hands and arms. Paraplegia. Phthisis. Pityriasis rubra. Psoriasis. 
Puerperal fever. Rupia. Scleroderma. Syphilis. Tetanus. 

Charaoteristics. — When the treatment of myxoedema and allied 
diseases by “ Thyroid feeding ” was introduced by Murray in 1892, 
many accidents occurred from overdosing. A large number of the 
pathogenetic effects I collected {H. IE., xxix. and subsequent volumes) 
and arranged in Schema form (H. IE., xxix. 251) along with cured 
symptoms, giving the authority and reference for each. In my sub- 
joined Schema I have omitted the references. Cured symptoms I 
have bracketed, unless otherwise indicated. Marc Joussett collected 
other symptoms in VArt MciUtaly and I have added some of these, 
together with others from later observers. The lirst published case 
treated with an attenuation was one of my own {H. IE., xxix. in): 
Eleanor N., 17, suffered from fits of “ hystero-epilepsy ” for ten 
months, following a chill. At first the fits had been frequent, latterly 
only before the menstrual period. The fits sometimes lasted half an 
hour, were preceded b/ swelling of limbs and face, vvhicli some- 
times occurred without the subsequent fit. She bit her tongue in 
the fits. Other symptoms were : pains in legs, back, and head 
(occiput and vertex) ; swelling of throat compelling her to loosen 
her clothes. Menses after an absence of four months returned 
excessively. Much left ovarian pain and tenderness. Despondent, 
feeble heart sounds ; pulse 120 ; could not lie d(wn for palpitation 
and headache. Legs so weak she could not stand. Thyroid very 



1438 THYROIDINUM 

slightly enlarged. Constipation. Sleepless, has had to take hypnotics 
regularly of late. A brother of the patient was epileptic. Loch, did 
some good, especially improving the sleep ; but no solid progress 
was made till Thyr. 3X, gr. ii. thrice daily, was given on November ist. 
On November 4th she could lie down flat ; on the 15th she could walk 
with assistance ; on the 39th the headache had ceased ; on Depember 
6th she could walk alone quite well and the bowels acted without 
enema for the first time. The mental condition improved, the 
prominence of the eyeballs disappeared, and she left the hospital per- 
fectly well before Christmas. With Thyr, im F.C. Skinner cured a case 
of dysmenorrhcea in a goitrous subject. In a case of valvular heart 
disease following rheumatism in a man, 24, Thyr. 3X, gr. ii. thrice 
daily, quickly relieved a squeezing pain at the heart with inability to 
lie down and materially hastened the patient's recovery. The action of 
Thyr, on the heart is most profound. Fatal syncope has occurred in a 
number of cases under “ Thyroid feeding." Cyanosis was produced 
in many cases. Severe angina pectoris was produced by it in a patient to 
whom Burnett gave the 3X. The connection between the heart and 
the thyroid gland is very close, as seen in cases of exophthalmic goitre. 
Many cases of the latter affection have been cured with Thyr. In 
myxeedema, cachexia strumipriva, cretinism and similar conditions the 
thyroid gland is absent or defective, and the idea of the Thyroiu 
feeding is to supply a physiological want. A state of puffiness ,and 
obesity may therefore be regarded as a keynote indication for fhyr. 
As drugs act sometimes in opposite wa^^s, I gave Thyr. 3X gr. ii. to 
a living skeleton of a child aged five, and looking not more than two, 
who had been kept in a box in a cellar all his life till brought into 
hospital, w’hen he weighted 14J pounds. Under Bac. 200 and careful 
feeding he gained J pound a week. When I commenced Thyr. he put on 
weekly f pound, and gained the use of his legs, beiijg able to stand 
by holding on to a chair. In a case of universal and very aggravated 
psoriasis in a schoolboy, fair, very chilly, cold, clammy hands and 
feet, Thyr. 3X and later 30 (which seemed to act better than the lower 
attenuation) completely cured after a prolonged course. An obese 
lady, aet. 60, developed diabetes. I cured her completely of the 
diabetes w'ith Thyr. 3X and 30. She has now for many years been 
able to take any kind of food. (On her husband, a spare man, who 
also was diabetic Thyr. had no effect.) Skin cases in great variety have 
been cured with Thyr, in substantial doses : Pityriasis rubra, intense 
redness, and scaliness of legs, and also with intense itching ; 
ichthyosis ; syphilitic eruptions ; scleroderma. The nutrition of 
the bones is afl'ected, and acromegaly has been relieved and united 
fractures made to unite. Thyr. has increased the flow of milk in nursing 
women when the flow has been deficient. It has cured cases of 
tetany both operative and idiopathic. The keynote in these cases 
appears to have been ‘* < of spasms by cold." Many cases of insanity 
have been cured with it, including a case of puerperal insanity with 
fever. H. O. Nicholson {B. M. J.j June 21, 1901) rekfes a case of 
eclampsia of pregnancy : A woman, 32, in her third pre^ancy, had a 
fit on October 3rd, Thyroid feeding was begun next day. Marked 
improvement followed. ®dema of face and body difninished. On 



THYROIDINUM 


^439 


October 23rd patient was about her usual duties. On November 6th 
she was delivered of a healthy boy without any untoward symptoms, 
r/iyr., according to Nicholson, is &uretic, like Urea] and Nicholson 
explains its action in eclampsia as being effected through its enabling 
the kidneys to carry off the toxins resulting from fcetal metabolism. 
Thyr, is antagonistic to Adrenalin in that the latter contracts, whilst 
the*£ormer dilates the arterioles. Among the pathogenetic effects of 
r/tyn, optic neuritis and accommodative asthenopia have been observed. 
Some curiosities have been noted in the action of Thyr. on the 
growth of hair. • Myxoedema patients lose their hair as a rule, and 
Thyr. when successful restores the growth. But in some cases the 
opposite effect has been noted. In one case of myxoedema the hair 
had fallen off the head and face and a thick growth appeared on arms 
and chest. Under Thyr. the latter disappeared, and the hair on the head 
and face grew again {VArt Med.^ Ixxxii. 44). The pains of Thyr. are 
stitching, aching, or heavy pains, and tingling sensations. At the 
point of injection when administered subcutaneously brawny swelling 
occurred in one case (which may suggest scleroderma) followed by 
abscess of slow development. Persons suffering from skin diseases 
were found tolerant of much larger doses than myxoedemics. In a 

t umber of cases latent phthisis has been lighted up into activity. 

yphilis, both secondary and tertiary, has been vastly relieved hy Thyr. 
Hansen.mentions fibroma uteri as having been cured by J//yr., and Bur- 
ford supports this. “ Brawny swelling’^ is a keynote of Thyr. pointed 
out by Burnett. With Thyr. 3X gr. vi. thrice daily he cured a case of 
dropsy and albuminuria which had been given up by several doctors. 
Burnett noticed that the swelling was bratvny. Soon after commencing 
Thyr. the patient passed a quantity of fluid from the feet and got quite 
well. The symptoms are : > By rest. < By least exertion ; by stooping. 
(Heart was < lying down.) < By cold. {Thyr. treatment nearly 
always raises the bodily heat.) 

Relations. — Compare : Myxoedema ; psoriasis, &c., Ars. [I per- 
manently cured a case of myxoedema with Ars. high, before the 
Thyroid method was introduced (H. TU., xxvii. 443) ; arsenic 
has been ‘found to be a normal constituent of the healthy thyroid 
gland]. Phthisis, Bac. [I have found Thyr. follow” Bac. well. 
Greenfield (see H. W., xxix. 7) found tuberculosis very common in 
myxoedemics, in five out of seven fatal cases it was widespread and 
advanced ; he also found it in one case of sporadic cretinism. Young, 
of Switzerland, has cured cretinism with Bac.] Syphilis, Merc., 
K. iod., Syph. Goitre, exophthalmic Spo., lod,, "Spi. Diuresis, 
Urea. Optic neuritis, Tab., Carb. s. Dilated arterioles (Adren., opp.). 
Ununited fractures, Synij^i. Wakes with headache, Lacli. Follows 
well : Lach., Bac. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.-7-Acute stupor alternating with restless melancholia ; at times 
could not be golto speak, but would lie on floor with limbs rigid ; at other 
times would weep and undress herself ; at times dangerous and homicidal, 
would put her arms round the necks of other patients so tightly as almost to 



1440 


THYROIDINUM 


strangle them ; (in this case the insanity was primary and the myxcedema 
secondary ; both conditions were removed). — Evinced increased vivacity by 
quarrelling with another patient about a trifling difference of <j opinion 
— Depression. — Fretfulness and moroseness gave way to cheerfuln^s and 
animation. — '' All progressed cases of myxoedema show some mental aberration 
which tends towards dementia, usually with delusions, the latter taking the 
form of suspicion and persecution. Occasionally actual insanity is present 
in the form of mania and insanity.” — Delirium of persecution (three cases 
observed, one fatal, the result of taking Thyr. in tablets to reduce obesity). — 
Sudden acute mania occurring in m3rxoedema, perfectly restored mentally and 
bodily under Thyr. — Mental aberration dating three years before onset of 
myxoedema, subject to attacks of great violence, with intervals of depression 
and moroseness. — State of idiocy ; fearful nightmares. — Excited condition, 
lasting all the rest of the day, grunting continuously and laughing in a way 
that was peculiar to herself. — Very excited ; excited state followed by con- 
siderable depression. — For several hours in what can only be termed a 
hysterical condition. — Profound depression. — Irritable and ill-tempered. — 
Became a grumbler. — Angry. — Had frights. 

2. Head. — ^\’’ertigo. — Feeling of lightness in the brain, scarcely amount- 
ing to giddiness.—Much giddiness and headache for twenty-four hours. — 
Awoke about4 a.m. with sharp headache and intense aching in back and lirab:>, 
which continued for three days and compelled him to keep his bed. — Ever 
since taking the first thyroid [had had five glands altogether, at intervals] he 
had a strange heavy feeling in his head, with vertigo and palpitation on 
stooping. — Headache (with fever symptoms); disappeared on suspending 
treatment, reappeared seven days after recommencing. — Fronto-coronal 
headache about two hours after each tabloid. — Persistent frontal headache 
after taking one tabloid for four successive days. — (Constant headache, pains 
in occiput and vertex.) — (Headaches in case of acromegaly.) — Headache. — 
Headache and pains in abdomen. — Fresh growth of hair (many cases). — Black 
hairs growing among the grey. — In one case of scleroderma and in one case 
of myxcedema the hair fell off permanently. — In a case of myxcedema the 
patient lost all the hair of his head and face and had thick growth over 
his arms and thorax ; under Thyr, the hair of the head and face*grew again 
and that of the arms and chest fell off. 

3. Eyes. — (Prominence of eyeballs — exophthalmic goitre.) — Optic 
neuritis (in five persons, four of them women, under treatment for obesity ; 
no other symptoms of thyroidism). — Accommodative asthenopia. 

4. Ears. — Moist patches behind ears heal up (case of psoriasis). — 
Hyperplasic median otitis with sclerosis and loss of mobility of the ossicles 
(rapid amelioration — several cases). 

6. Face. — Flushing *. with nausea and 'inmbar pains ; loss of con- 
sciousness, tonic muscular spasm ; immediate ; with rise of temperature, 
and pains all over ; suddenly became breathless and livid.'^Faintness, with 
great flushing of upper part of body and ^ains in back.— Swelling of face and 
legs. — In lupus of face, light sensation, heat, and angry redness removed. — 
Burning sensation of lips with free desquamation, 

8. Mouth. — Tongue became thickly coated. — Feverish and thirsty. — 
Great thirst.— (Ulcerated patch on buccal aspect on 1 . cheek near angle of 
mouth.) 



THYROIDINUM 


1441 


^ Throat. — (Full sensation.) — Goitre, exophthalmic, cured. — Goitre 
reduced. 

zx. , , Sftomach. — Loss of appetite. — Increased appetite with improved 
digestion. Eructations. — Dyspeptic troubles. — Nausea, with flushing and 
lumbar pains. — Nausea, slight vomiting — Slight nausea recurring on thinking 
of it— 'Nausea soon after taking the gland. — On five occasions the patient (a 
woman) vomited the thyroid. — ^Always felt a sensation of sickness after the 
injections. — Sensations of faintness and nausea (after a few injections). — Feels 
tired and sick. — Gastro-intestinal disturbance and diarrhoea. 

ia« Abdomeft. — Flatuence increased, followed later in the case by 
amelioration. — Headache and pain in abdomen. 

13. Stool. — Diarrhoea; with gastro-intestinal disturbance. — Relief of 
constipation with more natural actions.—Constipation. 

. 14. Urinary Organs. — Increased flow of urine. — Increased urination, 
usually with clear, pale yellow secretion. — Slight trace of albumen found in 
urine,-- Albuminuria. — Diabetes mellitus ; caused and cured. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Increased sexual desire. — Six days after 
commencement of treatment menstruation, which had been absent over a 
year, reappeared and continued profusely (in several cases of myxoedema with 
or without insanity). — Menses profuse, prolonged, more frequent ; early 
dlhenorrhoea. — (Painful and irregular menstruation.) — (Constant left ovarian 
pain, and great tenderness). — Looks pale and feels ill. — Pain in lower part of 
abdomen, headache and sickness (in girl of sixteen, probably menstrual 
effort provoked by Thyr, ; no catamenial flow appeared). — Acts as a gal- 
actagogue when milk deficient ; when the deficiency is associated with a 
return of the menses it will suppress the latter. — (Puerperal insanity with 
fever.) — (Puerperal eclampsia.) 

17: Respiratory Organs. — Slight attack of haemoptysis, followed by 
cough and signs of phthisis at apex of 1. lung. — (Voice became clear.)-— 
Dormant phthisis ; lighted up the disease in five cases. 

z^ Heart and Pulse. — Death, with all the symptoms of angina 
pectoris. — On trying to walk uphill died suddenly from cardiac failure. — 
While stooping to put on her shoes she “ fainted *' and died in half an hour. — 
On one occa^^ion, after exerting herself more than she had done for a long 
time previously, ** suddenly became extremely breathless and livid, and felt as 
if she was dying ; > by rest in recumbent position and stimulants. — Two 

fainting attacks. — Frequent faintingfit.^. — Complained occasionally of a feeling 
of faintness, not occurring particularly after the injections. — One patient 
showed extraordinary symptoms after the injection; the skin became so 
livid as to be almost blue-black. — Degeneration of heart muscle in animals. 
— systolic cardiac murmur was less loud after the treatment than before.— 
Sensations of faintness and nausea. — Palpitation on stooping. — Weakness of 
heart's action. — ^Tachycardia and ready excitability of the heart persisting for 
several days after the feeding was stopped. — Pulse rose to 112. — Relaxation 
of arterioles.— (Rapid pulsation, with Inability to lie down in bed.)— (Jumping 
sensatioa at heart) 

fto. Baclc.*~tF1ushing, nausea, and lumbar pains, lasting a few minutes. — 
Stabbing pains in lumbar region. — Intense aching in back and limbs, which 
continued for three days. — Flushing of upper part of body and pains in back. 
— (Backache.) 

VOL. n. 


92 



1442 


THYROIDINUM 


21. Limbs.— Quivering of limbs ; tremors.— Intense aching in back and 
limbs, lasting three days. — Pains in arras and legs, with malaise. — Skin of 
hands and feet desquamated. — (Acromegaly, subjective symptoms.)© 

22 . Upper Limbs. — After injection, to a great extent lost the use of her 
hands for two days ; recurred later, lasting a few hours. — Felt queer and 
unable to raise her arms (after injection, another case). — Arms less stiff 
and painful (psoriasis). 

23. Lower Limbs. — Tingling sensation in legs. — CEdema of legs ap- 
peared, and subsequently subsided and continued to reappear and subside 
for a month. — Pain in legs. — Incomplete paraplegia. — Swelling of face and 
legs. — Feet repeatedly peel in large flakes, leaving a tender surface. — Profuse 
flow of fluid from feet (in case of dropsy cured by Thyr,), 

24. Generalities. — Malaise > by lying in bed. — Stooping 8 palpitation. 
— Rest in recumbent position > extreme breathlessness with lividity, felt as if 
dying. — Myxoedematous patients ai e always chilly ; the effect of the treatment 
is to make them less so. — Loss of consciousness and general tonic muscular 
spasm for a few seconds. — Fainting attacks (many cases). — Tremors, quivering 
of limbs, complete unconsciousness. — (Tetany.) — Epileptiform fit, after which 
he was unconscious for an hour ; next day felt better and warmer. — Malaise 
so great she refused to continue the treatment. — Agitation. — Incomplete para- 
plegia. — Hysterical attack. — (Hystero-epilepsy with amenorrhoea.)— Nervc-s 
and hysterical, had to have nurses to watch her. — Feels tired and sick. — 
Stabbing pains. — Aching pains (many cases). — Aching pains all over. — Diffused 
pains. — ^Aching pains in various parts of body. — Pains over whole body. — 
Brawny swelling at point of injection, foUowed by abscess of slow develop- 
ment. — Myxoedema removed (many cases). — “ A series of abscesses resulting 
from the injections, but probably originating from an accidental abscess quite 
independent of them." — A small abscess formed. — Increased suppuration in 
case of lupus. — Gained a stone in weight. — Lost weight enormously (many 
cases of myxoedema). — Rapid gain of flesh and strength. — Anaemia and dejbility. 
— Infiltration rapidly absorbed (psoriasis). — Persons suffering from skin 
disease can bear much larger doses than those suffering from myxoedema. 
— (Acromegaly, headaches, and subjective symptoms.) — (Fractures refuse 
to unite.) — A peculiar cachexia more dangerous than m3rxQedema itself. — 
Syphilis secondary and tertiary. 

25. Skin. — Flushing of skin. — Skin became so livid ^ to be almost blue- 
black. — Skin has desquamated freely, but there has been no perspiration or 
diuresis. — Psoriasis ; eruption extended and increased. — (Psoriasis ; redness 
and itching reduced ; eruption separating and being shed in great scales, 
angry, inflamed appearance completely gone.) — Moist patches behind ears 
heal up. — ^Arms less stiff and painful ; swelling diminished. — Crusts separated, 
leaving faint red skin ; eruption not nearly so painful. — (Symmetrical ser- 
pigenous eruption ; dark red ; edges raised and thickened.) — Lupus : tight 
feeling, heat, angry redness removed; suppuration increased. — Eczema: 
irritation of skin markedly allayed. — Scattered pustules of eczema mature 
quickly or abort. — (Teething eczema.) — (Syphilitic psoriasis.) — (Rupia.) — 
Scleroderma.— Peeling of skin beginning on legs and extending over whole 
surface ; skin has since become comparatively soft and smooth.— Peeling 
of skin of Iqwqr limbs, with gradual clearing (eczema). — Skin of hands 
and feet desquamated. 



THYROIODINUM 


H43 


86« Sleep.— Continual tendency to sleep. — Awoke about 4 a.m. with 
sharp headache. Fearful nightmares disappeared. — Insomnia. — Excited 
conditioif; could not sleep. 

27. Fever, — Flushing : with nausea ; with loss of consciousness.— 
Always felt hot, and had a sensation of sickness after the injections. — Felt 
better and warmer.— -Flushing of upper part of body and pains in back.— 
Temperature never rose above 99® but she felt feverish and thirsty,— 
Temperature rose to 100® F., and remained there several days ; pulse 1x2,— 
Rise of temperature ; diaphoresis. — Profuse perspiration on least exertion. 


Thyroiodinum. 

lodothyrinum. Trituration. 

Clinioal, — Goitre. Obesity. Urine, increase of. 

Gharaoteristics. — Thyroiodine is now more generally named 
lodothyrinCf but I retain the former as more convenient. Hoenig- 
^hmied {Aerz, Cent. Zeti.j No. 6, 1900, quoted A. //., xxvii. 211) says 
of it that it is present in only small quantities in the thyroid of the 
sheep. It is completely free from albuminous substances, stable, and 
directly assimilated. The iodine exists in organic combination, and 
Tkyri. contains 0*003 parts of Iodine to every gramme. The general 
effects of the drug are — ^increased secretion of urine and corresponding 
loss of flesh. Hoenigsehmied gives two cases : (i) Labourer, 42, for 
several years had enlargement and induration of all lobes of thyroid, 
the enlargement causing compression of the structures of the neck, 
dyspnoea, whistling respiration, hoarseness, short, dry cough, vertigo. 
Tnyri.j 5-grain tablets, one every evening ; at the end of a week 
twice daily. After using twenty-five tablets the gland was smaller and 
softer ; the previously hard and resistant nodules were elastic ; after 
two more .weeks only remnants of the goitre remained. (2) Man, 60,, 
thyroid enlarged in all its lobes with a glandular cystic swelling in the 
right one ; dyspnoea, loud whistling breathing. Two, three, and at 
last four tablets were given daily for two months, by which time the 
goitre had vanished, but the cyst was not changed. {3) Man, 45. 
medium height, sedentary, suffered from obesity, vertigo, dyspnoea, 
weariness. Pulse feeble, 76 ; functions normal ; appetite and sleep 
good ; weight 230 pounds. With increasing doses of Thyri.j up to ten 
tablets dailjr, the weight steadily went down to 160 pounds, activity 
increasing in proportion! When the dose had reached four 
tablets daily the urine became very abundant, but was free from 
albumen. The daily dose was increased one tablet eve^ four days. 
At one stage Fowler’s solution *0! arsenic, four drops in wine, was 
given as well to prevent Thyroidism. 

oy ; Ars. Compare: Thyr. Urine, Urea, 



*444 


TILIA 


Tilia. 

Tilia Europoea. The common Lime or Linden. N. 0. Tiliaceae. 

Tincture of fresh blossoms. 

Ollttical. — Dentition. Enuresis. Epistaxis. Leucorrhoea. Lichen. Neuralgia. 
Peritonitis. Rheumatism. Toothache. Urticaria. Uterus, hearing down in; pro- 
lapse of ; inflammation of. 

Characteristics. — The sap of the Lime contains sugar, and the 
flowers an abundance of honey, which makes the tree particularly 
attractive to bees. A tincture of the fresh blossoms was proved by 
the Austrian Society. The most striking characteristic is “ an intense 
sore feeling about the abdomen and profuse warm sweat which gives 
no relief.’* This has led to its successful use in cases of peritonitis. 
In addition to this are marked bearing-down symptoms in the whole 
genito-urinary and rectal regions, especially in the uterus, and these 
combined with the others have indicated TiL in puerperal metritis 
and other disorders of the female generative sphere. An intense facial 
neuralgia was developed in the proving ; and also a very aggravatejj 
condition of skin irritation with pimples of the lichen order. Some 
Peculiar Sensations are : As if a piece of cold iron pierced through 
right eye, causing burning. Burning as if a piece of ice were drawn 
over ear and face. As if something living were under skin of face. 
Tearing in anterior muscles of thigh, as if they were too short. 
There are a number of pains above the root of the nose ; epistaxis of 
thin, pale blood which coagulated quickly. The left side was most 
affected. Great sensitiveness to draught of air was induced. The 
symptoms were : < Afternoon and evening ; talking ; walking ; 
sneezing ; stooping ; cold water. > In cool room ; walking about 
in open air ; closing eyes (head) ; by coffee. Pain in head was > 
by application of cold water ; pain in jaw <. Heat of bed < skin 
symptoms. 

Belations. — Compare : — Puerperal metritis, Bell. Uterine bearing 
down, Lil. t. Sweat without >, Merc. 

SYMPTOMS. 

X. Mind. — Melancholy, disposed to weep. — Love-sick. — Dread of 
society. — Irritable.— Disinclined to work. 

ft. Head. — Vertigo, with staggering, and like gauze before the eyes*-— 
Intoxication. — Stinging pain in forehead, with heat in head and face. — 
Extreme sensitiveness of head to draught of air. — Pressing-inward pain$, as 
from a dull instrument, just above root of nose. — Tearing in r. temple, 
extending down upper arm. — Pressure and burrowing in occiput.— Itching of 
scalp, — Eruption of small gritty vesicles, which itch and burn on scratching. 

3 . Eyes. — Hollow-eyed.— Sensation as if a piece of cold iran pierced 
r. eye, causing burning. — Vision : obscured ; flickering. 

4* Ears.— Stinging in ears. 



TILIA 


H4S 

5. Nose.— Bleeding from nose ; blood thin and pale, but coagulates 
- quickly.— Frequent sneezing.— Tickling of nose. 

6. PsLce , — Face pale ; or flushed ; frequent alternations. — Ulcerative, 
sore pain r. side of face from temple to jaw.— Cutting pains : starting from 
r. upper jaw ; near 1. malar bone.— Sensation of something alive under skin of 
face* — Quivering of lips.— Sprained pain in 1. jaw-joint. 

7. Teeth. — Stinging pain in all the teeth, < by cold water. — Drawing 
pains in gums. 

8. Mouth.— Much mucus in mouth, causing fuzzy feeling ; affecting 
speech,— Taste : bitter ; bitter-slimy ; pasty. 

9* Throat. — Bq/rning in throat. — Sensation of swelling of the palate, 
with desire to swallow, and hoarse voice. — Tickling in palate causing cough. 

11, Stomach. — Unusual hunger. — Desires refreshing things. — Good 
appetite but speedy satiety. — Nausea after eating. — No desire for tobacco. 
— Putrid eructations. — Cramp-like pain in stomach. 

XS. Abdomen. — Bloated abdomen ; pains as from incarcerated flatu- 
lence ; repeated noisy discharges of it, with much >. — Circumscribed 
distension of abdomen. — Abdomen painful when touched, esp. round navel. 
— Constant rumbling and gurgling ; sometimes with colic. — Sensitiveness, 
^oreness, and sensation of subcutaneous ulceration in upper part of abdomen. 
— Stitches suddenly appearing in abdomen, extending into pelvis, and 
impeding breathing. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Pressure on rectum which seems to force out 
anus. — Sudden urgent desire. — Stool : early in morning ; soft, mushy, unsatis- 
factory ; pasty ; scanty ; delayed ; hard. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Constant painful pressure on bladder and 
urethra. — Broad stitches in middle of urethra. — Frequent, copious micturi- 
tion. — Enuresis twice towards morning when in a stupid slumber. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Frequent pressing on uterus, as if 
everything would fall out of pelvis. — Spasmodic labour-like drawing from 
abdomen down small of back, as if catamenia would set in. — Great sensitive- 
ness and soreness of whole uterus, as after parturition. — Redness, soreness, 
and burning of external parts. — Menstruation too late and very scanty (blood 
pale). — Profuse leucorrhoea ; pale mucus. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Tickling, scraping, irritating, provoking 
slight cough, esp. in 1. side of larynx. — Fine stitches in larynx, < talking.— 
Hoarseness. — Frequent sighing. 

x8» Chest. — Oppression. — Whole chest weak ; acute pressure and pinch- 
ing under sternum. — Throbs as from a dull stitch from thorax to back. — 
Bruised pain and swelling of 1 . stcrno-clavicular joint. — Tearing from 1 . pec- 
toralis major to axilla and also upper arm with weariness and sensation of 
paralysis in arm while in bed! 

X9« Heart and Pulse. — Tensive, sore pain in praecordial region. — Pulse 
accelerated ; small. 

to. Neck and Back. — Tearing from nape to top of shoulder, — Sticking, 
drawing, and heat in r. back between liver and kidneys, — Heaviness in sacral 
and derssl region. 

ax. Limbs, — Trembling ; weariness ; bruised feeling in limbs. 

as. Upper Limbs.- Paralytic heaviness of arms, esp. upper arm. — 



1446 TILIA—TITANIUM 

Weariness of 1. arm even while hanging down,— Heaviness and painful lame- 
ness in 1. shoulder. — Tearing : in forearm near wrist ; in r. wrist and 1* half 

skull ; in hngers. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Weariness and prickling in limbs; cramps in 
flexor muscles. — Drawing in small spot 1. hip whilst sitting. — ^Tension in 
anterior muscles of both thighs as if too short. — Sensation as if leg tightly 
bound while walking.— Cramp in 1. sole. — Ulcerative pain in ball of 1. great 
toe < by touch. 

24. Generalities.— £sp. suitable for women after parturition, and for 
children during dentition. — L. side of body most affected. — < Afternoon and 
evening ; in warm room ; in heat of bed (skin symptoms) ; during motion 
(rheumatic symptoms). — > In cool room, and from motion, 

25. Skin. — Skin red ; hard pimples ; burn like fire after scratching. — 
Burning itching at night. — (Urticaria. — Lichen simplex.) 

26. Sleep. — ^Yawning ; sleepy ; exhausted. — Night disturbed by sudden 
waking. — Sleeplessness, with restlessness ; bed seems too hard, — ^Vivid frightful 
dreams ; skin of legs, csp. over tibiae, bathed in perspiration. 

27. Fever. — Pulse full, hard, and quick. — Chilliness in evening. — Heat 
all over, but most in head and cheeks. — Night-sweat. 


Titanium. 

Trituration of the copper-red crystals obtained from the slag at the 
bottom of a blast iron furnace, consisting of Titan, cyanide and 
Titan, nitride. 

Gllnieal. — Hemiopia. Semen, too early ejaculation of. 

CharaoteristiOB. — Titanium (Ti., A.W. 48' i) itands midVtray 
between Silicon and Tin in some of its relations ; and in other respect 
it is closely related to Iron, Chromium, and Aluminium. The crystals 
proved by Sharp (who took gr. ii. of the ist trit, daily for a week) 
were originally believed to be the pure metal, but were proved later 
to be the cyanonitrid. One symptom of the proving is remarkable : 

Imperfect vision, the peculiarity being that half an object only coifld 
be seen.^^ Another symptom, which Burnett has turned to good 
account in cases of sexual weakness, is “Too early ejaculatiou of 
semen in coitus.’^ 

BelatioilB. — Compare : Half-sight, Nat. c., Lyc., Aur., Lith. 

SYMPTOMS. 


2. Head.— Giddiness. 

3. Eyes.— Desire to keep eyelids closed.— Only half an object couid 
be seen at once. 

II. Stomach.-f-Loss of appetite.— Nausea.— Discomfort in stomaclu 
24. Generalities. — Greatly disordered ; felt and looked wretchedly ill. 
15. Mali Sexual Organs.— Too early ejaculation of semeii. 



TONGO 


1447 


Tongo. 

Dipterix odorata. Tongo, Tonka or Tonquin Bean. N, 0, Legu- 
• minosae. Tincture of the dried beans. 

Glillioal. — Hip, pains in. Migraine. Neuralgia of face. Toothache. 

Characterintios. — Tongo was proved by Ncnning. Its fragrant 
seed is much used by perfumers. Dtplerix odorata^ which yields it, is 
a native of Cayenne. The fruit is something like that of the almond- 
tree. Curiously in the proving it produced “ Risings with taste of 
bitter almonds.^^ The chief uses of Tong, have been in migraine 
and neuralgic affections. The symptoms are : < By rest ; when 
seated. > By movement. Pressure >. 

Relations. — Aniidoied by : Vinegar. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Peevishness and ill-humour. — Dislike to labour and con- 
versation. 

2. Head. — Head confused, esp. in occiput, with drowsiness. — Heavi- 
ness of head, esp. on rising up after stooping. — Drawing headache. — Pressure, 
tearings, and shootings in head, esp. on coming into a room, with tearings on 
one side of the face and ill-humour. — Shootings in head, when laughing. — 
Pul.sative headache, esp. on 1. side, — The headaches disappear on taking 
vinegar. — Excessive sensibility of exterior of head. 

3. Eyes. — Burning sensation and dryness of eyes, when reading in 
evefning. — Drawing, tension, and quivering in eyelids. 

4. Ears. — Tearing in ears. 

5. Nose. — Coryza, with obstruction of nosc.—Violent sneezing in the 
flight. — Slight tearing in root of nose with irritation to sneeze and cough, 

6. Face.— -Paleness of complexion, with red cheeks.— Tearing in maxillas. 
— Semilateral, tearing pains in face. 

7. Teeth, — Toothache, with tearing pain, esp. in molars, < by pressing 
upon them, dissipated by the use of vinegar. — Acid blood from teeth 
and gums. 

V 8 , Mouth. — Copious accumulation of water in mouth. 

9. Throat. — Roughness and scraping in throat. 

tx. Stomach. — Risings with taste of bitter almonds. 

12. Abdomen. — Burning sensation and cuttings in the hypochondria, 
as if externally. — Movements and pinchings in abdomen. 

13. Stool.— Tenesmus. — Hard fjcces, evacuated with straining. — Diar- 
fheea, followed by excessive sensilfility of abdomen. 

X4, Urinary Organs,— Scanty urine, with white sediment— Urine of 
colour of white wine, with much slimy sediment.— Red urine, with abundant 
day<oloured sediment. 

x§. Female Sexual Organs.— Catamenia premature.— Leucorrhoea, 



1448 TONGO— TRACHINUS . 

when walking.— Discharge of thick mucus from vagina (when making an 

effort to pass a stool). 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness, with burning seniition in 
larynx. 

xB. Chest.— Shooting and burning sensation under sides of the chest. 

20. Back. — Pains in loins, with excessive sensibility to the touch. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Tearing in 1. hip-joint 5 p.m. > rubbing.— Tearing 
in 1. thigh and knee > pressure. — ^Violent stinging like the prick of a needle in 
fatty portion of r. great toe after dinner. 

24. Generalities. — Tearing in the limbs, > by external pressure and 
also by movement. — The majority of the symptoms manifest themselves when 
seated, and during repose. — Vinegar dissipates many of the pains. 


Toxicophis. 

Toxicophis pugnax. Moccasin Snake. N. O. Ophidia. Trituration. 

Clinloal. — GEdema, Periodic neuralgia. 

Charaoteristios. — Some effects of bites with this snake have been 
recorded. A peculiar feature of the cases was that the symptoms 
of pain and fever recurred annually at exactly the same period for 
many years with decreasing intensity each year. In one case the 
pains spread to other parts after some years. 

SYMPTOMS. 

23. Lower Limbs. — R. leg became painful and swelled rapidly. — For 
several years the pain was confined to the knee of the bitten limb ; in a few 
years it left the knee and seized the hip, and finally attacked the shoulder. 

24. Generalities. — For the last eighteen years annual recurrence of 
symptoms with severe pain but without swelling ; occurred at precisely the 
same time of year ; decreased in intensity each year. 

25. Skin. — Skin rather dry. 


Trachinus. 

Trachinus draco and T. vipera. The Great and Lesser Weaver, 
Sting-bull and Sting-fish, Trituration df the poisonous fins. 

CllAioaL— Asthma. Blood-poisoning. Neuralgia. Ulcers. 

Gharaoteristics. — Some very serious effects have been recorded 
from wounds inflicted with the tins of Trachinus, Intolerable pains, 
swelling of the part, and in some cases gangrene, fever, delirium, and 
symptoms of hydrophobia have been observed. It should be indicated 
in cases of acute blood-poisoning with intense pains. 



TRADESCANTIA 


1449 


, SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind.— Raving.— Hydrophobia.— Anxiety.— Fear of death. 

9. Head.— Vertigo.— Violent headache. 

Jl. Stomach. — ^Violent thirst. — Nausea. — Green, bilious vomiting. 

V], Respiratory Organs.— Paroxysms of suffocation. 

29. Heart.— Palpitation. 

Generalities.— Swelling : of whole body ; of wounded arm then of 
head and chest.— Stinging, burning, throbbing pain increasing to unendurable 
intennty lasting an hour and then decreasing.— Violent burning pain extend* 
ing from wound to chest. 

25 . Skin. — Skin of whole body became yellowish green.— Gangrenous 
Blisters on arms. 

20. Sleep.— Sleeplessness. 

27. Fever. — Constant fever with irregular pulse. — Cold, clammy sweat 


Tradescantia. 

Tradescantia diuretica. JV. 0. Commelynaceae. Tincture of fresh 

leaves. 


CUnlcaL— Gonorrhoea. Orchitis. 

Characteristics.— Mure proved Trad., which belongs to a genu 
of lily-like plants. It produced disorder of the genito-urinary organs, 
urethral discharge, and inflammation of the scrotum ; also embar- 
rassed breathing. 


SYMPTOMS. 

f 

2. Head.— Vertigo. 

13. Stool. — Diarrhoea. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Whitish discharge from urethra. — Pain when 
urinating.— Stream thin.— Urine ; aud smelling ; yellowish, copious, ash- 
coloured sediment. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Scrotum inflamed, painful and red. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Breathing : very painful ; embarrassed, 
difficult, sighing, as from wivtt of air. 

18. Chest.— Pain in 1. side of chest. 



H50 


TRIFOLIUM PRATENSE 


Trifolium Pratense. 

Trifolium pratense. Red Clover. N. 0 . LeguminosaB. Tincture of 
flower heads. [In the cancer cases an extract of the blossoms 
of the first crop is used. This extract,” says Cooper, is 
made by boiling down the flowers till nothing but an 
inspissated residuum is left : in this condition it seems to be 
caustic and for this reason is used by herbalists : I doubt its 
utility.”] 

Clinieal* — Cancer. Constipation. Cough. Mumps. ^Pancreas, afTections of. 
Throat, sore ; mucus in. Uvula, pain in. 

CharaoteristicB. — Tri. />. has a reputation among eclectics in 
whooping-cough, and coughs of measles and phthisis. T. C. Duncan 
and others proved it and elicited some very decided respiratory symp- 
toms, dry, tickling cough, oppressed ^breathing with fever. One 
peculiar symptom was, cough followed By hiccough. Many symptoms 
of congestion appeared. The head felt full of blood. The lungs felt 
full of blood. Sensation in lungs as if breathing hot air ; as if air full 
of impurities. There was persistent headache on waking. Sleep was 
unrefreshing. The pulse was weak and intermittent, showing an action 
on the heart ; later it was full and bounding. Pharynx as well as trachea 
was irritated and there was : Sharp pain through uvula causing tears 
to start.” Dryness of trachea causing him to clear tfiroat of some 
foreign substance. Secretion of urine increased. Dull, stupid feeling 
generally. Farrington gives as characteristic ; Hoarseness and choking 
spells at night with cough ; the neck is stiff, cramps in stemo-mastoid 
muscle > by heat and friction. Cooper says of Tri, p. that it causes 
salivation in horses, and diarrhoea if they eat much of it ; and that it 
cures mumps and affections of the pancreas and salivary glahds. 
Hale says it causes heaves ” in horses. Felter (H. /?., xiv. 431) gives 
it to persons disposed to cancer. He finds it retards the progress of 
cancerous tumours and improves the general condition of tfie patient. 
It keeps cancer from ulcerating. After ulceration has occurred Tri,p, 
does no good. Another indication of Felter’s is scaly and ulcerated 
conditions of the tibial region of the old.” The symptoms are < 
in close room ; > in open air. When I became very warm (with 
the fever) my breathing stopped ; lungs felt as if breathing hot air,” 
< After sleep. 

Relations. — Compare: Botan. ; congestive symptoms, Meli. Head* 
ache on waking, Nat. m., Lach. Cough with pains in chesty Bry., 
Ranuc., Arn., Rhus. 


SYMPTOMS. 

!• Mind. — Confusion of ideas, morning. 

2. Head. — Great headache in morning on waking. — Dulness in anterior 
brain. — Head feels fall of blood.— Intermittent headache.— Prickinginforehead. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes : dull and sore ; heavy. 

5. Nose. — Much mucus in nose ; thin. 



TRIFOLIUM REPENS 


HSt 

8. Mouth.— Whole mucus tract sensitive.— Taste of drug disgusting and 
always in mouth. — Salivation (horses). 

9. Yhroat. — Much mucus in throat, constantly trying to clear it. — 
Throat irritated all the way down ; as if scalded.—Irritation of pharynx and 
trachea causing dry cough.— Sharp pain through uvula causing tears to start. 

11. Stomach. — Great thirst.— Hiccough. 

12. Abdomen. — Rises at 5.45 a.m. with griping pains in abdomen and 
headache. — Colicky pains all day. 

13. Stool apd Anus. — Very costive, each stool followed by several 
drops of dark blood, attended by a bearing-down sensation as if bowel would 
prolapse by its owi^ weight (this lasted fourteen days, after which bowels 
became regular), — Stool delayed several da3^s, hard, covered with mucus; 
later bowels moved freely. 

• Urinary Organs. — Uneasiness in region of kidneys, and whole 

urinary tract. — Urine very profuse. — ^Vesical tenesmus after urinating. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Great dryness of trachea causing him to 
clear throat of some foreign sub^ance at 1 1 a.m. — Irritation of pharynx and 
trachea causing short, hacking cough with accumulation of mucus which must 
be expectorated. — Incessant dry, hacking cough. — Seems as if trachea was 
^loaded with impurities, after eating. — Dyspnoea > in fresh air. 

x8« Chest. — Lungs feel as if full of blood 2 p.m. ; 10 p.m. had to leave a 
close room from oppression ; on going into fresh air was obliged to cough much ; 
this was followed by hiccough and profuse expectoration. — Chest tight ; on 
lying down. 

IQ. Heart. — Pulse slow and irregular ; later full and rapid. 

20 . Neck and Back. — Neck stiff, cramps in sterno-mastoid muscles, > 
by heat and rubbing ; with the cough. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Tingling in 1 . palm ; also in 1 . arm. 

28. Sleep. — On waking in morning felt as if he had not been asleep. 

27* Fever. — Immediately after retiring began to feel cold ; pulse inter- 
mitting, later bounding ; became very warm and breathing stopped ; lungs 
felt as if breathing hot air. — Feet and hands cold, head hot. 

Trifolium Repens. 

Trifolium repens. White Clover. Leguminosse. Trituration or 

. tincture of flower heads. 

9 

Qliideal.— Mumps. Salivation. 

Cbanoteristioa. — The proving of Tn r. produced a specific action 
on the salivary glands. ‘Hale says it produces marked salivation in 
horses. 

Bslations* — Compare : Jabor., Pilo. 

SraPTOHS. 

8. Face* — Feeling of fulness or congestion of all the salivary glands. — 
Discomlort and even pain in glands followed by copious flow of saliva.— One 
provir felt just as if she had mumps coming on. 



145 * 


TRILLIUM 


Trillium. 

Trillium erectum. Purple Trillium. Bethroot. Birthroot. Lamb^s 
quarter. Rattlesnake root. Wakerobin. Three-leaved night- 
shade. [According to Millspaugh 7. pendulum is the white 
variety of 7. erectum. Treas. of Bot. gives the names as synony- 
mous. The symptoms of H. Minton, the original prover, are 
given in Allen under 7. cernuum, Minton obtained the tincture 
from a botanic physician and did not himself verify the plant 
His symptoms are marked (M) in the Schema. Millspaugh 
considers 7. erectum as the proper source of the homoeopathic 
tincture.] N. 0. Smilaceae (or Trilliaceae) of the Liliaceae. 
Tincture of the fresh root. 

Glinio^ • — Bladder, catarrh of. Climaxis. Diabetes. Dysentery. Fainting, 
with flooding. Fibroma, hajmorrhages from. Haemorrhages ; post-partum ; ante- 
partum. Menorrhagia. Metrorrhagia. Writer’s cramp. 

Charaoteristios. — The chief uses of Trill, come to us from the 
eclectics, who learned some of them from the native Indians. The 
popular name Birth-root sufficiently indicates one part of its reputa- 
tion. In haemorrhage, ante-partum, post-partum, and climacteric, in 
fibroid tumours, and in haemorrhages of all kinds Trill, has been found 
curative. Both the White and the Purple varieties have been used. 
Minton^s proving of 7. cemuum (?) brought out the haemorrhagic pro- 
perty in the blood-tinged diarrhoea. One characteristic in connection 
with the haemorrhages of 7n7/. is faintness and sinking at the stomach ; 
also cold extremities and rapid, feeble pulse. Flooding with faint- 
ing^' is a keynote. Minton's proving brought out a symptom bearing 
on this : Sensation of goneness in abdomen." He had also extre^jme 
debility ; palpitation, and anxiety. Trill, has been used as a local 
haemostatic in epistaxis and for bleeding after tooth extraction. 
Peculiar Sensations are : As if eyes too large (M). As if a crumb were 
in larynx (M). As if the chest was tightly bound and could not be 
expanded. As if hips and small of back were falling to pieces. As if 
sacro-iliac synchondroses were falling apart ; wants to be bound tightly. 
As if bones were broken. Left side most affected. Restless, tossing 
agitation, fear of being sick, great anguish were experienced by Minton. 
The restlessness and exhaustion from haemorrhages aye typified in this. 
Blue vision ; and craving for ice-water are other noteworthy sym|^oms. 
There is tendency to putrescence of fluids. The haemorrhages of 
TrilL are copious ; either active or passive ; usually bright ted and 
profuse. Trill, is suited to women who flood after every labout; 
flabby subjects. The symptoms of Minton's proving were : > Bend- 
ing forward ; < sitting erect. < By motion. < After eating. > By 
exercise in open air. Standing or walking ss bearing down in pelvis. 
Motion < haemorrhages. 

Ralatioas.— ; Calc. p. (menstrual and haemorrhagic 
affections). Compare : Anguish, restless tossing about, Aoo. 
rhages, Chi., Calc., Ham., Secal., Ust, Sang. Bright-red blood, Ipec. 



TRILLIUM 


1453 


Mill. Bleeding after tooth extraction, Ham., Kre. Menses profuse, 
every two weeks and lasting a week or longer. Calc. p. Flow profuse, 
gushing; light red, < least movement, Sabi. Flow dark, clotted, Ust., 
Thlasp. As if bones of pelvis broken, ^sc. h. 

SYMPTOMS. 

X. Mind* — Melancholy with sadness (M). — Repugnance to conversation 
(M)* — Irritable (M). — Anguish ; agitation and tossing about, impossible to 
keep still (M). * 

2* Head.*-Vertigo, chiefly, on rising in morning (M). — Dull pain 1. 
temple < least nois^M). — Pain in forehead > bending forward, < returning 
to erect position (M).-— Headache < by least noise ; walking ; coughing (M). 
•—Head and face feel hot (M). 

3* Eyes. — Pain in eyeballs, feel too large and as if would fall from their 
sockets (M), — Burning in inner canthus with profuse flow of tears (M). — ^Vision 
blurred ; everything Iboks blue (M). 

5. Nose. — Profuse nose-bleed. 

8. Mouth. — Bleeding from gums or after extraction of tooth. — Greasy 
feeling on tongue and gums (M). — Very offensive taste, esp. on rising in 
morning (M). — Profuse flow of saliva (M). 

II. Stomach. — Disgust for everything except cold water (M). — Desire 
for ice- water (M). — Sickness ; excessive pain ; cramp of stomach (M). — Sink- 
ing in stomach with heat. — Haematcmesis. — Stomach symptoms < after 
meals and in morning (M). 

13. Abdomen. — Swelling of abdomen as in ascites, with sensation as if 
abdominal contents drawn back against vertebral column (M). — Flabbiness of 
parietes with sensation of goneness, a want of support in front, with at intervals 
of a few moments short, sharp, lancinating pains from before backward, com- 
pelling him to bend forward (M). — Much flatulence and grumbling. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Dysentery, when passages are almost pure 
blood. — Diarrhoea thin, watery, tinged with blood ; painless (M). — Constipa- 
tion succeeded by thin, watery, very offensive diarrhoea (M). — Chronic 
diarrhoeas bloody mucus, 

14. Urinary Organs. — Haematuria, passive. — Chronic catarrh of bladder. 
— ^Diabetes. — Sharp, cutting pain in urethra when urinating (M). — Urine copious, 
of strong disagreeable odour (M). 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Itching of genitals < by scratching. 

Id. Female Sexual Organs. — Haemorrhage from uterus ; with sensa- 
tion as though hips and back w’ere falling to pieces, > from a tight bandage. 
—Bearing down in pelvis when standing or walking ; copious, yellowish, 
stringy leucorrhoea; period* lingers several days beyond usual time. — Ex- 
cessive flooding with fainting. — Metrorrhagia at climacteric : pale ; faint ; 
flow returns every two weeks. — Climaxis with weak sight ; anxious look. 
— Displaced uterus, with consequ<»nt menorrhagia. — Menses come on after 
over-exertion, — Gushing of bright-red blood from uterus at least movement ; 
later» blood pale from anaemia. — Haemorrhages from fibroid tumours, — 
Threatened abortion ; profuse haemorrhages, — Pain in back and cold limbs, 
with haemorrhages. — ^Too profuse menstrual flow after exhaustion by exercise. 



1454 TRILLIUM—TRIMETHYLAMINUM 

—Profuse, exhausting leucorrhoea.— Haemorrhage in abortion of third month* 
— Ante-partum haemorrhage ; os uteri dilated to size of half a dollar ; no 
pains ; flooding excessive.— Post-partum hsemorrhage.— Profuse, lorg*lasting 
lochial discharges. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Sensation of crumb in larynx, keeps up 
continual coughing (M).— -Cough, with purulent or bloody sputum.— 
Haemoptysis. 

18. Chest.— Difficult breathing ; feels as if chest bound up preventing it 
expanding (M). 

19. Heart. — Palpitation with great anxiety (M). 

SI. Limbs.— Cramping pains in muscles of arms and calves (M). 

22. Upper Limbs.— Pain in 1. shoulder extending down arm to band 
(M). — Cramping pains in fingers when writing (M). 

24. Generalities.— Haemorrhages usually bright red, profuse ; also when 
sacro-iliac synchondroses feel as if falling apart ; wants to be bound tightly. 
— Feels as if bones were broken, with haemorrhages.— Crawling sensation in 
veins, like a tightening up of parts ; < in legs and ankles. — Great debility (M). 

25. Skin. — Skin hot and dry, with itching and burning, < by scratching 
(M). 

26. Sleep.— Sleepless ; rolling and tossing on bed (M).— Sleep disturbed 
by frequent dreams (M).— Dreams of festivities, sleigli-ride, &c. (M). 

27. Fever. — Feverish during pain in abdomen, on the subsidence of 
which a profuse perspiration broke out (M). 


Trimethylaminnm. 

Propylaminum. N(CH3)3. [Found in many plants, Chen, v., Crataeg. 
ox., Phal. imp., Pyr. com., Arn., Cotyl. u.. Fag. syl., &c., and in 
herring-brine.] Solution. 

OUnioal.— Ankles, pains in. Rheumatic fever. Wrists, pains in. 

Characteristics. — Trimdhyl., which is prepared frori herring- 
brine among other sources, has a very unpleasant and penetrating 
fish-like odour. At one time it was regarded as a panacea in cases 
of acute rheumatism. Experiments on patients and others shoW 
that it diminishes the amount of urea excreted. Hansen gives 
these as characteristics : great pains in wrist-joints, also great restless- 
ness, pains in ankle-joints from standing < slight movement C. 
Carleton Smith {H. P., vi. 432) gives these : “ Rheumatism, wheQ the 
needle held in the fingers gets so heavy sh&'Cannot sew.” “ Copious 
diarrhoea with pains in anMe-joints but not in wrists ; thirst for large 
quantities of cold water (like Bry.)” 



TRIOSTEUM 


H 55 


. Triosteum. 

Triosteum perfoliatum. Fever-wort. Horse-gentian. N. 0 . Capri- 
foliaceae (Tribe, Lonicerea:). Tincture of fresh root. 

Clinioalt'-’Asthma. Backache. Fever ; gastric. Headache; bilious. Influenza. 
Infra-mammary pain. Joints, stiff. Typhoid. Urticaria. 

GhaFaoterj/Sitios* — Triost. is an energetically acting drug, and has 
been proved by Williamson, Neidhard, Gatchell, and other experienced 
provers. The name “fever- wort” tells its traditional reputation. 
Hale says it is one of the ingredients of the “ fever powder ” of the 
eclectics. Talmadge, one of the provers, found it of great value in 
•typhoid and gastric fevers. It produced acute rheumatic symptoms 
and an intense urticaria. Talmadge says of the effect on himself t 
“ It acted promptly and emphatically, causing aching pains in nearly 
every part of the body, especially of lower limbs and head.” The 
right side of the head was more affected than the left. The stomach 
was very much disordered. The vomiting and pain in the stomach 
^ were very severe. At the anus there was itching and exudation of 
mucus. A peculiar concomitant of the evacuations was : numbness 
of the lower limbs after stool. Many symptoms came on in the early 
morning hours. One prover, though sleepy, could not sleep after 
midnight. The symptoms were : < Early morning, 3, 4, 5, and 
7 a,m. < Sitting up ; rising from bed ; turning in bed ; lying. < 
After sleep. < Drinking cold water. 

Relations. — Gastric fever, Bapt. Rheumatism, Bry., Rhus. Load 
at lepigastrium, Ab. n. Sleepy but cannot sleep, Bell. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Greater cheerfulness. — Dulness and drowiness, with dis- 
inclination for active business. 

2. Head. — Giddiness when rising at midnight, with extreme drowsiness. 
■^Headache < sitting up.— Headache < r. forehead and r. temple. — Boring 
pain in r. temple 3 a.m.— Pain back of head with feeling of weight. 

3. Eyes. — Slight pain in 1 . eyeball. 

5. Nose.-— Sneezing. 

8. Mouth. — Soreness as if from swelling of pharynx, and pain in 
cesophagus on swallowing. 

il. Stomach. — Increased appetite through day. — Loathing of ail food. 
—Thirst — Nausea; on rising, which was immediately followed by copious 
Vomiting of very sour ingesta, attended with cramp in stomach and followed 
by sweat and pain in forehead ^hich was < 1. side.— Vomiting : 5 a.m. on 
ristug to stool; drawing in calves. — Load and oppression in epigastrium 
4 a,m., throbbing and undulating sensation all through system. — Pain in 
epigashium, < by drinking water. — Soreness in epigastric region. 

ik Abdomen.— Flatulence confined to stomach.— Sharp pains in bowels 



1456 TRIOSTEUM— TRITICUM REPENS 

and stomach.— Heat and sharp pain in r. side of abdomen in evening.^The 
evacuations seemed to proceed from small intestines. 

X3. Stool and Anus.— Irritation of anus with exudation of uaucns.— 
Stools most frequent in evening.— Stool 7 a.m. preceded by pain in abdomen. 
— Stool : watery, frothy, without pain, followed by exhaustion ; at 7 a.m. 
followed by numbness of lower limbs. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Discharge of semen during sl^eep without 
erection. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Asthmatic troubles. 

XO. Heart. — ^Audible beating of heart and slight pain dnder 1 . breast. 

so. Keck and Back. — Pain in nape with perspiration. — Pain in nape 
and back. — Pain in nape and occiput with coldness and stiffness in feet — 
Rheumatic pain in back from stooping. — Pain and stiffness in loins ( 1 . »de). 

2X. Limbs. — Stiffness in all joints of her upper and lower limbs. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pain in r. shoulder from lying on it. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Remarkable stiffness in lower limbs, with slight 
coldness and tingling sensation.— Stiffness in knees when attempting to rise. 
— Pain in r. knee. — Drawing and shrinking sensation in legs ; most decided 
pricking in soles.— Calves numb. — Penetrating pain under and behind 1 . 
external malleolus, after sleeping. — Stiffness of all joints when lying. 

24. Generalities. — Aching in all bones.' — Acted promptly and cner-'" 
getically, causing aching pains in nearly every part of the body, esp. lower 
limbs and head. 

25. Skin. — ^Vesicular eruption on forehead, over 1 . eye, on middle of chest, 
and on r. arm. — ^Violent itching eruption on skin. — Great itching at night with 
welts all over surface. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepiness with inability to sleep soon after midnight. 

27. Fever. — Coldness and stiffness in the feet. — Fever. — Drying uji of 
perspiration and development of fever, with hot skin and increased thirst. — 
General sweat. 


Triticum Repens. 

Triticum repens. Couch-grass. Cooch -grass. Cutch-grass. Quitch* 
grass. Twitch. N, 0 . Gramineae. Tincture of fresh plant. 

OUllioal. — Bladder, irritation of. Dysuria. Urine, incontinence of. 

OharacteriBtioB. — Burnett {Organ. Diseases of Women^ 1 15J te&liOW 
learned of a herbalist the use of TriU r., the herbalist having cured 
with it a patient of Burnett's, a man suffering from dysuria. Butxiett 
has found it no less valuable for women than for men. ** !Frequen% 
in dysuria from an inflamed state of the urethra, I found TrU» 
ten crops in a little water, frequently repeated, of prompt effect, dSim 
giving complete relief in a few hours, and if the ailment is primartfy in 
the urethra the relief is an abiding cure ; if from a tugging of the heavy 
womb, it is only relief." He gives this case : A widow, suffering i^m 
complete procidentia uteri and very bad hmmorrhoidal bleeding, wrote 



TROMBIDIUM 


*457 


that she was driven almost mad with painful micturition ; the burning 
and straining were truly awful. Trit. r. as above, was ordered, and 
brought most grateful letter from the patient. She keeps a supply 
always at hand. 


Trombidium. 

'IQrombidium muscae domesticae. N. 0 . Acaridea (Class, Arachnida). 

* ^ Tincture of the animals, 

CliBioii* — Anus, prolapse of. Diarrhoea. Dysentery. Hip- joint, pain in. 
Liver, pain in. Nose, catarrh of. Sciatica. Tibia, pain in. Toothache. 

Characteristics. — Tromb. is “ a parasite found singly or in groups 
upon the common house-fly, of a bright red colour, nearly circular in 
shape. The alcoholic tincture, a brilliant orange in colour, was pre- 
pared from specimens, about 115 in number, collected in Frankfort, 
Philadelphia, in September, 1864. The provings, under the super- 
vision of Hering, were made by Harvey, Head, J. F. R, and Bancroft, 
khe potencies used 3X, 6x, 9, 18. and 30’* (Hering, Guiding Symptoms), 
The grand keynote of Tromb. is “ < by eating or drinking.^* The symp- 
tom maybe in the nose, teeth, or tonsils, this modality is characteristic. 
On this indication I have cured some of the w^orst cases of diarrhoea ; 
’and also intestinal pains coming on when the patient eats or drinks. 
I have used a lom preparation of Fincke^s given me by Skinner. A com- 
prehensive keynote in diarrhoea and dysentery is : ** Much pain before 
and lifter stool ; stool only after eating.^^ Tromb. has cured dysen- 
tery with brown, thin, bloody stools and tenesmus. Congested liver 
with urgent, loose stools on rising from bed ; during stool, sharp pain 
in left side, shooting downward.^' Skin symptoms were prominent, 
especially itching of scalp and in whiskers. Fainting on rising up. 
Restlessness, inability to keep quiet. Peculiar Sensations are : As if 
there were no weight in head ; lightness. As from incarcerated 
flatus in aBdomen, As if excoriated after tenesmus. As if everything 
were coming out of anus. As if hot air blowing over lower abdomen 
and thigh. As if abdomen needed support. As if three toes on left 
foot would be twisted off. As if her breath were leaving her. The 
symptoms are : < By touch (pain in liver). < By pressure (pain in 
abdomen). Lying down : < toothache ; prevents fainting. Swallow- 
ing, or blowing nose = shooting in right ear. < Shaking head. 
Reading aloud sr toothache. Rising up sr fainting. Walking < pain 
in head \ srpain in hip-joifit (which is, however, > after a few steps). 
< Moving. Warm drink > toothache. Open air > coryza. Cold 
air < toothache. Cold bath < pain in abdomen. < Eating or 
drinking. < After stool. * 

Re&tioilB. — Antidoted by: Staph, (toothache) ; Merc. c. (diarrhoea), 
Compare : Rheumatism, Ledm. Diarrhoea, Sulph. < Blowing nose. 
Cuiex, Thuja. Stitches up anus, Ign., Nit. ac., Sul. ac. ; with pro- 
lapse, Pod. 

VOL. IL 


93 



1458 


TROMBIDIUM 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Talkative during day ; disposed to be contrary ; constant 
disposition to gape. — Inability to collect ideas, absence of ideas; loss of 
memory. 

2. Head. — Oppressive headache. — Dulness of head in forenoon. — Con- 
gestion of head in evening, with red face and ears. — Lightness of head. — 
Dizziness ; on every attempt to rise from bed, with faintness. — Head heavy, 
sometimes sharp pains in temples, extending over foreheai, at 9.30 p.m., < 
1, side. — Pain : in 1. mastoid process on waking at 7 a.m. ; in 1. side of head 
at 10 p.m., < shaking head and walking. — Shooting 4 above r. temple at 
3 p.m. ; near r4 parietal eminence at ii a.m. — Intolerable itching at 7 a.m., 
< vertex and occiput. 

3. Eyes, — Redness of internal part of con j unctiva, similar to a pterygium. 
— Lachrymation in open air. — Itching at r. inner canthus at 9 p.m. 

4. Ears. — Shooting : in ears in afternoon, < r. ; frequently in r. during 
day and evening ; in r. in forenoon, < swallowing or blowing nose. — Itching 
in ears after rising. — Burning in both pinnne, csp. r. 

5. Nose.— 'Nose obstructed on rising. — Fluent coryza in open air and 
on eatin^^Mucous discharge from nose, < during dinner. — Dryness of nose^^ 
in ev^ing, with scabs. — Nose-bleed in morning ; afternoon. 

7. Teeth. — ^Aching in 1. decayed tooth : on waking at 7 a.m., renewed 
by breakfast, lasting till noon ; in evening ; in evening from reading aloud, 
preventing sleep almost all night, lasting next day, < lying down, eating, 
talking, and cold air, > warm drinks, > Staph, 

8. Mouth. — Tongue coated white. 

9. Throat. — Throat sore on r. side. 

10. Appetite, — ^Appetite lost, 

11. Stomach. — Eructations after meals ; tasting of ingesta. — (Vomiting 
■after breakfast, thought it was from drinking coffee.) — Griping in pit of 
stomach, < after dinner. 

12. Abdomen. — Flatulent distension ; at 10 p.m. ; at 1 1 p.m,, causing 
pain. — Shooting beginning in 1. hypochondrium. — Griping on rising, obliging 
stool, which was brown and diarrhoeic and which > the pain until after 
breakfast, when it returned with greater violence and induced a second stool, 
with tenesmus causing prolapsus, then burning about anus ; sudden griping 
at 1.30 p.m., < 1. side, which induced a stool, the stool passed quickly, then 
tenesmus and prolapsus, then pain as if excoriated ; stool > pain only tern* 
porarily, as it returned with such violence as to force sweat from all parts, 
abated gradually ; < by dinner, causing another stool of soft, brown faeces 
mixed with mucus, then tenesmus, prolapsus ; weakness, esp. in knees, — Pain 
in morning, with urging to stool.— Pain at 3 p.m., > diarrhoea; on eating, 
with desire for stool ; < pressure. — Darting pain, at 10 a.m., < above r, hip, 
— Pain as from incarcerated flatus at 3 p,m. ; sore, waking about 5 a,in*, with 
urging to stool. — Heavyipain in forenoon, < drinking cold water and ^ting 
dinner, the same pain next day, < by pressure.— Pain in hepatic region just 
under ends of floating ribs ; in forenoon, sore to pressure ; sorq in evening, 
with sensitiveness to touch.— Darting pain in liver at 10 p.m. 



TROMBIDIUM 


1459 


13. Stool and Anus.— ^Constipation after pappy stool.— Diarrhoea, with 
straining and expulsion of flatus.— Diarrhcea at 5 a.m., during day several 
small, Ic^se stools, always preceded by sore pain in intestines, with the stool 
tenesmus and shivering along the back, on following days several stools daily, 
mostly small, consisting of mucus with tenesmus ; (> by Merc, cor.)— Before 
stool : pain in 1. side of abdomen, with sweat ; griping pains ; sore pain in in. 
testmes. — During stool : pain in abdomen continues ; tenesmus ; chills on back ; 
much urging. — After stool : tenesmus ; prolapsus ani ; burning in anus ; great 
debility ; weakness in knees ; colic temporarily > but soon returns. — Light- 
brown diarrhoea* at 10 a.m. and 2 p.m., preceded and followed by pain in 
abdomen, strainin^^ith the second stool. — Stitches upward along 1. side of 
anus. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Hoarseness.— Hacking cough from irritation 
*in throat. 

18. Chest. — Cutting to r. of lower part of sternum at 7 a.m. — Sharp pain 
in lower part of chest at 7 a.m. — Throbbing all over chest from 9 till 11 a.m. 

19. Heart and Pulse. — Shooting in region of heart at 7.30 a.m. — Pain 
in region of heart at 4 p.m., < by a long breath. — Darting rheumatic pain in 
heart region. — Pulse 100 and full at 9 a.m.— Intermittent pulse. 

21. Limbs. — Shooting : in different joints during day ; in joints in after- 
noon and evening ; in 1. heel and wrist ; in phalangeal joints of third finger 
and in 1. knee in forenoon. 

22 . Upper Limbs. — Heaviness. — Shoulder : shooting in r. joint at 
2 p.m. ; shocks in 1. joint in afternoon and next forenoon ; pain in 1. ; rheu- 
matic pain in 1. — Forearm : aching down 1. ; pain in bones of 1. at noon ; 
frequent pains in 1., forenoon ; intermittent pain in 1. at ii p.m., then shooting. 
— Shooting : in a spot on inner side of dorsum of wrist at 4 p.m. ; in r. wrist 
at nooni intermittent at first ; in phalangeal joints of second 1. finger at 
8.30 a.m. ; in palmar surface of ungual phalanx of r. thumb ; intermittent in 
finger-joints, elbows, and wrists in forenoon. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Pain in 1. hip-joint on rising from a seat and 
beginning to walk, causing limping, usually > after taking a few steps. — ^Thighs : 
tearing in lower part of 1. at 2.30 p.m. ; flying, sharp pains in 1. at 9 a.m.— Knee : 
rheumatic* pain in 1. ; intermittent pain in r. at 9 a.m.— Boring m r. tibia in 
forenoon. — Pain in inner patt of 1. ankle at 12 p.m., < bearing weight on it. 
— ^Tearing in 1. tarsus at i p.m. — Shooting : in r. ankle at 3 p.m. ; in 1. tarsus 
at 6 p.m. ; in outer side of r. metatar'^us at 3 p.m. ; in inner side of 1. heel. 

24. Generalities. — Rheumatic pains in 1. shoulder, arm, knee, and region 
of heart, — Inability to keep quiet. — Weakness.— Felt > in evening ; > in 
open air. 

25. Skin. — Pimples on nape in evening. — Itching : in spots on chin and 
among whiskers ; in evening, and about neck. 

'26. Sleep. — Constant inclination to gape through day; in afternoon. — 
Sleepiness. — Restless sleep. — Wakefulness after 4 a.m., with restlessness. — 
Lewd dreams. • 

27. Fever. — ^Chilliness at night, < morning on waking.— Fever in after- 
• noon, with pulsation in arteries of head and aching in occiput and small of 
back.-^Burning in pinnae of ears in evening, < r. 



1460 


TUBERCULINUM 


TropsBolum. 

Tropaeolum majus. Indian Cress. Garden Nasturtium. N. 0 . 

Tropaeolaceae. Tincture of fresh plant. 

Clinloal. — Urine, fetid. 

GhaPaoteristios. — Tropceolum is a native of Peru. It was called 
Cress and Nasturtium because the taste of the leaves was con- 
sidered like the taste of cress, and they have been used like cress in 
salads. The seeds make pickles, and are used substitute for 
capers. A patient to whom Cooper gave Trop. noted that it made the 
urine extremely fetid in smell. On this keynote Cooper has relieved 
several cases of urinary difficulty, giving single doses of the ^ tincture. 


Tuberculinum. 

Tuberculin of Koch. A glycerine extract of a pure cultivation of 
tubercle bacilli (human). Liquid attenuations. 

Clinical. — Acne. Albuminuria. Appendicitis. Asthma. Bones, caries of. 
Bronchitis. Catarrhal pneumonia. Chilblains. Cornea, opacity of ; ulceration of. 
Dentition. Erysipelas. Erythema. Haematuria. Haemoptysis. Headache. Heart, 
affections of ; palpitation of. Influenza. Leprosy. Leucorrhoea. Lungs, cedema 
of. Lupus. Mania. Menses too early. Nephritis. Night-terrors. CEdema glottidis. 
Paralysis. Phthisis. Pleurisy. Pneumomay acute. Tuberculosis. 

Charaoteristics. — I consider it best to reserve the name Tuber- 
culinum for this preparation of Koch, as it is universally known by 
that name. Burnettes Bacillinnm^^ is now accepted as the name of 
the original homoeopathic preparation, and though its originator, Swan, 
named it Tuberculinum^ it owes its present position in therapeutics to 
Burnett, and it will simplify matters if we make the term Eiadllinum 
cover the homoeopathic nosode and Tuberculinum the preparation of 
Koch. When Koch's Tuberculinum was first launched the medical 
papers were teeming with reports of cases undergoing the injection 
for various diseases. Of the reported effects, curative and patho- 
genetic, I made a collection. These will be found in H. W.y xxvi. X55. 
I have there given the authority for the observations and the nature of 
the cases in which the effects were observed. These symptoms will be 
found arranged in the Schema, and each symptom has appended to it 
the initial of the observer, or an indication of the disease from which 
the patient was suffering when the observation was made. Koch’s 
own observations are marked (K) ; Virchow’s, (V) ; Jonathan Hutchin- 
son’s, (H) ; Ewald's, (E) ; Albrafid’s, (A) ; Watson Cheyne’s, 
(W C) ; Lennox Brown’s, (L B). The names of other observers 
are given in full. Lupus cases are marked (Ips.) ; observations made 
on a leper (Ipn). In Jour, Beige 1894, 236, Mersch published a 
pathogenesis of Tub, compiled mainly from the same sources as mine 



TUBERCULINUM 


1461 


but giving some additional symptoms. These I have included and 
marked (M). A few cured symptoms are put in brackets. The 
undisthiguished symptoms are from a proving by Nebel, of Montreux 
(H. XXXV. 397). The provers were tuberculous individuals, mostly 
workpeople, and only pathogenetic symptoms are recorded. Tub, 30 
was used, the preparation haying been obtained from Hausmann’s 
Pharmacy, St. Gall. 1 do not find any appreciable difference between 
the action of Tub. and that of Bac. My own impression is that they 
are practically identical, and that the one will answer to the in- 
dications of tlie other. Nebel has used Tub, in exactly the same 
iway as Burnett and others have used Bac,y on the indications Burnett 
laid down and <with Burnettes results. In H, W, for May, June, 
and July, 1901, I have copied from H, R, of the same year articles 
by Nebel giving his experiences with Tub, : (i) Boy, 13, had 
‘diphtheria with fearful headache extending from neck to vertex, 
with swelling in back of neck and occiput, due, it was supposed, to 
an affection of the middle ear. Seven weeks passed without improve- 
ment. Paracentesis of the tympanum resulted in the evacuation of pus 
for a day or two. Nebel found the face bloated ; strawberry tongue 
coated white at the root ; mastoids not sensitive to even strong 
, pressure. Swelling of occiput and neck down to fifth dorsal vertebra. 
The head is held fixed sideways towards the middle of the clavicle. If 
the boy wants to move his head he has to seize it with both hands 
and turn it slowly, with painful distortion of facial muscles, until it 
reaches the position desired. Even the slightest pressure on first, 
second, or third cervical vertebra was very painful ; the skin on them was 
reddened and the periosteum was swollen ; glands in neck enlarged. 
Tuberculosis of atlas and second and third vertebras consequent on 
diphtheria was diagnosed. Tub, im. was given, five grains, during the 
day. Two days after the dose the boy could move his head more 
freely, the swelling of the neck diminished, appetite returned, and in 
a short time he was able to get up and run about. Five weeks after 
the dose, the swelling had altogether gone, and the boy^s condition 
was altogether changed. (2) Swelling of tibiae two inches below the 
knee, in -a lady who had had cough for twenty years. Cured chiefly 
with Tub, im. This patient had offensive sweat in axillae, straw- 
berry tongue, lack of appetite. Distaste for milk, constipation, and bad 
sleep. [Mau, of Kiel, treated the following cases with Bac, (H, W,y 
xxxvi. 316) — I introduce them here for comparison : (i) Vigorous 
man, tsdl and of well-developed appearance, was very liable to get 
pneumonia in cold weather, and spent the winter in some sanatorium 
or other in order to escape. His father had died of pneumonia, his 
mother of consumption, jind a sister was consumptive. He perspired 
much^ took much fluid nourishment, partly alcoholic. Sleep poor. 
Almost constant fever. Enlarged glands. Three months^reatment with 
Bac. removed all the symptoms, and, moreover, made his tissues less 
watery and reduced his corpulence somewhat. (2) A distinguished 
author, 50, complained of dreadful pains in the head, almost total 
insomnia, and great debility. His brother and sisters had mostly died 
of dropsy of the brain ; he himself had congestion of the right lung, 
due probably to healed cavities, as he has frequently had haemor- 



1462 


TUBERCULINUM 


rhages. For this he had had a lengthened treatment in the South, 
and had been pronounced cured of consumption. Softening of the 
brain and loss of reason were now feared. The headache was attended 
with a sensation as if his head was being tightly squeezed behind with 
an iron ring. Hands trembling ; but he was most uneasy from a 
sensation in his back as if his clothes were moist. In less than a 
month, under Bac,^ the headache, insomnia, and sensation in the back 
had all vanished. Another patient of Mau^s, a child, had screaming 
out in sleep and great restlessness at night, which were cured, along 
with peevish, irritable, taciturn disposition.] In 1892^6. S. Arnulphy 
(Clinique^ xvi. 629) began giving Tub, 6x and 8x trituration internally 
in tubercular cases, acute and chronic, and with en!cx)uraging success, 
but with at times undesired aggravations ; with I2x and 30X these 
were avoided. In one case, originating in grippe, both apices were 
affected, the right one breaking down ; and abundant pleuritic 
effusion on the left side. Six weeks^ treatment with Tub* brought 
about recovery, and seen a year later the patient was quite well except 
for retraction of the left side. Arnulphy considers [Cliniquej xvii. 86) 
that Tub, is frequently the remedy for bronchitis, catarrhal pneu- 
monia, lobular pneumonia, tubercular pleurisy, parenchymatous 
nephritis,! and grippe. He gives {Clinique^ xvii. 457) two cases of acute 
lobular pneumonia with characteristic symptoms and high temperatures 
quickly resolved by Tub. One was in a boy of three who received the 
I2X ; the other was a man, 78, being a sufferer from chronic bronchial 
catarrh. The latter was taken with grippe, pneumonia developed, 
and he was in a very serious state. Tub. 30X made an almost imme- 
diate change for the better, and recovery followed. Arnulphy relates 
that in this case an abundant perspiration took place (the skin had 
been dry) during the night ; and he has observed this in all cases of 
pneumonia when Tub. acted favourably. I have found Tub. 30, 100, 
200, and im the best general antidote to the chronic effects of 
influenza poisoning. B. G. Clark {H. W., xxix. 349) reports the 
case of a lady, 60, who had had for some time a mild form of 
tuberculosis of the skin of the face, and more recently a small 
growth (lupus) on the side of the nose on a line with the inner 
canthus of left eye. It had grown much in six months. Tub. 200 
F.C., six powders given, one to be dissolved in twelve teaspoonfuls of 
water, one teaspoonful every two hours. The six powders were taken 
in this way on successive days. On the fifth day the growth began to 
dry up. On the tenth it fell off. Another dose of Tub. was given 
after this with marked improvement to the older affection of the face. 
A curious use has been made of Tub. by Jauregg, of Vienna, in a case of 
insanity (H. W.^ xxx. 196). Haying observed that cases of insanity 
arc always benefited by an attack of an acute infectious disease, 
especially if it is accompanied with high fever, the idea occurred to 
him of utilising the fever produced by Koch^s Tuberculin injections. 
He tried it on some patients, and though the decidedly favourable 
symptoms soon disappeared after the fever subsided, still there was a 
steady clearing of the comfused sensorium. Insanity is very fre^uenffy a 
manifestation of the consumptive taint, and there Jls something more 
than a pyrexial power in Tub. [Burnett has cufed with Sac. a case 



TUBERCULINUM 


1463 


of insanity, being led to give it by a ringworm-like eruption on the 
body.] Among the Peculiar Sensations noted under Tub, are : As 
if the brain were squeezed with an iron ring. As if the teeth were 
jammed together and were too many for the mouth. Of mucus 
in the throat; of a tumour in the throat. Pressure in stomach 
going to throat as if the clothes were too tight. As if the clothes on the 
back were wet (Bac,), Fatigue, faintness, profuse debility are frequent 
symptoms. Great weakness in the limbs after dinner : this at times 
amounts to paralysis. The circulation is always disturbed, chills 
and flushes alternating. Shivering when beginning to sleep ” is a 
•peculiar and interesting symptom ; also cold feet in bed,'’ which is 
common in persaos of low vital reaction. ^‘Sensitive to music” was 
observed in one of Nebel's patients ; another had pains in the region 
of the appendix vermiformis, which should lead to serviceable action 
* in appendicitis cases. The symptoms are : < By slightest exertion 
Wt ss excessive fatigue ; sweat). Walking pains in loins (fatigue). 
Raising himselfi up sr palpitation. Every movement ss sticking in 
chest and back. Rubbing = itching to change place. < Morning 
(much purulent expectoration ; sickness and nausea ; loss of appetite ; 
thirst ; fatigue). < From 10 to 3 p.m. (frontal headache). < 
Evening (heat in head ; cough preventing sleep ; severe pains in 
breast at beginning of menses. < Evening in bed (itching ; feet 
cold). < Night (sweat ; from 3 a.m. sleep disturbed). < Beginning 
to sleep (shivering). < After dinner (flushing ; drowsiness). Sensitive 
to music. 

Relations. — [Burnett recommends to give the Tuberculinum 
high if there is a strong tubercular element in the case ; if that element 
is small, 30 is better.] Compare : Bacillinum (including Tuberculinum 
of Swan), Bacil. test., Aviaire. In tubercular meningitis, lodf. Irre- 
gular distribution of circulation ; constitutional remedy, Sul, Analogous 
constitutional remedies, Pso., Med., Syph., Thuja. Sensation of an 
iron band compressing brain (Thuj. hoop round forehead). Sensitive 
to music, Thuj. Phthisis, insanity. Thyroid. Pain in region of 
appendix, Ir. t., Ars., Lach. Pains in breasts at menses, Con., Calc. 
Compatible: Hydrast., “it actually seems to fatten up tuberculous 
patients” (Burnett ; confirmed by Nebel), Calc., Calc, iod., Calc, ph., 
Phos., Thuj., Sep., Puls. Sensitive to music, Aco., Amb., Nat. c., 
Nux, Pho. ac., Sep., Thuj., Vio. o. (> by music, Trn.). 


SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Anxiety, gloomy, melancholy humour. — Has lost melancholy 
expression she formerly had (Ipr.). — Is disposed to whine and complain; 
dejected mind, anxiety. — She is very sad. — Nervous irritation ; aversion to 
labour. — Indifferent. — ForgetfuL-j-A version to all labour, esp. mental work.— 
Sensibility to music. — Does not like to be disturbed by people ; trembling of 
hands. 

a* Head.— Vertigo : esp, in morning ; heavy with obscuration of eyes ; 
is obliged to lean en something ; by bending down, esp, by rising ^ter 



1464 


TUBERCULINUM 


bending down ; with palpitations ; with headache ; with nausea ; with head- 
ache in morning ; after dinner. — Great heat in head ; flushes of heat after 
dinner ; sensation of heat in head in evening. — Headache : deep in forehead ; 
deep in temples ; on vertex with sensation of heat ; from neck to forehead ; 
in morning, passing away in afternoon.— Sensation of heaviness on vertex, — 
Headache with obscuration of sight. — Headache with vertigo. — Piercing head- 
ache.— Piercing pain in forehead from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m.— Headache in 
evening; in afternoon. — Frontal headache in morning. — Headache with 
rushing in ears. — Headache in morning with bleeding of nose. — Headache 
from neck to forehead ; burning, piercing.— Colossal hyperaimia of pia mater 
and brain substance ; extreme engorgement of vessels on the surface, internally 
dusky red ; tubercles presented no retrogressive changtf2'(arachnitis, — ^V.) — 
(Sensation as if brain squeezed with iron band. — Bac,) 

3. Eyes. — Swollen lids ; headache with swollen lids in morning, — R. 
eye much swollen, conjunctiva inflamed (Ips.). — Dulness and heaviness of 
eyes ; darkness before eyes. — Obscuration of vision with vertigo. — Opens r, 
eye (which had been closed. — W C). — Breaking down of cicatrices of old 
corneal ulcers (Stoker). — Clearing of corneal opacity the result of old tuber- 
culous corneitis (Stoker).— Tuberculosis of eyelids, small grey and yellow 
nodules, existing in conjunctiva of outer sections of lids, increased in size, 
ran together, then suddenly disappeared (A). — Phlyctenulre appeared where 
none existed before (Maschke). — Conjunctivitis ; herpes on lids (M). — 
Amblyopia with irregularity and complete paralysis of pupils (in an 
alcoholic). 

4. Ears. — ^Tinnitus (Ips.). — Rushing in ears with heavy head. — Sticking 
pain from pharynx to cars. — Headache with rushing in ears and pressure on 
vertex. — Great aching in ears and teeth. 

5. Nose. — Coryza. — Secretion of mucus from nose, viscid, yellow-green. 
— Increased secretion of mucus, with frontal headache. — ^Aching of ears and 
teeth with coryza in evening, with headache. — Bleeding of nose. — Comedones 
on nose, surrounded with minute pustules (Ips.). — ^The nose, which used to feel 
** hot and burning,’' has lost this sensation (ips.). 

6. Face. — CEdematous, pale face. — Clonic convulsions of musculus 
CM’bicularis inferior, acute. — Convulsions in region of facial musclCi esp» 
buccinator. — In one case the inflammation of the lupus (on face) present^ 
unquestionable erysipelas of a rather severe type, and the patient was for 
some time in danger (H). — Flushing of cheek of same side as lung aifectedi 
during the reaction (Borgherini). — Upper lip and nose become swollen during 
the first two or three reactions, the lip becoming cracked on inner surface 
(W C). — Herpes on lips and eyelids (Heilferich). — After the tenth injection 
his 1. moustache, which was kept cut to prevent scabs from gathering, ceased 
to grow, every hair fell out, and for a month the- 1. upper lip was perfectly 
denuded of hair, and had all the appearance when seen under a lens of being 
depilated ; however, the hairs began to grow well before he left the Home 
(Ips., Hine). 

7. Teeth.— -Vague toothache.— Teeth felt loose (Ips,).— ** Feeling as if 
the teeth were all jammed together and too many for his head” (Ips.),— 
Sordes on teeth (Ips.).— Inflammation of gums, scurvy-like.— Gums turgescent, 
felt swollen (Ips.). 



TtJBERCULINUM 


1465 

8. Mouth. — ^Tongue foul, furred. — Tongue much coated (Ips.). — Coating 
on soft palate and tongue (M). — Taste : salty, purulent. — ^Aphthae on tongue 
and budbal mucosa. — Tongue dry (Ips.). — Dryness of lips.— On lips black 
blisters.— Palate : granulations enormously swollen and vascular (Ips.). — 
Breath offensive (M). 

p. Throat. — ^Aching in pharynx and larynx. — Scratching in pharynx. — 
Tickling in throat exciting cough. — Sensation of mucus in throat. — Sensation 
of a tumour in throat. — Dryness in throat ; tonsillitis ; general inflammatory 
condition of pharyngeal mucous membrane (M). — Retropharyngeal abscess 
^M). — Burning pam in throat. — Sensation of constriction in throat ; in larynx. 
— Heaviness and s^sation of rattling in throat. — Aching extending from 
throat to ears. — Dysphagia increased ; later diminished (in laryngeal 
phthisis. — L B). 

• 10. Appetite. — Loss of appetite, esp. in morning. — Thirst : extreme, day 

and night ; burning in morning. 

XZ* Stomach. — Eructations and sensation of fulness over stomach. — 
Nausea, vomiting (K, 5h.). — Vomited severely with > to headache (Ips.). — 
Nausea and vomiting, nausea with efforts to vomit with colic and diarrhoea. — 
Transitory sickness and vomiting after dinner. — ^Vomiting after every meal. — 
Nausea and sickness in morning with heaviness in stomach region. — Pressure 
in stomach, going to throat, as if the clothes were too tight, — Cramping pain 
in stomach. — Nausea with pains in umbilical region with diarrhoea. — Nausea 
with racking and stirring in stomach and increased thirst. — Sickness in 
stomach and pressing. — Nausea in morning. — Sticking pains in stomach 
region. 

za. Abdomen. — Cramping pains in stomach and abdomen, — Sensation 
of constriction in abdomen,— Colic with diarrhoea and heaviness in stomach. 
— Colic with great thirst — Fatigue and sickness in region of stomach and 
abdomen ; sticking pains deep in spleen ; severe pain in region of liver,— 
Aching (sticking) in region of liver, spleen, ovaries, spermatic cord, testicles 
(esp. 1.), in hip-joints, in rectum.— Pains in region of appendix vermiforinis. — 
Mass of enlarged glands, in r. iliac fossa much smaller (W C). — Six pustules at 
different parts of skin of back and abdomen, and after discharging have healed 
(W C)— Discrete papular rash over chest and abdomen (W C). — Perforating 
ulcer in intestines (’^. 

Z3« Stool and Anus. — Obstipation ; stool hard, dry, with wind and 
colic.— Diarrhoea with pinching and burning pains. — Pressure and con- 
striction in rectum. — Pain in rectum. — Itching sensation in anus. 

Z4.. Urinary Organs. — Diminished quantity of urine, — Is obliged to 
urinate very often, esp. during changes of weather. — One tenth albumen in 
hdght of reaction ; disappeared afterwards (W C). — Specific gravity of urine 
increases from 1016 to loaf with an excess of urates and ropy mucus. — 
Peptonuria in man, 33 (Maregliano). — Haematuria with renal pain (M). — 
Excess of urates (M). — ^Abundant viscid mucous discharge. 

15* Male Sexual Organs.— Pains in testicles, and cord of 1. side. 

164 Vemale Sexual Organs. — Severe pains in breast in evening at 
beriming of menstruation. — Menstruation with pains in lumbo-sacral and 
Wrtisare^on. — Sticking pain in lower abdomen ; pains in lumbo-sacral region 
< when walking. — ^Weakness in genital region ; painful menstruation. — Blood 



1466 TUBERCULINUM 

lumpy, menstruation lasting more days tlian usual ; menstruation antepones 
eight days. — Burning pains in external genitals ; sharp leucorrhoea ; pains in 
sacral and ovarian region to hip-joints. — Sensation of heat in genitalig externa, 
with increased leucorrhoea, — Cramps in uterine region with pains in sacral and 
ovarian region.— -Burning pain in ovarian region.— Menstruation returns 
fourteen days after parturition. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Decided effect in laryngeal cases, mostly 

beneficial (L B). — ^After ten injections, larynx markedly affected, inflammatory 
swelling and ulceration (L B). — General infiltration of mucous membrane of 
larynx, high red colour, brighter than normal (L B). — Enormous swelling of 
arytenoids appeared (L B). — ^Tuberculous outgrowth (L — Exfoliation at f. 

vocal cord, appearance extravasated below its posterior part (L B). — Hyper- 
semia of cords intensified and covered with minute ulcerating points. — Cough 
and expectoration lasting four months, from a wetting (removed, no bacilli 
found). — Sensation of pressure on chest. — Cough and sputa. — Irritating cough, 
< in night. — Little cough in night with aching in side and blood-tinged sputa. 
— Severe cough in evening with pains below mamma on r. side. — Inclination to 
cough (K, 3 to 4h.). — Severe cough with muco-purulent secretion in morning. 
—Cough prevents him sleeping in evening. — Cough, secretion of phlegm, esp. 
by walking, with sticking pains in lungs and palpitation. — A sort of whooping- ^ 
cough. — Dry cough ; in night. — Cough with viscid mucus. — ^After much cough 
sensation of mucus in pharynx, mucous secretion being easily ejected.— 
Expectoration diminished (Heron).— Palpitation and pains in back with 
cough. — Crackling rales at r. shoulder behind (Ips.). — Copious watery 
expectoration usually seen during the reaction (Wilson). — With every 
increase of dose he suffered from asthmatic fits, lasting from three to seven 
hours. — Extreme rapidity of respirations without dyspnoea, 60 to 90 in the 
minute ; if the patient is spoken to, the rapid breathing ceases at once (as 
with a dog panting in the sun. — Heron). — Is obliged to take deep inspirations ; 
dyspnoea. — Difficulty in breathing speedily increased (K, 3 to 4h.). — Marked 
feeling of suffocation (Ipr.). 

18. Chest. — Sensation of pressure in chest, — Heat in chest (M). — 
Sticking pain in chest, esp. at the apex of 1. lung. — Sensation of contriction in 
the praecordial region. — Pains in both sides of chest going to back.— Pains in 
1. side. — Sticking in side, — Nightly pains on chest. — Sticking pains : in lungs ; 
in 1. side, pains between scapulae. — ^Aching in side in night. — Sticking pain in 
chest, on r. and 1. side. — Sticking pain in 1. side in morning and afternoon. — 
Sticking pain in lungs when laughing. — Pain in axilla, esp. when elevating 
arm. — Sticking pain : in lungs with cough and palpitation. — Pressure in chest, 
sticking pain on both sides of chest, in back. — Palpitation, caused by deep 
inspirations, aching in back with pains under ribs.— Pains in subdavicular 
region with cough.— Sticking pain in 1. lung. — Puin from clavicles to throit.— 
Pain in apex pulmonis radiating to axilla and arm. — Sticking pain in chest 
and in back, < from every movement. — Pain in 1. lung to axilla. — Pain on 1. 
side going to back. — Pain in 1. apex and in region of the spleen. — Severe pain 
in back, in axilla and arms.— Pains in 1. side, must take deep inspiration.— 
Bronchitic sounds in both lungs (W C).— Dulness r. apex (L B)*^udden, 
profuse haemoptysis, ends fatally (E). — Developed a cavity on side opposite to 
that first affected (£).— New deposit of tubercles on pleiura (£).^Surfaoe of 



TUBERCULINUM 


1467 


old pulmonary cavities showed unusually intense redness of granulation layers 
(V), — Hzemorrhagic infiltration of the walls (V). — Recent haemorrhage 
observed in the cavities. — In fatal cases of ulcerative phthisis the lungs esp,, 
and also the pleurae, showed extensive and severe recent changes — ^pleurisy, 
for the most part very severe, simple and tuberculous, frequently haemor- 
rhagic, and not infrequently bilateral (V). — Caseous pneumonia or caseous 
hepatisation — the lung appearing like blood-pudding studded with pieces of 
lard ; (the patient, an architect, 33, had six injections, the last four weeks 
before death. AJ the beginning he had induration of one apex only. The 
treatment was suspended because of persistent fever and infiltration of lower 
lobe. — V). — Catarrl^l pneumonia was found, but it differed from ordinary 
catarrhal pneumonia (in which the alveoli when squeezed out have a 
gelatinous appearance) in that the contents of the alveoli were very watery 
•and turbid — ^a turbid infiltration ; it resembles a phlegmonous condition 
(V). — Soft hepatisation, which differs from ordinary catarrhal hepatisation in 
that in the midst of the patches foci of softening become developed, leading 
to rapid breaking down and excavation (V). — Development of fresh tubercles ; 
small tubercles giving rise to new ulcers have suddenly appeared, esp. in 
pleura, pericardium, and peritoneum (V). — Metastasis, bacilli mobilised (V). — 
Abscesses in the lungs (V). — Perforating abscesses in respiratory organs (V). 

10. Heart. — Palpitation early in morning. — Sensation of heaviness and 
pressure over heart,— Palpitation with cough and sticking pains in lungs. — By 
deep inspirations severe palpitation. — Aching in heart. — Palpitation in night, 
< when raising himself up. — Palpitation with pain in the back. — Death from 
paralysis of heart (Libhertz). 

20 . Neck and Back. — Glands in neck and scars swollen and very 
tender, various lupus points about them showing yellow fluid under epidermis 
(Ips.). — Scars in neck softer and flatter ; no lupus nodules now perceptible 
(Ips.). — Glands cannot now be felt, except the largest, which is now reduced 
to size of a pea (Ips,). — Cervical glands much smaller (W C). — ^Aching like 
needle-pricks in the back. — Prickly feeling in skin of back (Ips.). — Weak- 
ness in lumbo-sacral region. — Sticking pain over both scapulae ; pain in region 
of spleen ; vague pains in back and on chest, with sensation of pressure. — 
Sticking in back. — Pain in back with palpitation. — (Sensation on his back as 
if the clothes were moist. — Bac ,) — Three red patches on 1. side of back became 
much deeper (Ipr.). — Violent reaction, during which severe pains in loins < 
by pressure ; (case of Addison's disease ; two injections given. — Pick.) — 
Tuberculosis of sacrum greatly improved (Kurz). 

21, Limbs. — Sensation of formication in arms and legs. — Great weakness 
in limbs after dinner. — Sensation of fatigue and faintness in all limbs. — Pains 
in limbs, fatigue (K, 3 to 4h. after injection). — Pains in limbs (K, 2nd d.). — 
Pains in ulnar nerve and caltes of legs and knees, 1. great toe much affected, 
and became very red and turgid (Ipr.). — ^Trembling of limbs (in an alcoholic). 
— ^Twitching in the limbs (M). 

22* Upper Limbs. — ^Aching* in forearms ; vague, sticking pain. — 
Dimmntion of inflammation above elbow-joint; disappearance of abscess 
over olecranon; sinus connected with radius discharging freely a thick 
y^ow pus (W C).— Sensation of luxation with severe pains in r, carpal 
joint ; < by effort to move it ; ceasing by rest.— Trembling of hands. 



1468 


TUBERCULINUM 


JQ. Lower Limbs.— During night pain referred to r. knee ; r. leg 
rotated in and Hexed slightly at hip and knee ; movement of r. hip-j^int free ; 

I p.m., 1. hip much more painful and tender, more flexed, abducted and rotated 
out (disease of 1, hip in girl of five.— B. M. T.).— Aching in the hip-joints.— 
Pain in r. knee without swelling (Heron, a non-tubercular case).— The knee 
became easily movable and could be bent to a right angle (tuberculous 
affection of r. knee). — Swelling and tenderness of both knee-joints (Heron), 
— Tenderness in r. ankle-joint (Heron). 

94. Generalities.— Feeling of fatigue (K, 2nd d.).— Malaise, depression, ^ 
headache, somnolence, oppression of breathing, tightness of chest, nausen * 
(Ips.). — General fatigue in morning ; sensation of faintness ; great weakness 
in lower extremities, esp. from knees down to feet. — Terribly tired, so that she 
can scarcely walk. — General excessive fatigue after a short walk, so that he 
must lean on his companion. — Emaciation (lost six pounds in fourteen days, 
twenty pounds in five weeks). — In parts affected throbbing pain. — Leucocy- 
tosis; diminution of oxyhaemoglobin (M). — Oxyhaemoglobin first diminished 
then increased (Henoque). — Feeling well, but decidedly losing flesh (Ips.). 
— Acts principally by very acute irritation of internal organs affected (in 
the same way as in external organs), causing intense redness and great 
swelling (V).— Actual inflammatory processes (not mere hyperaemias), and esp. 
active proliferations, occur to an intense degree, in (i) edges of existing ulcers ; 
in (2) neighbouring lymphatic glands, esp. bronchial and mesenteric (V). — 
Lymphatic glands present a quite unusual degree of enlargement, and notably 
that form of medullary swelling, characteristic of acute irritations, which is 
caused by rapid proliferation of the cells in the interior of the glands (V). — 
Leucocytosis ; various infiltrations of white blood corpuscles over affected 
parts, esp, round the tubercles themselves (V). — Enormous dangerous swellings 
in parts near ulcers (even where the surface of the ulcer becomes clean), 
causing dangerous constriction (V). — Phlegmonous swelling resembling 
erysipelatous cedema of glottis and retropharyngeal abscess (V), — ^Where 
tubercle is associated with any other specific disease, reaction is so slight as 
to be scarcely discernible (Heron). — Syphilitic cases are refractory to reaction 
Heron). — ^Children bear the treatment well (Wendt). , 

35. Skin. — Erythematous eruption like measles or scarlatina (M). — 
Er3dhema with subcutaneous indurated nodules (M). — Great bronze patches 
on the forehead and temples. — Bronze finger-points. — Finger-points as if 
touched by Argentum niiricum, — Itching all over the body in the evening in 
bed ; changing place after rubbing. — Rash on chest and abdomen similar, 
patient says, to what came out when disease first appeared (Ipr.).— Rash on 
abdomen and back, commencing very red ; speedily becoming brownish, 
resembling ordinary skin eruption of secondary syphilis (L B). — CEdematous 
condition of upper lip. — (Edematous condition of eyelids. — Nose swollen, 
tense, erysipelatous-looking epidermis in lupus patch raised by yellow fluid. — 
In two cases, at least during the febrile action, old chilblains became again 
inflamed (H). — Slight attack of jaundice (several cases.— W C). — Site of 
injection slightly painful and red (K, 2nd d.). — Erythematous blush confined 
to lupus parts, which were the seat of throbbing pain. — It has repeatedly 
caused genersd erythematous eruptions on the skin, and, in some» nodular 
effusions into the cellular tissue (H). 



TURNERA APHRODISIACA 


1469 


26. Sleep. — Great desire for sleep ; drowsiness during day ; after dinner. — 
Inclination to sleep in mornings.— Shivering when beginning to sleep.— Cold 
feet in be^, — ^Troubled sleep ; sleeplessness. — ^Sleep disturbed from 3 a.m. — 
Sleeplessness on account of constant coughing, — Many dreams; disturbed 
sleep, interrupted by fearful dreams; gloomy dreams; dreams of shame; 
cries out in dreams. ' 

Fever. — Shivering, when beginning to sleep ; cold feet in bed. — 
Freezing and heat alternately ; cold and heat for moments. — ^Violent attack 
of ague, lasting almost an hour (K, 5h.).— Freezing on the back in evening. — 
Freezing during njhole day. — Sensation of heat in evening in bed. — Flush of 
’ beat from back to head. — Feverish, nausea, thirsty, with headache, no vomit- 
ing (Heron). — Flushes of heat after eating. — High temperature, abating in 
twelve hours (K). — Lowering of temperature after each injection (Heron). — 
Lowering of temperature before a rise (Heron). — Temperature seven hours 
Jrfter injection, 103*8®, accompanied by thirst, rigor, increased cough, head- 
ache, and pains in joints (Heron). — Sweat in the night. — Much sweat, esp. on 
head in night. — Profuse sweat after light exertion. — A little walk and slight 
efforts produce sweats. — Short sweats in morning, while awaking. — Profuse 
sweats during slight exertion. 


Turnera Aphrodisiaca. 

Turnera aphrodisiaca. Damiana. N. 0 . Turneraceae. Tincture of 

fresh plant. 

Clinical. — ^Amenorrhoea. Dysmenorrhoea. Fatigue. Impotence. Leucorrhoea. 
Migraine. Prostate, affections of . Spermatorrhoea. Sterility. Urine, incontinence of. 

Gharaoteristios. — Hale lias collected from old-school sources 
much experience respecting this drug, show’ing its power over the 
genito-urinary system. The herb Damtana (the local name of 
Turn, a,)f has long been a domestic medicine in Mexico, where it is used 
to “invigorate the system.^' Indian hunters discovered that a decoction 
of it was a great invigorator after wearisome journeys ; and they also 
found in it a cure for inability to exercise the reproductive functions 
in both sexes. Hale gives many cases illustrating the latter. Among 
ttie causes of the defect in the cured cases are injury to spine from 
a fall ; sexual excess ; syphilis or gonorrhoea, in the men ; and 
amenorrhoea, dysmenorrhoea, and leucorrhoea in the women. Douglass 
(Hahn Ad,^ xxxix. 660) reports three cases of incontinence of urine : 
Man, 63, for four years has had dribbling of urine day and night. 
Turn, 2X, in water, four times a day, cured in two months. Another 
use of Turn, is recorded (it, R, xii., 410) in severe migraine, “ One or two 
doses dven within an hour causes the headache to cease and induces 
sleep, tfbm which the patient wakens free from headache and with 
good appetite.” This is perhaps analogous to the power of Turn, to 
dispel fatigue. 

Kelafioncu — Compare ; Impotence, injuries, over-exertion, fatigue, 
Beilis, Am. Prostatic affections, Sabal., Solid. Migraine, Epipheg. 



1470 


TUSSILAGO FRAGRANS 


Tussilago Farfara. 

Common Coltsfoot. British Herb Tobacco. (Waste, sandy, clayey 
banks.) N. 0. Compositae. Tincture of fresh plant. 

Clinical. — Coughs. Scrofula. 

Characteristios. — “ Tussil. farfara is used to this day in the form 
of a confection for coughs. The leaves are mucilaginous and were 
much used in scrofulous affections. Smoking tHffe dried leaves . 
relieves coughs** (Cooper). Tus.far. has also a popular reputation iii^ 
gonorrhoea. 


Tussilago Fragrans. 

Petasites fragrans. Italian or fragrant Tussilage. N. 0. Compositae. 

Tincture of whole plant. 

Clinical. — Corpulence. Plethora. 

Characteristics. — Demesnes proved Tus.fg. taking three drops of 
the ^ tincture on the tongue. After first causing a disagreeable, spiteful 
mood, it set up, in a few days, an opposite condition, which lasted 
some time. A journey taken on the ninth day of the proving, which 
usually caused loss of weight, did not do so. Stoutness increased, and 
plethora was added ; later the abdominal protuberance permanently 
disappeared. A Peculiar Sensation induced was as if a morsel of 
food lay at the bottom of the cardia and would not pass. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Complaining mood, fault-finding ; spiteful (after a few 
hours). — Serenity ; benevolence ; calmness ; increased power of mind and 
expression (fifth to tenth day). 

2 . Head. — Transient headache as after spirituous liquors. 

3. Eyes. — Dryness of eyes when looking in open air, compelling to 
wink. 

8. Throat.— Acidity in oesophagus like heartburn, > after dinner. 

XI. Stomach. — Sensation at bottom of cardia as of a morsel that will 
not pass down. ^ 

23. Lower Limbs.— Weakness in legs. — Pain from side to aide in 
tarsus {!.), below that and metatarsus, when walking ; (does not last long but 
frequently returns). — Pain in metatarsal joint as if caused by a blow. 

24* Qcneralities.— Corpulency at first increased, later reduced.— 
Plethora. 

28. Sleep.— Sleepless, and is none the worse for it. 

27. Fever.— Sweat and heat from slight exertion. 



TUSSILAGO PETASITES 


1471 


Tussilago Petasites. 

Petasites vulgaris. Bitter-bur (Sandy meadows on the banks of 
streams.) N, 0 . Compositae. Tincture of whole fresh plant. 

Ollnical* — Gonorrhcea. Headache. Lumbago. Night-sweat. Pylorus, affec- 
tions of. Throat, sore. Tibia, pain in. Uvula, burning in. 

Charaoteristios . — Petasites is a genus of Compositae established 
for three or foftr species of Tussilago^ which have the flower-heads 
partially diceceous in racemes, sometimes branching into panicles. The 
essential characters which separate them from the common Coltsfoot 
{Tussilago fatfara) are very slight, and the foliage is the same ** {Treas, 
.of Bot), I retain the name of Tussilago petasites under which it is best 
known. Tussilago grows on river-banks that are little trodden on. ‘‘The 
roots are an admirable medicine in the worst kind of fevers with 
boils or buboes (Green’s Herbal). Kuchenmeister and live others 
took substantial doses. Most noticeable among the symptoms are : a 
lumbago of very great severity. Tightness of the chest. {Tussilago 
means “cough-wort^’.) A headache shifting from one part of the 
head to another during two days. A pain about the pylorus. A 
urethritis, with yellow discharge. The last has been confirmed 
clinically. Hansen gives the indication : “ Acute or chronic gonorrhoea, 
yellow or white, thick discharge.” Crawling in urethra ; jerking in 
spermatic cord, and drawing in r. testicle are additional symptoms of 
the proving. [Ivatt’s {H. PP., xxxvi. 381) reports cures of gonorrhoea 
with T. fatfara^ common Coltsfoot.] Rosenberg {H, /?., ix. 501) gives 
some experiences : (i) An extremely violent gonorrhoea ; penis 
swollen, painful ; emission of urine extremely painful, mixed with blood, 
patient feverish and restless. Jwss. p, was given in water. There was 
a great aggravation of all symptoms in thirty-six hours. The remedy 
was discontinued and marked amelioration followed. Resumed again, 
much diluted, rapid cure followed. The remedy was used externally 
as well in this case. (2) Chronic ophthalmia, the result of gonorrhoea 
“ cured ’’with turpentine. Tmss. />. restored the discharge and then 
cured. Rosenberg refers to a writer who says of the plant that if it is 
macerated in water, the water will not spoil even if kept for years. 
The symptoms are ; < By pressure (pains in pylorus). < Standing ; 
stooping ; walking ; going up stairs ; especially < rising from a seat 
(lumbago). Drinking s eructations. < Walking. 

Relati ons* — Compare : Pain in pylorus (Tus. fg. is as if a morsel 
had lodged at bottom of cardia). Lumbago, Ant. t., Act. r. gonor- 
rhoea, Thuj. • 


SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — ^Severe confusion < 5 f head, more 1. side, in evening. — ^Vertigo ; 
on waking. — Dulness and heaviness of head. — Headache 1. upper forehead, 
thence extending slowly over vertex, as if under dura mater like a tearing 
pain ; after two hours pain seated over r. eye, with sensation as if supraorbital 



1472 


TUSSILAGO PETASITES 


muscles would be drawn upward, obliging him to wink ; in afternoon head* 
ache returned to vertex ; in evening again in temporal region ; next day on 
waking, in 1. side of vertex extending forward to r. eye. 

4, Ears. — (Otorrhoea with enlarged cervical glands. — R, T. C.) 

8. Mouth.— (Toothache all day, < by cold drink, esp. violent in bed ; 
> by Merc,), 

9. Throat. — Pain and burning in uvula. — Sore throat and pain on 
swallowing. 

IX. Stomach. — Eructations ; frequent ; numerous always after drinking. 
— Nausea. — Pain in pit of stomach. — Burning in epigastricm. — Pain about 
pylorus, at the point where sternum and ribs form a triangle, < by pressure. 

12. Abdomen. — Colic ; > by emission of flatus. 

13. Stool and Anus.— In afternoon, a second soft but formed stool 
followed by desire for stool. — Absence of usual stool after dinner. — Several 
unsatisfactory stools in one day. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Pressed out a drop of yellow mucus from 
urethra before urinating, though the urethra was not congested. — Crawling in 
urethra, obliging scratching, with erections. — Urine very profuse ; but not 
evacuated often. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — ^Jerking pain in spermatic cord causing 
him to bend backward. — Drawing in r. testis. 

18. Chest. — Tightness of chest. — Oppression in r. chest. 

ZQ. Heart. — Sudden stitch in 1. side of praecordium on deep breathing. 

20. Back. — Pain in small of back : on standing or stooping ; walking ; 
going up stairs ; esp. on rising from a seat. 

21. Limbs. — Increased stiffness of limbs at night. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pain in middle of r. tibia confined to a small spot. 

24. Generalities. — Weakness. 

25. Skin. — Itching on forehead and in beard. 

26. Sleep. — Restless sleep. — Many dreams. 

27. Fever — Cold feet. — Morning sweat. — Sweat at night ; profuse. 



Ulmus Fulva. 

Ulmm^ fulva. American Slippery Elm. Red Elm. Moose Elm. 
(Mountains of Canada and Pennsylvania.) N. O. Ulmaceae of 
the Urticaceaj. Pounded dried inner bark. Decoction of 
dried bark. Tincture of fresh bark. 

GlittieaL — Constipation. Deafness. Haemorrhoids. Herpes. Pain. Syphilis. 

Charaoteristios. — A decoction of the viscous inner bark of UL ful. 
is much used as a poultice for lessening pain in inflammations. In a 
case in which the mucous membrane of the rectum was dry and 
extremely painful, Burnett relieved the sufferings with 20-drop doses 
of the tincture. The bark in trituration gives much relief as a snuff 
in old vascular deafness with tubal obstruction (Cooper). 


Upas. 

Strychnos tieute. N, O. Loganiaceac. Tincture of the inspissated juice 
• obtained from the root and bark. 

Gllnloal. — Amaurosis, Blepharo-conjunctivitis. Convulsions. Coryza. Hang- 
nails. Headache. Heart, palpitation of. Heels, pains in. Liver, affections of. 
Nails, affections of. Ptosis. Sciatica. Sexual excess. Spine, pains in. Tendo 
Achillis, pafn in. Tetanus. 

CharacteristioB. — The Upas of homoeopathy is obtained from a 
SUyehnos and must not be confounded with Antiaris toxicana, the con- 
cocted mice of which forms the “ Upas antiar poison of the Javanese. 
S. iieuic is a climbing shrub. Pitet made a courageous proving of it, 
carrying it to the length of producing tetanic symptoms. A large 
proportion of the symptoms occurred in the head and eyes. A remark- 
able headache was this ; Superficial drjiwing pain traverses left 
temple from before back\?ard, and ceases at outer angle of orbit ; the 
part is hot and painful to touch.^’ The pains generally are pressive 
and laticinating. In the eyes there is pressure and feeling of a foreign 
body under the lids ; severe pifins in orbits ; inflammation of the 
conjutictiva of the lids ; distorted vision. Drowsiness is a feature in 
Upm* Every morning weakness of the eyes with lachrymation, the 
lids 1 ;>emg so heavy that they close involuntarily as if from drowsi- 
ness,^^ Up. is chiefly a left-side remedy. There is pain in the left 
VOL. n. 94 1^73 



H74 


UPAS 


side of the throat as from a splinter on swallowing ; pain in left sciatic 
nerve ; in left iliac fossa. Sensitiveness is a note of the remedy : 
irritability, crossness, moroseness ; increased sensitiveness to cold ; 
the least irritation brought on spasms ; pressing in throat causing feeling 
of suffocation. Noteworthy symptoms are : Vertigo, ending in pressing 
headache. Twitching in brain and orbits. Pulsative headache with 
throbbing all over body. Smell of manure in nose. Sallow com- 
plexion was produced, and severe symptoms were felt in the liver 
and from the right lung to the liver (cutting as with knives). Itching 
in patella. Aversion to meat and eggs ; me very thought of them 
ss nausea. The tongue is coated white so thickly that it can b^‘ 
scraped off. Left half of face red and hot, right half pale and cold. " 
Peculiar Sensations are ; As if the brain were rudely shaken. As after 
sexual excess. As if a foreign body in eye ; as if sand in*^ eyes. 
As if a splinter in throat on swallowing. As if a foreign body" 
in oesophagus preventing swallowing. As if an iron hoop round 
waist preventing breathing. The sexual function was depressed, 
coition was followed by distressing symptoms, and many of 
the symptoms were such as occur after sexual excess. Great eriiaus- 
tion after convulsive seizures. The symptoms are : < By touch (pain 
in left iliac fossa). < Pressure (throat). < By motion ; by walking. 
< Afternoon and evening. < Morning. > After rising. > Even- 
ing after dinner. > In open air (headache). 

Relations. — Compare : Botan. ; spasmodic symptoms, Nux, Ign. 
Gouty pain, Nux. Lancinations in rectum, Ign. Exaggerated sensi- 
tiveness ; acid eructations, Nux. Foul smell in nose, Anac. Splinter 
pain in throat. Hep., Arg. n.. Nit. ac. 

Causation.— Sexual excess. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind.— Depression. — Melancholy ; has to force tears back ; cold and 
repelling to friends. — Morose ; cross ; irritable ; quarrelsome. — Sensitive.— 
Great difficulty in concentrating attention. 

2. Head.— Head muddled.— Vertigo as if falling ; ends with pressing 
headache ; great tendency to feel cold. — Severe twitchings in brain and orbits. 
— Pulsating pains all over head on waking, > in open air. — Constant dull 
tearing in fore-part of brain, r. side ; sometimes sharp shootings. — Vexy sharp, 
deep-seated shootings r. side of forehead. — Pulsating heaviness in foreheil 
and through 1. eye, — Pressure and drawing in both temples, < 1. ; part hot to 
touch. — Superficial drawing pain, which every few moments traverses left 
temple from before backward, and ceases at ou^^er angle of orbit ; parts hot 
and painful to touch ; lasted all day, > next morning,— Heat of head with red 
face, — Shootings deep in brain and vertex.— In occiput : pressing inward 
pain ; heaviness as after sexual excess. — Scalp numb. 

3. Eyes.— Eyes sunken, bluish rings round them.— Pressure and dry- 
ness in eyes. — Sensation as if foreign body in eyes ; in 1. eye ; pustule on 
inner surface of r. lid. — Eyes weak as after sexual excess, — Every morning 
weakness of eyes with lachrymation, lids so heavy they close involuntarily 



UPAS 


H75 


as if fram irresistiblt dro^vsiness.— Dull pain in orbital and nasal bones.— 
Prolonged and violent lancinations under orbits.— Flow of blood from the 
eyelids.— Intense smarting itching on margins of lids and canthi. — Lachryma- 
tion,— Vision : dim, letters run together ; fog before eyes.— In open air 
dimness, and as if endless strings of white and transparent globules were 
floating in the air. — ^After rising from a stooping position, blackness before 
eyesy as if all the blood had rushed to the head, with vanishing of thought. 

4. Ears. — Tearings in ear cartilages,— Twitchings in cartilage near 
orifice (1).— Ears stuffed without affecting hearing. 

5. Nose. — Violent fluent coryza towards and during evening. — First r. 
^ostril then 1. stopped up, changing every few minutes, preventing sleep. — 

L. nostril stopped and discharging greenish mucus. —Smell of manure in nose. 

Face. — ^Yellow complexion.— Face red with hot head.— L. side face 
red and hot, r. pale and cold. 

8. Mouth. — ^Tongue : dry, burning ; coated white j so thickly it can 
be scraped off. — Unable to open his mouth to speak.— Blisters inside under 
lip towards 1. — Frequent itching in palate. — Increased saliva, which tastes 
sour. — ^Taste : sour ; bitter on root of tongue ; like old coryza. 

9. Throat. — Hawking frequent mucus in morning cured in the prover. 
— ^Pains and acidity 1. side throat on swallowing ; the acid sensation extends 
to 1. car.— Scraping burning soreness in throat ; cough with burning pain as if 
throat would burst ; difficult expectoration of bronchial mucus. — Pain as 
from splinter in 1. side of throat making deglutition painful, as if food were 
prevented passing into stomach by foreign body in oesophagus ; swallowing 
of fluids becomes difficult ; pressing I. side of throat s sense of suffocation. 
— Feeling of swelling of r. tonsil while writing. 

IX . ' Stomach. — Appetite totally lost. — Aversion to all food, esp. meat 
and* eggs, the mere thought of which ss nausea.— Hunger, but first morsel 
satisfies.— Urgent thirst.— Eructations ; bitter after meals, tasting of ingesta, 
all day j violent, of wind. — Qualmish, as if going to faint. — In morning, while 
hiccoughing, pinching in a line with lumbar vertebrae. 

x«. Abdomen. — Pressing pain : in region of liver ; in liver.— Out- 
pressing in 1. hypochondrium.— Stitches in region of liver and r. kidney.— 
Much flatulency pressing against both hypochondria, breaking it gives no > ; 
flatus odourless. — Rumbling.— Sharp pains in 1. iliac fossa, < drawing breath 
and by touch. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Sharp colic in rectum > passing fetid flatus ; 

shortly after, soft stool, preceded by renewed colic. — Lancinations or slow 
pinchings in cellular tissue extending to rectum, r. side.— Two soft diarrhoeic 
stools. daily.— Stools mushy, reddish, ending with brown jelly-like mucus.— 
Stool constipated, after much pressing, and insufficient; brown jelly-like 
mucus after stool. , 

14. Urinary Organs.— Pain in region of r. kidney during the night.— 
Frequent urging to urinate, with burning in urethra at 8 a.m.— Urine scanty, 
evacuated with great effort, light re^.— Urine dark like brandy. 

XJ. Male Sexual Organs.- Erections and diminished desire.— Virile 
function depraved.— Coition accompanied by painful and enervating un- 
©a^ness, and followed by great depression for several minutes.— Itching of 
pubes. 



UPAS 


1476 


17. Respiratory Organs.— Roughness in ar passages.— Hoarseness ; 
aphonia. — Dry cough, from soreness in larynx and trachea, < towards even- 
ing ; expectoration of colourless mucus. — Quickened breathing in morning. — 
Inability to breathe deeply from sensation of iron hoop round waist. 

18. Chest. — Chest tight. — Pinching drawing all round base of chest. — 
Knife-thrusts through r. lung towards liver, stopping breathing. — ^Needle- 
thrusts across chest behind 1. nipple. — Pinching 1. side chest. — Stitbhes 
through r. lung, evening. 

19. Heart. — ^After going to bed, severe palpitation and pulsation all over 
from vertex, where it is pulsative headache, to finge*^rtipi? — ^While writing, 
severe palpitation and feeling as if r. tonsil swollen (which it is not). — Pulse 
frequent ; weak, small, slow. 

20. Neck and Back.—Painful stiffness of posterior muscles ".^eck, 
morning. — Pain in r. trapezius. — Burning in r. side of nape. — Feeling of . 
stretching along spine. — Pressive and beaten feeling in spinal column, most 
in region opposite stomach. 

21. Limbs. — Hangnails, which become inflamed ; itching and redness at 
roots of nails. — Weakness. — Numbness in hands and feet. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pinching along back of nerves of 1. arm. — Drawings 
in r. wrist- joint. — Painful drawing in joint of 1. middle ring-flnger. — Shsu’p, 
deep-seated lancinating pains in palmar surface of 1. middle finger. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pinching back of 1. thigh along track of sciatic 
nerve. — Pains in knees ; under patellae, now one now the other. — Lancinations 
in 1. calf. — Sudden cutting in 1. tendo Achillis when stooping, — ^Violent and 
dull lancinations in 1. os calcis. — Dull pains in heels, chiefly 1, — Sharp pains 
in r, great toe-joint. 

24. Generalities. — Clonic spasms of muscles of nape of neck or 
extremities, which were at one time extended, at another flexed, frequehtly 
repeated spontaneously on the slightest irritation, muscles relaxed 
completely in intervals. — Sudden jerking of whole body, followed by violent 
stitches in extensors and drawing back of head. — Great weakness after a 
paroxysm. — Uneasiness : in morning ; in afternoon. — Increased sensitiveness 
to cold ; pale face. 

25. Skin. — Herpetic eruption : on upper lip, 1. side ; under lower lip 
near 1. commissure. — At inner border of 1. wrist- joint intense and obstinate 
itching, without eruption, > pressure. — Itching of pubes almost constant 
during several days. 

26. Sleep. — Almost irresistible drowsiness in morning. — Restless nights ,* 
unable to sleep before 2 a.m. 

27. Fever. — Feels chilly very easily, passing shivers. — Shivering ; burning 
in palms after dark. — Shivering along spine and both arms. — Flashes of heat 
and redness of face and hands, evening after a> meal, with drowsiness.— 
Night-sweat. 



URANIUM NITRICUM 


1477 


Uranium Nitricum. 

Nitrate of Uranium. Uranyl Nitrate. U022N036Ha0. Solution in 
distilled water. Trituration. 

Olilllealf — Albuminuria. Anus, pruritus of. Diabetes, mcllitus and insipidus. 
Duodenum^ ulcer at Enuresis, nocturnal. Gastric ulcer. Impotence. Milk, excessive 
secretion of. Opnthalmia. Phosphaturia. Seminal emissions. Sleeplessness. 
^Stomatitis. Stye. Urine, fishy odour of; incontinence of. 

% 

^^apaoteristios . — Uranium belongs to the Chromium group of 
elemSRts. Ur. nit. was proved by E. T. Blake, whose monograph 
* on the salt forms part of the Hahnemann Materia Medica. Blake’s 
proving was suggested by the observation of an old-school experi- 
menter, Leconte, who found sugar in the urine of dogs slowly poisoned 
with Ur» nit. Blake was not very successful in producing sugar, but his 
proving is not any less valuable on that account, and clinical use 
has filled out the picture. Many cases oi diabetes have been 
relieved or cured by Ur. nii.j usually in the lower attenuations. In a 
case of diabetes insipidus of mine, in a young girl, Ur, nit, 30 gave 
more relief than any other remedy. Excessive thirst, polyuria, and 
dry tongue are the indications. Glycosuria is by no means an essential 
part of the indications for Ur, nit. In some of the animals experi- 
mented on by Blake the pylorus was found to be affected. With 
this the symptoms of the proving correspond, and Ur, nit, has cured 
both pyloric and gastric ulcer. One case Aug., 1890) in a 

married woman was cured with 5-gr. doses of the 2x. Patient was weak 
and emaciated ; vomited mucus mixed with blood and coffee-ground 
matter, and passed dark, tarry stools ; sensitive and tender over region 
of pylorus. Sensations are : As if blood were flowing to head. As if he 
had taken cold with headache. The left side was more affected 
than the right. Many symptoms were < at night. Head < walking. 
> Deep inspiration. 

Relations. — Compare : Elemental relatives ; gastro-duodenal affec- 
tions, Chrom., and K. bi. Diabetes, Ph. ac., Syzyg., Thyr., Lac def., 
Lact. ac. Sinking immediately after meals, Ars., Ciu., Lyc., Sil., Stp. 
Craves tea, Selen. 


SYMPTOMS. 

X. Mind.-— Ill-humoui*; and not feeling well all day. 

2* Head. — Vertigo twice in evening. — Head heavy on waking. — Pain : 
in forehead ; over 1. eye ; in forehead and occiput in evening ; in temple ; in 
occipital protuberances ; in occiput* on walking. — Neuralgia on posterior edge 
of 1. temporal bone (formerly on r.) from 2 till 4 p.m. leaving dull aching, 
neuralgia woke me at i a.m. that night, lasted an hour and prevented sleep, 
ill from the pain during next day, two days later pain in old place (r. side) 
came on gradually, > by dinner. 

3. Byes. — Stye in 1. upper lid.— ((Edema of lower lids worse than 



1478 


URANIUM NITRICUM 


usual)— Lids inflamed, agglutinated.— Shooting from r. orbit to occipital pro- 
tuberance in evening. — Pain over 1. eye. 

5. Nose.— Itching in nose.— L. nostril stuffed.— Dry coryza. 

8. Mouth.— Painless ulcer, with one elevated side, in mouth opposite I 
anterior upper molar, < evening. — Acid saliva. 

9. Throat. — Hawking of tenacious mucus.— Contracted feeling in 
throat. 

10. Appetite. — Appetite lost ; (during menses).— Craves raw ham and tea. 

11. Stomach.— Eructations ; tasteless; putrid at 11? and 3 o'clock.— . 
Indigestion in afternoon a quarter of an hour before dinner, with gnawings 
sinking at cardiac end of stomach, not hungry nor faint.— Dyspepsia, flatus 
after food, acidity, pain from cardiac end of stomach to suprarenal<*:“;^4on, 
> movement, lasted all day, bowels slightly moved, pale clay-coloured faeces ^ 
(query, if from the drug, as I had had similar but slighter attacks), afterwards 
epigastric pain as above returned, > by food, with occasional twisting- 
screwing feeling lower down. — (Gastric and duodenal ulcers. — Recurring 
haematemesis.) 

12. Abdomen. — Flatus ; abdomen bloated.— Borborygmi. — Sharp colic, 
with tenesmus and with raw feeling in rectum, afterwards in sleep un- 
conscious seminal emission. — Enteritis and peritonitis with meteorism ; great 
prostration. 

13. Stool.— Urging in rectum and bladder, waking me at 2 a.m., bor- 
borygmi, soft stool. — Stool twice in one day.— Constipation. — Pruritus ani. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Sore pain in vesical region in evening, — Urine 
contained bile. — Urine high-coloured, a few lithates on standing. — “It 
produces acute parenchymatous nephritis ; sugar is found in the urine, this 
generally does not come on until after albumen has appeared ; glycosuria is 
very characteristic and persistent ; it also produces at times a large amount 
of oxalate of lime." — Profuse nocturnal urination. — Urination profuse, painful, 
pale milky. — Acute and chronic diseases of adults. — Diabetes insipidus. — 
Diabetes mellitus.— Nocturnal enuresis. — Urine greenish and smelling fishy. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Completely impotent with nocturnal 
emissions ; organs cold, relaxed, sweaty. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— During menses ; vertigo ; faint ; flush- 
ing of upper part of body. — No menstrual flow during diabetic attack ; 
pale, anaemic ; craves raw ham and tea. — Excessive secretion of milk. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Bronchitis, with copious mucous expectora- 
tion and much emaciation ; chronic colds. — Cough with purulent discharge 
from 1. nostril ; lung infiltrated with grey tubercle. 

18. Chest. — Intermittent pain radiating from 1. side to ensiform cartilage ; 
< fasting. 

20. Back. — Loins stiff. — (Pain at lower angle of 1. scapula < deep 
inspiration.) 

21, Limbs. — White vesicles on arms and legs with red areolae j burn 
and itch. 

24. Generalities. — Extreme languor ; on rising from bed. — Feeling as 
if he had taken cold. 

25. Skin. — Epithelioma; lupus excedens; ecchymoses. 

26. Sleep. — Night restless with shivering and heat. — Languor. 



UREA 


1479 


Urea. 

Carbamide. The chief solid constituent of the urine of mammals. 

(White crystals.) C0(NH2)2. Trituration. Solution [also 

• tincture or solution of the nitrate — Urea nitrica]. 

Clinieal. — Albuminuria. Diabetes. Dropsy. Eczema, gouty. Gout. Liver, 
cirrhosis of. Tuberculosis. Uraemia. 

Gharaoteristios. — ^The failure of the kidneys to eliminate Urea 
from the blood teads to uraemic intoxication, delirium, convulsions, and 
com. On general indications has been used in medicine by both 
scnooTs. Merck mentions that it is diuretic, and is used in cirrhosis 
of liver, pleurisy, renal calculus. Allen cites from Mauthner two cases 
of renal dropsy with symptoms of general intoxication in which Urea 
nit.^ gr. ii., divided into three doses and given two hours apart, cured 
brilliantly. Burnett has used both Urea 6 and Uric acid 6 in gouty 
eczema, where the gouty eczema has been the cutaneous outlet for 
the constitution.^' Burnett gave Urea in gouty cases where the urine 
was thin and of low specific gravity; it thickens the urine and gives 
great relief to the patient." Arthur H. Buch {Med. Press ^ Aug 14, 
1901) relates cases of tuberculosis cured, on the plan originated by 
Harper, of Nottingham, with Urea in 20- to 30-grain doses three times 
a day. Urea^ Buch says, is formed in the spleen, lymph and secret- 
ing glands, but principally by the liver." Under the treatment, 
lupoid nodules disappeared ; tuberculous glands disappeared ; tuber- 
culous joints improved. No ill-effects of the treatment were noticed ; 

6n the contrary, the action has evidently been in many cases that 
of a nervous tonic." Villers {^, of Hes,^ iv. 403) examined the urine 
of, an intensely neurasthenic woman, suffering from severe asthma 
and found 4*5 per cent, of Urea instead of the usual 2*5. In order to 
find out the effect of Urea on the healthy he took for five days Urea 
1$ X., five drops thrice daily. He was then compelled to stop by the 
severity of the symptoms. He gave the same dose to a patient, a 
woman. She begged after a short time to be allowed to discontinue 
the medicine, as it affected her so painfully, causing constant urging 
to urinate ; much sediment in the urine ; intolerable sensation in 
abdomen and burning of the skin. The symptoms of Villers and this 
patient are marked (V) in the Schema. 

Relations. — Compare: Urinum, Uric acid, Thios., Urt, mens. 
Diuresis, Thyr. Tuberculosis, Tub., Bac. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head very dull, a^s if filled with a very heavy lump (V). 

3. Eyes.—Itching and profuse watering of eyes (agg.— V). 

12. Abdomen.— In r. hypochondrium, a steady, dull sensation (V).— In- 
tc^erabie sensation in abdomen and burning of the skin (V). 

14. Urinary Organs.— Constant urging to urinate, beginning at root of 
penis (V),— Constant urging, with much sediment in urine (V).— From bladder 



1480 


UREA— URINUM 


to her groins a fatiguing, tearing pain < standing (V). — Profuse diuresis with 
rapid diminution of dropsy. — Albuminuria ; bloody urine ; general dropsy ; 
intermittent heart (boy, 7, Urea nit gt, ii., taken in three doses at twb hours* 
interval, cured). — Delirium, nose-bleed, urine brown, very albuminous; 
cedema of pudenda; ascites; pulse small, slow; attacks of suffocation 
(girl, 6, Ur. nit. as above ; urine increased ; swelling decreased ; albumen 
disappeared). 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Itching along sulcus of glans and a general 
tired feeling (agg. — ^V.) 

24. Generalities. — General uneasiness ; felt ill, poisoned (V). — Uraemia. 
— Acted as a nervous tonic in tuberculous patients. ^ 


Uricum Acidum. 

Uric Acid. Lithic Acid. CSN4H4O3. Trituration. 

Glinioal.—Eczema, gouty. Gout. Lipoma. Rheumatism. 

Characteristios. — Unc ac. has been used on inferential grounds in 
gouty conditions. Burnett gave it in 5th and 6th attenuations. It is 
most useful in cases where deposits persist ; it stirs them up and 
helps to eliminate them. It is useful in gouty eczema where the eczema 
has been ‘‘ the cutaneous outlet for the constitution.^^ With Uric ac. 
3X. Mersch (H. W.^ xxx. 395) cured a case of lipoma situated on the 
left side between abdomen and breast, as large as a man’s head, 
only lengthened.” Relief was immediate ; the tumour disappeared 
in a month. 

Relations. — Compare : Urea, Urtica urens. 


Urinum. 

U line. Dilutions, 

Clinioal. — Acne. Boils. Dropsy. Ophthalmia. Scurvy. 

CharaoteristiOB. — Under Allen gives some symptoms observed 

on a man who, for a skin affection, drank in the morning the urine he 
had passed the night before. The symptoms were severe, consisting of 
general dropsy, scanty urine, and excessive weakness. These symp- 
toms I have arranged under Urinum. Urinotherapy is practically as 
old as man himself. The Chinese (Therapist, x. 329) treat wounds by 
sprinkling urine on them, and the custom is widespread in the Far 
East. Taken internally it is believed to stimulate the circulation ; and 
is valued as an active oxytocic. The parturient woman drinks the urine 
of a male child four to five years old, and the part voided in the middle 
of micturition. The child urinates into three vessels, the woman 
drinking the contents of the second. In the Brit. Med. ^our. of 1900 



URINUM 


1481 


a number of instances of Western urinotherapy were given (collected 
H. W,f XXXV. 507). To these Cooper has made some additions (rbict., 
p. 584).* The cases are these : (i) A youth for crops of boils which 
nothing could remedy was recommended to drink every morning for 
three mornings a cupful of his own urine. Then after an inter- 
mission of three days to resume, and so on till cured. He was 
cured on the ninth day. (2) ** Blackheads’’ cured inexactly the same 
way. This patient drank it when fresh. (3) Chronic 'bronchitis 
much relieved. This patient was deaf, and misunderstood the 
doctor’s directk)n to bring some of his urine. He thought drink 
-^was the word and acted accordingly. (4) Ague (in the Lincolnshire 
fens). (5) Urticatia. (6) For thrush it is a custom in Yorkshire to wipe 
t h ftw hi^h y^s tongue with its own napkin. (7) For pimples and blotches 
the negroes of Barbados drink their urine and apply it locally. (8) For 
ophthalmia in children it is the custom in Switzerland to bathe the eyes 
in the children’s own urine. Cooper mentions the case of a man who 
suffered very much from weak and inflamed eyes until he adopted 
this plan, which after a time cured him. Cooper also mentions that 
a celebrated breeder of cattle and horses succeeded in getting his 
animals’ skin into an astonishing condition of fineness by giving them 
about a tablespoonful of old human urine with every meal. Kraft 
(A. H.y xxvii. 4) mentions that urine has been used as a remedy for 
croup. S. Mills Fowler (M. A.y xx. 281) mentions the use of urine as 
a remedy for scurvy in the Civil War. In Andersonville prison the 
starving prisoners were dying by hundreds of scurvy, and Mr. T. (who 
told the story) was one of the sufferers. His legs were flexed upon 
the thighs and the thighs upon the body in such violent contraction 
ths^t it was impossible to extend them an inch, and any attempt to do 
so was attended with shocks of pain as from an electric battery. He 
could only move on his elbows and rump. Within the stockade were 
growing two large turpentine trees. Of the pitch from these trees the 
patients would take enough to make their urine ‘‘ clear and white as 
crystal.” The urine voided was allowed to stand till it began to sour, 
which took twelve to twenty-four hours. The patients then took a 
‘‘good swallow ” four or five times a day. They felt the good effect 
of every dose. The treatment cured Mr. T. and all his companions 
in misfortune who adopted it. These cures are to some extent 
analogous with nosode cures, as the patients drank their own urine ; but 
Urinum^ Ureay Uric acid are also medicines on their own account, and 
rank with the Sarcodes. The symptoms of uraemia may be taken as a 
pathogenesis of Urinum for the use of the attenuations. Urea cured 
renal dropsy, and Urinum produced it. The skin action of Urinum is 
remarkable in connection with its use in the dressing of leather ; no 
substitute having been found for it in this. 

Belations. — Compare : Urea (probably urine owes its chief effect 
to urea), Ur. ac., Urt. urens. ^ 


SYMPTOMS. 

а. Head. — Heaviness of head, < on stooping. 

б . Face. — Face very much swollen. — Countenance pale, expression 
heavy and vague. 



T 482 URINUM— URTICA URENS. 

It, Stomach. — Little thirst. 

X2. Abdomen. — Fluid in abdomen and in parietes of chest an^ belly. 

14. Urinary Organs.— -Urine scanty, thick, deep brown, and very 
offensive. 

24. Generalities. — Anasarca ; generally more marked in upper than 
in lower parts of body. — Heaviness, heavy for work, having neither his«usual 
life nor warmth in him. — Loses her breath if she walks quick, is obliged 
to stop. 


Urtica Urens. 

Urtica urens. Small Stinging-nettle. [Urtica dioica, the Common 

Nettle, has similar if not identical properties.] N, 0 , Urticaceae. 

Tincture of the fresh plant in flower. 

Olinical. — Agalactia. Anremia. Bee-stings. Burns. Calculus, p'evenHon 
of. Deltoid, rheumatism of. Dysentery. Erysipelas, vesicular. Erythema. 
Gout. Gravel. Haemorrhages. Intermittents. Lactation. Leucorrheea. Menorrha- 
gia. Phlegmasia dolens, Kcnal colic. Rheumatism. Spleen, affections of Throat, 
sore. Urajinia. Urticaria ; nodosa. Vertigo. Whooping-cough. Worms. 

Charaoteristics. — Burnett may be said to have rediscovered 
Urtica as a remedy. The history of how he came to use it (Gnw/, p. 33) 
is one of the most fascinating passages of his works. As a remedy for a 
fit of the gout the discovery is entirely his own, and the result of great 
therapeutic acumen. Its use in gravel and urinary affections is 
very old. “ Being eaten, as Dioscorides saith, boiled with periwinkles, 
it maketh the body soluble, doing it by a kind of cleansing faculty ; it 
also provoketh urine and expelleth stones out of the kidneys : being 
boiled with barley cream it is thought to bring up tough humours that 
stick in the chest.^^ Gerarde, from whom I quote, mentions these 
other uses : (i) The juice inserted into the nostrils stops nose-bleed ; 
it is good against inflammation of the uvula.” (2) Pleurisy, 
pneumonia, whooping-cough, (3) Antidote to Hemlock, Mushrooms, 
Quicksilver, Henbane, Serpents, Scorpions. The leaves or seeds of 
any kind of nettle,” says Gerarde, ‘‘do work the like effect, but not 
with that good speed and so assured as the Roman nettle” ''(£ 7 , 
pilulifera). “A bundle of nettles,” says Cooper, “applied to a rheu- 
matic joint or part, has long been a favourite country remedy. A 
leaf of the nettle placed on the tongue and pressed to the roof of 
the mouth stops bleeding from the nose.” Burnettes tincture is 
made of the small nettle, U, urens^ which is the correct one in 
homoepathy. Burnett had used UrL u. a good deal in spleen affec- 
tions, and found patients under its use often passed large quantities 
of gravel. To a middle-aged maideq lady who had enlarged spleen, 
and “who smelled so strongly of nettles that it almost nauseated me 
whenever it was my duty to examine her,” Burnett gave Urt. u. p. 
Whilst taking it she passed large quantities of gravel. But this did not 
attract much notice, as the lady was in the habit of passing con- 
siderable quantities of gravel with her motions. Localised abdominal 



URTICA URENS 


1483 


pain preceding such an occasion by a number of days. The painfu 
spot, ju^t under her spleen, she called her gravel-pit.” Putting this and 
other points together, the fever-action of Urtica among the number, 
Burnett concluded that Urtica was a remedy for acute gout, which 
would cut short the attack “ in a safe manner^ namely, by ridding the 
economy of the essence of the disease product, its actual suffering- 
producing material.” He usually ordered five drops of the tinc- 
ture in a wineglassful of quite warm water every two or three 
hours. Undeii its action the urine became more plentiful, dark, 
and loaded with uric acid. Burnett remarks of the nettle 
that it springs* up everywhere near human habitations, and 

h^Jhas noticed it flourishing more by the side of ditches 

wBicn^ carry off fluid sewage, thus possibly living to some 
extent on uric food.” A very severe case of uraemia was 

cured by him with Urt, His discovery of its fever action was 

through the cure of a lady patient of his of ague (which he had not 
succeeded in curing) by drinking nettle-tea on the advice of her char- 
woman. Uri. ur. was his sheet-anchor in cases of the fevers of the 
East — India, Burma, and Siam. This action of Urtica^ as well as its 
antigout action, I have had abundant opportunity of verifying, 
Urtica causes fever as well as cures it, and one of Burnett's patients was 
obliged to stop taking it : “ It sets all my pulses beating, makes me 
terribly giddy, makes me feel as if I was going to topple (forwards) on 
my head, and then a bad headache comes on ; and when I take it at 
nighty it makes me very feverish.” When she took the dose in the 
morning she did not have the fever, and Burnett says, “ The fever of 
gout generally comes on at night.” He has often cured vertigo with 
UH, The provings of Urtica are not very extensive ; but supplemented 
by clinical observations, the picture is fairly complete. Headache, 
with spleen pain ; rush of blood to head ; soreness of abdomen ; 
dysentery ; burning and itching of anus ; oedema ; urticaria ; 
rheumatic and gouty pains, and fever were all evoked. Among the 
rheumatic pains a pain in the right deltoid muscle is very striking. 
The relation of this symptom to Burnett’s use of C/r/. is illustrated by 
the case of Dr. W. H. Proctor {A. H.y xxvii. 126). The doctor was 
suddenly seized with agonising pain in right deltoid muscle, due, he 
believed, to retention of uric acid in the system. .Hypodermic injections 
of Morphia and Atropia had to be resorted tot Then followed, for 
three weeks, scanty, pale urine, sour sweat, sleeplessness, restlessness, 
nervousness, loss of appetite, almost constant pain in deltoid with great 
soreness and lameness of the muscle, an intense sensation of general 
sickness and weakness with continued fever. Nothing did any good. 
Finally there appeared :*An intense burning sensation in the skin after 
sleeping : he was afraid to go to sleep for fear of the suffering. Urt. 
ur, 0 was now taken. After three doses he drifted into a quiet, 
refreshing sleep of two or three hours and woke absolutely free from 
all skin irritation. The nerves were quieted and all symptoms passed 
away. Soon after, Proctor had an opportunity of curing a patient of 
lameness of the deltoid of some standing in the same expeditious way. 
In this case there were no additional symptoms. J. L. Nottingham 
(H. R,j XV. 244) treated (i) Mrs. W., 38, tall, slender, with auburn hair, 



1484 


URTICA URENS 


for eczema vulvae with violent itching and burning, swelling and 
thickening of labia, smooth, pale, dry appearance of the mucou^urface, 
a dry, scaly, Assured appearance of labia majora and skin. Thirteen 
years before, she had had a sinus from the right ovary emptying into 
the uterus. (The husband had sycotic warts on the glans penis,) 
UrL ur. i x relieved all the symptoms and removed sexud excitement 
induced by the itching and uncontrollable desite to rub. {2) Mr. 
N.,2I, had swelling, stinging, burning of face, hands, and feet, witn red- 
ness. Rubbing with finger-tip would leave a white line for some time. 
When out in the cold, damp, snowy air, hands, feet, and face became 
purple red, puffed, and stinging cold ; going into a v^arm room he had" 
increased swelling, stinging, itching all over him, especially of hands 
and face. UrL nr, relieved in twenty-four hours. In four dayffTie iC- 
turned home better than he had been for years. (3) A woman with a * 
lump in her left breast of some years’ duration, was seen six weeks after 
childbirth, complaining of stinging pains in that part, entire absence 
of milk, stinging pains in whole right lower limb, with great soreness 
and stinging pains accompanying movements involving muscles of left 
side of head, cervical vertebras, sacrum, and upper limbs, front of chest 
and both breasts, especially the left. She was very despondent. Ad.r, 
relieved her, but the improvement ceased after a week. Con, improved 
the difficulty in moving the head but not the other symptoms. Urt, ur. 
was given, and after three days the breasts filled with milk and the 
pain was relieved. The breasts had now to be supported on account 
of their fulness. The right leg became natural. The action of UrUin 
causing flow of milk has been often confirmed. In the case given in 
Allen it caused swelling of the breasts and profuse flow of milk in a 
woman years after the birth of her last child. Urt, is one of the best 
remedies for burns of the first degree, used locally and given inter- 
nally. Gerarde mentions its antidotal action to snake-bites. A writer in 
Manats, f. Horn, of July, 1900 {H. Envoy j xi. 51) says it is the specific for 
bee-stings. An application of the tincture even on the most sensitive 
parts of the face or eyelid gives instant relief. In cases of stings about 
the eyes the application may have to be repeated every five minutes ; 
and a compress must be kept on all night. Eclectics regard “profuse 
discharge from the mucous surfaces ” as a specific indication for UrL 
In Sweden nettles are regarded as a remedy for anaemia, and fresh 
nettles are cooked and,eaten like spinach for the purpose, or a nettle-tea 
is prepared from dry nettles. The juice of nettles with sugar is in vogue 
for haemorrhages of all kinds. Sensations of UrL are : As from a blow in 
the eyeballs. As of sand in eyes. Muscles of right arm as if bruised. 
Burning, stinging, itching, and soreness are the principal pains. The 
right side very much affected ; but also the left hypochondrium (spleen). 
The symptoms are apt to return at the same season every year. This 
periodicity is a point in the correspondence of UrL to ague. The 
symptoms are < by touch ; lying pn arm. < Violent exertion 
(haemoptysis). Lying down ss soreness of bowels ; > nettle-rash. 
Burning in skin is < after sleep. < From application of water. (In 
the one observation with U, crenulatuj an attack like lockjaw was 
induced in a man who lightly touched the plant, and this was 
renewed for some days in full force whenever he put his hand in water.) 



URTICA URENS 1485 

< Exposed to cool, moist atmosphere. — Some new symptoms of 
Burnett’s I have marked (B) in the Schema. 

Rebitioiis. — Antidoted by: Dock leaves (Rumex obtus.) rubbed 
on the stung part lessen the pain ; also the nettle^s own juice, and 
the juice from the common snail. Antidote to : Apis (bee-stings). 
Compare: Gout, fever, spleen, Nat m. Dropsy, uraemia, gravel, gout, 
Ur. ac., Urea, Urinum. [The relation of Urt. to Nat. m. and Urinum 
is interesting in connection with the fact that nettles do not grow at 
any distance from human dwellings or away from parts where animals 
are fed. Schlegel asks (//. i?., xii. 179), is this due to the wetting of 
the soil with urine ? He says yes ; and queries further, if the salt in 
the urine is the eihcient agent, recalling the fact that Barbarossa, after 
degyjjjrvm Milan, strewed salt over the ruins “ so that nettles might 
^(owtnere.” Schlegel remarks that the briny waves produce sting- 
ing nettles of their own in the shape of Medusae.] Fever, vertigo, 
spleen, Querc. Spleen, Cean. Rheumatism of right deltoid, Sang. 
Secretion of milk, Ric., Puls. Urticaria, Apis, Nat. m., Ast. fl., 
Medusa, Homar, Pariet. 

Causation. — Burns. Bee-stings. Blows. Suppressed milk. 

Suppressed nettle-rash. 


SYMPTOMS. 

2. Head. — Terribly giddy, as if I were going to topple forwards on my 
head ; then headache (B). — Fulness in head, sensation of rush of blood and 
dulncss j all day, with giddiness. — Headache < over eyes. — Headache with 
stitches in region of spleen. — Pain : in r. side of sinciput ; and in r. side of 
face, extending to malar-bone ; over r. eye and eyeball ; over eyes during the 
day and evening ; neuralgic, in r. side of forehead and face at 9 p.m. — Sting- 
ing pain in r. parietal bone forcing me to rub and press it. — Dull aching in 
occiput and over eyes. — Urticaria of scalp suddenly appearing and determining 
internally. 

3. Byes. — Pain : in r. eye ; in 1 . at 3 p.m. — Pain in eyeballs as from a 
blow, with-feeling as if sand were in eyes. — Eyes feel weak and sore. 

9. Throat. — Burning in throat ; with frequent hawking of frothy 
mucus ; causing cough, expectoration scanty, frothy. 

11. Stomach. — Nausea, with burning in throat. — Vomiting from 
suppression of nettle-rash. 

12. Abdomen. — Soreness of abdomen at 10 a.m. when lying, and on 
pressure a sound as if bowels were full of water. — Pain in 1 . hypochondrium at 
10 p.m. — (Tumour of liver ; stored gout." — Burnett.) 

13. Stool and Anus^Stool omitted in morning, but at 2 p.m. scanty, 
dysenteric stool, a greenish-brown slime, with urging and tenesmus, afterwards 
constipation, then small stool with straining, later d ysentery, frequent urging, 
small painful stool, mucus mixed with white matter like boiled white of eggs, 
at times a little blood, pain in abdomen for a week. — Stool omitted for three 
days, then six hours after Nux 3 a natural stool, four hours later several 
dyscntcsric stools of whitish slime, with pain around umbilicus, then for the 
next live days, daily, two to four white and yellow stools mixed with mucus. 



i486 


URTICA URENS 


with colic and tenesmus.— A small haemorrhoid, with raw burnii^ in antis 
during and after stool, and in afternoon and evening itching and bumiog."- 
Ascarides with great rectal irritation. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine suppressed for eight days, everything 
disappeared with desquamation.— Suppression of urine for twelve days ; 
oedematous swelling of whole upper body to umbilicus. — Strangury ; gravel ; 
disease of bladder and kidneys. — Haemorrhage from bladder. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Itching of scrotum, kept him awake at niglit 
and tormented him nearly all day ; scrotum swollen ; stinging and itching ,* 
no moisture. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menorrhagia ; intense haemorrhage. — 
Leucorrhcea, very acrid or excoriating. — Pruritus vulvae with great itching^ 
stinging, and oedema of the parts. — A woman who had had no cMdren 
for three years and a half, and had nursed none of her children, haaaf'ftrSl 
great swelling of breasts, which discharged serum, then copious milk (from a 
pint of hot infusion of the herb). — ^Arrested flow of milk after weaning, 

17. RespiratoryOrgans. — Whooping-cough. — Not much expectoration, 
and what there is is frothy. 

18. Chest. — Sore feeling as from a blow in 1. side of chest. — Intermittent 
soreness in r. chest during day. — Haemoptysis from least exertion of lungs. 

19. Pulse. — Pulse accelerated. 

21. Limbs. — Rheumatic pain in arms and ankles, < r. arm. 

22. ‘ Upper Limbs. — Pain in r. deltoid, < 9 p.m., could not put on his 
coat alone. — Cramplike pain in r. deltoid in evening ; < rotating arm inward, 
with soreness to touch, with rheumatic feeling in 1. arm ; next day pain in r. 
arm < by lying on it ; and on moving it a stitch darted through arm, extend- 
ing over front of humerus. — At times pain in 1. arm, muscles of r. arm feel 
sore as if bruised, cannot raise or stretch r. arm on account of pain, afterwards 
rheumatic stiffness and pain in r. wrist, later rheumatic pain in 1. arm, wrist, 
and fingers. — Raised, red, itching blisters on skin of hands and fingers, — 
(Nodous joints of fingers. — R. T. C.) 

23. Lower Limbs.— Stiff soreness on inside of 1. knee. — Rheumatic 
pain in both ankles. 

24. Generalities. — Symptoms returned at the same time every year. — 
Haemorrhage from various organs. — Dropsy. — Sets all my pulses beating (B) 

25. Skin. — Itching swellings all over fingers and hands, resembling 
**bold hives” ; lumps and red spots on hands and fever blisters on Ups, itching. 
— Heat in skin of face, arms, shoulders, and chest, with formication, numbness 
ajid itching, lips, nose, and ears swollen, lids so cedematous that they 
could scarcely be opened, after awhile upper part of body as far as navel 
cedematous and pale, transparent blisters filled with serum and looking like 
sudamina, becoming confluent and making the skin look wrinkled, lids closed, 
forming transparent, here and there bluish shining swellings as large as hen's 
eggs ; disappeared on sixth day with desquamaUon. — (Intense burning in skin 
after sleep.)— Erythema. — ^Vesicular erysipelas. — Burns and scalds. 

26. Sleep.— Drowsiness when reading*. 

27. Fever.— General heat on getting into bed, with soreness over 
abdomen. — ^When I take it at night it makes me very feverish (not when taken 
in morning. — B). 



U ST I L AGO 


1487 


Usnea Barbata. 

Usnea barbata. Tree-hair. Tree-moss. N. 0 , Lichenes. Tincture. 

C^leal.->Headache, congestive. 

CharaoteristiCB* — An article by M. B. in U. S. Med, Invest (quoted 
New^ Old^ and Forgotten Remedies) gives an observation by the writer, 
who ate a littlg of the moss and had in consequence a severe 
congestive headache which compelled him to give up his work and 
go to bed. He got to sleep and woke very well next morning. Two 
vougg ladies out picking cranberries had headache from riding in the 
iRjfsuii^and were compelled to lie down. Usn, h, 0, one drop in a 
"tumbler of water, a teaspoonful to be taken at once and repeated in 
hfteen minutes. The second dose stopped the pain. A young 
married lady subject to headache for live years ; was almost frantic 
with the pain. Usn, b., as above, cured in one or two doses. 

SYMPTOMS. 

* 2. Head. — Head began to ache ; soon could feel the blood press into 
the brain ; with domestic attentions he got to sleep, and woke next morning 
uncommonly well. — Pain over entire head or front bead, with feeling as if 
temples would bbrst or eyes burst out of sockets. 


Ustilago. 

• Ustilago niaidis. Corn-smut. C>. Fungi. Trituration. 

Clinical. — Agalactia. Alopecia. Climaxis. Dysmenorrhoea. Fibroma. 
GalactOrrhoea, Headache, menstrual. Masturbation. Menorrhagia, at climaxis. 
Mcnstruatiwi, excessive ; vicarious. Nails, affections of. Orchitis. Ovary, left, 
affections of. RhinitivS. Scald-head. Tonsillitis. 

Charaoteristlcs. — Burt, who proved Usi, on himself and others, 
introduced the remedy to homoeopathy. It had been observed that 
pregnant animals feeding on maize affected with smut were very 
liable to abort. Roullin had noted that shedding of the hair, and some- 
times of the teeth, occurred in animals and men ; that mules fed on 
it cast their hoofs, and that fowls laid eggs without shells. The provings 
brought out a specific at^iiity for the generative sphere of both sexes, 
and especially for the left ovary and uterus. Ust. congests the uterus 
and produces haemorrhages, generally passive 01 in clots. li is in uterine 
haemorrhages, menstrual, post-partum and climacteric that Ust has been 
most successfully employed, it has also relieved vicarious menstrua- 
tion^ bleeding taking plaqe from the lungs and bowels ; and bleeding 
between the periods with left inframammary pain. Hurndall (H. W., 
XxKvi, 37) relates the case of the small bitch which brings out many 



USTILAGO 


1488 

features of Ustilago action. About a fortnight before he saw the 
patient she had aborted five foetuses, at about the fifth week of 
gestation. Since then there had been passive haemorrhage ^ of dark 
clots. Moreover, she was a perfect specimen of alopecia, not having a 
hair of any sort on her body ana only a little about the head. 
Os uteri soft, spongy. Great tenderness about the posterior parts 
when manipulating the hind-quarters. UsU 3X was prescribed; five 
drops three times a day. In two days the haemorrhage was completely 
arrested, tenderness reduced, spirits revived, and geneild health im- 
proved. At the end of three months there was a rice qoat of hsdr 
growing, which in due course became perfectly normal. Loss of hair 
and nails is a keynote for Ust,, and combined with the other symptoms 
made the correspondence perfect. Among the Peculiar SensatigjjgAgffir^^ 
As if head were being lifted off. As if forehead would burst open. 
As if something were under root of tongue pressing upward. As of a 
lump behind lar3mx. Excessively tired feeling. Bearing down, as if 
everything would come from her. Uterus as if drawn into a knot. 
As if intestines were being tied in knots. (This last symptom was 
produced in a patient of mine.) The symptoms are : < By touch 
(abdomen ; eyes). Pressure < (ovaries). Riding in carriage < 
backache. < Rising and motion (menorrhagia). Walking < frontal 
headache ; pain in left groin ; pain in loins. Warm room ss oppression 
and faintness. Open air srlachi-ymation. Swelling < pains in tonsils. 
Colicky pains > by constipated stool. 

Relations. — Compare : Botan., uterine affections, nails, Sec. 
Subinvolution, Na. hcl. Bearing down and prolapse of uterus, Sep. 
Left ovarian pain, Lil., Lach., Caul., Sul., Thuj., Vib. o. Vicarious 
menstruation, Bry., Ham. Millef. Intermittent flow, Ham., Bovis., 
Elaps. Crusta lactea. Vine, m., Melit., Med., Mez. Pain in right 
shoulder, Urt. ur.. Sang. Flying rheumatic pains, Puls. Faint at 
II a.m., Sul. Frequent emissions and lumbar pains, Cob. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Depression of spirits in afternoon. — Very sad, cries fre- 
quently ; exceedingly prostrated from sexual abuse and loss of semen ; sleep 
restless. — Could not bear to see or talk with any one. — Irritability, < being 
asked a question or to repeat anything. — The day seemed like a dream. 

2 . Head. — Vertigo in attacks, sometimes with double vision, sometimes 
white specks blot out everything else, later attacks of vertigo with internal 
heat. — ^Vertigo at climaxis with profuse menstruation, — Headache : all the 
morning ; at 7 a.m, ; in evening, < forehead ; < walking. — Nervous headache 
from menstrual irregularities in nervous women. — Frontal pain : in morning ; in 
forenoon, with smarting in eyes ; all day, with aching distress in eyeballs and 
with fulness in head in morning; with distress in epigastrium, — Scalp dry, 
head congested, with loss of hair. — Scald-head, watery serum oozing from 
scalp. — Prickling in 1 . temple. — Loss of hair. 

3. Eyes. — Attacks of twitching in eyes, they appear to look (revolve) in 



USTILAGO 


1489 


circles and dart from one object to another. — Continual watery flow from 
eyes and nose with occasional chills. — Spasms, with vanishing of vision and 
head segms to whirl. — Aching in eyes and lachrymation. — Hot feeling on 
closing lidSe— -Weakness of eyes.— Lachrymalion in open air. — Lids aggluti- 
nated in morning. — ^Vision of spots dancing to and fro. 

5 - No$e. — Boil" in r. nostril. — Dryness of nostrils in forenoon, with dry 
feeling in sldn. — Bright epistaxis, > pressure. — Rhinitis, bitter taste, offensive 
odour noticeable to patient himself. 

6 « Fa€®^^Sudden pallor in face when sitting, and in evening. — Burning 
, of face and sc^pefrom congestion. 

7. TeethU — Sometimes looseness of teeth. — Aching all day in decayed 
uf^r first and sedbnd molars. — Shedding of teeth (in animals). 

«J|M[OUth.— Tongue coated in morning. — Prickling in tongue, with 
^ feeling as if something were pressing the roots upward, with dryness of 
nostrils. — Salivation : bitter ; thin, bitter. — Taste ; coppery ; in morning ; 
slimy coppery; slimy coppery in morning; slimy; slimy, with burning 
distress in stomach. 

g. Throat. — L. tonsil enlarged, congested, dark reddish, r. painful on 
swallowing at 2 p.m. ; 1. painful at 9 p.m. ; next morning congestion of 1. 
extending along Eustachian tube and causing pain in ear. — Lancinations in 
r. tonsil (fauces were somewhat inflamed when the medicine was taken), next 
day fauces hotter and more sensitive to motion. — Roughness of fauces. — 
Dryness of fauces, with burning dryness in stomach. — Dryness of fauces, with 
difficulty in swallowing, feeling of a lump behind larynx, later frequent efforts 
to swallow, with feeling as if something had lodged in fauces, afterwards 
irritation of fauces, and on swallowing feeling of a lump in larynx. — Burning 
in oesophagus at cardiac orifice. 

20. Appetite. — ^Appetite : craving ; poor. — Thirst at night. 

XI. Stomach. — Eructations ; of sour fluid ; of sour food. — Cutting in 
stomach. — Pain in stomach : frequently in afternoon ; on full inspiration. — 
Pain in epigastrium with drawing pain in joints of fingers. — Burning in 
sternum and cardia. — Distress in stomach in forenoon ; in afternoon, > by 
supper. — Hsematemesis, passive, venous, accompanied by nausea, which is > 
by vomiting. 

12. Abdomen. — Periodical cutting in umbilical and hypogastric regions 
at 6 p.m., < at 8 p.m. by a constipated stool, afterw'ards grumbling pains in 
Whole abdomen. — (Pain as if intestines were Lied in knots.) — Pain : in r. lobe 
of liver; in umbilicus; in umbilicus before natural stool; in 1. gioin when 
walking. — Drawing pain in r. hypochondrium all day. — Distress in umbilicus 
and r, hypochondrium. 

13. Stool. — Natural stool at 4 a.m. — Loose stool at 4 a.m., with pain and 
rumbling in abdomen. — Ligjit- coloured diarrhoea. — Soft stool, next day dry, 
lumpy, two days later black, dry, lumpy. — ^Constipated. 

14. Urinary Organs. — ^Tenesmus of bladder and incontinence of urine. 
--^Urging, urine light-coloured. — No desire, but uneasiness. — Urine : increased ; 
scanty, red ; acid, high-coloured. 

X5» Male Sexual Organs.— Genitals relaxed.— Erections : when read- 
at 4 o'clock ; frequently during day and night. — Scrotum relaxed and 
cold $weat on it. — Pain in testes, < r. — Pain in testes, sometimes neuralgic ; 
VOL. II. 95 



1490 


USTILAGO 


in parox3rsms, sometimes causing faintish feeling. — Desire depressed«>---Chronic 
orchitis, irritable testicle* — Erotic fancies*'^--Seminal emissions and irresistible 
tendency to masturbation. o 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Yellow and offensive leucorrhoea.— 
Tenderness of 1. ovary, with pain and swelling. — Burning distress in ovaries. 
— Intermittent neuralgia of 1. ovary ; enlarged, very tender.— Utetus ; hyper- 
trophied ; prolapsed ; cervix sensitive, spongy. — Menses : too scanty *with 
ovarian irritation ; too profuse and too early; blood clotted ; as if evci^hing 
would come through. — Between periods constant suffering under 1. breast at 
margin of ribs. — Oozing of dark blood, highly coagulated, fofhiing occasionsdly 
long, black, stringy clots. — Extreme pain during period'. — Suppres»on of 
menses. — Vicarious menstruation from lungs and bowels. — ^Constant aching 
distress at mouth of womb. — Menses that had just ceased returne«*rbt%it*^ 
coloured, soreness and bearing down in 1. side preceding the flow and 
partially ceasing with it. — Menses copious, bright red, not coagulating easily 
(in a woman who thought she had passed the climacteric, as there had been 
no discharge for over a year), it stopped as suddenly as it began, no pain, 
only faintness and confused feeling in head. — Menorrhagia at cUmaxis. — 
Bland leucorrheea. — Abortion. — Dehcient labour pains. — Constant flooding. 
— Puerperal peritonitis. — Lochia too profuse, partly fluid, partly clotted ; pro- 
longed bearing-down pains ; uterus feels drawn into a knot. — Hypertrophy 
and subinvolution. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Feeling as if there were a lump behind 
larynx, which produces constant inclination to swallow. 

z8. Chest. — Spasmodic tearing at top of 1. side and passing to sixth or 
seventh rib, at 3 p.m. when standing or reading, < breathing. — Pain in 1. 
infraclavicular region in morning. — Drawing pain in 1. inframammary region, 
waking me at 3 a.m., > turning on back from r. side. — Aching, burning 
distress in sternum and under it in stomach, with neuralgic pains. — Oppression 
along median line. — Constriction, with pain. — Heat and pressure. 

19. Heart. — Sudden flying pain from heart to stomach, arresting breath- 
ing. — Burning pain in cardiac region. 

20. Back. — Pain in back extending to extreme end of spine. — Pain in 
lumbar region, — Pain in region of r. kidney, < sitting still ; next dAy in region 
of 1. kidney, > moving about, with heat, fulness, soreness on deep pressure 
(but it relieved the pain), with uneasiness in 1. thigh, frequent desire to urinate, 
stream very small, the following day it requires considerable effort of will to 
empty the bladder, which is done slowly, pain and soreness in 1. loin con- 
tinue ; heavy in lumbar region, in bed with uneasiness about bladder (had 
had no desire to urinate on going to bed), woke early in morning with dis- 
tended feeling in bladder, micturition slow and difficult, urine scarcely coloured, 
pain in back < next night, < lying on face, > lying on r. side. — Bearing 
down in sacral region as in dysmenorrhoea, changing to 1. ovarian region and 
gradually extending through hip. 

ax. Limbs. — Cutting in bones of r. band and foot,— Frequent rheumatic 
symptoms in arms. Angers, and legs. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pain in shoulder-joints ; rheumatic, in muscles of 
r. shoulder. — Intermittent, numb tingling sensation in r. arm and hand every 
day. — Pain in r. elbow, < motion. — Stitching along metacarpal bone Of r. 



UVA-URSI 


1491 

index.^Rheumatic drawing pain in finger-joints, < second joint of r. index, 
all afternoon* — Hypertrophy or loss of nails. 

23, dLower I#imbs. — Pain in 1. knee when walking, increasing to cramp, 
obliging me to lean upon the arm of a friend, the pain, with occasional cramps, 
lasted all the evening, < raising foot so as to press upon toes.— Cramp-like 
stiffness in 1. leg, < raising foot so as to press upon toes. — Feet swollen ; in 
morhing. 

24, Generalities. — Neuralgic pains in forehead, hands and feet. — 
Rheumatic pains all up and down 1. side, with cutting in 1. knee and calf if I 
pressed any weight upon toes or flexed knee with any weight upon it. — 
Rheumatic pains ip muscles of arms, hands, fingers, and small of back, those 
in back < walking. — Symptoms of a cold. — Malaise as if I had taken cold ; 

sichwvith a cold, continual watery flow from nose and eyes, with occa- 
sional chills. — Languor : during the day, with headache, < noon, and with 
burning frontal headache at 9 p.ra. ; in morning on rising ; at 2 p.m. — Faint 
feeling at 11 a.m. in a warm lecture-room. — Faint spells beginning in epigas- 
trium, with small pains in hypochondrium and bowels. 

25. Skin* — ^The scalp became one filthy mass of inflammation, two-thirds 
of the hair came out, the rest matted together, with oozing of watery serum 
from scalp, eruption like rubeola on neck and chest, gradually extending to 
feet, thickest on chest and joints, itching < night, rubbing any part brought 
out the eruption, on face and neck it was in patches like ringworm, but not 
vesicular. — Boils on nape. — Congested feeling in skin. — Skin dry and hot. — 
Painful, destructive disease of nails. 

26. Sleep. — Difficult falling asleep and then unpleasant dreams. — Restless 
night ; with fever ; with troubled dreams. — Sexual dreams ; without emission ; 
and disgusting, waking him, arose and urinated with difficulty and tenesmus. 

2 y. Fever. — ^Chills running up and down back. — Heat at night. — Internal 
heat ; with vertigo ; < eyes, which are inflamed and sensitive to light, eyeball 
sore, to touch ,* intermittent, < eyes. — Burning in face and scalp. — Skin dry ; 
at night ; and hot. 


Uva-Ursi. 

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Bearberry. N, O. Ericaceae. Tincture or 
trituration of dried leaves and fruit. Tincture of fresh leaves 
gathered in autumn. 

Cllnioal* — Cystitis. Dysuria. Haexnaturia. Urinary affections. 

Gharaoteristios* — A few experiments have been made with Uva, 
and these have seemed t(9 accentuate its traditional reputation as an 
** astringent used to check excessive secretion of mucus, as in urinary 
and bronchial affections, and even in calculus.'* The keynote indica- 
tions are ; Painful micturition with burning sensation. Burning after 
the discharge of slimy urine. Slime passes with blood. In one cured 
case there were pains shooting through from hip to hip. The bladder 
symptoms are > lying on the back. 

Balations* — Compare : Arbut., Gaulther., and Ericaceae generally. 



1492 


UVA-URSI 


SYMPTOMS. 

r 

2 . Head. — Slight vertigo and headache. 

5. Nose. — Fluent coryza with rawness. 

6. Face. — Flushing. 

II. Stomach, — Weak, sick at stomach, sore all over as if bruised, • 

14. Urinary Organs. — Slimy urine ; slime passes with blood.— Painful 
micturition ; burning after the slime passes. — Haematuria ; slimy, purulent 
urine. — Green urine. — Constant urging and straining. — Shooting pain from 
hip to hip, bladder and urethra sensitive. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness with pain ih bowels ; stopped 
up in throat ; no appetite. — Throat tickles, feels like coughing all the tinis^«* 
sore and bruised all over ; cough ; nose raw and burning ; cutting and burn- 
ing on urinating. 



Vaccininum. 

Taccininum. A Nosode. Trituration of vaccine matter. 

Gllnleal. — Cheloid. Eczema. Leprosy, Naevus. Nephritis. Small-pox. 
Tumours. Vaccinia. Vaccinosts. Whooping-cough. 

ChaTaotdristios. — Vaccinia, Small-pox, and Grease of horses are 
inter-related diseases, and the nosodes of each are available for the 
treatment or prevention of manifestations of all three. The vaccine 
poison is capable of setting up a morbid state of extreme chronicity, 
named by Burnett Vaccinosts. And it may do this without causing the 
primary symptoms : when the vaccination apparently does not “ take.^^ 
The symptoms of vaccinosis are protean, and are for the most part 
identical with the symptoms of the Sycosis of Hahnemann. Vaccinosis 
is a sycotic disease. Neuralgias, inveterate skin eruptions, chilliness, 
indigestion with great flatulent distension, are leading features of the 
vaccinal dyscrasia, and therefore indications for the nosode. There is 
another disease to which vaccinia is related, and that is whooping- 
cough. Some years ago an old-school observer vaccinated for some 
reason a child whilst suffering from whooping-cough, and the whoop- 
ing-cough vanished. He repeated the experiment in other cases, and 
with such signal success that he wrote to the journals to recommend 
it as a routine practice in the case of unvaccinated children. On the 
other hand, homceopathic observers have seen whooping-cough follow 
immediately on vaccination, and have cured it with Thiij, 30. Turiansky 
(B, M, y,, December 12, 1891) tried hypodermic injections of freshly 
collected calf vaccine in a series of cases of tuberculosis of the lung 
apices, and states that they were invariably, though somewhat 
slowly, followed by most decided amelioration both of the subjective 
and objective phenomena.’’ The temperature became normal, appe- 
tite knd sleep improved, night-sweats, dyspneea, muscular weakness, 
and painful sensations decreased ; cough lessened or disappeared ; 
sputa became thicker and whiter, pulse slower ; urine increased ; 
body weight increased ; bacilli decreased and degenerated. The 
exact amount and form of the injections is not stated. Here' is a case 
in the potencies : Garrison (i\ 5 , A. J, if., quoted H. i?., x. 278) was 
consulted by a lady, 50, of phthisical family. She had consolidation 
of both apices ; had been losing flesh for three months ; severe night- 
sweats ; almost constant, hacking cough, with considerable expectora- 
^tion at times. Vacc. 200, one dose. In a week she reported that 
• 1493 



1494 


VACCININUM 


she had not had a severe coughing spell since the dose, and for the 
last three days hardly any cough at all. She received one dose 
of Face, a week, and at the end of six weeks returned to bamees. If 
a child has a naevus it is the rule, when possible, to vaccinate on the 
naevus. The inflammation and subsequent scarring destroy the growth. 
But that does not completely explain the cure : vaccinia is causally 
related to the production of new growths. Over a year ago a yoUng 
lady came to me shortly after having been revaccinated under some 
Government rule. There had been nothing abnormal in the course 
of the vaccinia, but after the scabs fell off there waS>much pain in 
the arm, and each of the scars began to grow, and when I saw them 
were well-developed cheloids. Thuja removed the pains but did not 
arrest the growth. Under Malan. 200 they have now all but di^r^^ 
appeared. Frolich ( 5 . M. y., October 15, 1898) relates the case of a 
child, 6J, who had well-developed nephritis seven days after vaccina- 
tion with calf vaccine. The first symptom was puffed eyelids, then 
pain and swelling of scrotum ; on the fourteenth day the urine con- 
tained blood, inguinal glands enlarged and tender, slight oedema of 
legs. The urine contained blood and alumen for another month, 
when recovery took place. Other cases of this kind have been 
observed. The symptoms of the Schema are partly pathogenetic and 
partly cured. Peculiar Sensations are : As if forehead were split. As 
if heated or over-exerted in lower extremities. As if bones of leg 
were broken and undergoing process of comminution. Burnett says 
the < time of Vacc. is the early morning. One symptom is : Waked 
in middle of night by pain in forehead and eyes as if split, and stinging 
in temples.*^ 

Relations. — Aniidoted by : Tliuj., Apis, Sul., Ant. t., Sil, Malan. 
Compare : In small-pox, Var., Malan., Thuj., Ant. t. Sarr. Nephritis^ 
Apis, Merc. c. Phthisis, Bacil., Tub. Whooping-cough, Thuj., Meph., 
Coc. c., Coral. 


SYMPTOMS. 

X, Mind. — Crying. — Ill-humour, with restless sleep. — NerVous, im- 
patient, irritable; disposition to be troubled by things. — Morbid fear of 
taking small-pox. 

2. Head. — Frontal headache. — Forehead felt as if it would split in two 
in median line from root of nose to top of head. — Stitches in r, temple. — 
Eruption like crusta lactea. 

3. Eyes. — Tinea tarsi and conjunctivitis in a woman, aet. 28, remaining 
as result of variola in infancy, conjunctiva; painfully sensitive, — Weak eyes ; 
feeling in forehead as if it were split. — Inflamed eyelids. — Redness of eyes 
and face, with small pimples on face and hands. — Keratitis after vaccination 

5. Nose. — Full feeling of head, with running at nose. — Bleeding at nose 
preceded by a feeling of contraction above and between eyebrows, soon after 
eating meat ; menses rather profuse and too frequent ; cured by revacci* 
nation. 

6. Face. — Redness and distension of face, chill running down back.-^ 
Swelling of neck under r. ear (parotid gland) with sensation like being cut. 



VACCININUM 


1495 

8, Motttll.**-Tongue coated, dryish yellow, with papillae showing 
through coat. — Dry mouth and tongue. 

10. •Appetite. — Appetite gone, disgust to taste, smell, and appearance of 
food. — Coffee tastes sour. 

IX.' Stomach. — Aching in pit of stomach, with short breath. 

Z2. Abdomen. — ^A stitch in hepatic region, at margin of last lower rib, 
axillary line. — Stitch in splenic region. — Blown up with flatulence. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Nephritis with albuminuria, hagmaturia, and 
dropsy, developed eleven days after vaccination ; child recovered. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Short breath with aching in pit of stomach, 
^nd pressure in region of heart. — Whooping-cough. 

18. Chest. — Stitch in 1. side of chest, anteriorly, under short ribs. — 
$^itches^n r. side under short ribs in front from r. to 1., then at corresponding 
place in 1. side, but from 1. to r., lasting five minutes, felt in liver and 
spleen. 

19. Heart. — Febrile action of heart and arteries. 

20. Back. — Backache. — Aching pain in back, < in lumbar region, 
extending around waist. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Severe pains in 1. upper arm at vaccination mark, 
could not raise it in morning. — Rheumatic pains in wrists and hands, — 
Cheloids on re-vaccination marks. 

23. Lower Limbs. — ^Tearing in 1. thigh downward. — Soreness of lower 
extremities, as if heated or over-exerted. — Legs ached immoderately, hardly 
able to get about, a break-bone sensation, and a feeling as if bones were 
undergoing process of comminution. 

24. Generalities. — Restlessness. — General malaise. — Languor, lassitude. 
— ^Tired all over, with stretching, gaping feeling ; unnatural fatigue. — Child 
w^nts to be carried. — Many persons faint when being vaccinated. 

25. Skin. — Skin hot and dry. — A general eruption, similar to cow-pox. — 
Sii^all pimples develop at point of vaccination with fourth dilution. — Red 
pimples or blotches in various parts, most evident when warm. — Eruption of 
pustules with a dark-red base and a roundish or oblong elevation, filled with 
pus of a greenish-yellow colour, resembling varioloid, some as large as a pea, 
some less,' without depression in the centre, coming with a round, hard feel 
in the skin (like a shot), very itchy. — ^Tingling burning in skin over whole 
body, most intense in skin of forehead and in lower and anterior portion of 
hairy scalp, which parts are tinged with a scarlet blush, or efflorescence, 
similar to the immediate precursor of variolous eruption. — Vacctninum 6, in 
water, for one day with strict diet, repeated after eight days, acted as preventive 
in six hundred cases. — Treated a great many cases of variola and varioloid 
during last eighteen years, some of them of the most desperate character, and 
yet never lost a case when employing vaccine virus as a remedy ; moreover, 
none of the cases so treated were ever troubled with haemorrhage, or with 
delirium, or secondary fevers, or were ever disfigured with pitting. — Vacci- 
ninum 200th quickly > severer symptoms of variola occurring in a child, aet. 
six months ; two days before appearance of eruption had been revaccinated 
(after an interval of eight days) on a naevus near r. nipple ; deglutition 
difflcult through implication of tongue and fauces ; pustules, many of large 
siae, scattered over scalp, face, body, and limbs. 



1496 VACCININUM— VALERIANA ^ 

96 . Sleep.— Waked in middle of night by pain in forehead and eyes a$ 
if split, and stinging in temples. 

27. Fever. — Fever, with heat, thirst, tossing about, crying, aversion to 
food.— Chill with shaking, 


Valeriana. 

Valeriana officinalis. N. 0 , Valerianacese. Tincture of the 
fresh root. r» 

Clinical. — Asthma, spasmodic ; nervous. Bed-sores. ChanPe of life, Clairvoy* 
ance. Coxalgia. Headache. Heart, palpitation of. Hceh, pain in. Hypochon- 
driasis, Hysteria, Levitation. Neuralgia. Sciatica. Sleeplessness. Tpathachfr-.,. 

Characteristics. — V. officinalis is usually found in moist hedge- 
rows or on the banks of ditches and streams. The peculiar fetid 
odour of Valerians is probably due to the presence of Valerianic acid. 
It is especially agreeable to cats, who become, as it were, intoxicated 
with it. Volatile oil of Valerian seems not to exist naturally in fhe 
plant, but to be developed by the agency of water {Treas, of Boi,), 
Val, first appeared in homoeopathic medicine in Stapfs Additions^ the 
article on it was written by Franz, and Hahnemann and Stapf were 
among the provers. When Franz wrote, it was the custom among 
ladies in Germany to take Valerian almost as frequently as coffee, and 
to this practice he attributed no little of the nervous" suffering then 
prevalent. There is scarcely a drug,^^ he says, which communi- 
cates its primary as well as secondary action to the organism with 
more intensity than Val^ He instanced his own eye symptoms, 
which were both severe and remarkable, and of them he says that, 
though he had never had any tendency to anything of the kind before, 
they were excited at intervals for four months afterwards, the cause 
being frequently unknown, showing the deep action on the organism. 

The many inveterate spasms of the stomach and abdomen ; the 
incurable cases of hysteria and hypochondriasis ; moral disturbances, 
passing from one extreme of emotion to another, from the highest joy 
to the deepest grief, from leniency, kindness, and mildness to grumb- 
ling impatience, obstinacy, and quarrelsomeness ; from a sinking of 
the vital forces accompanied by a painful craving for stimulants^ to the 
greatest liveliness and extravagance, and vice versa ; tedious conva- 
lescence after nervous fevers ; paralysis, and contractions of the limbs, 
&c. — these, in Franzes opinion, were much less owing to the original 
intensity of the disease than to the Val. with which the patients 'had 
been dosed ; and they were only saved from worse effects by the 
fact that Val. was so frequently given in combination with one or 
more of its antidotes. Some notes by Franz are important : (i) The 
first and most rapid effect of Fa/., which precedes any after symptoms, 
is an acceleration of the pulse and congestion of the head. (2) Tlie 
symptoms of the upper and lower limbs alternate frequently. (3) The 
principal times of day when Val. produces its symptoms are noon and 
early afternoon and the hours before midnight. The abdominal 
symptoms especially are felt in the evening. (4) Val, causes several 



VALERIANA 


1497 


kinds of darting, tearing pains which come and go. Similar to these 

E iins are those which appear suddenly. If we compare with these two 
nds of pains — the jerking pains which are scarcely felt in any other 
than muscular tissues and the cramping pains— we have a very easy 
and natural indication of the grounds on which Tissot’s recommenda- 
tion of Val, for epilepsy might be considered valid. The eye symp- 
torm of Franz were burning, smarting, and pressure in the margins of 
the lids, which seemed sore and swollen. But in addition was this, 
which shows the exalted state of sensorum VaL can produce : Shine 
before the eyeaiin the dark ; the closed, dark room seemed to be filled 
with the shine of twilight, so that he imagined he distinguished the 
objects in the •same ; this was accompanied with a sensation as 
^ be felt that things were near him even when not looking at 
them ; on looking he perceived that the things were really there (at 
10 p.m., thirteen hours after the dose). There were also hallucina- 
tions of hearing and of sense. “ Imagines she is some one else and 
moves to the edge of the bed to make room was removed in one 
case. Anxious, hypochondriac feeling, as if the objects around him 
had been taken from him ; the room appears to him desolate, he does 
not feel at home in the room, he is compelled to leave it.^^ “ As if in 

a dream/^ The restlessness of VaL is a very prominent feature : 
Nervous irritation, cannot keep still ; tearings, cramps, > morning. 
Constant heat and uneasiness. The digestion is disturbed. The taste 
caused by Val, is as disgusting as its odour. Before dinner a taste of 
fetid tallow ; early in the morning on waking the taste is flat, slimy. 
Nausea begins in umbilical region, rising into pharynx. In the pre- 
face to his Pocket Book Boeninghausen gives a case which brings out 
many of the VaL characteristics : “ E. N,, 50, of blooming, almost 
florid complexion, usually cheerful, but during his most violent 
paroxysms inclined to outbreaks of anger with decided nervous 
ej^itement, had suffered for four months with a peculiar violent kind 
of pain in the right leg after the previous dispersion, allopathically, of 
a so-called rheumatic pain in the right orbit by external remedies 
which could not be found out ; this last pain attacked the muscle of 
the posterior part of the leg, especially from calf to heel, but did not 
involve the knee or ankle-joint. The pain itself . he described as 
extremely acute, cramping, jerking, tearing, frequently interrupted by 
stitches extending from within outward ; but in the morning hours, 
when the pain was generally more endurable, it w'as a dull, burrow- 
ing with a bruised feeling. The pain became < towards evening 
and, during rest, especially after previous motion, while sitting and 
standing, particularly if he did it during a walk in the open air. 
^yhile walking the pain often jumped from the right calf to the left 
upper arm if he put his* hand into his coat pocket or his breast and 
kept the arm quiet, but it was > while using the arm, and then the 
pain suddenly jumped back again into the right calf. The greatest 
relief was experienced while •walking up and down the room and 
rubbing the affected part. The concomitant symptoms were sleepless- 
ness before midnight, frequently recurring attacks during the evening 
of Sudden flushes of heat with thirst, without previous chill, a dis- 
gusting, fatty taste in the mouth with nausea in the throat, and an 



VALERIANA 


1498 

almost constant pressing pain in the lower part of the chest and pit of 
the stomach as if something were there forcing itself outward/^ Of 
course Val was the remedy, Val has a strong affinity for the* tendo 
Achillis, and I have cured with it many cases of painful affection of 
this tendon and heel when the VaL conditions were present. Nash 
cured with it a severe case of sciatica in a pregnant woman on the 
symptom, pain < standing and letting the foot rest on the floor/* 
She could stand with the foot resting on a chair or lie down in com- 
fort. Val. is a leading member of the group of remedies which meet 
lack of reaction. It is Suited to : (i) Hysterical women who have 
taken too much chamomile tea. (2) Nervous, irritable, hysterical 
subjects in whom the intellectual faculties predominate and whp 
suffer from hysteria and neuralgia. It meets “ nervous affection^ 
occurring in excitable temperaments ; in hypochondriasis it calms the 
nervousness, abates the /excitement of the circulation, removes the 
wakefulness, promotes sleep, and induces sensation of quietude and 
comfort ; sadness is removed ; in globus, in all asthmatical and 
hysterical coughs, nervous palpitation of the heart, profuse flow of 
limpid urine (quoted by Hering). “Red parts become white is 
another indication of Hering’s. Among Sensations are : As if flying 
in air. As if eyes would be pierced from within outward. As if 
smoke in eyes. As if a thread were hanging down throat. As if 
something forcing a passage through pit of stomach. As if some- 
thing warm were rising from stomach. As if something pressed out 
in lower chest. As from cold or over-lifting, pain in loins. As if he 
had strained left lumbar region. As if an electric shock through 
humerus. As if thigh would break. As if strained in right ankle. 
As if bruised in outer malleolus of right foot. Lightness in leg. Like 
lead in limbs. The .symptoms are : < By touch (blisters on cheek and 
lip). Rubbing > cramp in calf. Pressure of hand or covering with 
hat SB icy coldness on vertex. Early decubitus in typhoid. Sli^t 
injury ss spasms. Rest; sitting; standing <. Motion >, Moving 
eyes < headache. Bending head back < pain in occiput. Straighten- 
ing out limb < sciatica. < Noon. < Before midnight (cannot sleep 
before midnight). Profuse sweat at night, < Open air ; draught of 
air, > After sleep. < Fasting. > After a meal. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Bell., Camph., Cin., Coff., Puls, AniU 
dote to : Merc., abuse of Chamomile tea. Compare : Hysteria, Mosch. 
(Mosch. has more unconsciousness) ^ Ign., Asaf. Alternating mental 
states, Croc. Defective reaction, Ambra., Pso. (despair of recovery), 
Chi., Lauro. (chest affections), Caps., Op., Carb. v. Periodical neu- 
ralgia, Ars. (Val. hysterical patients). Pain ss fainting, Cham., Hep., 
Ver. Rheumatism > motion, Rhus. Pains pme and go suddenly, 
Bell., Lyc. Infant vomits curdled milk, ./®th. Over-sensitiveness, 
Nux. Averse to darkness, Stram., Stro., Am. m., Ars., Bar, c., Berb., 
Calc., Carb. a., Carb. v., Caus., Lyc., Pho., Pul., Rhus. As if in a 
dream, Ambr., Anac., Calc., Can. i., Coh., Cup., Med., Rhe., Ver., Ziz. 
Levitation, Nux m., Sti. p., Ph. ac. 

CaaBation.~Injuries (slightest injury s spasms. Bed-sores form 
soon in typhoid). 



VALERIANA 


1499 


• SYMPTOMS. 

X. Mind. — Extremely delirious, attempting to get out of the window, 
threatening and vociferating wildly. — Anxious, hypochondriacal sensation, as 
if afl around were desolate, disagreeable, or strange (very changeable dispo- 
sition). — ^Joyous, tremulous excitement ; mild delirium. — Intellect clouded. — 
Fear, esp. in evening, and in the dark. — Despair. — The most opposite 
moral symptom? appear alternately. — Extreme instability of ideas. — General 
illusions and erro;;s of the mind. — Hallucinations : esp. at night ; sees figures, 
animals, men ; thinks she is some one else, moves to edge of bed to make 
room. — l&reat flow of ideas, chasing one another. — Felt like one who is 
dreaming. — Hysteria, with nervous over-excitability of the nerves. 

2 . Head. — Head confused, as after intoxication. — Intoxication and 
dizziness, with absence of ideas. — Whirling in head when stooping forwards, 
— Headache, which appears suddenly or in jerks. — Fulness as from rush of 
blood to head. — Pressive headache, or with pressive shootings, esp. in fore- 
head, towards orbits, often alternating with confusion and dizziness in the 
head. — Headache ; < in evening, when at rest, and in the open air ; > from 
movement in the room and when changing the position ; the pressure over 
the orbits alternates between a pressing and a sticking ,* the sticking is like a 
darting, tearing as if it would pierce the eyes from within outward. — Head- 
ache an hour after dinner, pressure over eyes as if they would be pressed out, 
< moving them. — Drawing pain on one side of head, from a current of air. — 
Headache in the sunshine. — Stupefying contraction in head, as from a violent 
blow on vertex. — Sensation of icy coldness in upper part of head, from pres- 
sure of hat. — Pressure and drawing into side of occiput. — Piercing drawing, 
with pressure from nape to occiput, when bending head back. — Sweat in hair 
of forehead and on forehead about noon. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes downcast, as after a nocturnal debauch, esp. after a 
meal. — Pressure, burning sensation, and smarting in eyes as from smoke ; 
morning after rising. — Tearing inr. eyeball, sight dim in morning, and pain 
as from insufficient sleep. — Sees things at a distance more distinctly than usual. 
— The eyes shine. — Redness, swelling, and pain as from excoriation in margin 
of eyelids. — Swelling and painful sensibility of eyelids. — Myopia. — Brightness 
and light before eyes when in the dark, so that objects become almost 
distinguishable ; with this a sensation as if he felt that things were near him 
even when not looking at them ; on looking, he perceives they really were 
there (10 p.m.). — Sparks before eyes. 

4* Ears. — Otalgia, with spasmodic drawings. — ^Jerking in the ears. — 
Tinkling and ringing in the ears. — Illusions of hear mg ; imagined he heard 
the bell strike. 

5. Nose. — ^Violent sneezing. 

6. Face. — Pain in face, w^h spasmodic twitching and drawing in 
zygomatic process. — Redness and heat of cheeks in open air ; a quarter of an 
hour later sweat breaks out over whole body, esp. in face. — Twitching of 
muscles of face. — Darting like electricity in r. ramus of lower jaw. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache, with shooting pain. 



1500 VALERIANA 

8. Mouth.— White blisters on tongue and upper lip, painful when 
touched. 

10. Appetite.— Taste in mouth (and smell before nose) as of fetid tallow 
(early in the morning after waking). — Bitter taste on tip of tongue when pass- 
ing it over the lips after a meal. — Insipid and slimy taste ih mouth after 
waking in morning. — Bulimy, with nausea. 

11. Stomach.— Risings, with the taste of rotten eggs, on waking in 
morning. — Frequent, empty, or rancid and burning risings. — ^Voracious 
hunger with nausea. — Nausea and a sensation as if there we^e a thread from 
gullet to abdomen (arising from umbilicus and gradually rising to fauces), 
with copious accumulation of saliva. — Nausea, with syncope, lips white and 
body cold. — Disposition to vomit. — ^Vomiting of bile and of mucus, with 
violent shivering and shaking. — Nocturnal vomiting. — Weak stOHiEch and 
digestion. — Pressure at scrobiculus, appearing and disappearing suddenly, 
with a gurgling in abdomen. 

12 . Abdomen. — Pains in hepatic region and epigastrium when touched. 
— Painful shocks in r. hypochondrium. — Abdomen inflated and hard. — Power- 
ful sensation of expansion in abdomen, as if about to burst.— Tendency to 
retract abdomen. — Spasms in abdomen, generally in evening, in bed, or after 
dinner, allowing no > in any position whatever. — Haemorrhoidal colic ; from 
worms. — Gripings and painful pinchings in abdomen when retracting it; — 
Pains in 1, side of abdomen in evening, as from subcutaneous ulceration. — 
Drawing, pressure, and pains as from a bruise in hypogastrium, inguina, and 
abdominal muscles, as after a chill or strain. — Digging pains in abdomen. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Loose evacuations. — Greenish faeces of consis- 
tence of pap, mixed with blood. — Painful borings in rectum. — Bubbling 
pressure above anus in region of coccyx. — Discharge of blood from anus. — 
Ascarides from rectum. 

14. Urinary Organs.-— Profuse and frequent emission of urine.— Urine 
contains a white, red, or turbid sediment. — During urination much straining 
and prolapsus recti. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Creeping and drawing in penis as if it had 
gone to sleep ; frequent erections the day previous, early in morning. — 
Tensive gurgling in r. testis when sitting. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menses too late and scanty. — Neuras- 
thenia of sexual organs of women. — Child vomits as soon as it has been 
nursed, after mother has been angry. — Child vomits curdled milk in large 
lumps, the same in stools. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Choking in throat-pit on falling asleep ; 
wakens as if suffocating. — Inspirations grow less and less deep and moretapid 
till they cease ; then catches her breath by a sobbing effort in spells.^— Sensa- 
tion as if something warm were rising from stomach, arresting breathing, with 
tickling deep in throat and cough. 

x8. Chest. — Obstructed respiration and anguish in chest. — Oppressed 
respiration, with pressure on lower part of chest. — Frequent jerks and stitches 
in chest (with the sensation as if something were pressed out), sometimes on 
I, side (in region of heart) when drawing breath. — Sudden stitches in chest 
and liver from within out.— Eruption of small, hard nodosities on chest 

20. Back. — Drawing pains in the loins and back. — Pain in the region of 



VALERIANA 


1501 

the loins as from a chill or a straih, — Lancinations in 1.^ lumbar region above 
hip, worse when standing, and esp, when sitting, than when walking.— 
Rheumatic pains in the shoulder-blades. 

21. Limbs. — Painful drawing in upper and lower extremities when 
sitting quietly, > by walking. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Spasmodic drawings and jerkings, or else tearing 
in arms.— Crampy drawing in region of biceps, in r. arm from above down- 
ward while writing. — ^Crampy, darting tearing like an electric shock, repeatedly 
through the humerus, intensely painful. — Paralytic pain in joints of shoulder 
and elbow towaids the end of a walk. — Eruption of small, hard nodosities on 
arms.— Trembling of hands when writing. — Painful shocks across the hand. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Burning pjin in hips when in bed in evening. — 
Crampy^tearing in outer side of thigh, extending into hip. — Pain in hip and 
thigh intolerable when standing, as if thigh would break. — Spasmodic drawing 
and jerking in thighs. — Great heaviness and lassitude in legs, but esp. in 
calves. — Twinging pain in outer side of calf when sitting. — Pulsative tearing 
in r. calf when sitting in the afternoon. — Pain, as of a fracture, in the thighs 
and tibia. — Paralytic pain in the knees towards the end of a walk. — ^Violent 
stitch in knee. — Tensive pain in the calves of the legs, esp. when crossing the 
legs. — Drawing and weak feeling along tendo Achillis, toward heel, as if the 
part had lost all strength, when sitting ; disappearing when rising from a seat. 
— Constant pain in heels. — When sitting heels, esp. r., painful.— Drawing in 
the joints of the feet when sitting down. — Sudden pain, as if bruised, in outer 
malleolus of r, foot, < when standing, > when walking. — Wrenching pain in 
the joints of the foot and ankles. — ^Transient pain in r. ankle, < while stand- 
ing, but seems to disappear when walking.— Lower limbs contracted. — Pains 
and shootings in heels, esp. when seated. — Tearing pains in the soles of the 
feet and in the toes. 

24. Generalities. — [This remedy is like Puls, in many of its aggrava- 
tions, &c., but it has a different temperament— patients get raving, tearing, 
swearing ” mad ; get < toward evening from being still ; great .sleeplessness 
in early part of night— all like Pw/s., but the temper decides. — Affections in 
general of the orbit of the eye ; margins of the eyelids ; calves of the legs. — 
Fatty taste ; sediment in the urine ; reddish urine ; hysterical condition ; 
pains darting from within outward. — < On stooping ; after moving and being 
at rest ; while resting; standing. — > From moving, from walking. — H. N. G.] 
— Rheumatic tearing in limbs, but not usually in the joints, chiefly during 
repose, after exercise, and mostly > by movement ; or which gives place to 
other sensations in other parts of the body during a walk. — ^Jerking and 
shkking pains, appearing (in many places) suddenly and by fits. — Pains which 
manifest themselves after resting a long time in any position, and are > by 
changing it— Drawing and jerking in limbs, as if in bones.— Pain, as from 
paralysis in limbs, towarefe the end of a walk. — Periodical symptoms, which 
reappear after two or three months. — Epileptic fits. — Paralytic torpor in 
limbs. — ^The majority of the symptoms manifest themselves in the evening 
and after dinner. — Over-sensitivdiess of all senses. — General morbid excite- 
ment and irritability, with lassitude in the limbs, great gaiety, and appearance 
of vigour, — Painful weariness, esp. in lower extremities, after rising in 
morning. 



1502 


VALERIANA— VANADIUM 


115. Skin. — Eruption of small nodosities, at first red and confluent, the 
white and hard. — Painful eruptions. — Skin too dry and warm. 

26 . Sleep.— Sleeplessness.— Disturbed sleep (could fall asle^ only 
towards morning), with tossing and anxious and confused dreams. 

27, Fever. — ^The chilliness generally begins in neck and runs down back. 
— Sensation of icy coldness. — Fever, with constant heat, after a short fit of 
shivering, accompanied by confusion in head and thirst. — Heat < in evening 
and when eating. — Accelerated pulse. — Pulse irregular ; generally rapid and 
somewhat tense, sometimes small and weak. — Frequent perspiration, esp. on 
face and forehead (often appearing and disappearing suddenly). — Profuse 
perspiration, esp. at night and from esxertion, with violent heat. 


Vanadium. 

Vanadium. The Metal. V. (A.W. 5i’2). Trituration. (Burnett 
used the “soluble ammonium salt.”) 

Clinical. — Addison’s disease. Atheroma. Fatty degeneration. Innutrition. 

CharaoterUtiOB. — Burnett (Fifty Reasons) tells how he came to 
use Van, through reading the result of some experiments on animals 
in which the Salts of Vanadium produced “ true cell destruction, the 
pigment escaping, the liver being hit hardest.” Burnett had at the time 
a case of “fatty liver, atheroma of the arteries, much pain corresponding 
to the course of the basilar artery, large, deeply pigmented patches on 
forehead, profound adynamia.” Van, restored the patient, who was 
seventy, and at eighty he was “hale and hearty.” Marc Jousset 
(UAfi Med., Ixxxix. 217) tells of experiments with salts of Van., chiefly 
the meta-vanadate of sodium, by Lyonnet and others. Animals 
poisoned by intravenous injections rapidly develop Cheyne-Stokes 
respiration ; with little or no action on circulation or blood. These 
observers gave Vanadates to two hundred patients (suffering from 
tuberculosis, chlorosis, chronic rheumatism, neurasthenia, &c.), and 
produced in nearly all cases increased appetite, strength, and weight. 
The amount of urea was also increased. They regard Van, as “an 
energetic excitant of nutrition,” and probably an oxydant stimulating 
organic combustion. The dose was 2-5 mgr. in twenty-four hours, 
and only on three separate days in the week. 

Selati ous. — Compare : Fatty degeneration, Phos., Ars. Addison^s 
disease, Adren. Tuberculosis, Tub., Bac. 



VARIOLINUM 


1503 


Yariolinum* 

VarioUnum. Nosode of Small-pox. Trituration of matter from 
small-pox vesicle. 

Qlllllcal»*-*Asthma. Backache, Chill. Fever, Headache ; occipital. Herpes 
zoster. Neuralgia. Small-pox. Testicle, swelling of. 

ChaPaoteristioB. — The cardinal symptoms of small-pox are the 
•keynote sympfcms for the use The backache of 

small-pox is abo^t the worst back^^ known, and Var, has cured in 
my practice a number of bad badaMfes that nothing else seemed to 
touch. mVar. was Burnett’s chief remedy in shingles ; it generally, as 
^ he expressed it, wiped out the disease, eruption and pain as well. It 
will also cure neuralgia left by herpes. . Var. has aborted many cases 
of small-pox, and has proved an efficient preventive against small-pox 
contagion and vaccinal infection. G. M. H. (H. xxxii. 546) records 
this experience : Var» 6 (three pilules) was given to the mother and 
children of a family, one of whose members was taken with small-pox 
and removed to an isolation hospital, with his mother to nurse him. 
The patient (who did not receive Var) was dangerously ill for a 
month. Neither the mother who nursed him nor any of the other 
children took small-pox. Vaccine was sent by the Government and 
all the family were vaccinated, but it did not take with any of those 
who had taken Fnr., although the vaccination was repeated. More- 
over, G. M. H. himself, who had taken a dose of Van^ submitted to 
vaccination, but “ although four thorough inoculations were given, 
they healed up immediately, and did not even itch or smart.” — These 
are cardinal indications for Var. : Severe cold ; chill ; chilly creepings 
as if cold water were trickling down the back ; violent fever with 
extremely hot skin, with or without high pulse. Violent headache. 
Nausea. Pain in epigastrium. Pain in limbs as if in bones. Severe 
backache. There may be rash or there may not. Here is a case of 
Swan’s, vfho is a pioneer with nosodes (H. IF., xviii. 205) : Miss H., 
21, healthy, hearty ; complained of the following symptoms : Confu- 
sion of head as if going crazy, with a sensation as if it was all in the 
back of the head and running down spine, followed by intense, heavy, 
hot headache in back of head and neck and region of medulla ; sen- 
sation as if head weighed a hundredweight, with a tendency of it to 
fall backwards ; deathly nausea in throat-pit during headache. 
During headache hands and feet icy cold, particularly the hands ; 
tongue coated yellow in morning, with bad, disgusting taste in mouth ; 
no appetite ; knees feel jveak as if they would give way, especially on 
going down stairs ; pains in thighs and hips ; severe aching, burning 
pain in small of back ; skin hot and dry ; pulse not feverish. Var. cm 
(Swan), in water, cured in six hours, the confusion of the head ceased 
after the pain did. A school of *two hundred children was “ internally 
variolated ” with Var, cmm (Swan) on the evening of February i8th 
and the morning of February 19th. Of two schoolmistresses one was 
not at all aifected ; the other was two days in bed ill. On 21st many 



1504 


VARIOLINUM 


of the children were ill ; by the 23rd all except forty were, the symp; 
toms being the usual preliminary symptpms of small^pox, and later 
Swan found pustules on many. After the varioloid had passed pff, 
but before the patients had recovered their vitality, twenty-three 
children were vaccinated without Swih’s knowledge. All but one 
took and had terrible ulcers on the arms, and had to be remedied by 
Vacc. (emm, Swan). Sensations of Var. are : As if a band tightly 
encircled head. Crazy feeling through brain. As if throat were 
closed. As of a lump in right side of throat Like streams of ice- 
water running down back. Pain as if back were^ broken. The 
symptoms are < By motion. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Mdan., Thuj., Ant. t., Vacc., Sarr. 
Compare : Herpes, Mez., Rhus, Aifl 

Gansation. — Contusion (enlarged testicle). 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Delirium with the initial fever. 

2. Head.— Vertigo.— Syncope in attempting to rise. — Forehead very 
hot, face red and bloated, carotids pulsating violently. — Headache : with or 
after a chill ; all over head ; particularly in forehead ; severe in vertex ; as if 
a band tightly encircled head ; severe lancinating, throbbing ; < with every 
pulsation.— Intolerable pain in occiput. — Crazy feejjng through brain, hard to 
describe. 

3. Eyes. — Keratitis, with small-pox and after vaccination.— Chronic 
ophthalmia with loss of sight. — Pupils contracted. 

4. Ears,— Deafness. 

6. Face. — Skin of face and neck deep dark-purple hue. — ^Jaw falling 
when asleep, with trembling when aroused. 

7. Teeth.— Teeth covered with thick brown slime. 

8. Mouth. — Thick, dirty yellow coating on tongue. — ^When asleep 
tongue protruded, black coating, when raised it is with difficulty drawn 
back ; looks like a mass of putrid flesh. 

9. Throat.— Throat very sore, redness of fauees.— Pharynx ,and fauces 
deep purplish crimson, with gangrenous appearance ; breath horribly offen- 
sive. — Painful deglutition. — Sensation as if throat were closed. — Sensation as 
of a lump in r. side of throat. — Diphtheria with horrible fetor oris. 

10. Appetite. — Food, esp. water, tastes sickish sweet, 

11, Stomach. — Soreness in pit of stomach and across epigastric region. 
—Severe pain in praecordial region, frequent nausea and vomiting of bilious 
and bloody matter.— Frequent bilious vomiting.— As soon as he drinks milk 
he vomjts it up. 

13. Stool. — ^Thin, bloody stools. — Several brown, green, at last grass- 
green stools, painless, loose, of intolerable fetid odour ; no thirst ; last sjtool 
slimy, with small quantity of blood.— Dysentery. — Constipation, 

14. Urinary Organs.— Urine : high-coloured, like brandy ; turbid and 
offensive ; stains a rose tea-colour, difficult to remove. 

15. Male Sexual Organs,— Enlargement of testicle.— Hard swelling 
of 1. testicle in consequence of a contusion. 



VERATRIIsIUM 1505 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Oppressed respiration, — ^Asthma. — Trouble- 
some cough, with serous and j^ometimes bloody sputa. — Hawking up thick, 
viscid mme, smelling bad. 

so. Neck and Back. — Stiffness of neck, with tense drawing in muscles, 
< on motion. — Pain in base of brain and neck. — Chills like streams of ice- 
water running down from between scapulae to sacral region. — Intolerable 
aching in lumbar and .sacral region. — Pain in muscles of back like rheuma- 
tism ; < on motion. 

20. Upper Limbs. — Hands icy cold during invasion.-^weUtng of arm 
which had been^alf-paralysed. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Muscular rheumatism ; < on motion. 

25. Skin. — Exanthema of sharp, pointed pimples, usually small, seldom 
large an^ suppurating, dry, resting on small red areolae, frequently interspersed 
with spots of red colour, sometimes severe itching. — Petechial eruptions. — 
Van 30 warded off an attack of small-pox after intense sickness of stomach had 
been caused by the smell of a case. — Van im in water every two hours, given 
on third day of eruption of a confluent case cut short the attack. — Shingles. 

27. Fever. — ^Very severe chill, followed by hot fever. — Intense fever, 
commencing with chills running down back like streams of cold water, 
causing shivering and chattering of teeth. — Fever with intense radiating 
heat, burning hot to touch. — Hot fever, no thirst. — ^Very profuse, bad-smelling 
sweat. 


Yeratrinum. 

Vjeratria. (An alkaloid obtained chiefly from seeds of Sabadilla and 
roots of Veratrum.) CjaHjaNaOs. Trituration. 

^ ClinleaL — Colic. Diarrhoea, Dysentery. Dysuria. Intestines, catarrh of ; 
neuralgia of. Jaw, snapping of. Neuralgia. CEsophagus, stricture of. Paralysis. 
Spine, neuralgia of. Tetanus. 

Charaoteristlcs, — Large doses of Veratrinum cause violent 
sneezing* and great gastro-intestinal irritation, vomiting, purging, and 
symptoms of collapse, the pulse being rapid, small, and irregular ; 
and often involuntary muscular tremors come on. A peculiar creeping 
and prickling sensation in the skin generally accompanies these 
symptoms. Externally applied to the unbroken skin it has no marked 
action, but if rubbed on with some fat, it passes through the 
epidermis and acts on the true skin, causing first irritation and then 
paralysis of the ends of the sensory nerves, and producing a prickly 
and creepy sensation, succeeded by numbness. This effect is pro- 
duced whether appliea locally or taken internally. Its irritating 
aqfion in the sensory nerves is also observed if it be inhaled through 
the nose, when it causes violent sneezing, which also occurs after 
absotption through the stomacii (Brunton). A large number of the 
ejects of Vem. were the result of inunctions, Vern, is both a 
paralyser and a great pain producer. It causes electric pains ; 
sensation like electric streams in nerves ; shooting pains like electric- 
voL. n. 96 



VERATRINUM 


1506 

shocks in veins, muscles and joints. Vcm. causes tetanus, which 
Farrington distinguishes from the convulsive action q| Kux in that 
Vem, causes purgation and vomiting with the spasms, and that general 
paralysis does not take place from exhaustion as with Nux^ but from 
devitalisation of the muscles. Twitchings, subsultus tendinum, fibrillary 
twitchings are marked. Startings and tremors occur in limbs 
previously affected by paralysis or pain. The pains are tingling, 
sparkling, prickling, burning. There is a drawing pain along the 
spine. Sensations : of oppression in head, suffocation ; of boiling water 
running over the back. As if a stream of warm air OiC drops of hot 
water issued from various parts. As if a frozen atmosphere round feet 
to knees ; or cold water poured on them. Shocks in head. Twitching 
of facial muscles. Snapping, closhre of lower jaw. One Peculiar 
Symptom is: “ Dull pain, afterwards burning, in lower part oi spinal 
column, followed by pain in bowels and prepuce, accompanied with 
jerking in lower limb^*’ 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Coffee mixed with a little lemon- juice. 
Compare : Sabad., Aeon., Coniin. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Delirium with illusions. — Great anxiety. — Loss of 
consciousness. 

2. Head. — ^Vertigo, — Peculiar sense of oppression and anxiety in head, 
a sense of suffocation. 

3. Eyes. — Conjunctiva red. — Lachrymation. — Pupils extremely 
contracted. 

5. Nose. — Frequent sneezing. — After vomiting had been produced, 
violent sneezing came on and lasted half an hour. 

6. Face. — Twitching of muscles of face. — Violent shocks, tearing pain, 
extending from face (place of application) to vertex. — When eating or laugh- 
ing heartily, or talking animatedly, frequently spasmodic closure of lower jaw, 
shuts suddenly with a loud snap. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue much swollen. — Peculiar biting and creeping in 
tongue. — Mouth dry. — Mouth and throat very sore as if she had swallowed 
boiling water. — Intense irritation of mouth and pharynx. — Salivation very 
profuse, lasting weeks ; nausea and vomiting. 

9. Throat. — Constriction of throat. — Sense of constriction in fauces 
rendering swallowing difficult. — Prickly sensation in pharynx and throat, 
sometimes irritable. 

11. Stomach.—Appetite lost.— Violent, unquenchable thirst. — ^I^fcquent 
bitter eructations. — Nausea : violent ; and vomitkig. — Copious vomiting.-^ 
Slight transient burning in stomach. — A peculiar feeling increases to a 
burning. — Cramp. 

12. Abdomen* — Electric streams alojig nerves of abdomen and breast 
(inunction to back). — Great pain extending over all the nerves of the abdomen. 
— Colic. — Sensation as if whole intestines were tied together with a strong cord 
continually tightened. 



VERATRUM ALBUM 1507 

13. Stool and Anus. — Diarrhoea : slimy ; profuse watery ; of bloody 
mucus ; of mucous substances ; with tenesmus. 

14. •Urinary Organs.-— Spasmodic contraction of bladder with evacua- 
tion of watery urine. — Continual calls to urinate. — Ineffectual efforts to urinate 
(primary effect). — Urine : increased ; scanty, red, thick, 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Breathing hurried. 

^9. Heart. — Burning pain in praecoidial region. — Excessive feebleness, 
beats weak. — Sinking of pulse. 

20. Back. — Dull pain in back. — Dull pain, afterwards burning, in lower 
part of spinal ciRlumn, followed by pain in bowels and prepuce, watery and 
mucous evacuation, accompanied with jerking in lower extremities. — Drawing 
pain along spine. — Sensation of boiling water running over back. 

21. Crimbs. — Paralysis and numbness of limbs. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Painful jerking i#toes. 

24. Generalities. — Trembling and uncertain movements when he wants 
to lay hold of anything, he misses his grasp. — Subsultus tendinum, — Twitch- 
ings : slight in various muscles ; starting or tremors in paralysed or previously 
affected parts. — Faintness : collapse. — After an excellent night’s rest felt 
dreadfully tired and weak. — Great agitation with violent vomiting. — Tingling, 
sparkling, prickling in parts remote from stomach half an hour after dose ; 
sometimes with sense of warmth ; sometimes with coldness. — Warmth in 
stomach extending to other parts, cold or tingling exactly as after local 
application of Veraltia, — Electric streams in nerves. — Electric shocks in 
muscles. 

25. Skin. — Erysipelatous inflammation with violent pain, nettlerash 
eruption (from inunction), — Heat and tingling extend from parts rubbed 
over rest of body. — Parts rubbed very sensitive to stimuli, esp. electricity and 
galvanism. — Itching followed for weeks after by tingling. 

27. Fever. — Coldness, warmth, sticking, and prickling. — Cold extremities ; 
m\jst use foot-stove. — Sweat. 


Yeratrum Album. 


Veratrum album. White-flowered Veratrum. White Hellebore. N.O. 
Melanthaceae (of the Liliacese). Tincture of the root-stocks 
collected (in the Alps and Pyrenees) early in June before 
flowering. 

ClinieaL — ^Amenorrhoea.^ Anaemia. Anasarca. Angina pectoris. Apoplexy. 
Asthma. Bronchitis. Cholera asiattca. Cholerine, Colic. Collapse. Constipation, 
Coprophagia. Cramps. Debility. Diaphragm, affections of. Diarrhoea. Dysmenor- 
rh®a. Emphysema. Epilepsy. Fainting. Gastric catarrh. General paralysis. 
Headache ; sick ; nervous. Hernia. Hydrocephaloid. Hysteria. Influenza. Inter* 
mittent f&vcr. Intussusception. LabSur^ constipation after. Lips, cracked. Liver, 
hyperaemia of. Lock-jaw. Lungs, oedema of. Manta. Measles. Mendacity. 
Melancholia, Meningitis. Menstruation^ nausea before ; diarrhoea before. Neuralgia, 
palpebralis. Nyctalopia. (Esophagus, stricture of. Peritonitis. Pernicious fevers. 
Plica polonica. Pneumonia, Pregnancy, imaginary. Ptosis. Pyaemia, 



VERATRUM ALBUM 


1508 

Rheumatism. Salivation. Scarlatina. Sleep^ whining in. Spleen, awoUen. 
Sternum. Throat Toothache. Typhoid fever. Vertigo. Water-brash* \^ooping^ 
cough* Yellow fever. ^ 

Gharaoteristios. — In his Hellcborism of the Ancients^ Hahnemann 
showed that Verat alb. was the principal agent used at Anticyra and 
other places in Greece to produce the evacuations which were 
regarded as an essential of the cure.^^ Spring was deemed the liiost 
favourable season and autumn the next. Among the diseases in 
which the treatment was employed were ‘^mental derangements^ 
epilepsy, spasms of the facial muscles, hydrophobia, plfcyalism of the 
pancreas, diseases of the spleens, goitre, hidden cance^,” &c. (Hahne- 
mann quoted by Teste). Hahnemann says {M. M. P.) that doubtless 
many patients were cured, but not a few succumbed to the ewrmous 
doses given. These doses hefhowed were quite unnecessary, when the 
symptoms of the proving are taken as guides. The evacuant use 
of Ver. gives one of the keynotes for its homoeopathic use — its dis- 
charges are copious ; copious stools, copious vomiting, copious urine, 
copious salivation, and copious sweat. The discharges drain the 
tissues like cholera, in which disease its pathogenetic effects render it 
one of the first remedies, ranking with Camp, and Cupr. in Hahne- 
mann’s trio. The discharges exhaust the vitality as well as the tissues 
and cause vertigo ; blackness before the sight, fainting, collapse ; 

Rapid sinking of forces ; complete prostration ; cold sweat and cold 
breath.*’ Skin blue, purple, cold, wrinkled ; remaining in folds when 
pinched.” Face hippocratic, nose pointed.” Hands icy cold.” 
“ Face and legs icy cold.” This coldness is another of the keynotes of 
Ver. It is one aspect of the fever-producing power of the drug : 
“ Coldness of the whole body.” Coldness running over whole body 
soon after taking it.” “ Feeling of internal chill ran through him from 
head to toes of both feet at once.” “ Continued rigor in back and 
over arms.” Very characteristic are ; Cold feeling in abdomen ; ” 

coldness as of a piece of ice on vertex;” “cold nose;” “face 
cold and collapsed ; ” “ cold tongue ; ” and most characteristic 
of all, “ cold sweat on forehead.” Along with the coldness is blueness 
of face and extremities. Ver. is like cholera in that coldness pre- 
dominates in its fever, but it has also “heat and redness of face and 
hands.” With the fever there is apt to be delirium and prolonged 
sleep. The delirium may develop great intensity and violence ; 

Fury ; tears his clothing ; bites her shoes to pieces and swallows 
the fragments ; cursing ; stamping ; wants to run away ; makes a great 
noise.” These and kindred symptoms seem to indicate Ver. in acute 
afEections attended with delirium ; and also in cases of mental alienation, 
which was prominent among the affections treated with the drug by the 
ancients. Hahnemann says of Ver. that it has the power “ to promote 
a cure of almost one-third of the insane in lunatic asylums (at all events 
as a homoeopathic intermediate remedy).” One of the symptoms 
taken by Hahnemann from Grading iS this : “ He swallows his own 
excrement,” which Goullon has verified (Z. Berl. V* H. A.y xix. 156) : 
a child had a craze for eating its own faeces, or dung lying in the 
street. Ver. 2., thrice daily, cured in a month. The mania of Ver. 



VERATRUM ALBUM 


1509 


may be of the exalted kind, religious or sexual. Imagines she is 
pregnant and will soon be delivered ; nymphomania ; puerperal 
mania ^^ania for kissing everybody have been cured by V&r. 
Generally there will be collateral Ver. symptoms to confirm the 
choice : coldness, blueness, collapse, fainting, vomiting, or diarrhoea. 
Ver, is a great fainting remedy. There is fainting from emotions, 
from the least exertion, from retching, from stool. Sinking feeling 
during haemorrhage. The gastric conditions are characterised by 
extreme hunger ; craving for cold food and refreshing things ; thirst 
for ice-cold wXter. This last is very characteristic, and appears in the 
chill and heat of fever. The copiousness of the stools distinguishes 
Ver, from Canv^h, The evacuations are apt to be green^ vomit, stool, 
urine. %The characteristic diarrhoea of Vcr, is: frequent, greenish, 
^shing ; mixed with flakes ; cutting cqjic, with cramps commencing 
in hands and feet and spreading all over ; prostrating, after fright ; < 
least movement ; with vomiting, cold sweat on forehead during stool 
and prostration after. ‘‘ Violent vomiting with profuse diarrhoea is a 
keynote of Vtr. The constipation of Ver, is no less characteristic : no 
desire ; stools large, hard ; in round black balls ; from inactive 
rectum ; frequent desire fell in epigastrium ; painful of infants and 
children ; of women after confinement. Ver, is a great pain producer, 
tod the pains of its neuralgias (dysmenorrhoea, migraine) are often 
accompanied by diarrhoea, vomiting, cold sweat, fainting, or prostra- 
tion. This case was reported in P. C. J, H, (vii. 150): Prosopalgia, 
right-sided, kept an anaemic woman awake and in misery for several 
days and nights from the crushing paroxysmal pain, causing 
sweating and prostration. Ver, cured at once. E. F. Watts (A, //., 
xxi., 317) had this case : Mrs. C. had severe nervous headaches for years. 
Any over-exertion, as riding or working on hot days, would excite 
them. They frequently began in occiput, settling sometimes in one 
eye sometimes in the other. Spi, and Sil, gave no relief. One day 
Watts noticed that the brow contracted and eyelids nearly closed 
with the intensity of the pain. Ver, was now given and relieved at 
once. Gee {M, A,, xxv. 22) cured this case with one dose of Ver, 200 : 
Mrs. L.*, widow, 43, had sciatica four years. Pain sharp, transient, 
darting upwards and downwards and from both sides to centre. Heat 
< j ** the cooler the better.^’ Cold sweat with the attacks. Headache 
from both temples to base of brain < by heat. Vertex itches during 
attacks. Pain compels her to move about, but no > from motion. 
The cramps of Ver, are part of its general convulsant properties. The 
convulsions of Ver, may be tetanic, with lockjaw, or epileptic. The 
eyes are particularly convulsed or the lids paralysed. There may be 
vanishing of sight or^ sparks before the sight or night-blindness. 
Dryness and burning are leading sensations as¥n other parts. Dryness 
is felt in nose, mouth, palate, throat. Ver, has a sharp action on the 
respiratory organs and has cured many cases of pneumonia when the 
mental and other symptoms* of Ver, have been present. A leading 
local sympton is tickling : Tickling deep in trachea and bronchi. 
“ Ticldmg in chest, as if it would provoke cough, in middle of sternum.” 
This symptom helped me to the remedy in the following case : Mrs. 
W., 30, had much pain inside throat. Painful ulcer in mouth. Throat 



1510 VERATRUM ALBUM ' 

sore and inclined to be ulcerated. 7 'tckUiig all over inside of chest and 
throat; outside tender. No pain on swallowing. Has had cold and cough 
some time, cough hurts chest. Stan, had no effect. Ver. im thrice 
daily gradually removed all symptoms. Ver. meets cardiac debility, 
following acute diseases ; pulse thread-like ; faints in morning ; face 
red when lying down or sitting up, deadly pale ; hands cold, clammy. 
Ver. is Suited to (i) the extremes of life — children and old people ; 
(2) lean, choleric, or melancholy persons ; (3) young people and 
women of a sanguine or nervo-sanguine temperament (of mountaineers* 
— ^Teste) ; (4) people who are habitually cold and deiicient in vital 
reaction ; (5) persons of gay disposition ; (6) of fitful mood ; (7) 
anaemic persons. Peculiar Sensations are : As if pregnant or in throes 
of child-birth. As if he had a bad conscience, or had comijiiitted a 
crime. As if in a dream. As if things whirled in a circle. As if a 
lump of ice on vertex. Burning in brain. As if head would burst. 
As if heat and cold at same time on scalp. Hair as if electrified. 
Eyelids as if rubbed sore. As if inner surface of lids too dry. As if 
hundreds of fine needle-points were thrust into eyelids. As if ears 
were stopped. As if alternate current of cold and warm air coming 
out of ear. As it nose dry. As if teeth were filled with lead. As if 
tongue too heavy. As of dust in throat. As if mouth lined with 
mucus. As if something alive running from stomach into throat. * As 
from ravenous hunger, pain in stomach. Radiating pain from 
abdomen. Distress over heart and epigastrium. Sinking, empty 
feeling in abdomen. As of knives cutting bowels. As of hot coals in 
abdomen. Pinching as with pincers in abdomen. As if intestines 
twisted into a knot. As if cold water running through veins. Arms 
as if bruised or broken. As if bones of 1 . forearm were pressed. As 
if arms too full and swollen, feel cold when raising them. As if hands 
had been asleep. As if a heavy stone were tied to feet and knees. 
Limbs pain as if exhausted by excessive fatigue. As if she would 
have to fly away. Electric pains occur in various parts. The 
symptoms are : < By touch ; pressure ; shock of injury. Slight wounds 
ss fainting. Rest > palpitation. Horizontal position > vomiting, 
cough, and general condition. Stooping < headache ; ss rush of 
blood to head. Motion <. Throwing back head > asthma. Walking 
> jerks in limbs ; neuralgia of arms and legs ; pain in feet and knees. 
Least exertion =: fainting ; cough ; sweat. < Night ; and morning on 
waking. Warmth <. Hot water <. Drinking <. Cold food and 
drink < cough. Drinking cold water on a hot day = diarrhoea. < 
Damp weather. < Change of weather. (Rheumatism < in wet 
weather which drives patient out of bed. — Nash.) < Sharp, cool 
air ss dry tickling cough. < Before and during menses ; before and 
during stool ; after stool ; during sweat. < from fright. 

Relations* — Antidoted by: (Poisonous doses) Strong Coffee; 
Camph. (pressive pain in head with coldness of body and unconscious- 
ness after. — Hahn.) ; Aeon, (anxious, distracted state with coldness of 
body or burning in brain. — Hahn.) ; Chi, (other chronic affectioii^ 
from abuse of Ver. — e.g., daily forenoon fever.~Hahn.) ; Staph, (most 
cases. — ^I'este). Antidote to: Ars., Chi., Cup, (colic), Op,, Tab*; 
removes the bad effects of Opium and Tobacco, Follows well : Atb,, 



VERATRUM ALBUM 


1511 

Am., Chi., Cup., Ip. ; Camph. (cholera) ; Am. c., Carb. v,, Bov, (in 
dysmenorrhoea with vomiting and purging). Lyc, and Nnx in 
painfiil Jbnstipation of infants. Followed well by : Puls., Aco., Bell, 
Cham.^ Rhus, Sep., Sul. Compare : Electric sensations ; tickling, 
prickly sensations, Veratrin. Cold sweat on forehead (Tab. over 
entire body). Mania with desire to cut clothes, Trn. Lascivious 
talk, amorous or religious, Hyo., Stram. Fainting from least exertion, 
Carb. v., Sul. Sinking during haemorrhages (Trill, fainting). Sensa- 
tion of lumps of ice on vertex with chilliness, Sep. Facies hippocratica, 
Aco. Craves^ acids or refreshing things, Ph. ac. Cold feeling in 
abdomen, Colch., Tab, Vomiting < by drinking. Ars. Vomiting 
< by least motion. Tab. Cholera after fright, Aco. Prostration after 
vomitiilg, Ars., Tab. Large hard stools, Sul, Bry. Round black balls, 
Chel, Op., Pb. Frequent desire for stool felt in epigastrium, Ign. (Nux, 
in rectum). Weakness at menses, Aim., Carb. an., Coccul. Collapse, 
cholera, coldness, < by heat, Camph. (Camph. has scanty, Ver. 
copious stools). Rheumatism < in wet weather, which drives patient 
out of bed, Cham. Delirium, Bell, Stram. (these have not the cold 
surface and cold sweat of Ver.). Fright = Diarrhoea, Gels. Cholera, 

} at. c. (vomits ropy, albuminous matter with purging) ; Pod. (painless) ; 
r, V. (better for summer complaints ; excoriated, raw feeling at 
amis) ; Crot. t. (single gush ; every attempt to eat or drink = stool) ; 
Elat, (olive-green stools). Suppressed scarlatina, Zn. (Ver. has 
succeeded when Zn. has failed to = reaction). Emaciation about neck, 
Nat. m. (Ver. especially in whooping-cough). Weak from talking, 
Stan., Coccul, Sul, Calc. Collapse, diarrhoea, vomiting. Ant. t. (Ant.t., 
more drowsiness ; Ver., more cold sweat). Neck muscles too weak 
to hold head up, Ant. t. Craves cold drinks, Ars. (Ver. is between Ars. 
and Nux. — ^Teste.) Purging and collapse. Hell. (Hell, apathetic). 
Pressure in vertex with pain in stomach > pressure < motion. Puls. 
Abdominal pains, Coloc, (Ver. must w^alk about). Pain = fainting, 
Cham., Hep., Val Convulsion after sudden emotions, Ign. Convulsions 
with spasm of glottis, Nux (Ver. secondary to exhausting diseases). 
Intermittent fever, Lach. Cough followed by belching, Amb., Sul ac. 
Alarmed about souls salvation, Sul Windy colic and spasms of 
women, Castor, (with yawning), Diosc. " (> moving about). 
Desire to ramble hither and thither, Bell. As if in a dream, Amb., 
Anac., Calc., Can. i.. Con., Cup., Med., Rhe., Val, Ziz. Umbilical 
hernia with absence of urging Bry., Nat. m. ; (with urging, Nux, 
Coccul). Faintness connected with evacuations, Ap., Nux m.. Pul, 
Spi. (with scanty stools, Crot t., Dulc., Ox. ac.. Pet., Sars., Sul). > 
Uncovering, Aco., Calc., Camph., Fer., lod., Lyc., Pul, Sec., Sul. 
Griping, cutting, tearing, and spasmodic pains in body, Col, Dulc. 
Laughing and weeping by turns, Aur., Pul, Lyc., Strain., Aim., Pho., 
Sep., Sul. Loquacity, Cup., Hyo., Lach., Op., Stram. Gossiping, 
baobling, Hyo. (Ver, on religious subjects). Kisses everybody, 
A^ar. Averse to hot food, Pho. Cold drink < cough (> Caust.). 
Night-blindness, Nux, Bell. Smell of manure or smoke before nose, 
Anac. Evacuant action, Lobel 

Causation,— Fright. Shock of injury. Disappointed love. Injured 
pride or honOhr. Suppressed exanthema. Opium. Tobacco. Alcohol 



1512 


VERATRUM ALBUM 


SYMPTOMS. 

^ 0 

z* Mind. — Affections of the mind in general ; tired of life, but fear to 
die ; amativeness ; haughtiness ; delirium ; madness ; sensitiveness ; memory 
weak, or entirely lost (H. N. G.).— Melancholy dejection, sadness, and inclina- 
tion to weep.-— Inconsolable affliction, with bowlings and cries on account of 
imaginary misfortunes. — Melancholy, head hangs down, sits brooding in 
silence. — Excessive anguish and inquietude, with apprehensii^n and troubled 
conscience, esp. at night, or in morning, often also when getting out of bed, 
or rising from a seat. — Strong tendency to be frightened, and timidity. — 
Deadly anguish. — Discouragement and despair (hopelessne.ss of life).— Busy 
restlessness, constant motion, with great inclination for labour. — Disposition to 
be angry at the least thing, often followed by anxiety, and palpitation of the 
heart. — Woman, 66, after paralytic seizure became maniacal, extremely angry, 
constantly accusing her nurses, pupils contracted, continual excitement, often 
incoherent : a dose of Ver, a. inci eased these symptoms, and then a single 
dose of Ver, v, ^ calmed all down (R. T. C.). — Loquaciousness, he talks rapidly. 
— Swearing, inclination to run away, tearing things. — Is conscious only as in 
a dream. — Cannot bear to be left alone ; yet persistently refuses to talk.— 
Strong disposition to silence, with abusive language on the slightest provo- 
cation ; if he talks he scolds, and the voice is weak and scarcely audible.—* 
Disposition to converse about the faults of others. — (He hunts up other 
people's weak sides and reproaches them.) — She is continually accusing and 
scolding her husband when dying of phthisis. — Never speaks the truth ; does 
not know herself what she is saying.-— Erroneous and haughty notions.— 
Thinks himself distinguished ; squanders his money, proud of his position.-^ 
Imagines he is a hunter. — Immoderate gaiety and loquacity. — Fury, with 
impulse to bite, to tear everything, and to run away. — Loss of memory, — 
Absence of ideas. — Loss of sense. — Insanity, he wants to cut up everything. 
— Unusually joyous mood. — Mild delirium, with trembling excitement. — 
Mental alienation and insanity, with singing, whistling, laughing, inclination 
to run from place to place, extravagant and haughty ideas and auctions, or 
else a disposition to ascribe to one's self diseases which are altogether 
imaginary (thinks herself pregnant, or that she will be delivered soon). — 
Persistent raging with great heat of body. — Swallowing his own excrement — 
Paroxysms of amorous or religious alienation. — Mental disorders, with lechery 
and obscene talk. — Kisses everybody ; before menses. — Puerperal mania and 
convulsions. — Nymphomania with violence and destructiveness.— Violent 
delirium (religious or exalted). — Suicidal tendency from religious despiir. 

a. Head. — Confusion in head, as if all within it were in motion, esp. in 
morning. — Dulness of all the senses. — Whirling vertigo. — Intoxication and 
dizziness. — ^Vertigo, esp, when walking.— Vertigo : with cold sweats on fore- 
head ; with loss of vision ; sudden fainting ; from opium eating ; from abuiie 
of tobacco and alcohol— Fainting from least exertion, turning in bed, straintng 
at stool, retching, slight wounds, pains ; ""loss of fluids ; anxiety, nansea, 
convulsive, twitchings. — Fainting with lockjaw, convulsion of eyes. — Fits of 
headache, with paleness of face, nausea, and vomiting (of green mucus)* — 
Headache with painful stiffness of nape of neck*— Hea^he with (profuse) 



VERATRUM ALBUM 


1513 

flow oj arine.*^Sick-beadache in which diuresis forms a crisis. — Headache, 
by paro^sms, as if the brain were bruised or torn (with pressure). — Heavi- 
ness of me whole head. — Pressive headache, often in vertex, or else semi- 
lateral, with pain in stomach. — ^Violent headache which disappears on 
appearance of menses, — During menses (which had not occurred for six 
^weeks) headache, esp. in morning, with qualmishness ; > evening. — Head- 
ache, with nausea and vomiting. — Neuialgia of head with indigestion, features 
sunken. — Constrictive pain in head (and gullet). — Incisive pain in vertex. — 
Sh^ng_in h«d, with jerking in arms and paleness of the fingers. — Blood 
rushes violently to head when stooping, — Hyperaemia of brain from whooping- 
cough.— Pulsatiae headache. — Burning pain in brain. — Sensation of a cold 
wind blowing through head. — Headache as if brain were broken. — Sensation 
of coldfless and heat in the exterior of head, with painful sensibility of the 
hair.-«Crawling, bristling sensation (r. side of head) as if the hair were 
electrified ; with slight shivering of skin under hair. — Plica polonica. — ^Cold- 
ness at vertex as if there were ice upon it (with icy-cold feet and nausea ; < 
when rising from the bed ; > from external pressure, and when bending head 
backward). — Sensation of warmth and coldness on head at same time. — Head 
burning hot ; limbs alternately hot and cold. — Head hot and covered with 
sweat ; children rub head, cannot bear to be left alone ; put hands to head 
(typhoid). — Scalp very sensitive, with headache. — Cold sweat on forehead. — 
Sensation of soreness of the head, with nausea. — Neck too weak to hold 
head up. 

3. Eyes. — Pain in the eyes, as if the eyeballs were bruised. — ^The eyeballs 
are turned upwards. — Painful tearing or compression in eyes. — Permanent 
burning in eyes, — Redness of eyes. — Painful inflammation in eyes, esp, r., and 
sometimes with violent headache, and nocturnal sleeplessness. — Eyes dull, 
clouded, yellowish. — Blueness of eyes. — Eyes surrounded by blue or black rings. 
— Eyes fixed, watery (sunken, with loss of lustre), and as if they were covered 
with albumen. — Excessive dryness of eyelids. — Profuse lachrymation, often 
with burning, incisive pains, and sensation of dryness in eyes (and lids, 
with redness). — Agglutination of the eyelids during sleep. — Trembling of 
upper eyplids. — Neuralgia palpebralis. — Paralysis of eyelids. — Eyes convulsed 
and prominent. — Pupils strongly contracted ; or perceptibly dilated. — Loss of 
sight. — Diplopia. — Nocturnal blindness. — Sparks and black spots before eyes, 
esp. when rising from a seat, or getting out of bed. 

4« Ears. — Shootings in ears. — Pressure and constrictive sensations in ears. 
—Alternate sensation of coldness and heat in ears ; as if an alternate current 
of cold and warm air were coming out of the car. — Deafness, as from obstruc- 
tion in ears. — Sensation as if a membrane were stretched over ear. — Humming, 
with sensitiveness to noise. — Roaring in ears, esp. when rising from a seat. 

g. Nose. — Nose grsws more pointed; seems longer. — Icy coldness of 
nose.— Inflammation and pain, as from ulceration, in interior of nose. — 
Contractive or depressing pain in nasal bone.— Nose-bleed : at night; during 
sleep ; from one nostril only ; before menses. — Smell of manure, or smoke, 
before nose. — Distressing sensation of dryness in nose. — ^Violent and frequent 
sneexing. — Coryza, 

Face. — Face pale, cold, hippocratic, wan, with the nose pointed, 
and a blue (<^ green) circle round eyes, — Bluish colour of face. — ^Yellowish 



VERATRUM ALBUM 


1514 

colpur of face. — Redness of one cheek, the other is pale. — Alternate redness 
and paleness of face. — Redness of face when lying down, paleness when 
getting up. — Burning heat, deep redness, and perspiration on iacfe. — Cold 
perspiration on face (esp. on forehead). — (Periodical neuralgia of face 
and head, with coldness of hands and tendency to faint — R. T. C.) — 
Drawing and tensive pains in face, on one side only, and extending 
to ear.— Jerkings and pinchings in muscles of face (when masticating). 
Lockjaw. — Risus sardoniciis. — Pustules in face, with pain, as from excoria- 
tion, when touched. — Acne. — Military eruption on cheeks. — Bloatedness of 
face. — Lips : bluish or hanging down ; dry, black, parched ; wrinkled, pale 
or black and cracked. — Froth from mouth. — Eruption on tha commissures of 
the lips.*--Acne round the mouth and chin. — Cramp in the jaw.— Pain and 
swelling of the submaxillary glands. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache with headache, and red, bloated face. — ^Tooth- 
ache (sometimes pulsative), with swelled face, cold perspiration on forehead, 
nausea, and vomiting, painful weariness, and coldness of whole body, prostra- 
tion of strength, even to tainting, internal heat, and insatiable thirst. — Aching, 
and sensation of extreme heaviness in teeth, with drawing pain during the 
mastication even of soft food. — Grinding of teeth. — Looseness of teeth. 

8. Mouth. — Mouth dry and clammy. — Burning in mouth and throat. — 
Salivation, with nausea, or with acrid or salt taste. — Much flow of saliva from 
the mouth like water-brash. — Froth before mouth. — Sensation of coldness, or 
burning in mouth and on tongue. — Inflammation of interior of mouth. — 
Tongue, dry, blackish, cracked, or red and swollen. — Tongue loaded with a 
yellow coating ; or cold and withered. — Biting taste as from peppermint in 
the mouth. — Stammering. — Loss of speech. — Sensation of torpor, and great 
dryness in palate (with thirst). 

g. Throat. — Sore throat, with constrictive pain of contraction (as by a 
pressing swelling) esp. during deglutition. — Contraction of gullet, as from a 
pressive swelling. — Swelling of the gullet, with danger of suffocation. — 
Sensation of coldness, or burning in back of mouth and gullet. — Dryness in 
throat, which cannot be mitigated by any drink. — Roughness, dryness, and 
scraping in throat — Exophthalmic goitre (Kirsch). 

xo. Appetite. — Insipidity of the saliva in the mouth. — Bitter, bilious 
taste in mouth. — Water tastes bitter. — Putrid taste in mouth, like manure, 
also herbaceous taste. — Cooling, or sharp taste in mouth and throat, as from 
peppermint. — Insatiable thirst, with craving, principally for cold drinks. — 
Craves ice. — Appetite and craving for food, also in intervals between vomiting 
and evacuation. — Raging and voracious hunger. — Hunger and thirst witfi 
profuse flow of urine. — Bulimy. — ^Ardent and continued desire for acid or 
cool things (fruits). — Craves : fruits ; gherkins ; citric acid ; salted things ; 
herrings ; sardines. — ^Aversion to hot food. — ^After oating, however little may 
be taken, immediate vomiting and diarrhoea. — Nausea, with hunger, and 
pressure at the stomach, when eating. — After a meal hiccough, inclination to 
vomit, and regurgitation of bitter serum, (of bile ; of bitter substances ; 
greenish). — > From eating meat and drinking milk. — < From potatoes and 
green vegetables. 

II* Stomach. — Risings with taste of food. — ^Violent empty risings, also 
after a meal. — Bitter or sour risings. — Frequent and violent hiccough.— 



VERATRUM ALBUM 


1515 

Qualm^hness and salivation with closure of the jaws. — ^Violent nausea, which 
frequont^almost induces syncope, and generally with excessive thirst (and 
increastfdilow of urine). — Frequent or continued nausea, also in morning. — 
Extreme nausea causing one to retch and strain with great violence, some- 
times with vomiting, sometimes not. — Great nausea before vomiting. — ^Water- 
brash. — ^Violent vomiting, with continued nausea, great exhaustion, and want 
to lie down, preceded by coldness of hands, with shuddering over whole 
body, accompanied by general heat, and followed by ebullition of blood and 
heat in hands. — ^Vomiting of food. — Bitter, or sour vomiting. — Vomiting of 
froth and of yelfewish green or white mucus ; with cold sweat. — Green vomit. 
— ^\Jomiting of giieen mucus. — Vomiting of mucus at night. — Vomiting of black 
bile and of blood. — Continued vomiting, with diarrhcea, and pressure in the 
scrobiculfcis. — The least drop of liquid, land the slightest movement, excite 
vomiting. — Painful contraction of abdomen, when vomiting. — Pain in 
stomach, with hunger and burning thirst. — Excessive sensibility in region 
of stomach and scrobiculus. — Pyloric end of stomach affected (Bayes). — 
Pains come some minutes after eating. — (Severe gastralgia an hour or two 
after meals, a pain extends from middle of sternum to below ribs, must hold 
stomach from the violence of the pain, but the pressure does not >, the pain 
then extends to above hip, is accompanied by distressing vomiting, brings up 
a-quantity of stuff like vinegar ; the pain ss thirst, and lasts eight to ten hours ; 
she trembles with it, — R. T. C.) — Excessive anguish in pit of stomach. — Inter- 
mittent neuralgia in girl, 1 1, about 4 p.m. throws up quantity of wind, about 
5 p.m. agonising pain sets in like knives cutting the bowels every few minutes, 
lasting one or two minutes ; so intense that it took three or four men to hold 
her ; attacks end by sighing (Kitching). — Painful distension of pit of 
stomach. — Emptiness and uneasiness in stomach. — Cramp in stomach. — 
Pressure in scrobiculus, extending sometimes into sternum, hypochondria, 
and hypogastrium, esp. after a meal. — Acute pains in stomach and epi- 
g^trium. — Burning sensation in pit of stomach. — Inflammation of stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Tensive pain in hypochondria as from flatulence. — 
Shaking in spleen, while walking, after a meal. — Spleen swollen. — Hyperaemia 
of liver with cholcra-like symptoms, or with asthma. — Diaphragmatis with peri- 
tonitis, vomiting, and coldness. — Colic in umbilical region. — Excessively painful 
sensibility of the abdomen when touched. — Nocturnal pains in abdomen, with 
sleeplessness. — Swelling of the abdomen, — While vomiting abdomen is pain- 
fully contracted, — ^Abdomen hard and inflated. — Tension in the hypochondria 
and umbilical region. — Cramps in abdomen, and colic. — Colic : cutting ; griping 
and twisting, esp. about navel, > after stool ; as if intestines were twisted in 
a kAot ; flatulent ; cold sweat ; < after eating. — Pressive, drawing pains in 
abdomen, when walking, in evening. — ^Cuttings (in abdomen) as by knives, 
accompanied by diarrhoea# and thirst, with flow of urine.— Burning sensation 
throughout abdomen, as from hot coals.— Cold feeling in abdomen. — Pain in 
efftrails, as if they were bruised. — Inflammation of intestines. — Inguinal 
hernia. — Incarcerated hernia. — Protrusion of hernia during cough. — Flatulent 
colic, with noisy, gurgling borborygmi in abdomen. — ^The longer the flatus is 
retained, the greater the difficulty with which it is expelled. — ^Violent expul- 
sion of flatus upwards and downwards. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation, sometimes obstinate, mostly from 



VERATRUM ALBUM 


1516 

inactivity of rectum, and often accompanied hy heat and headach6.<;r’^s^^ 
hard, and of too large a size. — Unsuccessful urging to stool.— Constipation of 
nursing infants.— Violent and painful diarrhoea, often with teiision of 
abdomen, preceded and followed by gripings. — ^Watery diarrhoea, < from 
motion ; desire for very cold drinks. — Complaints before stool, during, and 
after. — Copious evacuations. — Rice-water stools with tonic cramps. — ^Simul* 
taneous purging and vomiting. — Cholera, cramp, cold tongue and breath, 
feeble, hoarse voice, wrinkled fingers, retention of urine. — Sudden vomiting 
and purging. — Diarrhoea of acrid matter, with burning sensation in anus.— 
N octurnal diarrhoea. — Loose blackish, greenish, brownish, evacuations. — Flaky, 
green stools, like spinach. — Loose, sanguineous evacuations.^ -Sudden involun- 
tary evacuation of liquid faeces ; when expelling flatus. — Diarrhoea of phthisis. 
— During the evacuation, great lassitude, shivering, with shuddering, pajeness 
of face, cold perspiration on forehead, and anxiety, with fear of apoplexy. — 
Fainting during stool. — Burning sensation in anus, during evacuation. — Pain, 
as from excoriation in anus. — Pressure towards anus, with blind haemor- 
rhoids. — ^Verminous symptoms. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Retention of urine.— Want to urinate, while 
bladder is empty, with pain as if urethra were constricted behind the glans. — 
Urine diminished, 5^ellow and turbid even during emission. — Flow of urine, 
with raging hunger and thirst, headache, nausea, colic, hard faeces,* and 
coryza. — Involuntary emission of urine ; during cough, in typhoid. — ^Acrid 
urine.— Deep-coloured or greenish urine. — Dark red urine, discharged 
frequently, but in small quantities. — Pressive pain in the bladder, and burning 
sensation when urinating, 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Excessive sensibility of the genital organs. 
— Excoriation of prepuce. — Drawings in testes. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Catamenia premature and profuse.— 
Catamenia suppressed. — Before catamenia : headache, vertigo, epistaxis, and 
nocturnal perspiration. — At commencement of catamenia : diarrhoea, nausea, 
and shivering. — During catamenia : headache in morning, with nausea, 
humming in ears, burning thirst, and pains in all limbs, — Towards end of 
catamenia : grinding of teeth, and bluish colour of face. — Nymphomania : 
before menses ; from unsatisfied passion or mental causes ; from disappointed 
love ; puerperal mania ; during confinement, — Metritis. — Menorrhagia. — 
Dysmenorrhoea ; with prolapse ; nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, exhaustion ; 
cold sweat ; chilliness ; pain in kidneys and uterus before and during menses. 
— Amenorrhoea. — Strangulated, prolapsed vagina, with cold sweat, exhausting 
vomit and diarrhoea. — Suppressed catamenia, lochia, and secretion of milk, 
with delirium. — Sexual desire too strong, particularly in childbed ; < at night ; 
nymphomania (of lying-in women) ; complaints during menstruation, as, 
vomiting and diarrhoea, which may occur at these- times. — Threatened abor- 
tion, with cold sweat, nausea, and vomiting. — During pregnancy wants to 
wander about the house ; taciturn ; haughty ; thirsty ; hard faeces, inacflvc 
rectum. — ^Vomiting of pregnancy. — Labour pains exhaust. — Suppression of 
lochia or milk with nymphomania. — Puerperal mania, wants to kiss everybody, 
— In childbed : impudent behaviour ; nymphomania ; exhaustion. — Eclwps^ 
—Painfulness of breasts. 

19. Respiratory Organs.— Respiration oppressed; voice hollow 



VERATRUM ALBUM 


1517 

weak. — Chest loaded with mucus, with roughness and scraping in the throat. 
— ^SpasAodic contraction of glottis with dilated pupils. — Suffocative constric- 
tion in lafnyx,— Tickling very low down in trachea, provoking cough without 
expectoration. — Cough, excited by a tickling, deeply seated in the bronchia, 
with easy expectoration, or else dryness. — Cough, irritation referred 
to lowest part of sternum; pressure at stomach-pit, or over abdomen 
as cough immediately (Bayes).— Dry, tickling cough, after walking in 
sharp, cold air.— Cough provoked by drinking, esp. cold water.— Violent 
cough, with continued risings, as if about to vomit. — Cough in the evening, 
•with salivation.-^Dry, burning cough, generally in evening and morning.— 
Coojjh, with pain in side, weakness and obstructed respiration.— Hollow, 
deep cough, always in three or four shocks, as if proceeding from abdomen, 
with inciftive pains in abdomen. — Lancinations towards inguinal ring, when 
coughing.— Cough, like whooping-cough, with vomiting. — Cough, with 
yellowish expectoration, on entering a warm room, followed by pain, as from 
a bruise in chest. — Cough, with copious expectoration. 

x8« Chest. — Obstructed respiration, often to the verge of suffocation, 
generally produced by a spasmodic constriction of throat and chest.— Shortness 
of breath on least movement. — Dyspnoea and impeded respiration, also when 
seated. — Chest very much oppressed, with pain in side, during an inspiration. 
— rPressure at chest, esp. in region of sternum, and principally after eating or 
drinking. — Sensation of fulness in chest, which induces frequent eructations. 
— Squeezing in chest, esp. after drinking. — Cramp in chest, with painful 
constriction. — Spasmodic contraction of muscles of chest. — Incisive pain in 
chest. — ^Tickling in chest, as if it would provoke cough, in middle of sternum. 
— Shootings, by paroxysms, in chest, with obstructed respiration. — Slow, sharp 
stitches near nipples, which at last itch. 

• 29. Heart. — ^Violent palpitation of heart, which pushes out the ribs, with 
choking, and severe fits of anxietas praecordium. — Pulse slow, almost lost. — 
Great activity of arterial system. — Angina pectoris. — The blood runs like cold 
mter through the veins. 

ao. Neck and Back. — Rheumatic stiffness in nape, extending to 
sacrum ; with vertigo, moving. — Paralytic weakness of the muscles of neck 
(esp. in whooping-cough) which become incapable of supporting head.— 
Muscles of nape paralysed. — Pain (back and small of back feel sore and 
bruised) as of a fracture in loins and back, with drawing pressure, esp. when 
stooping and rising. — Squeezing (tension like cramp) between shoulder-blades. 
— Pain in scapulae, extending over whole back, with diuresis, thirst, and 
constipation. 

ai. Limbs. — Painful paralytic weakness in all limbs. — Numbness, 
tingling, or falling asleep of the limbs. — Stiffness of limbs, < morning and 
after a walk.— Trembling of limbs. — Shooting in limbs as from electric sparks. 
-—Pain as from fatigue. — l 9 ails blue from coldness.— Pains in limbs resembling 
a4>ruise, < during wet, cold weather ; < in warmth of bed ; > walking up 
and down. — Icy coldness of limbs ; of hands and feet. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Paralytic pain, as of a fracture in arms, from 
shoulder* joint to wrist. — ^Jerking in arms. — Coldness or sensation of fulness 
(heaviness) and of swelling in arms. — Constant sensation of numbness in 
arms.— Pain in middle of 1. forearm as if bones were pressed together. — 



ISIS VERATRUM ALBUM 

Trembling of arms, on grasping an object. — Shocks in elbow, as from 
electricity, — Dry tetters on hands. — ^Tingling in hands and fingei 4 .— ‘The 
hands go to sleep and feel like dead. — Numbness and paleness of' fingers.— 
Icy coldness and blueness of hands. — Drawings and cramps in lingers.— Nails 
blue. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Paralysis in hip-joint (first r. then 1 .), with diffi- 
culty in walking. — Paralytic pain, as of a fracture in legs. — ^Arthritic tearing 
and drawing in legs and feet. — Constant sensation of numbness in legs.— 
Tension in tendons of ham, as if they were too short. — Pain, as of a fracture 
in knees, when going downstairs (or when stepping). — ShCcks in knee, as 
from electricity. — Extreme and painful heaviness in knees^ legs, and feet, 
with difficulty in walking. — Violent cramps in calves and feet. — Rapid swelling 
of feet. — Icy coldness of feet. — Trembling of feet, with coldness, 9 ^ if cold 
water were circulating in the part. — Shootings (stitches) in (great) toes. — 
Stinging in toes when standing. — Painful gout in feet. — Lancinations, and 
pain as from excoriation, in the corns of the feet. 

24. Generalities. — [We may think of this remedy where there is a 
marked debility or exhaustion from functional or physical disturbance, as e.g., 
in whooping-cough, patient will cough until completely exhausted, and then 
have a cold perspiration on the forehead ; or there may be a great exhaustion 
obliging one to lie down after the passage of a stool, even though it be .soft, 
with cold sweat on the forehead. — Affections in general of the sexual organs, 
principally on r, side ; on crown of head, esp. for sensations felt there ; 
appearing in the rear of the navel ; small of the back. — Countenance is 
almost always changed presenting an unnatural appearance. — Dry mouth. — 
Inguinal hernia. — Flatus in general ; flatulent colic.-— Urine very dark ; 
blackness of outer parts, staggering when walking, from debility ; drowsiness ; 
dry exanthema. — < After drinking ; before and during menstruation ; before 
and during stool (feeling very weak and turn pale during stool) ; often after 
stool; during perspiration. — H. N. G.]. — Paroxysms of pain, which always 
occasion, for a short time, delirium and dementia. — Drawing pain in limbs, 
esp. during a long walk. — Pressive pain, as of a fracture, in limbs, muscles, 
and bones. — Paralytic pain in limbs, as after great fatigue or exhaustion. — 
Tearing in extensors, when seated. — Pains (rheumatic) in limbs, which are 
rendered insupportable by the heat of bed, > on getting up, and which disap- 
pear completely when walking, generally manifesting themselves towards 4 or 
5 a.m. — Pains in limbs, < in spring and autumn by bad weather, when it is cold 
and damp, — Pain < by hearing another speak. — Relaxation of muscles* — 
Continuous weakness and trembling. — Fits of cramp, and convulsive move- 
ments of limbs. — Tetanic stiffness of the body. — Attack of spasm, with 
clenching of jaws, loss of sense and movement, and cpnvulsive jerking of 
eyes and eyelids ; before the attack, anguish, discouragement, and despair. 
—(Epileptic fits.) — Tonic spasms, sometimes with contraction of palms of 
hands, and soles of feet, which are spasmodically drawn inward. — Seveiul 
of the symptoms are renewed by rising up, and > by lying down,— 
Sudden, general, and paralytic prostration of strength. — Excessive chronic 
weakness, which does not permit to be seated, nor to remain lying down^ or 
else excited by the least movement. — ^Tottering gait. — Syncope, sometimes 
also on the least movement (characteristic). — General emaciation. — Tingling 



VERATRUM ALBUM 


1519 

in whole body, as far as ends of fingers and toes. — The patient is affected by 
the opeil^air. — Inflammation of inner organs, esp. those of digestion. — Sporadic 
and Asi^fc;;i,cholera. 

25. Skin. — Miliary eruption, which itches in the heat, and burns after 
being scratched. — Measles, tardy and pale ; skin livid ; haemorrhages but no 
relief ; drowsy, weak, vomiting. — Scarlatina in hot weather, eruption bluish, 
burning heat of limbs alternating with coldness.— Nettle-rash.— Dry eruption, 
resembling scabies, with nocturnal itching.— Dry tetters.— Desquamation of 
the epidermis (of indurated or thickened portions of the skin). — Skin flabby 
And without elas^city (the folds remain in the state into which the skin has 
been pressed). — ^Whitish colour of the skin. — Skin anaemic or cyanotic. — 
Skiif blue, purplef cold. 

2O. I^eep. — Yawning. — Drowsy insensibility, or coma vigil, with in- 
complete consciousness, starts with fright, and eyes half open, or shut only 
on one side. — (Drowsy in evening, yet cannot sleep at night. — R, T. C.). 
—Nocturnal sleeplessness, with great anguish.— Sleep, long, uninterrupted, 

heavy, too profound. — Sleep, with the arms passed over the head. 

Dreams : anxious, of being bitten by a dog and cannot escape ; of being 
hunted ; of robbers, with frightened awakening and a fixed idea that the 
dream is true ; of quarrels ; frightful, followed by vomiting of a very tenacious, 

,, green mucus. — Moaning or whining during sleep. — Sleep with thirst and 
diuresis. 

27. Fever. — General coldness of whole body, and cold, clammy perspira- 
tion, esp. on forehead. — Coldness of the skin even when covered up warmly. — 
Coldness of single parts. — Shuddering, and shivering, with thirst for cold 
water. — Coldness over the back. — Shivering with sensation of coldness in the 
limbs, esp. shoulders and arms, as if ice-cold water streaming through the 
bones, in a warm room. — Coldness of the feet as if ice- water running into 
them, with trembling, — Shuddering, and cutis anserina, after drinking. — 
Chill < by drinking. — Fever, with external coldness. — Violent shivering and 
shaking (followed by heat and slight thirst), then perspiration, which soon 
changes to coldness. — Chilliness and coldness predominate, and run from 
below upwards. — Shiverings, at first with much thirst, followed by shivering 
alternately with heat, then permanent heat, with thirst.— Fever, with internal 
heat only, and deep-coloured urine, or with vomiting and diarrhoea, or with 
constipation ; during the shivering, vertigo, nausea, and pains in loins and 
back.— During the heat, continual coma, or delirium, with redness of 
face. — Heat only internal, with thirst, but without desire to drink.— 
Heat in the evening, with perspiration, — Heat suddenly alternating with 
• chillmess.— Fever before midnight, and in morning quotidian, tertian, or 
quartan. — Creeping running from head to toes. — Pulse slow, and almost 
extinct, or small, quick, and intermittent. — The blood runs like cold 
water through the veins.— ^Perspiration in general ; complaints concomitant 
w^h. — Perspiration easily excited during day, by least movement.— Violent 
perspiration in morning, in the evening, or all night, as well as during every 
, stool — Cold, sour, or putrid perspiration, sometimes colouring linen yellow, 
always with deathly paleness of face. — Intermittent fever : external coldness, 
with dark urine and cold perspiration, desire for cold drinks, and chill with 
nausea; afterwards heat with unquenchable thirst, delirium, redness of face. 



1520 VERATRUM NIG.— VERATRi/M VIK 

constant slumber ; finally perspiration without thirst, and very pale coun- 
tenance.*-^weat only on hands. 


Yeratrum Nigrum. 

Veratrum nigrum. Dark-flowered Veratrum. JY. 0. Melanthaceae. 

Tincture of fresh leaves and succulent flower-stalks. 

Clinloal. — Headache. Menstruation, protracted. Tinnitus aWium. 

ChaPaoteristios. — Cooper has given me a few observations with 
VcY» nig,j which I have arranged in Schema form. The plant^^he says, 
has much the same botanical characters as Ver. alb.y but the flowers 
are dark-coloured. It is native to Austria and Siberia. 

BTHPTOHS. 

% 

a. Head. — Constant headache when attempting to move or exert the 
brain (cured). — Fierce headache threatening acute mania (cured). 

4 . Ears. — ^Constant buzzing of 1. ear for two weeks with tenderness of 
meatus and intense sensitiveness of the head to the motion of an omnibus 
with beclouding of the brain ; can hardly tell which instrument to take up 
(in his work as a dentist), and pain in nape of neck (agg.). 

z 6 . Female Sexual Organs. — Period continually returning ; some- 
times light-coloured and slight in quantity, and sometimes profuse ; vihth weak 
feeling in back. 


Yeratrum Yiride. 

Veratrum viride. American White Hellebore. Indian Poke. iY. 0, 
Melanthaceae (of the Liliaceae). Tincture of fresh root 
gathered in autumn. [Burt proved Squibb^s liquid extract and 
says he found no other preparation satisfactory.] 

Olinloal. — Amaurosis. Amenorrhoea. Apoplexy. Asthma. Bunions. Ccecum^ 
inflammation of . Chilblains. Chorea. Congestion. Convulsions. Diplopia. Dia* 
phragmitis. Dysmenorrhoea, Erysipelas. Headache, nervous ; sick. He^ aNec- 
tionsof. Hiccough. Hyperpyrexia. Influenza. Malarial fever. Measles. Meningitis. • 
Menses, suppressed. Myalgia, (Esophagus^ spasm of. Orchitis. Pneumonia. 
Proctalgia. Puerperal convulsions. Puerperal mania. Sleeps dfeamful. Spine, 
congestion of. Spleen, congested. Sunstroke. Typhoid fever. Uterus^ con- 
gestion of. 

Charaoteristios. — Verat. v. is the American White Hellebore. 
Growing side by side, Verat. a. and Verat. v. are scarcely distinguish- 
able when not in flower. Millspaugh, however, says that though 
much like Ver. alb. in its minor points, Ver. v. is strikingly different in 
general appearance, having a much more pointed leaf, panicles looser 
and more compound ; the racemes of Ver. a. being more compact and 
as a whole cylindrical, those of Ver. v. scattered, compound, ayd 



VERATRUM VIRIDE 


1521 


• I 

scraggy. Ver, a, flourishes in mountain meadows, Ver, v, grows in 
swaoM)s, and wet meadows, and along mountain creeks from Canada 
to th^garoiinas. Cooper has pointed out (H. W.^ xxxvi. 153) a con- 
fusion^hich exists through the Veratrums being also called Hellebores. 
Ver. V. is “American White Hellebore'^ and not “Green Hellebore” 
(which is Helleborus viridis). Through this confusion an accidental 
proving of the latter (G. C. Edwards, No. ii. in Allen) has been 
included in the pathogenesis of Ver. v. The plants belong to 
different orders, though it must be admitted there is a close resem- 
blance in their effects. The root of Ver. v. contains Veratrin^ and 
the other alkiiloids found in the root of Ver. a., but in different pro- 
portions, Hale was chiefly instrumental in introducing Ver. v. to 
hdknoeopathy, "using it in fevers and particularly in pneumonia. Burt 
made jj^heroic proving of the liquid extract ; and his infant daughter 
(twenty-one months) very nearly died from taking a few drops of 
the tincture from a phial. In two minutes she began vomiting. Coffee 
and Camphor were given as antidotes. In five minutes her jaws were 
J pupils widely dilated ; face blue ; hands and feet cold ; no 
pulse at wrist. Abdomen and back were rubbed with Camphor^ when 
she went into spasms with violent shrieks. These spasms were 
frequently repeated, a hot bath being most effective in relaxing the 
muscles. Vomiting ropy mucus kept up for three hours. Pulseless ; 
hands and feet shrivelled. After three and a ha 4 f hours she slept 
qpietly and soundly and next morning was well but a little weak. 
Burt recalls his own symptom, “ constant aching pains in back of neck 
and shoulders,” and concludes that Ver. v. acts on the cervical portion 
of the spinal cord and base of brain. He also regards it as acting on 
the vagus, and paralysing the circulatory apparatus. The great key- 
note of Ver, V. is congestion^ and it is in resolving congestive states that 
its chief successes have been scored. The correspondence is rough 
and the lower potencies have been mostly used. D. McLellan told 
me of a case of his. He was sent for in the middle of the night to 
see an old lady whom he found sitting up in bed gasping for breath, 
and blue. Rapid congestion of the lungs had occurred. The attack 
had come on suddenly. Ver. v. quickly rescued the patient from 
a condition of imminent peril. The concomitance of congestive 
symptoms, and also of nausea and vomiting, form one of the leading 
indications of Ver. v. in a great variety of cases. Sensations of fulness 
(“ Head feels full and heavy ; ” “rush of blood to the head ; ” “ face 
flushed ; ” buzzing in the ears ; ” “ chest constricted ; or oppressed 
as from a heavy load ; ” point to the congestive tendency. The 
localities most congested by Ver. v. are : Base of brain ; chest ; 
spine ; stomach. Slowing of the heart’s action is a leading effect 
of the provings (from^ its action on the heart muscle and cardiac 
ganglia — Dig. on the pneumogastric) ; and Ver. v. has been used 
to “ knock down ” fever in the same way as Aeon. Nash points 
out that there is some risk in this. When Ver, v. was first intro- 
duced he used it largely and successfully in a number of cases ; 
but in one case which appeared to be going on favourably, the 
patient died suddenly. This he attributes to the Ver. v. In 
chorea Ver. v. has had many successes : “ twitchings during 

VOL. II, 97 



VERATRUM VIRIDE 


1522 


sleep” was a characteristic of some cases. Constant jerking 
or nodding of the head,” jerking and trembling, threatened with 
convulsions, ” are other leading symptoms. In puerperal copyulsions 
Ver. V. has only succeeded when nauseating doses have Wen given. 
In muscular and articular rheumatism it has been used locally as 
well as internally ; and in chorea an application to the spine of the 
tincture, diluted with spirit, has proved a serviceable adjunct. Among 
other indications for Ver, v, are : Violent pains attending inflamma- 
tion.” Head full, throbbing of arteries, sensitive to sound ; double 
or partial vision.” Suddenness : Sudden fainting ; prostration ; nausea. 
A keynote symptom is : Red streak down the centre bf the tongue. 
Ver, V, has a pronounced action on the oesophagus ; it causes a sprt 
of ruminating action or reversed peristalsis. Numbness is prominent 
among the effects of Ver, v. With the 30th I cured a maa, 56, of 
these symptoms : Dim sight as if scales over it ; numbness ; pain in 
head as if a tight band were round it ; rush of blood to head ; sleep- 
lessness. Peculiar Sensations are : Confused feeling in head as if 
head would burst. As if boiling water poured over parts. Tongue 
as if scalded. As if a ball rising into oesophagus. As if stomach 
tightly drawn against spine. As of a load on chest. As if ankles 
distorted. As of galvanic shocks in limbs. As if damp clothing on 
arms and legs. Ver, v, is Suited to full-blooded, plethoric persons. 
Dreaming about water is a characteristic which I have confirmed. 
The symptoms are: > By rubbing. > By pressure (pain in head). 
Motion <. Sudden motion = faintness and blindness. Rising <. 
Walking < ; ss blindness. Lying < (headache, breathing, &c.) ; > 
faintness and blindness. Closing eyes and resting head > vertigo. 
< Going from warm to cold. < After exposure. The least food 
vomiting. < Morning on waking ; also evening. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Hot Coffee. Antidote to : Strychnine. 
Compare : Puerperal convulsions, Gels. (Gels, has dull, drowsy 
state of mind) ; Ver. v., apoplectic, condition between the fits, face 
red, eyes congested, violent convulsive twitches). Congestions, 
Per. ph.. Bell. Plethora, Aco. Chorea, Hyo. Pneumonia with 
engorgement, Sang. (Ver v. more marked arterial tension), . Scalded 
tongue, Sang. Tetanus, Nux, Hyperic. Rheumatic fever, Bry., Sal. 
ac. Sunstroke ; double or partial vision, Glon., Gels. Slow, irregular 
intermittent pulse. Dig., Tab. Aching in gall-bladder, Bap. Heat 
in heart, Lachn., Rhod., Kalm. Clumsiness, Bov. As if damp clothfng- 
on legs, Calc. (Ver, v. and arms). Nodding of head, Lyc., Stram. 
Neck muscles weak. Ant. t., Ver. a. 

Causation. — Sun. Suppressed menses. Suppressed lochia. * 


SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Stupefaction ; congestion. — Mental confusion, loss of 
memory. — Temporary delirium. — Quarrelsome and delirious, striking and 
kicking with r. hand and foot (at times these movements seemed to be 
involuntary) ; changed to a happy and comical delirious state. — Depression 



VERATRUM viride 


1523 


and prostration. — Great fear of death. — When not vomiting lay in a stupor. 
— Pue^ijeral mania : silent, suspicious ; fears being poisoned. — Loquacity with 
exaltatij^ pf ideas. 

2. Head. — ertigo : with nausea and sudden prostration ; with 
vomiting as soon as he rises ; with photophobia, > closing eyes and resting 
head* — Sunstroke with prostration, febrile motion, accelerated pulse. — Head- 
ache with vertigo, dim vision and dilated vessels. — Head feels full and 
heavy. — Fulness in head, throbbing, aching, buzzing in ears, double or partial 
vision. — Constant dull frontal headache, with neuralgic pains in r. temple 

. close to eye. — Kush of blood to head. — Pain in head as if tightly bound. — 
A principal headache remedy ** (Cooper). — [Cooper gives me the following 
cui^d cases : Sidk-hcadache ; eyes ache and burn, fearful headache and pain 
in lower back on waking in morning, digging in shoulders. — Headache 
generally before menses, and much sensitiveness of nerves, has to keep in a 
dark room ; pain < behind eyelids ; unable to bear sounds.— Sick-headache 
dating from childhood, often at beginning or end of menses, with great 
depression and lasting two days. — Headache in girl, 23, for two years, on 
getting up in morning is very giddy and weak on her knees, falls down faint 
in the street, vertigo and sickness and pains all over head, < on vertex, behind 
ears and in occiput, can’t bear to talk or be in noise. — Painful swelling of 
sides of neck, head also feels swollen with suffocative feeling and sneezing and 
chills down back (Fer. v, cured after Apis failed). — Sick-headache, vomiting, 
< from fatigue.] — On waking after a short sleep indescribable sensation rising 
from forehead to crown and seems to grasp vertex and occiput. — Dull 
occipital headache. — Constant jerking or nodding of the head. — Congestive 
apoplexy. — Basilar meningitis. — Cerebral irritation ; threatened hydroce- 
phalus. — Erysipelas of r. side of head and face, with swelling. — Phlegmonous 
erysipelas of scalp. 

3. Eyes. — Full, pressing heavy feeling in eyes. — Severe shooting, 
suddenly stopping pain in 1. eye, — Aching : upper part of r. orbit ; directly 
over r. eye. — Fulness about lids as after crying. — Lids heavy and sleepy. — 
Profuse lachrymation. — Vision : dim (as if scales over eyes) ; unsteady ; 
double ; dim with faintness on rising up. — Green circles round gas-light. — 
Immense green circles round candle, which as vertigo came on and I closed 
my eyes turned to red. — Suddenly blind in upper half of visual field. — 
Cannot walk ; if attempts it very faint and completely blind ; obliged to keep 
horizontal position 2.20 p.m. — Photophobia and vertigo > closing eyes and 
resting head, morning. 

4. Ears. — Fulness and throbbing in ears (esp. 1.). — Used locally relieves 
eara9he (R. T. C.). — Earache with sleeplessness and restlessness, sometimes 
leaving 1. ear and passing up to vertex causing eyeballs to ache and back of 
head to be painful ; chills down back and electric twitches in fingers of both 
hands, and affecting tongfte ; temperature and pi^se high (great relief. — 
RJT.C.). — Deafness from moving quickly with faintness. — Ringing; humming 
with sensitiveness to noise. 

5. Hose. — Nose pinched aiyl blue. — Catarrh and sneezing. — Profuse 
secretion o£ mucus from nose. — Itching first of r. then 1. ala. 

6. Face.— Face : very pale ; with cadaverous look ; blue ; hippocratic ; 
flushed.— Stinging in r. malar bone. — Pains in r. angle of lower jaw.— Lock- 



VERATRUM VIRIDE 


1524 

jaw. — Convulsive twitchings of facial muscles. — Mouth drawn down at one 
corner.— Lips dry, and mucus of mouth thick. — (Phlegmonous erys^^elas of 
face and head.) 

8. Mouth. — Tongue : white as if bleached (not coated) ; white centre, 
red edges and tip ; strawberry ; red centre, edges yellow, feels scalded ; red 
streak down centre ; inclined to be dry. — Acrid burning sensation in mouth. 
— Faint odour of chloroform or ether in mouth. — Great increase of saliva ; 
and mucus from stomach and nose. — Taste : flat ; like lime water ; bitterish 
and peculiar, like odour of semen. — Loss of speech. 

9. Throat. — Dryness and heat in throat, with severe hiccough.— , 
Burning in fauces and oesophagus, with constant inclination to swallow. — 
Numbness of fauces. — Spasms of oesophagus constant, violent, with or without 
rising of bloody frothy mucus ; with violent hiccough. — Sense of ball moving 
into oesophagus as far as top of sternum. 

11. Stomach. — Ravenous appetite ; on waking. — ^Very thirsty, drinks 
little, which > for a short time. — Hiccough : constant ; exceedingly painful 
and violent. — Eructations : frequent of wind : acrid, sour risings. — Nausea and 
dizziness, followed by heat of surface. — (Continual nausea and sick feeling with 
dread of food in a bronchitis patient. — R. T. C.)— Contents of stomach thrown 
off with a rumbling action without nausea. — Sensation as if stomach slowly 
contracting on its contents and forcing them into oesophagus, producing 
sensation as of a ball rising up to top of sternum. — Retching with agomsiiig 
pain.— The least quantity of food ss violent vomiting.— Vomiting : profuse, 
of thick, glairy mucus ; of food ; of bile ; with collapse and cold sweat. — 
Twisting-tearing pain in stomach < by least motion.— As if waves rising 
from stomach to chest, on waking. — Pains in stomach, sharp ; flying. — Great 
irritability of stomach. — (Choked spleen. — R. T. C.) 

12. Abdomen. — Dull, heavy aching in region of gall-bladder; aiyd 
umbilical region. — Neuralgic pain r. side of navel to groin. — In umbilical 
region : severe cutting aching pains, with rumbling ; dull aching ; distress. — 
Peritonitis when pulse is hard and firm (A. C. Clifton). — Pain and soreness 
across abdomen just above pelvis. — Pain in bowels ran into scrotum ; pain in 
scrotum last to disappear. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Crawling in anus. — Tenesmus and- diarrhoea, 
copious and offensive stool, with burning of anus and pale face ; tenesmus 
and burning before and up to stool, not during and after ; > after stool. — 
Sudden excessive tenesmus. — Stools : copious, light, mornings ; mushy, with 
tenesmus and burning ; bloody (black in typhoid) ; doughy, stringy, hard to 
expel ; alternately soft and hard every two hours. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Smarting in urethra on urinating. — Urine : . 
scanty ; very clear ; turbid, with reddish sediment, and scum. — Haemorrhage 
in fungus haematodes vesicas. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Pains in both testicles, < 1 ., morning ; 
sometimes shoots up into abdomen. — Severe pain in 1 . testicle all through the 
proving. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— (Congestion of pelvic organs, tender- 
ness of uterus ; fever ; heat ; restlessness ; palpitation ; local or general 
anaesthesia.— Menstrual colic or dysmenorrhoea ; much nausea and vomiting ; 
plethora ; cerebral congestion. — Membranous dysmenorrhcea, soreness as of 



VERATRUM VIRIDE 


1525 


a boil^in uterine region. — Suppressed menses with cerebral congestion; 
plethori^Amenorrhoea from exposure ; chill, complete suppression of dis- 
charge, *he^vy pressive aching in uterine region ; intense pain in head with 
heat and throbbing arteries ; mind wandering, sobbing; tendency to hysteric 
spasms. — Vomiting during pregnancy. — Rigid os. — Puerperal convulsions with 
arterial excitement ; cold, clammy sweat. — Puerperal fever, sudden suppres- 
sion* of milk and lochia; quick, weak, or hard, bounding pulse. — After 
abortion retained placenta. — Mastitis with great arterial and nervous excite- 
ment.) ^ 

17. Respiratory Organs. — In evening, tickling, spasmodic cough from 
jus4 above stermjm. — Respiration : difficult ; with nausea : slow between the 
vomiting spells ; convulsive almost to suffocation. — Oppressed breathing on 
attempting to walk, irregular bowels, sleepless ; fulness and heaviness in 
splenic region, history of ague in early life ; profuse diari^oea followed 
Ver, V, with great relief (R. T. C.). — (Membranous croup, after Acon^ — Cough : 
short; dry; hacking; loose, rattling; < going from warm to cold. 

x8. Chest. — Constriction of chest ; when vomiting ceases. — Chest 
oppressed as from heavy cold. — (Oppression of chest with phlegmmy sickness 
in woman, 83. — R. T. C.) — Feeling of dislocation in chest when walking. — 
Throbbing in r. side of chest. — Pains about 1. nipple. — (Congestion of chest 
with* rapid respiration, nausea, vomiting ; dull burning in region of heart. — 
Pneumonia and pleurisy ; pulse hard, strong, quick, or slow and intermitting ; 
lungs engorged ; faint feelihg in stomach ; high fever, face flushed.)—(01d 
pneumonic congestion with superadded acute pleurisy, — R. T, C.) 

19. Heart. — Pricking pains in region of heart with the headache. — 
Constant burning distress in region of heart. — Burning under sternum. — Dull, 
hot, aching pain in heart region 3 p.m. — Neuralgic pains in heart. — Slow 
stbtion of heart. — Palpitation and dyspnoea. — ^Violent palpitation of heart and 
faint feeling (agg. — R. T. C.). — Faintness and biliousness ; when rising from 
tying ; from sudden motion ; lying quietly. — Pulse : slow, soft and weak ; 
irregular, intermittent; suddenly increases and gradually decreases below 
normal. 

20. Heck and Back. — Aching in neck and shoulder, almost impossible 
to hold head up. — Muscles of back contracted, drawing head back. — Pain in 
r. and 1. sides of neck. — Throbbing and crawling in 1. back. — Pain in r. of 
sacrum where it joins pelvis. 

21 . Limbs. — Rheumatism esp. 1. shoulder, hip, and knee ; high fever, 
scanty red urine, — Clumsiness. — Loss of power of gastrocnemii and muscles of 
forearm. — Slight drawing in r, elbow and calves. — Throbbing in 1. radius and 
r. fehiur. — Sensation as of galvanic shocks in limbs. 

22. Upper Limbs. — ^Aching : top of 1. shoulder above scapular ridge ; in 
arms and neck. — Shuddering in 1. and r. shoulders in succession.— Pain : in 
outer condyle of r. humerus ; in r. elbow ; in r. and 1. ulna ; in fingers and 
tlfhmb. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Total loss of locomotion for some hours. — Pains 
in either great trochanter when lying on it. — Much pain in hip-joints and 
about condyles. — Cramps in legs.— Sensation of cramp in gastrocnemii with 
inability to exert them. — Drawing in r. calf while walking. — Lancinating 
pain in r. hip. — Joints swollen, very tender, high fever. — (Knee tender, swollen 
after a wrench.) — R. ankle feels dislocated, can scarcely walk ; later, 1. 



1526 VERATRUM VIRIDE— VERBASCUM, 

24. Generalities. — Pallor with syncope. — Tremor. — Spasm with^iolent 
shrieks ; opisthotonos ; face dark blue ; breath suspended ; lastibg two 
minutes and recurring after few minutes' interval. — (Epileptic fits in a child, 
bad case.— R. T. C.)— Nervous attack with shaking trembling and chilliness 
(agg. — R. T. C.). — Numbness.-— Clothes irritate as if they did not fit well. 
— Convulsions.— Chorea, movements continuing in sleep. — Often indicated in 
haemorrhage from various organs (R. T. C.). — ^The pains of influenza ; head- 
aches, gastralgia, pains in calves of legs (R. T. C.). 

25. Skin. — Itching in many parts. — (Erythema. — Erysipelas, — Congestive 
stage of exanthema.) — Used locally, relieves pain in erysipelas (R. T. C.) — 
(Measles, with intense conjunctivitis and high fever. — R. T. C.) 

26. Sleep. — Very sleepy. — Coma ; blue face ; spasms, — Restless and 
sleepless. — Dreams : frightful ; of being on the water ; of people di Owning ; 
about water, fishing, &c. ; lively in which he was continually baffled and 
provoked. 

27. Fever. — Chilly ; body cold but moist skin. — Cold shivers, head and 
feet cold and numbed, crept up arms and legs as if enveloped in damp 
clothing. — Heat followed dizziness and nausea; icy coldness followed the 
heat. — Feverishness ; depressed in mind and body, weak, pains in shoulder 
and over body as from influenza, with prickling irritating rash on forehead, 
face, and chest (agg. — R. T, C.). — Profuse diaphoresis and sense of utter pros- 
tration. — Bathed in cold sweat.— Cold, clammy sweat on forehead.— (Irritative 
fever with cerebral congestion. — Streptococcus fever ; rapid and violent 
alternations of temperature. — Ephemeral fevers with nausea and retching. — 
Cerebro-spinal fever, — Typhoid. — Yellow fever.) — (Typhoid fever, fourth 
week, beef-steak longue ; sickness, unable to retain any food, great prostration 
and sinking at epigastrium. — R. T. C.) 


Yerbascum. 

Verbascum thapsus. Great Mullein. iV. 0. Scrophulariacea^. Tinc- 
ture of fresh plant at the commencement of flowering. 

Mullein Oil ” is prepared by placing the crushed yellow 
blossoms in a bottle, which is corked and allowed to stand in 
the sun (Cushing) ; or by steeping the blossoms in oil and 
keeping in a warm place till the oil has absorbed them 
(Gerarde)] . 

Olinioal.— ttchm^ of. Colic. Constipation. Couffh, Deafness. Enuresis. 
Hcemorrhoids. Neuralgia, Prosopalgia. Urinc^ incontinence of 

Characteristics.— The thick woolly leaves of V. thapsus^ the 
Great Mullein, have a mucilaginous, bitterish taste, and a aecoctidh 
of them is employed in domestic practice in catarrhs and diarrhoea. 
They are also used as emollient applications to hard tumours and in 
pulmonary complaints in cattle — hence one of its popular names is 
Bullock^s Lung-wort. It is also called Adames flannel, from its flannel- 
like leaves ” {Treas, of BoL), Hahnemann proved Verbascum, and his 



VERBASCUM 


1527 

proviM confirms many of the old uses. It produced neuralgic 
pains very great intensity, pressing and lancinating, and especially 
in the<a<!ial bones, navel, and limbs, and a peculiar cough. ** Cough, 
deep, hollow, hoarse, in sound like a trumpet,’^ is Nash^s description. 
He has cured many cases and always used it low. It is more 
especially a night cough. It occurs in children during their sleep. 
Softie years ago Mullein was brought forward as a popular specific 
for phthisis, the leaves being boiled in milk, which was then strained 
and given warm. Among its traditional uses Gerarde mentions it as a 
remedy for pfies, and 1 do not know a better application for itching 
haemorrhoids or pruritus ani than an ointment made of the ^ tinc- 
ture in the proportion of 5i to the Ji of Cetacean ointment. I 
generally direct it to be applied at bedtime. Gerarde says that the 
oil of the yellow flowers is also curative in piles. The flowers contain 
<‘a yellow volatile oil, and fatty acid, free malic and phosphoric 
acids, and their -ate salts of lime, a yellow resinous colouring matter, 
and the general plant constituents including an uncrystallisable 
sugar (Millspaugh). Cushing prepared from the flowers an oil ” 
^(i) by putting the blossoms in a bottle and laying the bottle in the sun ; 
and later (2) by expression. This Mullein Oil has found many 
uses, and especially for instilling m the ears in cases of deafness, or 
Earache ; in cases of enuresis nocturna (Cushing had good success with 
the 3x), and painful micturition. The provings brought out some very 
marked symptoms in the ears, especially the left ear {Verh» is predomi- 
nently left-sided). W. B. McCoy (Horn, News^ xxviii. 36) gives several 
illustrations. According to him Verb, {i.e.j the oil has a “ soothing 
effect on the entire nerv^ous system, in many cases acting as a 
soporific.^' In summer diarrhoea he gives one to four drops in two 
ounces of warm water, a teaspoonful every hour. In enuresis or 
dribbling of urine one-drop doses in warm water three or four times a 
day. Among his cases were those of two boys who had become deaf 
from getting water in their ears when swimming. They were cured 
by having three drops of the oil instilled “ in each ear alternately 
night apd morning.’’ 0 . S. Laws cured a youth, of 16, of enuresis 
with fifteen drops of the oil three times a day (N, Y. Med, TimcSy 
xxiv. 318). The oil plainly acts on the indications of the proving, and 
may be regarded as an alternative preparation to the official tincture. 
It might be called Verbasci oleum. E. E. Case reports a case of 
neuralgia cured by Verb. [Med. Adv.^ quoted A. //., xxvii. 234) : A 
widow, 36, black-haired, had been for a long time overworked, 
sewing, and her life made miserable by neuralgia. The symptoms 
were : Tearing, stitching pain above left ear, downward and inward ; 
outer ear numb ; dulpess of hearing left side ; heavy pressure in 
vertex. Shivers run up back and left side with the pam. Irritable 
4Uid despondent. Verb, im, one powder taken in four doses at three- 
hour intervals, cured. Among the Sensations are : As if everytliing 
would press out at forehead, • As if left ramus of jaw were pressed 
against upper jaw. As if temples were pinched and crushed. As if 
ears were stopped up. As if nose and larynx were stopped up. As 
if something had fallen before ear. As if one were violently pressing 
on left malar bone. As of a crushing with tongs. Pressure as from 



VERBASCUM 


1528 

a stone on umbilicus. As from needles from umbilical region tc^ack. 
As if intestines were adherent to wall of abdomen and wer«? being 
torn away. As of a twist around navel As if a weight were 
hanging on lower extremities. As if cold water were poured over side 
of body from shoulder to thigh. “ Salt water collects in mouth ” is 
a guiding symptom. The symptoms are < By touch ; by pressure. 
Rest rs sticking in left metatarsal bones. Lying sst tension across 
chest, stitches in region of heart. Sitting = pains ; sitting up >. 
Motion > some pains ; < prosopalgia. Stooping < ; (> pressure in 
forehead). Walking <. < Night ; no sleep after 4 a.m. < Draught 
of air ; exposure to cold ; change from cold to warm ^nd vice vend. 
Attacks appear at 9 a.m., reach their height at noon, gradually 
diminish till 4. Many pains are intermittent. 

Relations. — Compare : In neuralgia, Plat, (pressure) ; Stan, 
(gradually increasing and decreasing). Deep cough, Coral, Dros., 
Spo., Sul. Sheep-dung stools. Mg. mur. Cough from tickling in 
chest, Ver. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Apathy. — Moroseness, ill-humour, and irascibility. — Exces- 
sive gaiety, with laughter. — Mental excitement, with voluptuous images.—' 
Weakness of memory.— Distraction.— A great concourse of ideas, and liveli- 
ness of imagination. 

2. Head. — Dulness and confusion in the head. — ^Vertigo : when 
pressing one (1.) cheek while supporting the head ; sudden, as from pressure 
on whole head. — Headache, with a forcing outwards at forehead. — Pressive, 
stupefying headache, principally in forehead ; or semilateral, and mostly 
when passing from a warm into a cold temperature (and vice versd), — Heavi- 
ness of head, with dull pain.— Pinching in temples.— Deep, stupefying stitches 
in brain (pressing, slow stitch from behind forward through 1. hemisphere of 
brain). — Stupefying shooting in temples (in r. temple when eating ; < from 
pressure ; extending into upper teeth of r. side). — Resonance in head, when 
walking. 

3. Eyes.— Pains in eyes, as from contraction of the sockets, with 
burning in eyes. — Sight confused, as if directed through a veil. 

4. Ears. — Tearing in ears, sometimes when eating, with lancinations.-^ 
Sensation as if ear were drawn inwards. — Deafness as from stoppage of ear.— 
Sensation of a stoppage of ears (first 1., then r., also of nose and larynx) when 
reading aloud; hearing unaffected, — Numbness in 1. ear. — Oil of Mullein 
{Verb, oL) relieves earache at once.— is said to meet many cases of 
deafness (R. T. C.). 

5. Nose. — Sensation of stoppage of larynx and ears. — Profuse coryza 
from frontal sinuses, with hot, burning, profuse lachrymation. 

6. 7. Face and Teeth. — Facial neuralgia (esp. caused and < by a 
change of temperature), generally with stupefying, pressive or tensive pains, 
principally in cheek-bones, and commencing from maxillary joint, < by 
clenching teeth, and by external pressure. — ^Violent pressure in 1. malar bone 
and zygoma. — Stitches in 1. zygomatic arch. — Shootings in the cheek-bones, 
with dull pressure, — ^Violent tension in integuments of chin, masseters, and 



VERBASCUM 1529 

throaJ^^oothache, with tearing pain in the molars. — Pinching pressing pain 
on lowe^ide of jaw. 

8. Ttfouth. — Copious accumulation of salt saliva in the mouth. — Root 
of tongue brown, without bad taste, in morning and during forenoon. — 
Tongue of a brownish yellow colour, loaded with viscid mucus in morning 
and after dinner. 

9. Throat. — Very severe pain in throat on swallowing. 

ZO. Appetite. — Mawkish taste, with fetid breath. — Hunger, without 
jrelish for food.-^nsatiable thirst. 

zx. Stomach.— Regurgitation of insipid serum. — Empty, or else bitter 
risings, with nausea.— Frequent hiccough. — Aching of stomach. — Sensation 
of emptiness at pit of stomach, which disappears with a rumbling below 1. 
ribs, • 

12. Abdomen, — Cuttings and shootings in 1. hypochondrium. — Inces- 
sant gurgling and rumbling beneath 1 . ribs. — Inflation of the abdomen, 
violent and painful pressure on navel, as by a stone, < by bending double. — 
Spasmodic constriction of the hypogastrium, towards the umbilical region. — 
Pains in abdomen, which extend deeply downwards, with want to evacuate, 
and spasmodic contraction of anus. — Pinchings and gripings in abdomen. — 
Shootings in abdomen, principally in umbilicai region, sometimes tearing and 
tending downwards. — Sensation as if intestines had adhered to umbilical 
region, and were torn away. 

Z3. Stool and Anus. — Fearful diarrhoea ; griping ; much pain as if 
pierced with a lance through inside of 1. ankle-joint ; pain in both cheek- 
bones and above eyebrows ; menses came on early this time, and she has 
coughed a good deal. — Suppressed evacuations. — Faeces hard, like sheep- 
dung, and expelled with effort. —(Itching hemorrhoids.— Pruritus ani.) 

X4. Urinary Organs. — Frequent want to urinate, with profuse emission 
(afterwards scanty). — Enuresis nocturna ; (obstinate, with seminal emissions, 
—Cushing). 

Z5, Male Sexual Organs. — Pollutions without lewd dreams. 

Z7. Respiratory Organs. — Sensation of obstruction in the larynx and 
nose, with hoarseness when reading .aloud ; deep voice. — Catarrh, with hoarse- 
ness and stuffed chest. — Cough esp. in evening, and at night, when sleeping, 
generally rough and dry, or hollow and dull. — Dry, hoarse cough < at night. 
— Frequent attacks of deep, hollow, hoarse cough, with sound like a trumpet, 
caused by tickling in larynx and chest. — The cough is lessened as soon as the 
patient succeeds in taking a breath. 

z8. Chest. — Shooting in chest, sometimes with oppression and ob- 
structed respiration. — Tension in chest, with lancinations in region of heart, 
in evening, after lying down. — Stitches in the chest. — Red nodosity near 
xiphoid cartilage, painful when pressed upon. ;r 

20. Back. — Lancinations in the back and shoulder-blades. — Sharp 
intermittent stitches in 1. scapula.— Fine persistent stitch in last dorsal 
vertebra. — Between r. loin and spine deep, knife-like stitches quite intense in 
intestines.— rBackache < from pressure. 

2Z. Limbs. — Stitching in the limbs. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Tearing pain in the shoulder, back of hand, and 
elbow. — Spasmodic pressure in forearm, hand, and thumb. — Tearing shootings 



1530 VERBASCUM-VERBENA HASTATA 

in hand and fingers.— Tensive pain in wrist. — ^Wrenching pain in jfiint of 
hand.— Stitches like a sprain (or paralysis), where carpal bone <?t thumb 
articulates with radius.— Paralytic pain in joints of fingers. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Excessive heaviness and lassitude in legs and feet, 
esp. when going up stairs. — Cramp-like pain in muscles of r. thigh, while 
walking in open air. — Spasmodic pressure in thighs, legs, and soles.— Cramp- 
like pressure in sole of r. foot, while standing, disappears when walking.— 
Trembling of knees. — Dull lancinations in patella, bones of feet, and toes. — 
Violent, intermittent, dull sticking in metatarsal bones of grfat and adjacent 
toes of 1 . foot during rest.— Tearing along legs. 

24. Generalities.— General indolence, and disposition to sleep, after 
rising in the morning. — Stretching and frequent yawning. — Haemorrhoids ; 
affections of the inner navel region ; obstruction from induration 6i stool. — 
Darting pains in inner parts ; want of perspiration.— < When sitting ; from 
change of temperature.— > On rising from a sitting posture.— Stinging pains 
in the limbs. — Benumbing sensation with almost all the pain. — Tearings, 
sometimes lancinating, in different parts (going downwards). — Tottering 
when walking. 

26. Sleep.— Strong disposition to sleep after a meal.— Disturbed sleep, 
at night, with tossing. — Short sleep at night, lasting only till 4 a.m., with 
anxious, frightful dreams of wars and dead bodies. 

27. Fever.— Internal coldness of whole body, of hands and feet, percep- 
tible also externally. — Shuddering, esp. on one side of body, as if it were 
bathed in cold water. 


Verbena Hastata. 

Verbena hastata. Ironweed. N. 0 . Verbenacae. Tincture of entire 

fresh plant. 

CUnieal. — Ague ; chronic. Epilepsy. Rhus poisoning. 

Charaoteristics.-— According to Hale Verbena h. grows profusely 
on the prairies and low bottom lands all over U.S. It is a popular 
domestic remedy for ague, especially when chronic. The root is 
intensely and disagreeably bitter. Dr. Griffin, of New York, suggests 
its use as a remedy for Rhm poisoning. Richey Horner {Med. Cent., 
vi. 324) mentions a case of epilepsy developing during whooping- 
cough, treated with 12-drop doses (“ presumably of the tincture ”) eVery 
four hours. Improvement set in from the first and proved 
permanent ; though during the first two weeks there were attacks of 
petit mal. The patient took the remedy at increasing intervals 
during six weeks. 



VESICARIA 


1531 


Yesicaria. 

Vesicaria communis. jV. 0 . Cruciferae (Tribe, Alyssineae). Tincture 
of whole fresh plant. 

*01illicalt — Albuminuria. Cystitis. Dropsy. Gleet. Gonorrhoea. Gravel. 
Haematuria. Nephralgia. Prostatitis. 

ChaPaotwistios. — Vesicana is a genus of Crucifercc^ natives of 
the Northern Hemisphere, distinguished by the globose or ovoid 
inflated pouchywith hemispherical valves and numerous seeds (generally 
four to six) in each cell. They are herbs, sometimes shrub% at the 
base, ^^ith oblong or linear entire or repand leaves, and terminal 
racemes of yellow flowers {Treas. ofBoL). George R. Shafer {Chic, Med, 
TitneSf quoted H, News^ xxx. 117) says Ves, com. is an old remedy 
much used in some parts of Germany for all forms of urinary and 
kidney difficulties ; for gravel ; for gonorrhoea, both in the male and 
female. Shafer’s indication for the remedy is a smarting, burning 
sensation along the course of the urethra and bladder, with frequent 
desire to void urine, often accompanied with strangury.” The 
conditions he has found particularly amenable to Vesic, are : 
Nephralgia ; acute cystitis ; irritable bladder, following acute cystitis ; 
chronic cystitis. He mentions these cases : (i) T. S., 67, suffering 
from nephralgia, for winch he had received Morphia injections in 
former attacks. Vesic, 0, in 15-drop doses every hfteen minutes, gave 
marked relief in two hours, which in six hours was complete. 
(2) S. B., 57, cystitis from cold ; high fever, sweating, burning pain on 
•voiding urine, which was drop by drop. Vesic. <^, in lo-drop doses, 
cured in two days. (3) Lady, 39, pain in back, brick-dust sediment 
in urine ; hands and feet swelling so she could hardly close her hands 
or walk. Vesic, ^ cured. (4) Man, 65, irritable bladder, had to rise 
twenty to thirty times in the night. Vesic, 0, in 20-drop doses, relieved 
quickly and cured in six weeks. (5) C. M., 89, chronic cystitis, pass- 
ing largfe quantities of muco-pus. The bladder was at first washed 
out with Boric acid solution, then Vesic. 0, 20 drops every two hours, 
were given. Improvement followed, and in two hours the Boric acid 
washing was stopped and Vesic, given every four hours. This finally 
cured. (6) Gonorrhoea with smarting and burning on micturition and 
thick creamy discharge. Vesic. 0, a drachm every four hours, soon 
curjed. (7) Gonorrhoea, female, after being treated for two weeks with 
injections, was cured in seven days with Vesic. 0 in drachm doses. 
Cowperthwaite {H. il/., July, 1900, 477) has succeeded in causing 
albumen to disappear ft*om the urine even in eases of actual Bright’s 

f isease. He adds that is necessary to use only the imported 
i,e,y European] tincture, 15 drops every four hours.” (There are 
several Vesicarias native toNo/th America.) A. L, Davison {H. News^ 
Dec., 1892, 568) treated Mrs. P. for general dropsy of a year’s standing ; 
was in uraemic spasms when first seen ; the kidneys having ceased to 
secrete urine. Vesic, 0 was prescribed, 15 drops in a teaspoonful of 
water every hour till urine was •freely secreted, then three times a 



VESPA 


1532 

day. The second day the kidneys were pouring out urine, and \;v^^ery 
stools were passed. In a week all dropsy had disap jJeared. 
Bancroft (ihid,^ 557) treated Mrs. T. for irritable kidneys and bladder 
with polyuria. After a time the urine became bloody, with occasional 
thin clots ; previously there had been for some months a thick, 
yellow sediment. Vestc, 6 drops four times a day and later 15 
drops three times a day, taken persistently, effected a cure. Halbert 
{Clinique^ xx. 107) reports the case of Mr. H., a young man whose 
occupation involved much outdoor exercise, and who contracted a 
chill and had lumbago in consequence. Under an “ orifir^iial surgeon 
his rectum was operated on and the sphincter stretched. Thereafter 
he had fever, rigors, and acute prostatitis. Micturition painful and 
dijBficult, and soon haematuria ensued. The pain and nervous exlj;austion 
were so extreme that he was put into hospital, and for a time only 
relieved by injections of Mo^hia. The urine contained albumen, 
blood-clots, much pus. Urine was only passed by means of the 
catheter, and defecation was extremely painful. Vesic. 1 x was given 
hourly, and great relief followed. The painful tenesmus was 
alleviated, and he was soon able to pass urine without the catheter. 
In three weeks he was able to go home. 

Relations. — Compatible: Cact, Thlasp. b. p. Compare: Botan., 
Thlasp. b. p. In Gravel, Coc. c., Urt. ur., Thlasp. b. p. Haematuria; 
Chi. s., Fic. r. Phos. Prostatic affections, Hydrang., Solid., Sabal. 
Cystitis, Chimaph. u, [Shafer gave Cact. and Thlasp. b. p. in a case 
of dropsy from heart disease in a lady, 48. These gave little relief. 
He then gave Vesic. in combination ivith the others. There was 
marked relief in twenty-four hours, and in ten days the dropsy had 
disappeared.] 


Yespa. 

Vespa vulgaris, the Wasp ; Vespa crabro, the European Hornet ; 
and Vespa maculata, “ Yellow-jacket,” the American Hornet. 
V. 0 . Hymenoptera (Sub-order Vespidae). Tincture of the 
living insects. 

Ojhdcal* — ^Abscesses, multiple. Alopecia. Chemosis. Enuresis. Fainting, 
Flushing. Glottis, spasm of. Indigestion ; with flushing. CEdema. Ophthalmia. 
Ovary, left, pain in. Quinsy. Tongue, swelling of. Uterus, ulcerated. Vertigo. 

ChaPaoteristios. — Vespa was introduced into the materia medica 
by Hering. The symptoms of the Schema are mostly the results of 
stings. Berridge proved Vesp, crabro 30 on ^three persons. Low 
spirits ; pain in right ear ; nausea with faint feeling and trembling ^ 
pain in left side of the neck on waking — these were the chief 
symptoms experienced by them. Berridge demonstrated that the 
poison of the hornet and the wasp may answer to each other^s 
indications by curing with Vesp, c. cm. (Fincke) a symptom produced 
by Vesp. vulgaris^ namely, chemosis the right eye. Mr. X., 66, had 
had his right eye inflamed for six days. When seen there was redness 



VESPA 


1533 

lower lid ; baggy swelling of conjunctiva partly covering tbe 
corne^hen pressed upward ; lachrymation of right eye < in open air ; 
right lld% adhere in morning. Vesp. c. thrice daily cured in a few 
^ys {Org., ii. 319). E. T. Blake (M. H. R., xxii. 370, quoted Org,j 
i. 320) cured with Vesp, i. the following group of symptoms : Face 
swollen and puffy, skin transparent and blanched ; scalding urine 
followed by itching ; itching of right arm. Blake also related 
{M: H. xix. 418, quoted by Allen) the case of Miss C. J., who at 
the age of thirty-one was stung on the left thumb, through some 
calico, and vgis never well after, dying at the age of thirty-eight. 
She was prone to constipation all her life, and at twenty-three 
had had congestion of the left lung.^^ Most of the abdominal, 
urinary, ovarian, and uterine symptoms were hers. Among the 
latter Was an irritable ulcer surrounding the os iincce, W. Row- 
botham {prg,^ ii. 79) was stung on the right cheek. Next day, about 
4 a.m., was suddenly awakened by burning, stinging pain in cheek, 
“as if pierced with red-hot needles,^’ and soreness and smarting 
along the lymphatics. After bathing the face he got to sleep and 
was again suddenly awakened by the pain two hours later, which 
recurred periodically^ in paroxysms^ throughout the day. Burnett 
observed a case of sting on the tongue in a woman. The tongue 
entirely filled the buccal cavity. The patients appearance was exactly 
like one suffering from severe cynanche. The swelling was diffuse 
and deep-seated. There was not much redness. Peculiar Sensations 
were : As if a harpoon were sticking deep in and were drawn on. 
Cold, chilly sensation round sting. As if pierced with red-hot 
needles. As if about to suffocate. As if left shoulder-joint were 
sprained. As if a cutting instrument were piercing all joints like an 
- electric shock. As if dying. The symptoms were : < By motion. 
Cold water applied, first >,then <. Open air < lachrymation. Feet 
were cold except in summer, when they burned uncomfortably. 
< After sleep. < After eating (indigestion with flushes). 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Apis, Led., Cainph., Salt-water, Vinegar. 
Incompatible : Arg. n. Compare : Pains as if pierced with red-hot 
needles/ Ars., Apis. Ulcers around os uteri, Mitch., Eu. pu., Apis., 
Hydrocotyle, 


SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — ^Terrible anxiety. — Low-spirited.— Insensibility. — Uncon- 
sciousness, with inability to move. 

* 8. Head. — Fainting and loss of consciousness. — A violent heat came 
over him, felt sick ; then turned giddy and spun round and round like a top 
till he fell ; staggered to 4he house, got into a chair, in a moment, fell out of it, 
almost fainting ; dashed water into his face, at length was able to lie down on 
Tiis bed. — Headache. — Face and head swollen and inflamed. — Alopecia. 

3. Eyes. — Injection of r. conjunctiva. — Itching of r. lid in evening, with 
swelling, afterwards pain in lid and ball, erysipelatous inflammation of lid, 
whole side of face painful and swollen, almost complete chemosis of con- 
junctiva, it being raised up on the sclerotic membrane, more than half over 



1534 


VESPA 


eye to border of cornea, as if fatty matter were under it, caused by efF^sion 
of lymph, an abscess opened upon inside bf upper lid about its centi^ later 
the chemosis became reddish.— Inflammation of r. eye, with bagg/gwelling 
of conjunctiva. 

4* Ears. — Sticking deep in r. ear. — Purulent catarrh of middle ears. 

6. Face. — Face hvid. — Face smooth, dark red, bloated. — ^Anxious 
expression. — Face and eyes oedematous, face, mouth and throat appejired 
as in severe cynanche (after a sting on tongue). — Pain in cheek (part stung) 
as if pierced with red-hot needles, suddenly awakening him from sleep, and 
recurring periodically. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue : swollen and tense, swelling below chin, between 
that and hyoid bone, pain in a point in middle line of tongue,'4-in. from apex ; 
swollen, red, rounded, tilled the mouth, immovable, could not speak, only mum- 
bled, swallowing was painful and difftcult. — Swelling of palate, with inflamma- 
tion, so preventing respiration that he died. — Swelling of mouth and throat, 
with burning pain, nausea, vertigo, after two hours fever, delirium, face, neck, 
arms, and chest swollen and shining red, respiration impeded, swallowing 
difficult, pulse 126, heart's action irregular and tumultuous (cured by Camph,). 
— Peculiar taste, a combination of palatal and nasal sensation, as when a nest 
of wasps is disturbed, < heat. 

9. Throat.— Swelling of throat ; soreness ; heat of throat. — Difficulty 
of swallowing. — Hypertrophied tonsils which secreted a cheesy matter.-^ 
Pharyngeal varicosis. 

10. Appetite. — Hunger. — Thirst. 

11. Stomach. — Eructations. — Nausea : in evening after coming indoors, 
with weight in stomach ; with faint feeling and trembling. — ^Vomiting, with 
swelling of head. — Cold feeling in stomach. — Heat in stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Uneasiness in abdomen. 

14. — Urinary Organs. — Marked tenderness to deep pressure in renal 
region. — Incessant enuresis (after five years). — Burning micturition in 
women. — Remittent dysuria with backache. — Haematuria. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Swelling of scrotum and penis. 

16, Female Sexual Organs. — (Valuable in aflections of 1. ovary, with 
tenderness, frequent micturition, pain in sacrum extending up back.)— Pain 
in 1. ovarian region. — Menses : intermittent ; sometimes brown ; always 
accompanied by pain and flatulence, preceded by mental depression, pain, 
pressure and constipation. — An irritable ulcer surrounded os tincae. — Irrita- 
tion « in groins), passing into pudenda sr ulceration. 

17, Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness.— Voice lost. — Spasm of glottis 
(after application of diluted ammonia to tongue), face pale, drops of sweat 
on forehead, arms thrown out to gasp for air, he got out of bed, sank back on 
bed, face livid, breath and pulse stopped. — Dyspnoea. — Respiration hurried. 

19. Heart and Pulse. — Aching in heart. — Slow beating of heart, almost 
imperceptible. — Pulse ; rapid and small ; rapid and feeble; rapid with violent 
beating of carotids. 

20. Neck and Back. — Pain in 1. sid^ of neck, waking her at njght, 
preventing her from turning it to 1. side, felt least when lying on back, best 
on r. side. — Pain in scapula (place of sting), with soreness. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pain in shoulder, in region of stings, axillary glands 



VIBURNUM OPULUS 


1535 


» V 

sw(5^en. — Sprained pain in 1. shoulder-joint on moving it, < lifting arm or 
twistmg it. — Aching in hand and arm. 

24. generalities. — Trembling, quaking, with chattering of teeth.— 
Nervo-Ausliular excitement.— Stinging piercing deeply, as if a hook were 
pulled out. — Sudden stinging and burning in cheek waking me at 4 a.m. 
(after a sting on the cheek). — Burning of the part, then swelling, red, with 
burning pain. — ^Sudden tearing. — Cutting like electric shocks through all 
joints, arm, head and face swollen, eyes red and twitching, red lines along 
absorbents, itching over whole body, insensibility, vomiting, pulse slow, 
heart's action stgircely perceptible. — Feeling as if dying at night. — ^Weakness ; 
*with enuresis somni, heat esp. overpowers him.— Faintness ; all day with 
trembling and ngiusea. 

25. Skin. — Redness of hands, feet, and chest. — Swelling : of face, body, and 
limbs ; dt cheek, skin soon became bright red, the redness spread over head 
and down neck, shoulders, back and front of chest, with pain and tenderness ; 
of the stung part (r. side of neck), with aching, redness, and burning, the burning 
> then < by cold water. — Swelling of thumb and face, soon became red as 
if covered with scarlet rash ; restlessness at night, heat, irritation, and wherever 
he scratched himself-there arose spots like nettle-rash, swelling and redness of 
1. arm and hand, after forty hours cedema of lids (esp. lower), face pallid and 
puffy. — Prurigo-like, pinkish, lentil-shaped spots on hand and forearm, on 
neck, and, all over, down to feet. — Ulcer.— Desquamation of whole surface. — 
Abscesses over whole body, causing emaciation. — Itching : of whole body ; 
of the part every day about 3 or 4 a.m., slightly > by application of vinegar, 
always burning after scratching ; also the same every day about 8 or 9 a.m. 
and at 3 p.m., the itching > by applications of salt and vinegar. 

26. Sleep. — Night restless. — Sleepless all night. 

27. Fever. — Heat, with sick feeling, vertigo, almost faintness. — Burning 
(after the sting) as if something were sticking and drawing out, the part stung 
was bright red, elevated, with hard swelling, the redness surrounded by a 
cycle of chilliness, soon changing to a general chill, intermittent, extending 
in waves over whole body. 


Viburnum Opulus. 

Viburnum opulus. High Cranberry Bush. Cramp Bark. Water 
Elder. (The Gueldres Rose, or Snowball-tree of our gardens, 
is the cultivated and sterile variety.) N, 0, Caprifoliaceae. 
• Tincture of the fresh bark. 

OUnloal. — ^After-pains. Cough, of pregnancy. Cramps. Dysmenorrhoea ; 
spasmodic ; neuralgic ; mefnbranous. Ears, painful. Epididymitis. Headache. 
Hysteria. Labour pains, false. Lumbago. Menstruatiotty patufnl. Miscarriage. 
eWaries, pain in. Paralysis. Uterus, cramps in ; bearing down in. 

Characteristics. — Viburnupi opulus^ a native of Great Britain, is 
widely distributed over the northern parts of the continent and 
America. In America (says Hale) the wild species is called Cramp 
bark/^ and the knowledge of its curative virtues in painful spasmodic 



1536 VIBURNUM OPULUS 


r <• 

diseases, especially in dysmenorrhoea, is derived frdm the Amgj:lcan 
aboiigines. The tincture has a strong odour of Valerianic add also 
has that of Vib. tinus). Hale derived his knowledge from domestic 
sources. He gives these indications and directions ; (i) Irf spasmodic 
dysmenorrhoea he gives a few drops of ^ to 3X thrice daily for a week 
before the period, every hour when the pains set in, or every fifteen 
minutes if the pains are severe. (2) False pains preceding labour. 
(3) After-pains, a dose after each pain. (4) Cramps in abdomen*' and 
legs of pregnant women. (5) To prevent miscarriage when the pains 
are spasmodic or threatening. Hale considers it acts like galvanism ; 
he cured with it cases exactly resembling a series Cured with gal- 
vanism by Neftel. The first provings were by H. C. Allen, assijsted 
W eleven provers, male and female, with ^ and ist and 30th dilutions, 
llieir symptoms constitute the basis of the Schema. IJr. Susan 
J. Fenton, of Oakland {Pac, C. J. /f., reprinted New Eng. M.Gaz.^ xxx. 
405), proved Vih. 0. on six provers. One of the six took the tincture 
up to drachm doses without obtaining a single symptom. One prover 
was cured of a number of symptoms, but developed no new ones. 
The other four had very pronounced symptoms, which I have marked 
in the Schema (F,), (Fa), (F3), and (F^). They were : (i) Mrs. A., 49, 
tall, slender, rigid fibre, dark hair and eyes, nervo-bilious, (F,). (2^ 
Miss B., 21, short, plump, dark hair, grey eyes, phlegmatic, (F*). (3) , 
Miss D., 24, nurse, short, plump, dark hair and eyes, .bilious, gobd 
health, (F3). (4) Miss E., 21, nurse, medium height, dark-brown eyes, 
dark hair, bright, lively temperament, (F^). All took potencies at first 
without eliciting any symptoms. Taking the tincture all had these 
symptoms with variations : severe backache going through to the 
front or round the abdomen to uterus. Cramping pelvic pain. 
Temporal headache. Three had nausea with the pains. All had 
sick feeling all over.^' One had omission of a period ; two had 
menses too early. The cured case was the following ; Miss F., 25, 
housekeeper, medium height, rather slender, blonde, sanguine, was 
strong till late in 1891 (t.c., 3^ years before the proving), when she 
had severe pelvic congestion and was fifteen months under treatment 
and most of the time in bed. In June, 1892, double oophorectomy was 
performed with great relief ; but attacks of pelvic congestion with 
severe pain still persisted, at first every two to four weeks, later less 
frequently, causing impairment of general health and strength. The 
symptoms were ; excruciating pains through lower abdomen, with 
bearing-down sensation and a feeling as if the body from the waist to 
lower part of pelvis would collapse ; an indescribable sick feeling all 
over with severe aching in rectum ; great depression of spirits ; symp- ’ 
toms > when lying down. Vib, 0, f was taken in three-drop doses 
thrice daily. After taking it for three days s^e lost all her symptoms 
and felt ** perfectly wejl for the first time in over four years.^' It is 
evident that sick feeling all over'' in connection with pelvic com- 
plaints ; and < from movement, > by rest are keynotes of Vib. o. 
Peculiar Sensations are : As if she could not tell where she was or what 
to do on awaking. Crushing pain in head. Opening and shutting in 
left parietal region. As if stabbing with a knife in eyes and ears. 
Ear as if bruised ; as if pinned to head. As if she could not live, sick 



VIBURNUM OPULUS 


’537 

feeil^g at stomach. Sick feeling all over. Goneness as if stomach 
emptyj^ As if body from waist to lower pelvis would collapse. As if 
a hot fluid running through splenic vessels. As if urine continued to 
flow after urinating. As if menses coming on. As if pelvic organs 
were turning upside down. As if parts would be forced through 
vulva and she must support the part. Pain in back and across lower 
abdomen. As if breath would leave body and heart would cease 
beating. Bruised feeling in back as after severe exertion. Buzzing 
in hands as if they would burst. Left side as if strained or bruised 
by over-lifting. — The lejt side is much more powerfully affected than 
the right. Vib. o, is Suited to tall, slender, dark- or fair-haired hysterical 
suBjects. The symptoms are : < By sudden jar. > By pressure. 
< By tgotion. Rest ; lying down >. Lying on left side impossible. 
Straining at stool < headache. Stooping as dizziness. Usings: 
fainting, nausea, and dizziness. < At night. < In close room. 
Open air >. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Aeon, (epididymitis), Ver. (diarrhoea). 
Compare : Botan., Samb., Vib. p., Vib. t. Chemical, Valer. Nervous, 
rheumatic diathesis. Act. r. Cramplike abdominal pains and menstrual 
symptoms, Caulo. Threatened miscarriage, pains go down into thighs, 
Cham, (with Cham, pains are intolerable, and there is flow of dark 
blood). * Pains coming round pelvis to uterus ; goneness ; bearing 
down ; feeling that organs will escape from vulva, and wants support ; 
nervousness, Sep. (with Vib. the bearing down is more violent and 
culminates in uterus in cramps). Uterine cramps, Caul., Sec., 
Act. r. Aching eyeballs, Act. r. Bearing-down pains, Bell., Calc., 
Gossyp., Lil., Pul, Sul. Left ovarian and left inframammary pain, Lil, 
Lach., Caul, Sul, Ustil > Menses coming on, Lach. 


SYMPTOMS. 

* 

1. Mind. — Exaltation of spirits, in some cases followed by depression. 
— Depressed. — Irritable, wishes to be alone. — Very nervous and excessively 
irritable, lasting all day (F3). — Confusion ; and inability to concentrate thoughts. 
— Stupid feeling as if I could not tell where I was or what to do in morning 
on waking. — Inability to perform mental labour. 

2. Head. — ^Vertigo : in afternoon on closing eyes ; < descending stairs 
or walking in a dimly-lighted room ; with inclination to turn to left ; as if he 
would fall forward on rising from a seat. — Head hurl by every cough. — Pain 
in head : beginning about 3 p.m., < at night ; with red face. — Tlirobbing in 
head, all the evening, so severe on retiring that I felt sick all over. — Heavy 
headache, < over eyes, < 1. side, at times extending to vertex and occiput 
« when delayed menses should appear), < a sudden jar, bending over, false 
step or movement. — Dull, heavy pain r. side of head, throbbing on movement, 
> by rest; with dizziness and nausea (Fa). — ^Very painful shootings from 
temples « r.) to base of brain (FjJ.— Head dull and sluggish.*— Frontal head- 
ache ; over 1. eye ; in r. supraorbital region ; in forenoon over eyes on open- 
ing them, the soreness extending back into head ; with occasional vertigo, 
almost incapacitating him for study, with profuse and frequent micturition ; 

VOL. n. 98 



VIBURNUM OPULUS 


1538 

and in supraorbital region, with profuse, clear, watery urine. — Headache 
beginning over r. eye and extending to vertex, with fulness in h^d and 
pressure on vertex.— Throbbing pain in forehead, extending to ^eBalls, < 
by mental exertion, > moving about. — ^Terrible crushing pain in head, < 1, 
parietal region where there is sensation as if head opening and shutting ; < 
by motion ; by mental exertion ; > by rest (F,). — Confusing, dull frontal head- 
ache extending to temples as after night-watcliing, compelling cessatioh of 
mental exertion. — Pain in 1. temple, with pinching.— Pain in 1. side of 
head. — Sharp pain in parietal region penetrating into braip, < coughing, ^ 
moving head, and at stool.— Pressive pain in r. supraorbital region. — Hair feels 
as if pulled. — Scalp sensitive to touch. 

3. Eyes. — Swelling about r. eye with induration. — Sclerotica streaked 
with blood. — Sensation of sand in eyes. — Pain in r. eye with congestion. — 
Sore feeling on closing lids.— Burning and lachrymation.— Heaviness of eyes ; 
feels almost sick enough to go to bed. — Heaviness over eyes and in balls, at 
times had to look twice to be sure of seeing an object. — Eyeballs feel sore ; 
(also F,). — Lids swollen. 

4. Ears.— Stabbing in ears.— Pains in bone waking at night.— External 
ear sore as if bruised, cannot lie on affected side of head ; had to rub ear and 
it seemed as if I must straighten it out, sensation as if pinned to head ; lay on 
other side, and was awakened by same feeling in that ear, in consequence 
compelled to change position often. 

5. Nose. — Sneezing. — Watery coryza. 

6. Face. — ^Very pale with dark circles under eyes (F4). — Face and lips 
pale ; dark circles under eyes (F,). — Face swollen and congested with dark 
circles under eyes. — Face flushed and hot. — Lips dry. 

7. Teeth.— Tooth sore on pressure. 

8. Mouth. — ^Tongue broad and white, with brown centre and imprints 
of teeth. — Dryness of tongue ; of mouth. — Taste disagreeable ; coppery. 

9. Throat. — Tickling in r. side of pharynx, causing cough. 

11. Stomach. — No desire to eat ; stomach feels full (F3). — Nausea : 
every night ; during menses ; for ten days after menses, with faintness at 
stomach; > eating, with faintness, both returning; in pit of stopiach, > 
lying perfectly quiet, faintness always on trying to get up ; with faintness ; 
(without inclination to vomit), > eating ; then vomiting. — Pain in stomach in 
afternoon, > stretching body and throwing stomach forward. — Cramp-like 
pain in stomach and abdomen, doubling him up. — Cramping pain in 
stomach (F,). — Sensitiveness of stomach region. — Indigestion, food lies heavy. 
— (Dyspepsia, habitual, with flatus, nausea and distension, and general catarrhal 
tendency. — R. T. C.). — Goneness. 

12. Abdomen. — Rumbling and darting and flying pains in abdomen. — 
Darting pains, which settle about navel. — Bearir-g-down pains as during 
menstruation, with heavy pain over pubes. — Bearing-down pain, with draw- 
ing pains in anterior muscles of thighs and occasional shootings in ovarian 
regions. — Soreness of abdpmen (Fg). — ^Sensitiveness to pressure, < about 
umbilicus. — Pressure of flatus in 1. side.— Throbbing pain under 1. floating 
ribs from ii p.m. till 3 a.m., > hard pressure and walking about the room*— 
Throbbing in 1. hypochondriura when lying on 1. side.— Sticking in spleen in 
evening, > walking about the room, with sensation as if a hot fluid ran through 



VIBURNUM OPULUS 


1539 


it^Jvessels. — Pain in region of spleen causing faintness, > sweat. — Cramping 
pain in hypogastrium during menstruation.— Sudden cramping pain ; as before 
men^ruMion, < night.— Constant bearing down from back through to front 
in ovarian and uterine region (F3). — (Feeling as if the body from the waist 
down to lower pelvis would collapse.) 

13. Stool and Anus. — Stools watery, profuse, frequent, at menstrual 
period, with chills and cold sweat rolling off forehead.— Haemorrhage of dark 
red blood during and after stool. — Inactivity, no inclination for stool. — Con- 
stipation ; with tenesmus ; when bowels moved pain in 1. orbital region. — 
Desire with much straining.— Constipation alternating with diarrhoea.— Stools : 
h^rd, large, with cutting in rectum and anus when passed ; hard, large, pain- 
ful and so difScult that mechanical assistance was necessary ; scanty, in balls ; 
long, large, hard and difficult, having a desire to evacuate, but on attempting 
feels as if nothing were there, evacuation occurs slowly and only after long 
straining. — Large stool, difficult, with urging.— Irregular. — Omitted two days, 
then hard stool, with blood and soreness of anus. — Frequent desire for stool 
with aching haemorrhoids, frequent urination (F,). 

Z4. Urinary Organs. — Sensation after micturition as if urine continued 
to flow. — Frequent, profuse urination (F,). — Copious urine ; in morning, clear, 
watery, sp. gr. 1019, frequent micturition ; every hour in afternoon and even- 
ing ; at^ night, and pale, sp. gr. 1021 ; every hour or two during menses, 
and clear, light-coloured ; and watery ; in afternoon, watery, clear, micturi- 
tion frequent.— Spurting of urine when coughing (J. C. B.). — Light-coloured 
urine. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Pain and swelling of epididymis and testicle 
of 1. side ; next day epididymis of r. side so painful and swollen he was com- 
pelled to wear a suspensory bandage. — Emission without dream. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Leucorrhcea : thick, white, and copious ; 
thin, yellowish white after menses ; thin, colourless, except with every stool, 
when it was thick, white, inodorous, blood-streaked ; causing redness, smart- 
ing and itching of genitals.— Sudden pain in womb and hypogastrium before 
menstruation. — Pain in ovarian region. — Congested feeling in pelvic organs, as 
before jnenses.— Bearing-down pains : in pelvic region, with uneasiness ; as 
before menses ; as during menses, with heavy aching in sacral region and 
over pubes ; as during menses with drawing pains in anterior muscles of 
thighs, every day after 3 p.m., with occasional shooting over ovaries, later the 
same, with nervousness, could not sit or lie still on account of the pains. — 
Menstrual pain, with feeling as if the breath would leave her body and heart 
would cease to beat. — Crampy, colicky pains in both ovarian regions, extending 
d6wn thighs (F,). — Slight, deep-seated pain in r. ovarian region, extending 
down thigh and < by walking or exertion (F,).— Bearing down as if menses 
would appear (Fa), — Whole pelvis feels full anc|^ congested (Fa).— At 4 a.m. 
heavy bearing-down pains running from back around abdomen to uterus 
where pain is cramping; pressure on bladder; surprised to find herself 
menstruating (eight days after previous period ceased— F3).— At intervals, 
distressing, grinding pains in ovaries and uterus, with sensation as if organs 
were turning upside down ; and as if parts were being forced through vulva ; 
desire to support the parts (F3),— Menses began ten days early (always regular 
before) ; pain in back and cramps lasted throughout the period (F4).— Menses : 



1540 


VIBURNUM OPULUS 


too early, profuse and offensive ; too late, scanty, thin, light-coloured, lasting 
but a few hours, with lightness of head, faintness on attempting to sit up ; 
look like jelly ; stain permanently ; ceased for several hours, then fflurMarge 
clots of the colour of raw beef, but as solid as liver ; for two days flow like 
normal menses, but with cramping pain and nervousness. — (Dysmenorrhoea, 
excruciating colic through the uterus and lower part of the abdomen, just pre- 
ceding menstruation, — After-pains. — Membranous dysmenorrhoea. — Cramps m 
the calves always between the menses, < just before the period, with scanty, 
delayed menstruation, dysmenorrhoea. — Cramps in abdomen and legs in 
pregnant women, &c.) 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarse. — Suffocating spells at night. — 
Cough during second month of pregnancy ; < night and morning and on 
lying down ; urine spurting out when coughing (J. C. B.). 

z8. Chest.— -Shooting over 1 . sixth rib near sternum. — Feeling of op- 
pression over whole chest (FJ. — In lungs sensation as if muscles of chest 
failed to act, causing dyspnoea. 

zg. Heart. — Clutching pain in region of heart < by any exertion (F4). — 
Excruciating, cramping pain in heart (F^). — Palpitation, with sensation of lack 
of air after each severe pain (Fg). — Heart's action increased. 

20. Back. — Pain as if back would break during menses. — Lame and 
bruised feeling in muscles of back. — Wandering, tired pains in muscles, < - 
1 . side. — Terrible clutching, cramping pain beginning in back, extending round 
lower abdomen to uterus with bearing down, as if menses would appear* 
(lasted six days, > only when menses appeared, having missed the previous 
month — F,). — Tired, bruised pain in muscles from point of scapula to wing 
of ilium, on both sides of spine, > firm pressure. — Pain : in lumbar region ; 
between 1. floating ribs and wing of ilium, > pressure, but must keep moving ; 
in kidney region, < working in laboratory, > pressing across back with arms ’ 
crossed ; in 1. loin and 1. hypochondrium, causing faintness, > warm sweat 
though the night was cool ; throbbing in 1. loin, < lying down, > walking ^ 
with cane pressed across back ; in back, loins, and hypogastrium as if menses 
were coming on, < early part of evening and in a close room, > open air and 
moving about. — Pain in back in region of sacrum, an unjointed feeling" (F4). 

az. Limbs.— Aching in limbs (Fa).— Aching of arms and thighs ; feet 
somewhat swollen (F3). 

22. Upper Limbs.— Pain in r. shoulder. — Soreness of 1 . shoulder in 

region of subclavian muscle, < rest and wet weather, > motion, with lame- 
ness. — Pain in 1 . biceps. — Numbness of 1 . arm and hand. — Buzzing feeling in 
hands as if they would burst. — Swelling of fingers, < washing in cold water, 
with numbness. / 

23. Lower Limbs. — Weakness of lower extremities with heaviness.— 
Wandering, tired pains extending to hips and kneee, with disinclination to 
move about. — Cramps in legs in pregnant women.— ^Feeling in feet as from 
the starting of circulation after constriction is removed. — Cramps in feet after * 
long walking. 

24. Generalities. — Pains flying from one part to another ; wandering, 

tired pains extending to hips and knees. — Felt bloated all over (Fg). — Sick 
feeling all over (F„ ^ 4)* — Pains as perspiration ; during the pains felt she 

could not move (F,),— Great exhaustion (Fg).— Paralytic condition coming on 



VIBURNUM PRUNIFOLIUM 1541 

^ ♦ 

afl^^r convulsions. — Hysterical convulsions from uterine conditions 1 — Cramps 
and contractions of limbs, esp, during pregnancy. 

2& Sleep.— Retired early, very restless sleep, felt sick all over ; when 
asleep, sensation of falling and awakened frequently with a start (F3). — Desire 
to sleep between severe pains from exhaustion, but could not (F3). 

27. Fever. — Chill followed by severe headache. — Dripping wet all over, 
with the pains. 


• Yiburnum Prunifolium. 

• • 

Viburnum prunifolium. Black Haw. (An American species.) N, 0 . 

• Caprifoliaceae. Tincture of fresh bark (“gathered in October 
and November from trees grown in open situations.’^ — Phares, 
quoted by Hale). 

Clinical. —Abortion, threatened. Dysmenorrheea. Menorrhagia. Tetanus. 
Tongue, cancer of. 

ChaPaoteristios. — Hale quotes experiences showing a close 
resemblance between Vtb. p, and Vib, 0., with some additional uses of 
Vib, />. E. P. Fowler cured two cases of cancer of the tongue with 
the decoction of Vib. p. bark, used topically. Phares thinks it perhaps 
the best remedy in the world for tetanus.” Hale used the tincture 
in threatened miscarriage, dysmenorrheea, and spasmodic uterine 
pains. Phares says of it, “ It is particularly valuable in preventing 
abortion and miscarriage, whether habitual or otherwise ; whether 
threatened from accidental causes or criminal drugging,” and he gives 
cases in support of each. It entirely antidotes the effect of Gossyp.j 
which is much used for procuring abortion in some of the States ; one 
pint of a strong decoction of the cotton-root being sufficient. Vib. p, 
taken regularly completely neutralises this. Here are some of Phares’ 
cases : (i) Mrs. W. had never gone to full term ; had had several 
children at eight months, all of them dying one month after birth. 
Frequent pregnancies and haemorrhages had seriously impaired her 
health. When next pregnant Vib, p, was ordered, and at the eighth 
month when pains set in vigorously with copious sanguineous dis- 
charge, Vib, p. was given freely, and she went to term, giving birth 
to a healthy boy, who survived. (2) Mrs, L., married eighteen months, 
had miscarried, and suffered long and much in consequence. Being 
again pregnant, Phares gave Vib, p, p, a teaspoonful thrice daily. At 
the third month she was severely injured by a fall from her carriage. 
Strong uterine contractions ensued, but were arrested by Vib, />., which 
had to be given freely for several days, the dose being gradually 
diminished. For nearly a week abortion was threatened whenever 
Vib, p, was too long suspended. The patient went to term and gave 
birth to a large boy. 

Relations.— to* Gossyp, 



VICHY 


1542 


Viburnum Tinus. 

f ) ' 

Viburnum tinus. Laurustinus. N. 0 . Caprifoliaceae. Tincture of 

fresh leaves. 

OlinloaL— Deafness. Diaphragm, cramp in. Hypochondriasis. Ovary, pain in. 

Charaoteristios. — Viburnum tinus is the beautiful evergreen shrub 
known in our gardens as Laurustinus, Cooper has inv^pstigated it, 
giving always single doses of the ^ tincture in cases analogous to 
those for which Vib. 0. is given. He has cured with it : (i) Pain in 
ovary with depression. [He considers hypochondriasis an indication 
for Vib. /.] (2) Deafness, with sufferings in lower segment of abdomen 
and dysmenia ; erosions about the os uteri. (3) Cramp in diaphragm. 
(4) Horrible headache all over head, < on right side with right-sided 
deafness, coming on at 7 and ii a.m. and 4 and 7 p.m., with great 
sinking in pit of chest. (5) Waking at 4 a.m. with horrid depression 
of spirits that lasts till noon, with a weight on chest and back ; has 
to hold herself up in order to breathe. 


Vichy. 

Mineral springs at Vichy, in France. [Grande - Grille springs, 
containing in 100 parts : Carbonic acid 4*418, Mur. ac. 0*344, 
Sulphuric acid 0*164, Sil. ac. 0*070, Phos. ac. 0*070, Arsenic 
acid 0*001, Ferric oxide 0*002, Sodium 2*488, Potassium 0*182, 
Calcium 0*169, Magnesium 0*097.] Dilution. 

Clinical. — Bladder, catarrh of. Constipation. Diabetes. Gall-stones. Gout. 
Gravel. Heartburn. Indigestion. Intermittent fevers. Liver, affections of. 
Neck, stiff. Rheumatism. Salivation. Skin, affections of. Uterus, affections of. 

Charaoteristios. — ^The springs of Vichy are alkaline, both hot 
and cold. They are used in a large number of maladies, especially 
(i) diseases of the digestive tract ; (2) diseases of the liver with or with- 
out calculi ; (3) abdominal engorgements consequent on paludal 
fevers ; (4) chronic engorgements of the uterus ; (5) catarrh of the 
bladder ; (6) gravel ; (7) gout and rheumatism ; (8) diabetes mellitus ; 
(9) skin diseases (Constantin James). Croserio proved Vichy , taking 
the water, and triturations of the salt and dilutions. His symptoms 
make up the Schema. Among the most prominent symptoms were 
stitches : stitches below mastoid ; in chest ; in right loin and in heart. 
A.cross the chest there was a sensation as of a bar impeding breathing. 
Sinking sensation ; and sensation as if about to be sick. Burning 
flatulence. In the nose there were illusions of smell ; corpse-like 
odour ; odour of cucumbers. After coitus there was excessive weak- 
ness as if from hunger. The symptoms are : < From cold ; from 
draughts of air. < After eating ; when eating, (Uneasiness is > by 
dinner.) < When seated. < After coitus. 



VICHY 


1543 

Belations. — Compare : Nat mur. Stitching pains, K. ca. Bar 
sensation, Haematox., Ars,, Ox. ac. < From coitus, K. ca., K. bi., 
Staph* Illusory smells, Anac. 

SYMPTOMS. 

, I. Mind.—Very low-spirited ; felt as though some misfortune about to 
happen ; causelessly anxious about the future. 

2. Head. — Slight compressive pain in forehead and temples. — Painful 
stitching in r. ^mple for some minutes. — Stitching below r. mastoid process, 
followed by griping in middle abdomen, then return of stitching. — Stitches in 
petrous portioif of temporal bone. — Pressure at occiput with general uneasi- 
ness, as^if fever were coming on. — Stitches in occiput below 1. tuberosity. — 
Itching of head : violent in morning on rising ; in forehead. 

3. Eyes. — Stinging in eyes with lachrymation. — Pain below 1. eye like 
pressure after breakfast. — Different coloured sparks before eyes in morning. 

4. Ears. — Stitches in bones below ears. 

5. Nose. — Coryza. — Fetid, corpse-like odour in nose, morning on rising. 
— ^Very strong smell of cucumbers in nose, morning. 

6. Face. — Sharp stitching between articulation of jaw and 1. temple. — 
Tvyisting pain in lower jaw, near ethmoid process, as if jaw was swollen, 
when masticating on that side. — Red and sore pimples on upper lip. 

8. Mouth. — Mouth very dry, with very bitter taste all day. — Saliva : 
abundant, immediately ; salty, with burning in stomach. — Taste : bitter and 
clammy ; bitter in evening with thirst ; bitter, morning on rising. 

11. Stomach. — Great hunger. — Keen relish. — Diminished thirst (in spite 
of hot weather). — Longing for wine. — Craving for food as from feebleness of 
.stomach, with sick feeling without hunger. — Heartburn. — Transient nausea 
while eating. — ^Acidity. — Belching. — Pinching ; griping ; burning in stomach. 
— After the first swallow, cutting pain throughout whole stomach. — Burning 

* in stomach < afternoon. 

12. Abdomen. — Shooting in liver. — Compressive pain in 1. hypochon- 
drium. — Emission of burning flatulence, with slight urging to stool. — Bor- 
borygmUs, with gripings, during day. — Distension and uneasiness. — Burning 
borborygmi. — Griping and colic. — Feeling of desire for stool, only wind 
passes. — In evening sensation as if diarrhoea would come on, with sensation 
of hunger at an unusual hour. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Ineffectual urging to stool, only wind passes. — 
Very difficult stool with copious flatulence, follow»ed by burning and uneasi- 
ness in rectum. — Large, soft stool. — Copious diarrhoeic stool. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Griping in bladder, morning.— Frequent urina- 
tion during night.— Urine : abundant, watery, foamy. 

15. Male Sexual ^Organs.— Strong and Idhg-lasting erections without 

• desire. — Excessive itching : at orifice of glans, fossa navicularis, scrotum. — 

Desire diminished. — Excessive weakness after coition, as if suffering from 
hunger. • 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Dry cough produced by a pricking or 
tickling in the neck ; followed by fluent coryza.— Cough at night with difficult 
expectoration. 



1544 


VICHY— VINCA MINOR 


i8. Chest. — Painful uneasiness in chest followed by expectoration of 
purulent matter.— Sensation in chest as if a bar across it preventing respira- 
tion, followed by a cough with expectoration of thick mucus.~-Tearing pain 
at border of false ribs on both sides. — Stitches in r. chest, evenings.— Very 
painful stitches in r. chest, corresponding to commencement of cartilaginous 
portion of two first false ribs, and extending below and behind breast 
towards back. 

ig. Heart. — Stitch in heart followed by stitch in r. lumbar region, when 
seated. 

ao. Neck and Back. — Painful stiffness of muscles of hztk of neck and 
1 . scaleni as after making a false step ; moving these parts is very painful.— 
Stitch in r. loin when seated, following stitch in heart. 

22 . Upper Limbs. — Bruised pain in arms. — Bruising pain in„fingers 
and uneasiness as if a fever were coming on, after lunch. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Stitch in r. tibia, extending from upper part of 
instep. 

24. Generalities. — Uneasiness as if fever coming on. — Weakness after 
coition.— Very sensitive to cold and draughts. 

25. Skin. — Pimples : on lip ; back of neck, with pricking. — Pricking 
and itching compelling scratching, which >, but itching returns. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepy : after dinner ; in evening ; fatiguing dreams, but . 
sleep more prolonged than usual. 


Vinca Minor. 

Vinca minor. Lesser Periwinkle. (Woods and shady places.) 

AT. 0 . Apocynaceae. Tincture of whole fresh plant. 

Clinical.— Acne. Alopecia. Crusta lactea. Eczema, Favus. Neck, stiff. 
Nose, redness of. Plica polonica. Schorrhoea, Throat, sore. Utems^ bleeding from. 

CharaoteristiGS . — Vinca was proved by Rosenburg on four healthy 
persons, who took the tincture in 20- to 6o-drop doses. It produced 
a deep impression on the organism and tissues. Weakness and pros- 
tration accompanied many of the sufferings ; the stool caused exhaus- 
tion ; great debility accompanied the uterine haemorrhage. There 
was ** weakness as if he would die^' ; inclination to stretch ; tremu- 
lousness and tendency to start, especially on exciting the mind ; and 
tremulousness in all the blood-vessels. Allied to this an empty, all- 
gone sensation appeared in the stomach and chest A corresponding 
deep impression was made on the tissues : blood and blood-vessels ; 
skin, hair, and nails ; bones. In passive uterinv^ hcemorrhages Vinca 
has a wide range. This case is related in Ind, H, K 113) : 
Uterine haemorrhage, blood dark red, flow copious, uninterrupted, 
with extreme debility. Chi. and Helen, failed to relieve ; Vinca 1 x 
effected a rapid and permanent cure. Frequent nose-bleed is another 
effect of Vinca. And there is a curious symptom in connection with 
the nose which it is well to remember : it becomes red from the 
slightest cause ; when the least bit angry . There are scabby eruptions 



VINCA MINOR 


1545 


about the nose and on the septum, which are part of the general skin 
effect of the remedy. It causes corrosive itching of the skin provoking 
scratching ; moist spots, and burning in ulcers. The most charac- 
teristic effect is on the scalp, where it produces a condition having 
many features of crusta lactea, favus, and plica polonica. I have 
cured with Vinca *^sore spots on the scalp” in a young lady. A 
number of symptoms were produced in the throat and oesophagus. 
C, M. Boger records this case (M. Cow«., xvi. 265) : Woman, 31, had 
a cutting sensation in lower part of oesophagus while swallowing food, 
•continuing aftfcr. Empty faintness in stomach > by eating. Stomach 
sore to touch or pressure of clothing. Constipation from induration 
of ^faeces. Haemorrhoids constantly sore, smarting after stool. 
Vinca 4yn (Fincke) cured. Peculiar Sensations are : As if a hammer 
were beating from within outwards in vertex. Cold wind in ears. As if 
something sticking low down in oesophagus. As if a weight lying on 
cervical muscles. As if he would die from weakness. The left side 
was most affected. A peculiar symptom was distension of abdomen 
after stool. Toothache > in warmth of bed ” is unusual. The symp- 
toms are : < On stooping. < Walking. < Reading. > Moving 
in open air. Toothache > by warmth of bed. Drinking < : liquids 
(esp. beer) = eructations ; coffee = nausea. Mental exertion < ; 
treihuloi^ feeling and tendency to start. 

Relations. — Compare : Peevishness with repentance, Croc. Crusta 
lactea, Med., Melit, Mez., Tug, r.. Clean., Viol. t. (with strong-smelling 
urine), Arct. 1 . (glands swollen ; axillary glands even suppurate), Staph, 
(sickly children, pale face, dark rings round eyes), Ustil. (filthy erup- 
tions, part of hair comes out, part matted). Alopecia, Bacil., Pho. 

Causation. — Anger (red nose). Mental exertion (tremulousness 
and starting). 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Sadness with fear of death. — Lachrymose. — Peevish and 
quarrelsome, soon followed by repentance. 

2. dead. — Whirling vertigo with flickering before eyes. — Pressure on 
head ; in temples. — Dulness of sinciput with slow pressure towards eyes and 
dimness of vision, < stooping when writing. — Sticking in 1. temple extend- 
ing to malar bone. — Tearing in vertex with feeling as if a hammer beating 
from within out. — Corrosive itching on the hairy scalp. — Badly-smelling 
eruptions on the head, in the face, and behind the ears (breeding vermin). — 
The hairs are entangled, as in plica polonica. — Hair falls out and is replaced 
by grey hair. — Bald spots, covered with short, woolly hair. — Humid eruptions 
on the head, with muej^ vermin, and nightly itching, with burning after 
scratching. 

• 3. Eyes.— Itching and burning of lids, which become red.— Eye dry, 
on getting snuff into it there was so little secretion he was obliged to wash it 
out.— Obscuration of vision (fog* before eyes) while reading ; at times also 
while walking. 

4« Ears.— Ringing and whistling in cars, with feeling of cold wind, 
esp. 1. 



VINCA MINOR 


1546 


5. Nose. — Nose becomes red on becoming the least angry. — ^Tip of 
nose becomes red from slightest cause. — Frequent nose-bleed. — Stoppage of 
npse, mostly of one nostril, with discharge of much mucus through p3sterior 
nares. — Distressing dryness and heat in nose extending into frontal sinuses. 
Itching in nose, — Moist eruption on septum exuding moisture which forms 
light-brown scab ; skin dirty white, elevated, with red areola. 

6, Face. — Bloated face, with pimples. — ^Tearing in malar bones. 'Dry 
lips, — Swelling of upper lip and corner of mouth. 

8. Mouth. — Tearing in teeth > by warmth of bed,— Aphthae. In- 
creased secretion of saliva. — Insipid taste in mouth ; to all fodd. 

9. Throat. — Frequent hawking through day. — Ulcers in throat (?). 
Sore throat, with difficulty in swallowing. — Sensation as if something was 
sticking low down in cesophagus, which provokes swallowing. f 

IX. Stomach. — Hunger alternating with loss of appetite before the 
hunger has been satisfied. — Scarcely any thirst. — Empty eructations after 
drinking beer, and generally < from taking liquid. — Nausea after coffee. — 
Violent, bitter, copious vomiting of yellowish-green liquid. — Gastric disturb- 
ance. — Emptiness in stomach. 

Z2. Abdomen. — Distension after a stool. — ^Abdomen full, tense but 
painless. — Rumbling and gurgling, with passage of much offensive flatus. 
Griping. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Urging to stool. — Stool first hard, then soft. — 
Stool exhausting, with burning in anus. 

Z4. Urinary Organs. — Diminished secretion of urine.— Urine pale 
yellow. 

z6. Female Sexual Organs. — Excessive, profuse menses, flowing like 
a stream, with great weakness. — Passive uterine haemorrhage from fibroid 
tumour. — Passive uterine haemorrhage in women long past their climacteric. • 

Z7. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness. — ^Tenacious mucus in trachea. 
— Spasmodic cough, with little tickling in larynx. — Rapid respiration. 

z8. Chest. — Pains in chest, with sticking and dyspnoea. — Pressure on 
sternum, with feeling of emptiness in chest. — Stitching in sternum. 

20 . Neck. — Painful tension and stiffness of cervical muscles, with an 
illusive sensation as if a weight were lying on them. 

2X. Limbs. — Inclination to stretch limbs. — Tearing pains in limbs. — 
Arthritic tearing in bones. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Cramp-like drawing in upper arm and tips of 
fingers, — Swelling and stiffness of first joints of fingers, with burning pain in 
the nails. 

23. Ix)wer Limbs. — Cramp-like drawing in feet and toes, 

24. Generalities. — ^Weakness as if he would die. — ^Tremulous feeling : 
in all the vessels ; in upper extremities, with tendency to start, esp. on 
exerting the mind. — Emptiness or hungry feeling. — Most symptoms > moving 
about in open air. 

25. Skin. — Great sensitiveness of skin, with redness or soreness even 
from slight irritation. — Burning in the ulcers like bed-sores on h buttock.— 
Corrosive itching provoking scratching. — Itching, moist spots on upper part 
r. ankle. 

26. Sleep.— Frequent yawning. — Sleeplessness and restlessness at night. 
— Lascivious dreams. 



VIOLA ODORATA 


1547 


27. Fever. — Sudden paroxysms of shivering. — Heat with firm, hard 
pulse. — Great warmth in scalp with prickling. — Heat of cheeks with redness. 
— Tremof in»every blood-vessel. 


Yiola Odorata. 

Viola odorata. Sweet-scented Violet. N, 0 . Violacese (an order 
most members of which contain Emetin, and under which 
Ipec. is sometimes placed : allied to Cinchonaceae), Tincture 
* of fresh plant in flower. 

Clinical* — Cancer. Choroiditis. Cough, spasmodic; by day. Hoarseness. 
Hysteria. Neuralgia, supra-orbital. Otorrhoea ; suppressed. Rheumatism. 
Seminal emissions. Styes. Whooping-cough. Wrists, rheumatism of. 

Chaeacteristios. — The Violet was introduced by Gross and 
proved by Hahnemann, Gross, and Stapf. Gross says of his symp- 
toms that they recurred equally in all positions, were mild, yet more 
definitely felt than from other drugs. Hahnemann had bruised pain 
in all the bones in the morning, in bed after waking, > after rising. 

• Stapf had relaxation of all the muscles. The mind was greatly excited 
and disturbed, and V. od, found its first uses in hysterical cases. 
Aversion to music, especially the violin, is one of the peculiar symp- 
toms. There is increased activity and rush of ideas, generally confused : 

Can only grasp half an idea ; puts it in its proper place but cannot 
hold it.^^ A keynote symptom of F. od. is Tension : “ Tension of the 
occiput and forehead ” ; Tension of the scalp of occiput even when 
not moving, though < bending head forward and backward ; painful, 
compelling him to wrinkle forehead ; lasting several days.'^ Gross 
experienced the former and Stapf the latter of these. The following 
•is from Gross: ** Tension which at times extends to upper half of 
face, especially of nose, thence to forehead and temples, as far as 
ears, alternating with a similar sensation in occiput and cervical 
muscles.'^ Cooper (//. M., xxix. 154 and 640) has illustrated the 
action of F. od, on the head and eye by a case : Miss X. had for 
twenty years attacks of fearful headache which began suddenly and 
without apparent cause at intervals of a week or more. The pain 
was throbbing under right temple and eye, sometimes flying for a 
short time to the other side. Vision very defective, especially on dull, 

• wet.days ; chronic choroiditis had been diagnosed by one prominent 
oculist. On September ii, 1893, a single dose of F. od. ^ was given. 
Next day the patient had a headache, not in the usual place, but quite 
at the vertex. After tMs there were no sevefe headaches and very 
(pw threatenings. General health improved and the sight also j the 
pain and irritation, which were formerly distracting, disappeared. 
Cooper ordered discontinuance of glasses. On March 10, 1894, there 
was a rather pronounced attach of headache, with sick feeling, at the 
time of the period ; the first day the pain was through my head, the 
second day about an inch or two above the right ear.^^ Another dose 
of F. od. 0 was sent. From this time the cure went steadily forward. 



VIOLA ODORATA 


1548 

Appetite and strength increased, and sight gradually became normal. 
On May ii, 1894, the patient wrote, “ I am quite well, and my sight 
is in splendid order. Cooper considers V. od, has. a very^specific 
relation to the lateral sinuses and their vasomotor nerves. Symptoms 
of the proving show a “ decided pitch on the interior of the eyes : 

Oppression in the eyeballs ; heat and burning of the eyes ” ; Fiery 
appearances (a fiery semicircle) before the eyes “ Stinging in the 
eyes.*^ Cooper has also published an ear case treated with Viola 
{H, M., xxix. 154) : A child of seventeen months had been affected 
with recurring otorrhoea of both ears (< right) from birth ; and two 
other children of the same parents were said to have died from dis- 
charges of the ears, coming on in the same unaccountable manner. 
V, od, 0 , one dose, was given, and the next day a great quantity of ill- 
smelling discharge came from the right ear, with immediate improve- 
ment in the child^s condition ; from being drowsy and listless she 
became bright and intelligent. Thereafter both discharge and deaf- 
ness disappeared. Ear affections with pain about the orbits indicate 
V, od, V, od, has cured a number of cases of rheumatism, chiefly 
right-sided. It has a marked affection for the wrists, especially the 
right. Cooper considers it Suited to dark-complexioned people of 
the Fer, pic, type ” ; Hering says to : tall, thin, nervous girls ; to 
mild, impressive girls of fair complexion ; and to tuberculous 
patients.^^ Teste, who used Viola frequently, described the type as 
a lymphatico-nervous temperament, a mild disposition, dry and cool 
skin.^* Many patients cured by him were tall and slender. [The 
cure of Lady Margaret Marsham, 67, of an affection of the throat 
pronounced to be malignant (apparently epithelioma of tonsil), with 
an infusion of Violet leaves is on record (H. W^., xxxvi. 556). Boiling 
water was poured on the fresh leaves and allowed to stand twelve 
hours. Compresses moistened with this were applied externally to 
the throat and covered with oil-silk. Relief of pain, dysphagia, and 
suffocative symptoms was immediate. The external swelling dis> 
appeared in a week, the growth on the tonsil in a fortnight.] Peculiar 
Sensations arc : As if everything in head whirled around, if eye- 
balls were compressed. As if nose had been beaten and blood were 
pressing out. As if hard palate were dried up. As if a stone were 
lying on chest. Burning like a small, transient flame in spots here 
and there. The symptoms are : < Bending head backward and for- 
ward. < By day (cough). < From music. Bone pains > after rising 
in morning. < Cold room (hoarseness). < Dull wet day (vision). 

Relations. — Antidoted by: Camph. Compatible: In whooping- 
cough, Coral. ; in helminthiasis, Cina. Compare : Pain in right wrist, 
Act. spi., Bry. Ropy sputa, K. bi. Weakness of muscles of neck, 
Ver., Ant. t. < Music, Nux, Sep., Ph. ac., Aco., Nat. c.. Puls. 
[Cooper has pointed out a close relationship between the Violaceaj 
and the Rubiaceae, notably between Viola and Ipecac. Both Viola 
and Ipec. have been used externally aa.remedies for stings and snake- 
bites (H, W,^ xxxvi. 249).] Teste puts Viola in the Chelidonium 
group, and finds a striking analogy between these two remedies. 

OauBation.— Suppressed discharges. 



VIOLA ODORATA 


1549 


SYMPTOMS. 

X. Uisd.— Sombre melancholy and sadness.— Hysterical humour, with 
constant weeping, without knowing why,^ — Aversion to conversation, — Great 
weakness of memory and forgetfulness. — Great concourse (excessive flow) of 
unsettled and confused ideas. — Insane confusion, childish behaviour, dis- 
obedience, refusing nourishment, talks in a low, soft voice. — Remarkable 
perspicuity and great activity of brain. — Predominance of intellect over 
feeling. — Increased activity of the intellect. 

* 2. Head.-*Dull and painful confusion in the head. — ^I'urning vertigo, 

also when seated. — Headache, sometimes with cramps in eyes and luminous 
circles before sight. — Drawing in 1 . frontal eminence. — The head feels heavy 
and sinks forward ; sensation of weakness in muscles of nape. — Rush of blood 
to head, with prickings in sinciput (forehead). — Tension in integuments of the 
head, extending into face, nose, and ears, frequently causing a knitting of the 
brows, — Burning in forehead. 

3. Eyes. — Cramps in eyelids. — Closing of eyes as from drowsiness. — 
— Heaviness of eyelids. — Sensation as if eyeball were compressed.— Pupils 
contracted. — Heat and burning sensation in eyes. — Myopia. — Flames before 
eyes. — (Chronic choroiditis with fearful throbbing headache under r. temple. 
— R. .T. C.)— Caused styes on r. eyelids in a case of Cooper’s.— (Vision dim, 
< on dull,*wet days). 

4. Ears. — Shootings in (and around) ears. — Aversion to all kinds of 
music, principally violin. — Murmuring and tinkling before ears. — (Discharges 
of both ears with deafness disappeared after one dose of R. T. C.) — 
Brings on a discharge that has stopped ; or heals a discharge in a few days 
(R. T. C.), 

. 5. Nose. — Numbness of tip of nose as from a blow, and as if blood were 
pressing out. 

6. Face. — Hot forehead. — Pain in face, with drawing pressure in zygo- 
-matic process. — Tension in integuments of face, esp. above eyes. — Tension 
below eyes and above nose, extending to temples. — Tearings in ( 1 .) lower jaw 
in direction of ear. 

7. Teeth. — ^Tearing pain in (r.) lower teeth. 

8 . Mouth. — Sensation in hard palate as if it were completely dried up. 
— Aphthae. 

12. Abdomen. — Distension of abdomen. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation, with ineffectual want to evacuate. 
—Helminthiasis. — Itching of anus every afternoon. 

15. Male Sexual Organs, — Pollutions, followed by headache. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— During pregnancy, dyspnoea. 

17. Respiratory Orj^ans. — Hoarseness, followed by coryza.— Dyspnoea 
with violent cough; < in daytime. — By day chieffy, in long lasting spells, 
dry, short, violent cough, with much dyspnoea. — Whooping-cough in nervous, 
thin little girls, — Sputum profuse, clear, ropy, jelly-like. — Respiration difficult, 
and scarcely perceptible, with painful expiration, excessive anguish, and 
violent palpitation of heart. — Shortness of breath. 

18. Chest. — Violent oppression of the chest and dyspnoea, with pressure 
on the chest, as by a stone. 



1550 VIOLA ODORATA— VIOLA TRICOLOR 

/' 

20. Neck and Back. — ^Tension in muscles of the neck. — Jerking draw- 
ing in cervical muscles, near nape, extending down, < lying on opposite side. 

21. Limbs.— Rheumatism of r: side ; motion of r. side almost impossible. 
— Bruised pain in all bones in morning in bed, after waking, disappears after 
rising. — Relaxation of all the muscles. — Drawing pains in limbs.— Pain as if 
broken in all joints on waking in morning. — ^Trembling of limbs. 

22. Upper Limbs.— Slight trembling of arms ; dyspnoea. — Rheumatism 
of upper limbs ; deltoid ; of r. carpal and metacarpal joints.— Drawing pain 
in elbow* joint and back of hand. — Pressive, aching pain in the wrists, esp. r. 

23. Lower Limbs.— CEdematous swelling of lower liidbs with stitching 
pains. 

24. Generalities. — Congestion of blood to single parto. — Troubles of or 
on 1 . ear. — Burning and flushes of heat in different parts. — Grejat nervous 
debility. — The sufferings are mild, but still well defined, and the same in all 
positions. — ^Yawning every morning, with lachrymation. — The patient lies on 
the back while asleep at night, with the 1. hand passed above the head and 
the knees bent ; contrary to his habit. 

25. Skin. — Dry, warm skin, want of sweat ; only palms moist ; measles 
running an irregular course. — ^IVansient burning here and there in small 
spots. 

26. Sleep. — Yawning : and stretching without sleepiness ; pvery n 
morning so that eyes fill with water.— Sleepiness in eyes, lids'* will close. 
— Lies on back in sleep with 1 . hand over head, knees bent and lying far to 
side. 

27. Fever. — Chilly disposition. — Forehead hot. — Transient burning, here 
and there, as if it concentrated in a small spot and burned there like a small 
flame. — Febrile shuddering, — N ight-sweats. 


Yiola Tricolor. 

Viola tricolor. Jacea, Pansy. Heartsease. N, 0 , Violaceae. 

Tincture of fresh plant in flower. 

OlinieaL — Crusta lactea. Eczema. Enuresis. Gonorrhoea, suppressed. Gout. 
Impetigo. Leucorrhoea. Ophthalmia, scrofulous. Orchitis. Plica polonica. 
Rheumatism. Ringworm. Seminal emissions. Syphilis. Throat, ulceration of. 

CharacteristiOB. — The Pansy was proved by Hahnemann and 
his provers. It had an ancient reputation in asthma and epilepsy, 
and especially in obstinate skin diseases. Teste quotes from old 
observers (Starck, Haase, Murray, &c.) the following as cured by 
K tri. : (i) Milk-crust in children at the breas^ [or] recently weaned. 
(2) Milk-crust with violent cough and excessive oppression. (3) Im- 
petigo of hairy scalp and face in children and adult females. (4) 
Favus and serpiginous crusts in children and adults, with swelling and 
induration of cervical glands. (5) Large boils all over body in a 
scrofulous child. (6) Pustules and ichorous exanthema of feet. (7) 
Squamous spots on skin. (8) Rheumatism and gout ; articular rheu- 
matism with itch-like eruption round the joints. (9) Impetigenous 



VIOLA TRICOLOR 


1551 

# 

exanthema on forehead. (10) Ichorous ulcers with violent itching. 
In Russia a decoction of Pansy is a popular remedy for scrofula ; and 
Schlegel, ®f Moscow, used it with good effect in syphilitic affections, 
especially venereal ulcers. Teste (from whom I take all the above) 
puts P. irL in two groups, whose types are Lyc. and Cham. Homoeo- 
pathy has brought out some characteristics of F. tri. which single out 
its cases. One of these is concomitance of urinary symptoms with 
skin affections : Tinea capitis with frequent involuntary urination. 
Eczema with urinary disturbances ; too copious urination ; or sudden 
arrest of secfetion. Urine smelling like caVs urine is a keynote. 
The male sexual organs were much excited. Emissions with vivid 
dreams occuriied ; swelling, itching, and pains in prepuce and glans, 
with erections. Peculiar Symptoms are : Face hot and sweating ^ter 
eating. ^ Dyspnoea after eating. Hands twitch and are clenched in 
sleep. Nervous paroxysms followed suppressed milk-crust. The 
axillae and clavicular regions were noticeably affected ; and stitches 
and burning stitches were prevailing pains. The symptoms are : < 
By pressure on side opposite to painful side. < Lying on unpainful 
side. Lying ssz anxiety about heart. Raising head sss, and stooping 
>, heaviness in head. Walking = vertigo ; stitches through chest 
and abdomen. Sitting = stitches in abdomen and groin (standing > 
them). ^ At II a.m. ; at night. Open air > headache ; = chilli- 
ness, Aversion to open air. < In winter when walking in cold air. 

Relations. — Aniidoled by: Camph., Merc., Puls., Rhus. Com- 
patible : Puls., Rhus, Sep., Staph. Compare : Tension of integuments 
of face and forehead, V. od. Crusta lactea, Vinca m. (V. tri. has 
urinary concomitants). Eruptions, ulcers, &c., Cham., Graph., Hep., 
Merc., Clean., Petrol., Staph. Stitches, K. ca. Botan., see Viol, od, 

Cansation. — Suppressed milk-crust (nervous paroxysms). 

^ SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Sadness respecting domestic affairs. — Precipitation as from 
internal ^nguish, with sensation of great weakness. — Tendency to shed tears. 
— Ill-humour, moroseness, with dislike to conversation. — Great sensitiveness, 
inclination to scold, and combativeness. — Disobedience. — ^Aversion to labour. 
— Great dulness of the intellect. 

2 . Head« — Head bewildered and perplexed.— Vertigo and dizziness 
when walking. — Headache from root of nose to brain, disappearing in open 
air. — Heaviness of head, which draws it backwards, principally when getting 
up* > by stooping.— Pressive headache, esp. in forehead and temples 
(extending outward).— Shootings in occiput day and night.— The brain shakes 
when walking. — Burning stitches in scalp, esp. in forehead and temples 
(tearing stitch externally in 1. temple).— Scurfs on head, unbearable burning, 

*most at night.— Impetigo of the hairy scalp and face.— Crusta lactea in chil- 
dren recently weaned.— Thick incrustations, pouring out a large quantity of 
thick, yellow fluid, which mats tlfe hair. 

3. Byes. — Pain in eyes, as if a hard body were between upper eyelid 
and eyeball— Smarting and incisive and itching shootings in eye.- Contrac- 
tion and closing of eyelids, with inclination to sleep.— (Myopia.) 



VIOLA TRICOLOR 


1552 

6 . Face. — Heat in face at night in l}ed, sometimes semilateral, and in 
cheek on which patient is not lying. — Heat and perspiration of face after 
eating.— Thickness and hardness of skin of face.— Scabs on face w^th J)orning 
itching, esp. at night, and running of a yellow and viscid pus ; also behind 
ears. — Tension in integuments of face and forehead. ' 

8. Mouth. — Tongue loaded with whitish mucus of a bitter taste. — 
Accumulation of saliva in the mouth, with sensation of drynes& 

9. Throat. — Sore throat in evening. — Swelling of cervical glands. — 
Much phlegm in throat =r hawking, ii a.m, — Swallowing difficult and very 
painful (syphilis). — ^Chancroid ulcer on posterior surface of Irauces and soft 
palate (syphilis). 

12. Abdomen. — Stitches and cutting pain in abdomen^with urging to 
stool and crying and lamentations, followed by discharge of lumps qf mucus 
and flatulence. — Pressing-stinging in diaphragm. 

13. Stool. — Chopped soft stools. — Stool with mucus and much flatus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urging (frequent) to urinate, with profuse dis- 
charge of urine. — Fetid urine ; it smells like cat's urine. — Very turbid urine. 
— Stitches in the urethra. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Swelling of the prepuce with itching, — 
Stitching in penis or pressing in glans ; burning of glans. — While standing 
voluptuous itching of prepuce, accompanied by an erection which prevented 
scratching. — Itching stitches in scrotum. — Involuntary seminal discharges, 
with vivid dreams. — Loss of seminal fluid at stool. — Suppressed gonorrhoea ; 
indurated testicle. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Stitch in region of mons veneris, r. side. 
— Painful pustules on labia. — Leucorrhoea : with stitching pain ; in children ; 
in syphilis, — Chancroid ulcers about breasts. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Stitches in 1. side of chest; < during 
inspiration and expiration. 

18. Chest. — Syphilitic ulcers on clavicles. — Shooting in chest.— Stitches 

in the chest, on the ribs, sternum, and intercostal muscles. ^ 

19. Heart. — Oppression and lancinations in region of heart on bending 
forwards while sitting. — ^Anxietas praecordium, with palpitation of heart when 
lying down (with beating like waves). 

20. Neck and Back. — Swelling of glands of neck. — Spasmodic pain 
and contraction, with pinching between shoulder-blades (with cutting, ting- 
ling, and crawling in the skin). 

22. Upper Limbs. — Lancinations in joints of shoulder, elbows, fore- 
arms, and fingers ; > on motion. — Painful pustules in axillse (syphilis), — 
Cutting stitches with itching in axillae. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Pain, as of broken thighs, on waking in morning. 
— Flexion of knees when walking ; with drawings^ in thighs and calves. — 
Jerking of musclesnn calvcs.—Fine stitches in r. tibia when walking. — Shoot- 
ings in patellae, tibiae, and feet. — Pustulous and ichorous exanthema on feet. 

24. Generalities. — [The principal use for this remedy is for nocturnal 
emissions accompanied by very vivid dreanw ; they are not very exhausting, 
but cause an uneasy and played-out ” state of the mind.— Loss of seminal 
fluid at stool and in the urine, trembling, poor appetite, feels dull, sleepless.— 
Very vivid, amorous dreams.— Pricking in skin ; pricking itching.— < When 



VIPERA 


1553 

sitting. — > After rising from a seat. — H. N. G.] — Dejection, sometimes as 
from insufficient sieep.— Lancinating pains in the limbs, — Miliary eruption 
over wiiojp body,*with lancinating, gnawing sensation, 

25. Skin. — Stinglng*biting rash. — Dry scabs over the whole body ; when 
they arc scratched they exude yellow water. — Eruption over face (except 
eyelids) and behind ears, with burning, itching, < at night, a thick, hard scab 
formed, cracked here and there, from which a tenacious yellow pus exuded, 
and hardened into a substance like gum. 

26. Sleep. — Inclination to sleep in afternoon. — Distuibed sleep, with 
frequent wakiflg. — Awakens frequently without cause. — Sleep retarded by a 
concourse of ideas, with difficulty in waking in morning. — Vivid and amorous 
drftams. — ^Jerking of the (child’s) hands and retraction of thumbs when sleep- 
ing, with redness of face and general dry heat. 

27. Vever. — Chill, or chilliness in forenoon and in open air. — Dry, 
anxious heat at night in bed, with red face. — General heat, esp. in face, with 
anxiety ; dyspnoea immediately after eating. — Night-sweats. 


Vipera. 

Vipera •communis. Pelias berus. Common Viper [with other 
varieties, especially V. redi (Italian Viper) and V. torva 
(German Viper)], N, O. Ophidia (Family, Viperidae). At- 
tenuations of the venom. 

Clinioal. — Epistaxis. Goitre. Haemorrhages. Jaundice. Liver, enlargemen 
of. Neurasthenia. Phlebitis. Senility, premature. Tongue, swelling of. Vari 
Qosis. 

Characteristios. — The effects of bites by the Common Viper and 
related species have been collected, and have furnished the data for 
•liomceopathic prescribing. Vipera affects the blood and blood-vessels, 
conducing to haemorrhage and inflammation of the vessels themselves. 
A keynote for Vip, in cases of phlebitis and varicosis is < on letting 
the limb affected hang down ; as if it would burst with fulness. 
The region of the vessel affected is inflamed and sensitive. Allen 
{Handbook) relates this case : A goldbeater found the veins of his 
right arm become exceedingly swollen and painful, so that he could 
no longer work, or let his hand hang down. Vip, cured immediately. 
A case (quoted from Med. Adv. in Med. Cent. /li. 79) of varicose vein of 
the popliteal space, with the sensation as though the kg would bursty 
and a nervous, fidgety condition of the feet which kept them in 
constant motion, was onred with Vip. torva 3^. The bursting feeling 
appears to be at the root of this characteristic. Swan said Vip. was a 
Remedy for all forms of epistaxis. Vip. has a chronic and periodic 
action ; the symptoms return annually for years. Patients resist the 
cold badly. The parts may be paralysed and ulcers and gangrene 
follow. A Sensation as if something ran up the thigh occurred in the 
bitten limb in one case. In one case there was sweat over the whole 
body except the bitten limb. Leonard {M. A.j xxvi. 103) gave Vipera 
VOL. II. 99 



1554 


VIPERA 


aconiica carinata (i) to a lady suffering from climacteric haemorrhage ; 
flow red with dark clots ; excessive to prostration and faintness. 
She had a small uterine fibroid. A few doses relieved, and the^xces- 
sive haemorrhage did not return. (2) A lady nursing a child a year 
old was much prostrated by haemorrhage lasting several weeks, not 
profuse, but continuous : Nose-bleed nearly every day ; weaning 
brought no relief. Chi, 200 did no good. Vip, ac, cm cured in three 
doses. The symptoms are : < By touch ; by pressure ; on change 
of weather. < Letting limb or part hang down. 

Relations. — Compare: Haemorrhage of fluid blood*^ Sanguisuga. 
< Hanging down limbs, Calc., Aim., Am. c., Sbi., Thu. 


SYMPTOMS. 

X. Mind. — Delirium ; and raving ; with vomiting ; alternating with 
sopor.— Coma, with thirst for water. — Loss of mental functions with drawn 
features. . 

2. Head. — ^Vertigo : with falling forward, with nose-bleed and anxiety ; 
with nausea and vomiting, so that he fainted ; with loss of vision. — Ecchy- 
moses in membranes of brain, effusion of bloody serum into ventricles. — 
Tearing at every change of weather, with sticking.—- Headache : wHh coated 
tongue and bad appetite ; with inclination to sigh. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes : dark yellow ; red, inflamed, and watery ; staring ; 
sunken. — Pupils ; dilated ; 1. dilated, r. contracted. — Paralysis of lids ; dropped 
over eyes. — Vision ; dim ; dim in 1. eye, lost in r. ; lost. 

5. Nose. — Bleeding from nose ; with vertigo. 

6. Face. — Face ; swollen (and neck), with pressing out of eyes ; tense 
and blackish, with closure of throat ; convulsed ; red ; pale and hippocratic, 
with cold sweat on forehead ; covered with drops of sweat. — Lips : blue ; 
lips and tongue swollen, covered with saliva and pale ; livid and protruding 
— Acid burning in lips, mouth, and throat. 

8. Mouth. — Scorbutic line on gums. — Sensation of swelling in the 
teeth {H, IF., xxviii. 25). — Swelling of salivary glands ; of mouth ; of mouth 
and throat, with dryness, so that swallowing was impossible. — Tongue: 
swollen ; and brownish-black, protruding ; so that he could not speak ; with 
closed jaws and difficult speech. — Tongue ; black ; fuliginous and breath 
fetid; yellow, tip red; white, tremulous; white in middle, moist on edges, 
with thirst. — Speech : inarticulate ; and thick ; lost on account of weakness. 

9. Throat. — Swelling like a goitre. — Closure of throat so that she could 
swallow only water and milk, afterwards biting in fauces, the swelling of 
which became blackish. — ^Viscid mucus adheres to pharynx. 

10. Appetite. — A^ppetite lost. — Thirst ; with moist tongue, for cold 
drinks. ^ 

XI. Stomach. — Nausea : with shuddering ; with attack of faintness. — 
Retching ; with suffocative sensation.— Vomiting : after milk ; of all food and 
drink ; with weakness ; faintness ; shivering and thirst ; coldness of body ; 
with colic ; with colic and thirst ; bilious diarrhoea of bitter yellow fluid ; 
green substances ; green liquid ; viscid greenish fluid.— Pain : in epigastrium ; 



VIPERA 


1555 

< pressure ; in epigastric or umbilical region. — Uneasiness in epigastrium. — 
Digestion slow. 

Z2. •Atedomen.— Hypochondria tense; sore.— Abdomen tense, pressure 
causes distension of facial muscles. — Swelling with raging pains and spasms 
even to faintness, and after drinking milk vomiting of a mass of round worms, 
then freedom from worm troubles which he had before. — Sudden flatulent 
distension, with colic, pain in back, and vomiting. — Rumbling.— Pain in 
abdomen ; in umbilical region, < pressure. 

13. Stool^and Anus.— Diarrhoea : frequent; bilious.— Fetid ; and 
black. — Bloody stools ; in masses of dark, offensive blood (apparently from 
th^ tongue, which had been scarified). — ^Stools : copious ; numerous, with 
shivering, urgidg, and thirst ; involuntary ; and frequent, mixed with blood 
and mueus ; and involuntary micturition. — Discharge of black, coagulated 
blood; of blood just before death. — Pain and tenesmus. — Urging to pass 
stool and urine ; desire for stool, with coldness to touch. — (After diarrhoea, 
greenish and bloody, most violent pain in the enlarged liver, with jaundice 
and fever, pain extending from liver to shoulder and down to hip ; Vipera im- 
mediately removed the pain and reduced the liver to its normal size.) 

14. Urinary Organs. — Ineffectual desire. — Strangury. — Involuntary 
micturition. — Urine : increased j suppressed ; dark yellow, as in jaundice. 

. 17. Respiratory Organs. — Suffocation. — Dyspnoea ; with sticking in 
heart— Anxious breathing, as in croup, threatening asphyxia. — Breathing 
ceased suddenly, heart stopped, face became livid, &c., tracheotomy was 
performed, blood drawn from arm flowed scantily, was dark, mixed with 
bright streaks. 

18. Chest. — Veins of chest and abdomen thick and hard. — Swelling of 
chest as far as umbilicus after bite on face. — CEdema of lungs before death. — 
Pain : in 1. side ; over four or five r. ribs on pressure.— Oppression, with 
anxiety ; with violent efforts to breathe and swilow. 

19. Heart and Pulse. — Sticking in heart ; with cold sweat and faint- 
fiess. — Pain in heart with faintness. — Dragging pain so that he tears his 
clothes, becomes faint. — Anxiety at same time for four years, with soreness of 
the bitten foot and paralysis of r. arm. — Heart’s action ; slow ; feeble ; and no* 
pulsation in radial or carotid arteries, but that in crural was very strong. — 
Pulse: rapid ; interrupted ; slow, febrile; irregular; weak. — {Vip, is a very 
valuable remedy for varicose veins and for acute phlebitis, the vein is swollen, 
bordered by an area of inflammation, which is very sensitive to touch, 
but particularly with the sensation, on letting the leg hang down, as if it 
would burst from the fulness of the veins.— Phlebitis of r. arm, < hanging 
arms down.) 

20. Back. — Sticking in kidneys.— Pain in loins. 

21. Limbs. — Limbs swollen and red. — Livid s|>ots on the bitten limb 
every year at the time of the bite. — Yellowish, livid, mottled spots. — Trem- 
tiling. — Pain in limbs : < touch ; alternating with pains in abdomen. — 
Limbs : benumbed : relaxed. — (Burning feeling in limbs in three cases— 
neurasthenia, an old sprain, and varicose veins.) 

22 . Upper Limbs. — Pain : in shoulders ; in arm, extending to chest. — 
Arm swollen; livid red; red, covered with spots; painful. — Paralysis of r. 
arm recurring for years after a bite on foot. — Swelling : of the hand not 



1556 VIPERA— VISCUM ALBUM 

bitten ; of hand, not pitting on pressure, with pain as if it would burst, with 
pain on touch ; and stiffness. — Hands violet-coloured, covered with phlyc- 
tenules.— Skin of hand dead and detached in large plates, subjacwnt? tissues 
livid.— Stitches in finger-tips after bite on arm. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Shuffling gait caused by paralysis.— Convulsive 
movements. — Cramps. — ^Weakness. — Feeling as if something moved up along 
thigh (after bite on ankle). — Tension in knees and ankles. — Knees stiff.— Leg 
swollen, cold, and insensible. — Paralysis of foot with shuffling gait. — Paralysis, 
then ulcers. 

24. Generalities. — Persons become prematurely old ; tbe development 
of children is arrested. — Blood altered, tending to haemorrhages, coagulability 
lost ; blood black. — Symptoms periodic, return every year. — Persistent oedema 
with tendency to ulcers, — Faintness. — Reeling. — Prostration. — Collapse. — ^The 
bite was felt through the whole body like a streak of lightning, she sank to 
the ground. — Bitten part seat of violent pain. — The swelling was insensible. 

25. Skin. — Skin : pale ; yellowish ; jaundiced on face and trunk, with 
red patches on limbs ; livid ; in spots ; black petechial spots over whole 
body, which was cold to touch. — Herpetic eruption, with itching about the 
wound. — Roseola-like eruption on inside of arm and down side of body. — 
Ulcers. — Blisters about the bite, bursting and leaving ulceration, muscles 
were laid bare, were dark red, dry, looked like smoked meat, insensible to 
touch, the sore was offensive. — Gangrene. — Crawling in soles, th'en also in 
palms. 

26. Sleep. — Disposed to yawn. — Sleepiness ; and heaviness ; with in- 
ability to sleep, and also almost constant necessity to change the position. — 
Sleeplessness ; from pain. — Night restless. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness : with sweat ; with cold sweat ; with rigidity and 
clammy sweat ; then fever. — Temperature diminished, resists cold badly.— 
Heat : in morning, with thirst, restlessness, and moderate pains ; towards 
evening ; at night, with delirium ; then shivering. — Fever of irregular type ; 
intermittent fever. — Burning : running up arm ; rising from heel to tongue 
on chest and abdomen, with longing for cold applications though skin was 
cold to touch ; of fingers (from rubbing a stick with which a snake had been 
bruised), with swelling. — Sweat : after vomiting ; after chamomile tea, 
copious sweat from abdomen to toes except over the bitten limb ; cold ; 
cold, clammy.— Skin dry. 


Yiscum Album. 

Viscum album. Mistletoe. AT. 0. Loranthaceae. Tincture of ripe 
berries. Tincture of bruised leaves. Tinclure of whole plant. 

Clinical . — Aura epileptica. Chorea. Deafness. Dysphagia. Endometritis':* 
Epilepsy* Labour, slow. Levitation. Lumbago. Menorrhagia. Metrorrhagia. 
Orchitis. Otalgia. Otorrhoea. Ovaritis. Retained placenta. Sciatica. Spleen 
pain in. Struma. Throat, sore. Whooping-cough. 

Gharaoteiistios. — In a pamphlet on ** Viscum Album Dr. George 
Black, of Torquay, has put together most of the facts relating to this 



VISCUM ALBUM 


1557 


plant, including four new provings, by himself and three female 
prover|. The symptoms of these provings I have marked in the 
Schema — (B) Dr. Black, 43, from 3X and ^ ; (B,) Miss F,, 20, from 
2X and (fr ; (B9) Mrs. X., 37 from 3 ; (B3) Miss S., 27, from 3X, 2X, i x, 
and Proell made a proving of the tincture, and developed symp- 
toms resembling epileptic aura and petit mal, which had the additional 
epileptic feature of recurrence — they recurred frequently for two 
years. Belcher gave to a girl, 17, suffering from chorea, 5-drop doses 
of a tincture 4?f leaves and berries. On the second day he was called 
to see her, and found her suffering as if under the influence of an 
opiate. Two women took Vise, to procure abortion. Every muscle 
save those of* the eyes became paralysed, as did also the intestinal 
tract. •They could not swallow, and died of starvation in conse- 
quence, the bowels being obstinately constipated. The muscles of 
speech were also paralysed. A boy, 14, ate some berries ; soon after 
began to feel giddy, and then became insensible. He was found with 
suffused countenance, lips livid, conjunctiva injected, pupils slightly 
dilated and fixed, pulse slow and full, bounding ; breathing slow, ster- 
torous. On pricking the soles the feet were quickly drawn up. Cold 
affusions roused him, when he began to talk incoherently, had spectral 
illusions^ and was inclined to be violent. Laville (Epilepsy and Mania 
in Men bnd the Lower Animals) isolated (i) Viscine^ a soft substance, 
yellowish blue, of poisonous odour and bitter taste ; (2) Visco-resin^ a 
bluish resin, pitchy, saccharine, odour at first agreeable, then fetid, 
Viscine is most abundant in the mistletoe of the apple-tree ; Visco- 
resin in that of the oak and acacia, which last excites the sexual 
appetite. The mistletoe of the hawthorn possesses, like all the rest, 
but in a higher degree, the contractile properties of Secale on the 
uterus in uterine inertia. That of the oak has a remarkable anti- 
'epileptic power on horses. A breeder had a very fine stock which 
•became epileptic at four or five years old. He cured them with a 
tincture of the fresh leaves bruised in a mortar. According to Laville, 
all mistletoes are useful in epilepsy and rabies (Ozanam^s account of 
Laville^s work, B. J. //., xxv.). Black also quotes from B. H., 
xxii. 637, William Huber's experience with Fisc. a. : (i) Case of 
retained placenta with constitutional symptoms after miscarriage at 
sixth month. Expulsion rapidly effected by Fisc. a. 3. (2) Man, 22, 
robust, fair, took a chill from travelling in ice-cold wind. Got a draw- 
ing-tearing pain in left lower jaw, lasting some hours, succeeded by 
loud buzzing, and stopped-up feeling, ending in complete deafness of 
that ear. Fisc. 3 cured. (3) Metrorrhagia following suppression from 
a cold foot-bath. Fisc. 3 cured. (4) Metrorrhagia following suppres- 
sion from working iif water. (5) Sciatica left side. Vise. 3 cured. 
^ (6) Rheumatism from wading ill-shod through great tracts of snow. 
Fisc. 3 cured. (7) Hydrothorax (right) from chill, with shooting in 
spleen. Fisc. 4 and 3 cured, John Wilde (M. H. R.y xii. 144) made a 
tincture of the bruised leaves, 'and gave 5-drop doses to a boy, 14, who 
had chorea affecting face and limbs. There was improvement in two 
days, and in a few weeks a complete cure. A boy, nine, strumous, with 
tendency to skin disease, was affected with chorea after a fright. He 
was completely changed in expression, speech quite inarticulate, look 



VISCUM ALBUM 


1558 

^ idiotic. The movements continued at night, and the boy was worn 
out for want of sleep, Fisc. i to 2-drop doses, did no good. The 
dose was then increased to 15 drops. Improvement set in at 6nce, and 
a perfect cure was effected ; the doses being diminished after a time 
because soreness of the tongue and redness of the conjunctiva were 
set up. Black removed with Vise. 3 the following : (i) Lumbago, 
from chill, tearing pain, wants something to press against it. ’{2) 
Lumbago, right, extending to right buttock, < by slightest movement. 
(3) Pain in sacral region, unable to turn either side, < slightest move- , 
ment; ^‘pain of a terrible clutching nature, as if her vitals were 
affected.’^ [Cooper has given great relief with Vise, in old spinal- 
irritation pains.” He names also “ spinal symptoms dhe to uterine 
causes” as indicating it.] (4) Rheumatism ; “ the weight of my body on 
the joint causes it to be very sore” ; excessive perspiration. (5) Sciatica 
associated with otorrhoea. Burning pain from centre of left buttock 
to inner ankle ; heel as if red-hot coal applied ; leg feels heavy as 
lead. In addition a number of cases of catarrhal deafness with noises 
in the ears were cured or greatly improved. C. M. Boger {Med, 
Couns,y xvi. 266) relates this case : Persistent vertigo after epileptic 
seizures, lasting a month at a time. Vise, cm cured. Huber (H. R., 
ii. 74) used the 3X and 6x. He considered it applicable to all kinds of 
rheumatism, acute and chronic, especially when charactefised by 
tearing pains ; in cases occurring in winter, the result of exposure to 
sharp winds ; and in cases of rheumatic deafness. The symptoms 
are < By movement ; by slightest movement. The lumbago cured 
in one case was > by pressure. 

Relatlonfi. — Antidoied by: Camph., Chi. Follows well: Aco. 
(rheumatism). Compare: Epilepsy, Bell., Strain., Plumb. Effects 
of working in water. Calc. Chill, fright, Aco. Uterine action, Secale. 
Rheumatism, Aco., Bry., Puls., Rho., Rhus, Spi. 

Causation. — Chill. Wetting. Fright. Suppression of menses. ^ 


SYMPTOMS, 

1. Mind.— Incoherent talk and spectral illusions ; inclined to be violent. 
— Insensibility.— Stupor, succeeded by almost entire insensibility, lying 
motionless, with her eyes closed, as if in a sound sleep, but easily roused 
by a loud noise, and then would answer any question, but when she relapsed 
into her former condition there was a slight disposition to stertorous breath- 
ing ( 2 nd d.).— Feels as if going to do something dreadful while the tremblings 
are on (B,). — Keeps waking in night thinking the most horrible things 
imaginable (B,).— If awake seemed to be dreaming^ if asleep she was dream- 
ing (B3). — Felt in bad temper when pain in chest was on (B3). — Great 
depression (B). 

2. Head. — Giddiness ( 2 nd d.). — Intense throbbing headache (B*). — 
Sharp pain in head and face, leaving them Sore (B,), — Numb feeling in head 
(B).— Tightening sensation of the brain once or twice (B). — Sharp shooting in 
1. occipital bone (B).— Twinges of pain in 1. supraorbital region and r 
thigh (B). 



VISCUM ALBUM 


1559 


3. Eyes. — Conjunctiva injected. — Pupil slightly dilated and fixed. — 
Pupils contracted, and at first insensible to light (and d.). — Spectral illusions. 
— Eyfcs sleepy, difficult to open, lids heavy (B3).— Neuralgic pain lower part 
r. orbit (B). 

4. Ears. — (Deafness in 1. ear.) — Hearing in 1. ear impaired, sounds 
muffied (B). — Dulness of hearing, 1. ear ; sharp twinges of pain in r. ear ; 
later in 1. (B),— Sound as of wind in trees (B).— Singing in r. ear, crackling in 
1. (B). 

5. No^. — Dryness back of nose, extending to larynx (B), 

6. Face. — Countenance suffused. — Lips livid. — Face flushed (after pal- 
pitation, Bx). — Face hot and flushed (B). 

8. Mottth. — ^Teeth have bled (B,). — ^Teeth chattered. — Mouth suddenly 
fills with saliva (B). — Unpleasant taste on waking, tongue coated to tip with 
ochre-yellow fur (B).—Tongue sore. — Felt starving at supper-time (B,). — 
Appetite ravenous (B,). 

11. Stomach. — Squeamish before breakfast and dinner (B,). 

12 . Abdomen. — ^Whole alimentary canal paralysed. — ^When out at times 
feels as if some one were dragging her down from the waist ; and directly 
after as if upper part of body floating in air (B,). — Hot feeling and constant 
ache in 1. groin; followed by sick feeling and shivering (B3). — Aching in 
hypogastrium as if menses coming on (Bj). — Sharp twinges of pain about r 
PouparVs ligament, inner aspect, shooting along spermatic cord (B). 

13. Stool and Anus.— Bowels obstinately constipated. — Copious action 
of bowels and very offensive (cadaverous) flatus (B). — Stinging, stitching pains 
1. side of rectum near anus, on lying down soon after midnight ; coming 
and going (B). — Constipated stool following itching of anus (after leaving off 
Vise. a. — B). — Acute aching 1. side of anus for hours, < evening (B). 

14. Urinary Organs. — Frequent urination; urine pale, increased in 
quantity (B,). — Urine milky-white after standing (B3). — Urine turbid after 
standing, pink deposit (B). 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Erotic dreams and seminal emissions (B). — 
Sharp twinges of pain along r. cord to testicle, which was drawn up close to 
inguiqal ring. — During coitus rather severe palpitation of the heart (B). — Pain 
in r. testicle (B). 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Sharp pains in ovarian region coming 
and going for two weeks, < morning in bed (B,). — Shooting pains in 1. 
ovarian region, and on movement lumbar pain and stiffness (B*). — Shooting 
pains in 1. ovarian region, < lying on 1. side ; with dead ache after (B3). — 
Felt faint, and actually fainted before menses (B3). — (Numerous cases of 
retained placenta.) — Metrorrhagia, partly bright, partly clotted and dark, with 
dull headache, stitches in temples, numbness of extremities, blue rings round 
eyes, sunken eyes. — It»causes uterine contractiqns and stops haemorrhages. — 
[Chronic (granular) endrometritis characterised by enlargement ; either sub- 
involution, alveolar hyperplasia or hypertrophy.] 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Spasm of glottis, came with dry sensation 
in throat, followed by efforts to swallow, then a sort of complete block, 
causing efforts to swallow and eyes to fill with tears (B). — Breathing slow and 
stertorous. — Slight disposition to stertorous breathing (2nd d.). — (A case of 
whooping-cough was cured in two days. 



VISCUM ALBUM 


1560 


x8. Chest. — Pain across sternal region, below breasts, coming and going, 

< by deep breath or lying on 1 . side (B3). — Stitching pain at upper part of 1 . 
breast (Bj).— Stabs under 1 . false ribs and constriction upper part of I lung, 

< taking deep breath. — Stitch in chest below 1 . breast, again above r. knee 
(B). — Creepy, chilly feeling 1 . side of lower outer chest (B). 

19. Heart.— Just when going off to sleep heart gave two severe thumps, 
then went off beating at a great rate (B,).— Heart gave a throb and then a 
pause (B).— Palpitation during coitus (B). — Pulse small, quick, and very 
irregular. — Pulse slow, full, and bounding. 

20. Neck and Back. — Sudden, momentary pain r. side of neck, two 
inches above clavicle (B). — Pain in 1 . side of neck on turning head to 1 . (B).— » 
Aching between shoulders (B,). — Aching and burning in sacrah region (B,), 
—Lumbar pain and stiffness < on movement (B). — Creepy shivering lumbar 
region (B). 

21. Limbs. — Twitching in hands and legs like chorea (B3). 

22. Upper Limbs, — Severe pain in r. shoulder- joint while sitting think- 
ng, 9 p.m. ; < on raising arm. — Felt in dorsum of 1. hand as if a large spider 
were crawling over it ; soon afterwards felt same sensation in dorsum of the 
r. hand (Proell, after 40 drops). 

23. Lower Limbs .—^Several cases of sciatica.) — In same winter sud- 
denly felt in r. foot a violent aching pain from within outwards, that com- 
pelled him to take off his boot, as it felt too iight; this sensation went off in 
an hour (Proell). — Sharp pain in r. buttock (B). — Unable to sleep till 4 a.m. 
for pain in r. leg, in popliteal space and edge of tibia, as during catamenia ; 
> moving leg about (B3). — Burning in centre of calf, changing position of 
limb > but does not remove the pain (B3). — ^Aching at upper and outer 
aspect of both calves, must keep moving them (B3). — Sharp shoot centre r. 
thigh at back (B). — Sharp twinge of pain in 1 , tibia (B). — Sharp twinge of pain 
in ball of 1 . great toe (B). — Stitch above r. knee (B). — Sudden twinges of pain 
in lower r. thigh and 1 . supraorbital region (B), 

24. Generalities. — About 10 a.m., when he was going to see a patient, 
he felt very queer, as if he must fall down ; he felt a glow that rose up from 
the feet to the head, and it seemed to him as if he were on fire, at same time 
his face became very pale ; this kind of aura epileptica recurred three times 
during the winter (Proell, after 40 drops). — Every muscle of body, except 
those of eyes, were paralysed ; could not speak or swallow, and both died 
about eighth or ninth day, literally starved. — Frequent recurrence of the 
symptoms during two years. — (Chorea from fright.)— Trembling in limbs, 
teeth chattered, got generally shaky (B,). — Unable to keep any part of body 
quiet at night, jerking first in one part then in another (B,). — Jerking and 
twitching of muscles (B*). — Fearfully tired as after hard work, evenings (B3), 
—Shooting pain in various parts of body (B). — Tremor through body as if all 
muscles in fibrillary contraction (B). 

25. Skin.— Skin warm and moist.— Skin felt dry and burning (Bj).— 
Red spots on neck and chest (B3). — L. side of neck large papule or small 
blood-boil (B). 

26. Sleep. — Drowsiness (2nd d.). — ^Wakes thinking of horrible things; 
gets to sleep again soon by changing thoughts (B,). — Sleep dreamful ; worry- 
ing dreams of affairs of day (B3). 



VOESLAU 


1561 

27. Fever. — Chilly even near a stove ; cold, chilly feeling creeps over 
him frequently (B).— Skin warm and very moist (2nd d,).— First cold and 
then hof feWing without being actually hot (B,).--On waking always very hot 
except on knees, legs, and feet, which are very cold.— Hot feeling at night 
during micturition (B). 


Yoeslau. 

Minenal Spring at Voeslau, in Austria. (Contains in 100 cubic inches 
14*2 gr. of solid constituents : Calc. c. 4*9, Calc. suL 27, Calc, 
mur. 0*5, Mag. c. 27, Mag. sul. i-8, Mag. mur. 0*4, Nat. sul. 0*9, 
Nat. m. 0*4, Alumina and Silica 0-4, Fer. c. 0*2, gummy sub- 
stance 0*1.) Dilution. 

Clinical. — Menstruation, disorders of. Seminal emissions. Urticaria. Vertigo. 

Charaoteristios. — Rosenberg observed the effects of Voeslau on 
the healthy. His symptoms constitute the Schema. The waters 
produce : Orgasm of blood ; pressure and tension. The throat was 
sensitive* to swallowing warm food and drink. Nettlerash with 
desquamation. In males there was sexual excitement and emissions ; 
and in females increased secretion of mucus in genitals and many 
troubles connected with menses. 

SYMPTOMS. 

, I. Mind. — Mind restless and excited. — Irritability, peevishness. 

2 . Head. — Vertigo and whirling in head. — Reeling and tottering of 
tvhole body two or three hours after a bath. — Congestion to head and orgasm 
of blood.— Heaviness of head. 

9. Xhi’Oat. — Hoarseness and dryness in throat, painful sensitiveness 
swallowing warm food or drink. 

11. Stomach. — Appetite is increased after the first bath. — Heaviness and 
sensation of fulness in stomach. — Sensitiveness and pressure in stomach after 
eating. 

12. Abdomen. — Pressure and tension in hepatic region, extending to r. 
shoulder. 

*13. Stool and Anus. — Thin stools, increasing to diarrhoea, with a slight 
degree of tenesmus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Frequent desire and frequent micturition. — 
^Urine : first days red, afterwards watery and copious. — Increased secretion 

from prostate. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Erections.— Rush of blood to genitals.— 

Nocturnal emissions.' * 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Increased secretion of mucus from 
genitals. — Menses : delayed ; diminished, accompanied with numerous 
troubles ; offensive ; too frequent and copious. 



1562 VOESLAU 

X7* Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness and dryness in throat, painful 
sensitiveness on swallowing warm food and drink.— Dry cough with slight 
pains in chest, • • 

iS. Chest.-— Congestion to chest and other organs. — Oppression ; respi- 
ration difficult, rapid, short. 

21. Limbs, — ^Weakness and falling asleep of limbs. 

24. Generalities. — Emaciation of young people. — Uneasiness and un- 
steadiness at work. — Increased sensitiveness, esp. to external air. 

25. Skin. — Itching nettlerash on whole body after fourteen baths,, 
ending in desquamation. — Itching, heat, biting, esp. towards midnight, pre- 
vious to the outbreak of perspiration. 

26. Sleep. — Overpowering sleepiness during day ; esp. afternoon. 

27. Fever. — Coldness and chilliness at times changing to hteat, with 
increased thirst. — Flushes of heat without thirst. — Perspiration in bed towards 
morning. 



Wiesbaden. 

The Sl>ring at Wiesbaden, in Prussia. (Contains in sixteen ounces 
Carbonic acid 6*416 cubic inches, Nitrogen 0*103 cubic inches ; 
of the following solids, in grains, Nat. m. 52*49, K. mur. 1*119 
Li. mur. 0*00138, Am. mur. 0*128, Calc. mur. 3*617, Mag. mur 
1*566, Mag. bro. 0*027, Calc. sul. 0*692, Calc. ph. 0 0029, Calc 
ars. 0*0015, Calc. c. 3*210, Mag. c. 0*079, Mang. c. 

0*004, Silicic acid 0*46, Alumina silicica 0*603 ; traces of Mag. 
iod., Stro. c., Cup. c.) Dilution* 

Glinloal. — AmenorrhoBa. Angina pectoris. Body, odour of, offensive. Consti- 
pation. Corns. Diarrhcea. Ear-wax, excessive. Epistaxis. Glaucoma. Gout. 
Hjemorrhage. Hjemorrhoids. Hair, rapid growth of; falling of; grows darker 
Hernia, inguinal ; femoral. Indigestion. Miscarriage, prevents. Rheumatism. 
Sterility. Vertigo ; caduca. Whitlow. 

CharaoteristioB. — The hot, chlorinated saline springs of Wies- 
baden (Fontes Mattiaci of Pliny) contain 8*176 grammes of solids to 
each litre, and of these Nat mur, makes up more than seven grammes. 
The baths, which constitute the chief part of the treatment, are 
extremely excitant. The baths, combined with drinking the water, 
generally determine at the commencement of the cure certain 
phenomena of saturation which disappear on temporary suspension 
of th^ treatment. The most common of these is a saburral state of 
the stomach, and a feeling of fulness and tension in the whole 
abdomen. Gout and rheumatism are the chief affections for which 
Wiesbaden is sought. Passive or atonic gout is the only kind for 
which Wiesh, is suited, and these cases usually pass through a period 
of aggravation before improvement sets in. Torpid and nodous 
rheumatism are benefited, the douche being employed as well as the 
•bath. Paralysis ; muscular and tendinous contractions ; sprains ; in 
complete anchyloses ; stiffness from old fractures ; gunshot wounds 
which are slow to Jiieal, are also benefited by Wiesh. Abdominal 
plethora and portal obstruction are relieved. By the artificial con- 
gestion which they set up in the venous plexus of the rectum they 
have for an almost constant effect the disengorgement of the viscera 
under the diaphragm, and the prevention of stasis in their parenchyma 
(Constantin James — to whom I am indebted for the whole of the 
above facts). Apelt observed the effects of drinking the water and 
excessive bathing. Magdeburg observed the effects on eight healthy 
persons. The excitant, congestive, and evacuant effects mentioned 

1563 



1564 


WIESBADEN 


by James appear in the provings. Blood rushes to the face. There 
is vertigo when lying in bed ; and vertigo which causes frilling. 
Haemorrhages occur from anus and nose which relieve other symp- 
toms. Fermentation occurs in the abdomen, and there is great 
exhaustion after diarrhoea. Haemorrhoidal flow occurs with > of 
abdominal plethora. In one case nose-bleed occurred persistently for 
six weeks, at the end of which a weakness of vision bordering bn 
blindness was cured. During the menses there is great weakness ; 
also constipation. A number of remarkable symptoms ;>ppeared in 
reference to the skin and nails. The hair grew rapidly and became 
darker. Nails also grew rapidly. Corns and callosities dropped off. 
Berridge cured with Wiesh. 200 a Miss B., 21, of a soft c‘6rn between 
fourth and fifth toes of right foot. There was burning and shooting 
pain in the corn (H. P., vii. 477). With the sweat of Wiesb. there is 
itching. The sweat on the diseased parts made a brown stain. The 
urine stiffened linen. The symptoms were : > By nose-bleed ; by 
hasmorrhoidal flux. < During menses. < From coffee (frequent 
micturition). < Lying in bed (vertigo). 

Relations. — Compare : Nat. m. Corns, Fer. pic. Callosities, 
Ant. c. Hair turns darker, Jabor., Pilo., Wild. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Becomes more cheerful (after 7th d.). — Impatient, depressed, 
hopeless. — Anxiety and uneasiness prevent sleep. — Apprehensive. — Ill-humour. 
— Peevish, talks to no one. — Disinclined to think. 

2. Head. — Vertigo : falls while walking ; whirling in head, kind of 
insensibility, trembling faintness, spasmodic hiccough, alternations of chills 
and heat, thirst, hajmorrhage while riding in a carriage. — Dizziness and 
heaviness of head while lying in bed, sensation as if she would fall. — Reeling 
and tottering, objects move before the eyes. — Head heavy, dull. —Hair : grows 
much more rapidly than usual ; falls out and grows again rapidly ; new 
growth darker ; formerly soft, becomes hard and brittle. — On scalp : large 
boils ; desquamation ; itching, as from vermin ; intolerable ; incessant. 

3. Eyes. — Glistening of eyes without clearness; slimy moisture is 
wiped from them. — Copious secretion : tenacious ; slimy ; purulent. — Mois- 
ture in canthi. — Eyes ache. — Pressure deep in eyeballs. — Eyeballs painful. — 
Increased tension. — Falling of eyebrows and lashes, with rapid secondary 
growth. — Itching of lids and margins. — ^All things seem to move before eyes 
when walking ; reeling ; staggers to and fro. — ^Weakness of vision > by 
persistent nose-bleed. 

4. Ears. — Copious secretion of car- wax; soft; slimy; pale brown; 
thin, almost fluent. — ^Tickling sticking in meatus. — Much itching of ear, > 
after copious flow of ear-wax. — Pains in ears. — Roaring in ears with diminished 
hearing. 

5. Nose. — Frequent sneezing, secretion of thick mucus. — Secretion 
from nose ; watery ; tenacious, like isinglass ; yellow mucus for four months. 
— Nose-bleed for six weeks, with which weakness of vision, bordering on 
blindness, disappeared. — Inclination to nose-bleed.—Frequent itching of 
nostrils. 



WIESBADEN 


‘565 

6. Face.-^Expression of suffering. — Face : sunken ; emaciated ; red 
and hot, with itching ; circumscribed redness. — Blood rushes violently to 
facc.-^fSe^sation of cobweb lying on skin of 1 . cheek (and d.).— Profuse sweat 
on face compels rubbing. 

8. Mouth. — Teeth seem too long. — Drawing tearing in teeth, so he 
could scarcely eat. — Gums : became scorbutic after long bathing ; blistered ; 
loqse and painful ; sore while eating.— Tongue : fuzzy with nauseous taste ; 
white on edges ; middle brown. — Injected veins under tongue. — Mouth dry. 
— Skiri forms folds on inner side of mouth, lips, and cheeks, after which it 
peels off. — Tfbkling in posterior part of palate. — Very bad taste in morning. 

Q. Throat,— Inclination to clear throat. — Swollen cervical and parotid 
gfands. « 

11. ^ Stomach. — ^Appetite ; great; at first increased, afterwards diminished. 
— Thirst ; great, with chilliness ; for refreshing drinks.— Qualmish ; inclina- 
tion to vomit ; vomiting. — Promotes digestion. — Pressure in stomach, feeling 
of fulness and visible swelling of epigastric region. 

12. Abdomen. — (Inflammation of the liver.) — Violent pain in region of 
spleen. — Emission of much flatus ; preceded by much rumbling and fermen- 
tation in abdomen. — Fermentation < after drinking the water. — Heaviness. — 
Colic. — Dragging from abdomen, half-way down r. thigh, at the point where 
a femoral hernia had protruded, with a sensation as if the hernia would pro- 
trude (lasting several days, very distressing). — Swelling of r. inguinal region, 
with a sensation of an inguinal hernia. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Hemorrhage from rectum. — Haemorrhoidal 
flow (curative of abdominal plethora). — Burning in rectum and bowels. — 
While urinating very urgent desire for stool. — Diarrhoea : early in morning, 
after drinking the water ; scanty ; copious, slimy ; then liquid, mixed with 
lumps, great exhaustion ; then pasty ; involuntary ; black ; grey ; slimy ; 
smells like rotten eggs. — Stools more seldom as activity of skin or kidneys 
increases. — Constipation. — Retained stool. — No stool during menses. — Stool 
lustreless, like hardened membranous bile. 

14. Urinary Organs. — (Inflammation of the kidneys.) — Pressure in 
region of kidneys. — Urination frequent ; during night ; < after coffee ; scanty 
with perspiration.— Urine ; copious, becoming dark, with a greenish-yellow 
sediment ; clear, light yellow, fatty ; sediment in urine with haemorrhoids 
of the bladder." — Urine stiffens linen. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Genitals turgid, excited.- Intolerable itch- 
ing on genitals. — Emissions, 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — (A woman, married for several years, 
Jbecame pregnant for the first time.) — Miscarriage, that had taken place 
several times, was avoided.— Oozing of slimy moisture from the vagina,— 
Menses profuse, like haemoiThage for several days, then scanty, but con- 
tinued fourteen days. — Scanty menses increased^^Menses return after climac- 
teric. — Menses, usually late, became earlier and more profuse. — Menstrual 
flow, that had. been long absent, returned on sixteenth day after drinking the 
water, with whirling in head, irembling, faintness, colic, alternations of chill, 
heat, and sweat, with thirst, cramp in thighs, calves, feet, with cramp-like 
hiccough ; menses very profuse. — Menstrual blood : seems like mucus ; slimy 
dark-coloured, not watery. — During menses, great weakness. 



1566 


WIESBADEN 


17. Respiratory Organs^ — Loose cough in morning.'^Expectoration : 
lumps of mucus ; firm, tenacious mucus ; sweetish after drinking the water ; 
salt. — Respiration in the bath, at first accelerated, gradually Jjeooming 
slow, after which gradually increases.— Short breath on walking, on 
ascending. 

18. Chest. — Oppression of the breath, constriction of chest in region of 
diaphragm as soon as that region is bathed ; obliged to raise chest out of 
water j returned whenever the water reached the region of diaphragm. — 
Chest seems constricted by clothes, which are not tight. 

19. Heart. — Slight angina pectoris. — Becomes very welk about the 

heart. — Beat of heart accelerated, violent. — Palpitation, — Pulse ; slow ; 
irregular ; accelerated ; intermittent. c 

20 . Neck. — Tension and stiffness in nape. — Drawing in nape. ' ^ 

21. Limbs. — ^Trembling of limbs with weakness. — ^Very rapid growth of 
nails. — Limbs : feel light, with desire to move ; heavy ; indolent ; weary ; ex- 
hausted. — Swelling of hands and feet disappeared after copious sweat. — 
Sweat of hands and feet. 

22. Upper Limbs. — ^Trembling of hands. — Inclined to panaritia. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Great weariness of lower limbs, with pain in toes. — 
Cramp in thighs. — Rheumatic pain in r. thigh for several days, < walking. — 
Pain in r. thigh-bone as if hernia would protrude. — Feet : painful and sensi- , 
tive ; burning. — Corns become raised, softened, and drop off. — Stron’g odour 
of sweat on feet. 

24. Generalities. — Body smells like rotten eggs. — Great ease and vigour 
of motion. — Feeling of comfort with very profuse sweat. — (Less weak- 
ness.) — Weariness ; fatigue ; exliaustion ; uneasiness. — Faintness. — Dormant 
rheumatism reappears. — ^Aversion to the water, sometimes causing cramp-like 
sensations when coming near the bath. — Much inclined to take cold. — Whole 
body feels bruised. 

25. Skin. — In the bath the skin becomes thick, parchment-like, after a 
while rough like sand between the fingers, feeling wrinkled. — (Parchment-like 
skin becomes soft.) — Cracks. — Desquamation. — Callosities come off. — Pimples, 
vesicles, boils ; red, elevated points ; moist tetter. — Very painful abscesses 
develop towards surface from deep in flesh, with long-continued suppuration. 
— Itching : biting, burning ; intolerable. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepiness. — No desire to rise ; weary, with sleep in 
morning. — Sleep sound but not refreshing. — ^Sleep disturbed by dreams. 

27. Fever.— -Chills : from slightest air on the clothes or under bedcovers ; 
while dressing after bath. — Alternations of chill and heat. — Orgasm of blood 
disturbing sleep. — ^General heat of body with a hard stool. — Sensation of 
burning heat over whole body. — Constant sensation of heat with qualmish- 
ness. — Burning heat of hands. — Sweat : profuse, an<J urine ; copious on a 
long walk, with itching ; clammy, itching ; trickles from head ; on neck, 
with disappearance of the yellow spots ; profuse on face, compels rubbing. — 
Sweat on palms and soles, wrinkling of skin of hands as washerwoman’s. — 
The sweat on diseased parts colours linen broum. 



WILDBAD 1567 


Wildbad. 

t 

The Springs at Wildbad, in Wiirtemburg. (The water contains in 
16 ounces, Carbonic ac. gr. 0*972, Nat. m. i*8o8, Nat c. 0 837, 
Nat. sul. 0*391, K. sul. o*io8. Calc. c. 0*738, Silicic acid 0*480, 

. Mag. c. 0*079, Fer. c. 0*002, Alumina 0*004, traces of 
Mang.) Dilution. 

Gliilieal.'^^ones, pains in. Catarrh. Gout. Hair, affections of. Indigestion. 
Knees, creaking of. Nails, soft. Paralysis, spinal. Paraplegia. Rheumatism. 
Shoulder, rheumatism of. 

Charaotbristios. — In spite of its very slight mineralisation, says 
Constalhtin James, the water produces very distinct effects in a 
graduated series. The first impression of the bath is delicious ; this 
is succeeded by sensations more clear and distinct : a slight degree of 
excitement ; at times luminous sparks before the sight ; a finer 
(plus subtil) blood seems to flow to the brain. ‘‘ One would like to 
remain in the bath, but something unusual and strange warns you 
that it is time to get out.” It is chiefly, says the same authority, for 
affections of the spinal cord that Wildbad is frequented, more than 
half the patients being paraplegic. Hartlaub, Kallenbach, and others 
proved ^he water. Among the symptoms were : Sensation as if the 
brain were over-filled. Gnawing, sinking, empty sensation. Pain as 
if sprained. Sensation of looseness in the joints ; ankles loose ; knees 
loose *, the bones seem as if they did not fit. Teeth seem too long. 
In one prover the hair, which had been greasy, became dry ; and the 
beard became of a darker colour. Desire to stretch. The symptoms 
.were : < On waking at night. < Lying down (throbbing and heat 
in occiput). < Walking (pain in sciatic nerve ; looseness of knees). 

Relations. — Compare : Uric acid in urine ; pain in right shoulder, 
• Urt. ur. Right shoulder, Sang. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Great depression with anxiety. — Memory weak. 

2. Head. — Rush of blood to head. — Head : dull, heavy, esp. occiput. — 
Sensation as though whole brain overfilled, intolerable lying with head on 
pillow. — Throbbing headache on waking at night. — Tearing piuns in fore- 
head, extending from middle of r. eyebrow. — ^Violent pulsation on vertex and 
occiput, — Heaviness in vertex on waking at night. — Throbbing and warmth 
in occiput, < lying down. — Hair lost its oiliness ; hair of beard grew darker. 
— Moving scalp was difficult, as though frontal muscles too short. 

3. Eyes. — Pain and pressure in eyes on writing in evening. — Fine 
sticking pain in eyes « 1.) and above eyes (eyebrows, below eyes, and also 
in eyeballs), without affecting vision. — ^Acute pain in 1. upper eyebrow, spot 
remained sensitive after. — Pairbin 1. (and r.) supraorbital foramen.— Itching in 
canthi. 

4. Ears,— Sensation in ears as after taking cold, first r., then 1. — Sensa- 
tion of warmth in r. ear, — Pressing stitches in I. ear as if deep in meatus. 



1568 


WILDBAD 


5. Nose.—Blood from r. nostril in morning. 

6. Face.— Violent painless twitching in face. — Pain 1. jaw-joint, lower 

jaw, and in top of shoulder. ^ j 

8. Mouth. — Teeth, esp. r., painful, as if too long, or as after taking cold. 
— Dryness of mouth ; without thirst, and with coated tongue in morning. — 
Mouth and tongue dry toward morning. — Burning point in r, corner of mouth 
or wing of nose. — Bloody saliva, apparently from fauces, after talking in 
open air. 

9. Throat. — Expectoration of mucus from throat, larynx, and posterior 
nares. — A retching, spasmodic, or drawing pain in oesophagus, above the 
stomach, with some nausea. 

11. Stomach. — Hunger : ravenous ; as from an empfy stomach in 
morning, also in evening after supper. — Gnawing emptiness in stomach and 
whole abdomen. — Emptiness without hunger. — Eructations ; empty. — Nausea ; 
on waking. — Feeling of indigestion or disordered stomach. — Pressure in 
stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Colic in umbilical region, as before a stool, without an 
evacuation. — Sticking, drawing pains in both hypochondria, 

13. Stool and Anus. — Spasmodic pressure in anus and perinaeum. — 
Great urging to stool, which was at first dark and thin ; afterwards brown 
with mucus, and at 1 1 a.m. very watery, yellowish grey, with some colic. — 
Stool : dark, with tenacious mucus ; lumpy, covered with mucus t»f a dark 
blackish-brown colour ; retained, hard, lumpy, dark ; constipated, after a few 
days natural with colic. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Frequent urgent desire to urinate. — Mucus in 
urine with large uric acid crystals. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Erections : painful on waking ; more easy 
than natural. — Painful drawing in cords on waking, after an emission. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Menstruation usually hastened. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Dry cough. — Breathing oppressed ; on 
ascending stairs. 

18. Chest. — Pain and cracking in upper part of sternum at junction with 
first r. rib. 

20. Neck and Back. — Tearing pain, as if sprained, transversely through 
nape. — Constant pulsation in nape and occiput at night. — Drawing in back as 
though a hot sponge drawn along skin on waking in morning. — Prickling on 
back, followed by ncttlerash. — Disagreeable sensation of warmth along 
lumbar vertebrae. 

21. I#imbs. — Joints weak. — Fulness and heaviness in limbs. — Drawing 
pains here and there in limbs ; drawing pain in 1. upper arm and r. thigh. . 

22. Upper Limbs. — Violent drawing tearing about r. shoulder, — Shud- 
dering jerking about r. upper arm.— Drawing in 1. upper arm,— Acute pain in 
1. arm above elbow, outer portion, as if in bone or tendon, as if sprained. — 
Drawing burning beneath r. elbow, in bone. — Rheumatic pain in forearm 
from back of wrist to elbow, near wrist arm painful. — Nails became so soft 
he could not open a watch with them.— Hang-nails.— Stiffness and painfulness 
of all fingers on opening and closing hand. — Painful swollen sensation in 1. 
thumb. 

23. Lower Limbs. — ^Weariness of hips after a slight effort. — Pain in 



WYETHIA 


1569 

nates, r. and 1., astif in sciatic nerve, csp. on walking. — Pain in muscles of r. 
thigh, on posterior and inner surfaces. — Drawing pain in r. thigh, a hand's- 
breadtl^above knee, below anterior and outer portions.— Violent cracking : in 
both kneel on rising ; r. knee. — Pain and stiffness in r. knee, as if contracted, 
on waking in morning, — Knees feel loose, as if bones did not fit ; must be 
supported in walking. — ^Violent itching in 1. calf and on tibia. — Pain in r. calf 
on walking. — Ankles feel loose. — Drawing : in ankles ; in 1. sole behind toes. 
— Sprained sensation : in first joint of r. great toe ; in r. and 1. great toes. — 
Acute pain in 1. little toe. 

• 24. Generalities. — ^Weak, weary, wants to keep quiet. — Weary : after 
walking ; esp. knees and ankles ; sudden, ankles seem loose. — Great desire to 
lie on back anci stretch, with feeling of comfort and warmth through whole 
body, and averse to business, esp. after a bath. 

25. Skin. — Crawling itching about 1. half of mouth, around red of lip> 
esp. lower lip. — Itching on : one finger of r. hand ; r. thumb, in small spot as 
if in periosteum, > (but not removed) by rubbing ; 1. calf and tibia ; 1. index 
finger, with development of a small vesicle ; middle knuckle of 1. ring-finger ; 
r. natis. 

26. Sleep. — ^Very sleepy in evening. — Unusual desire to sleep after eating. 
— Complete sleeplessness till 4 a.m., with constant excitement and uneasiness, 
dry, burning heat ; > sitting erect with head against hard pillow. — Sleep : 
feslless ; full of confused dreams, wakes every few minutes feeling as if he 
had slept for hours. — Dreams : disagreeable ; forgetful ; anxious ; confused, 
—Violent weeping in a dream, waking in perspiration. 

27. Fever. — Hands quite cold, with weakiless and sweat on waking. 
— Feet cold. — ^Violent, dry heat over whole body. — Prickling heat over whole 
body, with some sweat. — ^Very disagreeable heat in occiput, intolerable on 
lying down, and amounting to violent pulsation. — Sweat : easy ; free at night 
and during day after any exertion. 


Wyethia. 

Wyethia helenoides. Alarconia helenoides. Melarhiza inuloides. 

Poison Weed. N, 0 . Compositae. Tincture of the root. 

Clinioal. — Amenorrhoea. Asthma. Constipation. Cough. Debility. Diar- 
rhoea. Dysmenorrhoea. Epiglottis, affections of. Fever. Haemorrhoids. Head- 
ache. Hiccough. Indigestion. Influenza, Nervousness. Ovaries, pain in. 
Pokt- nasal catarrh. Salivation. Throat, sore. Uvula, affections of. 

Charaoteristios. — Wyethia was introduced and proved, with the 
fresh root or the 0 tinftture, on seven men and two women, by J. M. 

• Selfridge. Their symptoms make up Allen’s pathogenesis. A later 
proving {{Pad/, C. J. H., vii. 127) was made under Selfridge’s direction 
with the I X on Dr. A. McNeil, the 15X on Dr. M. F. Underwood, and 
the 30X on Dr. Elfeanor F. Martin. Their symptoms 1 have marked 
respectively (M), (U), and (E M) in the Schema. The first proving 
gave Wyeth, a definite and important place in throat affections. 

• . VOL. II. 100 



WYETHIA 


i5;o 

These symptoms have been confirmed : Throat feels swollen ; 
epiglottis dry, and has a burning sensation ; constant desire to 
swallow saliva to relieve the dryness yet affording no comfort ; 
swallows with difficulty. — Prickling, dry sensation in posteriSr nares ; 
sensation as if something were in nasal passages ; an effort to clear 
them through the throat affords no relief. Burning sensation in 
bronchial tubes. Dry, hacking cough, caused by tickling in epi- 
glottis.'^ The following case was reported to me : A boy had been kept 
awake many nights by a persistent, dry, hacking, nervous cough. Wyeth, 
30 cured in one dose. Hale gives these cases from Selfridge : (i) Dry 
asthma in a lady ; Wyeth, gave prompt relief in several paroxysms. 
(2) Chronic follicular pharyngitis with dryness of pharynx and burning 
in epiglottis. In a severe epidemic of influenza Hale '^ound Wyeth, 
most successful. Other noteworthy symptoms are ; Tough, ropy 
saliva. Pain over left ovary, shooting down to knee. In one case 
menses, which had been in abeyance since confinement a year before, 
returned with much pain. Peculiar Sensations are : Mouth as if 
scalded. Uvula as if elongated. Epiglottis feels dry and burning. 
Weight in stomach as if something indigestible had been eaten. 
Uterus feels as if it enlarged in order to contain all the pain. There 
is belching alternating with hiccough. The symptoms are : < After 
eating. < By motion. < By exercise ; it s= perspiration. < 
Afternoon. ' 

Relations. — Compare. In throat affections, Ar. dracon., Caust., 
Hep., Stict., Rumex, Penth., Pho., Sul. Tough, ropy saliva and head- 
ache, Epipheg. Sensation as if something indigestible eaten, Ab. n. 
Scalded mouth, Ran. sc. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Nervous, uneasy ; apprehensive of calamity. — Depressed ; 
incapacitated for mental work ; averse to company ; impatient, quarrelsome' 
(U). 

2. Head. — Dizziness. — Rush of blood to head. — Severe headache. — 
Sharp pain in forehead over r. eye, followed by feeling of fulness. — At 
10 a.m. headache in 1. anterior part of brain, as if radiated from 1. inner 
canthus ; 12.30 in 1. occipital protuberance (M). — Terrific headache during 
the sweat ; intense, congestive ; eyes sensitive ; bones of face sensitive ; least 
movement intolerable. 

3. Eyes. — Itching in 1 . inner canthus (M). 

4. Ears.— Itching in r. ear. — Pain in 1 . ear (M). 

5. Nose. — Sensation as if something in nasal passages. 

8. Mouth. — Mouth feels as if scalded. — Increased flow of tough, ropy 
saliva. — Mouth full of sweetish saliva (M). 

9. Throat. — Throat feels swollen ; epiglottis dry and has a burning 
sensation ; constant desire to swallow saliva to relieve the dryness ; swallow- 
ing with difficulty. — Prickling, dry sensatiori in posterior nares ; sensation as 
if something were in the nasal passages ; an effort to clear them through the 
throat does not >.— Uvula feels elongated. — Dryness of fauces; constant 



WYETHIA 


1571 

desire to clear tkroat by hemming. — Sensation of heat down oesophagus into 
stomach, < while eating. — After restless night waked with sharp pain in r. 
tonsil, ^tooat swollen and sore, glands externally swollen and sore (E M). 

11. Stomach. — Belching of wind alternating with hiccough. — Nausea 
and vomiting. — Sense of weight in stomach as if something indigestible had 
been eaten. 

12. Abdomen. — Pain and bearing down in abdomen, r. side. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Itching in anus. — Itching in rectum (M). — Stools : 
diarrhcBic, dark brown, came on at night, lasted five days ; small, dark brown, 
look burned^ previously light-coloured, irregular, and constipated, became 
dark, regular, and soft.— Great constriction, haemorrhoids, not bleeding (never 
hftd them before or since — several provers). 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Pain in 1. ovary, shooting down to knee. 
— Menses appear for first time after birth of last child, a year before ; purple, 
scanty, great pain. — Leucorrhoea. — Menses commenced with intense burning 
pain, constant, but increasing in paroxysms, with sensation as if uterus ex- 
panded in order to keep all the pains within its walls (E M). 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Burning sensation in bronchial tubes. — 
Dry, hacking cough, caused by tickling in epiglottis. — Persistent, dry, hacking, 
nervous night cough (in boy, cured with 30th). 

18. Chest. — Sharp pain just below r. ribs, deep-seated, followed by 
soreness. 

19. Heart.— Pulse slowed (from 72 to 58, in 10 h.). 

20. Neck and Back. — Glands r. side of neck swollen and sore (E M). 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pain in r. arm, with stiffness of wrist and hand. — 
Neuralgic pain commenced in 1. arm and hand, spreading to back and other 
parts (E M). — Sore hang-nail on r. third finger (M). 

23. Lower Limbs. — Tingling in r. foot when standing (M). 

24. Generalities. — Feels weak, nervous, uneasy ; apprehensive, — Feels 
as after a severe illness. — Irritability from exertion ; least exercise s sweat. — 
All symptoms < afternoon. — Aching all over body, with chill and fever (E M). 

26. Sleep. — ^Wakes frequently and loo early (M). 

27. Fever. — Chill ii a.m. ; thirst for ice- water during chill; no thirst 
with heat ; profuse sweat all night ; pains in back and limbs, at times jerking; 
chill recurred at 1.30 p.m. six days later, with intense headache (E M). — Cold 
sweat over whole body, which soon dies off, and comes again and goes as if 
by flashes. — Fever and pains all over body, with inflamed r. tonsil (E M). 



Xanthoxylum. 

Xanthoxylum americanum. X. fraxineum. Prickly Ash. ^‘Toothache- 
tree, N. O. Rutaceae. Tincture of fresh bark. « 

Clinical.— -After-pains. Asthma. Coccygodynia. Dysmenorrhcea. Earache- 
Fibroma, Headache. Hemiplegia. Hysteria. Jaw -joint, pain in. Levitation- 
Menstruation j painful* Nerves, injured. Nervousness. Neuralgia; crural. Oph- 
thalmia. Sciatica, Toothache. Ulcers. 

Charaoteristios. — According to Hale, Rafinesque was the first to 
investigate Xanthoxylum^ which was known to him as “ a great article in 
the materia medica of our Indians ” ; who use the root bark in decoction 
for colics, gonorrhoea, syphilis, inward pains, toothache, ulcprs, &c. 
It is a great topical stimulant, he continues, changing the nature 
of malignant ulcers,*^ Xan, contains Piperitu T. C. Duncan (Minn* 
H* M*f ix. 340), recounting reminiscences of his boyhood, says : 

There was another drug that set my youthful mouth and stomach 
on fire, and that was Prickly Ash. You wanted to open the mouth to 
let the cool air get in.'^ This warmth is felt as a warm glow through 
the entire system, with a sensation in the nerves as if gentle shocks of 
electricity were passing through the body. In one of Cullis^ provers, 
Miss D. (there were six provers, three of them women ; all took 
the 0 tincture), the entire left half of the body became numb, 
the left half of the head being sharply divided in sensation 
from the other half. These symptoms, with the many head pains 
and fulness in the head, give the correspondence in hemiplegia, 
in which Xan* has been given with success. Two additional 
provings on women appear in C. D. P. (quoting from Publ* Mass, Horn* 
Soc*). In these provings 20- to loo-drop doses of the tincture were 
taken, and symptoms of great severity were produced. Both provers 
had severe dysmenorrhoeal pains, with increased and anticipating 
flow. This is the characteristic of Xan, The symptoms in each case 
roused the prover from sleep with pain and suffocation ; the pain 
being confined to head, heart, throat, and pelvis. Many of the pains 
were radiating — from above right eye over head ; from right ovary 
down thigh and in other directions. Left-sided numbness was pre- 
sent in one ; who also had symptoms of levitation and disordered 
sensation. In dysmenorrhcea Xan. has a wide range. Cullis, who 
had most success in cases of dysmenorrhcea and amlnorrhcca^ relates 
these cases : (i) Miss A., 25, brunette, had menstrual irregularity since 
commencement ; would go three, four, or five months, and then her 

1572 



XANTHOXYLUM 


1573 


sufferings were excruciating. When she came under treatment had 
had ijo menses for two months. Xan. i was given', 5 drops thrice 
daily. IVlenses appeared in three days and were painless. (2) Miss 
B., fair, nervous, had menses suppressed by getting feet wet, being 
then a week over time. Xan, i x, 5 drops every three hours, brought 
on menses next day. Cullis thinks Xan. especially Suited to women of 
sp&re habit, nervous temperament, and delicate organisations. Leucor- 
rhoea with amenorrhoea he regards as a strong indication. P. C. 
Majumdar ^nd, H, R., viii. 21) cured a case of uterine fibroid with 
Xan, 3x : An emaciated, feeble, wrinkled woman, 56, widow, had 
been advised by allopaths to have an operation for tumour. Men- 
struation had ceased fifteen years before. It had always been profuse 
and painful, and preceded and followed by leucorrhoea. She had 
neuralgic pain in right ovarian region ; a hard nodular tumour size of 
a small orange, painful on deep pressure. Fetid, yellowish white 
discharge from vagina. Patient was nervous, depressed ; lazy and 
sleepy even in the daytime. Appetite poor ; disgust for food. Xan> 
3x was given night and morning. In a week the pain was better and 
discharge less. In four weeks Majumdar found the patient a changed 
person. The tumour was much softer and reduced by half. In six 
. months the tumour had gone, and the patient was quite well, Xan. 
having teen taken intermittently all the time. Xan. belongs to the 
Rutaceae, and, like Ruta^ has a vulnerary action, as I discovered in this 
case : Miss X., 28, injured her right ulnar nerve at the elbow 
by repeatedly striking it against the edge of a bath whilst washing 
some articles. For two months she had had to keep the arm in a 
sling. A few weeks after that the arm swelled. Some eight months 
after the injury I saw her. The pain centred in the ulnar nerve 
'where it crosses the inner condyle of the humerus, though there 
was pain above and below as well. I gave Ruta 30, which gave some 
, relief to the pain, and relieved a frontal headache to which the patient 
was subject. The arm becoming less well, I gave Xan. 12 four times 
a day. This made a distinct improvement in the arm, and also relieved 
a dysmenorrhoea to which Miss X, was subject. After persistent 
treatment with various attenuations of Xan. the nerve lost its sensi- 
tiveness, and the patient could use her arm freely. Xan. i in five- 
drop doses night and morning, with a liniment of Xan. proved most 
effective. A patient to whom I gave Xan. 3X had immediately a hot 
pricking pain in right ovary. Among the Peculiar Sensations are : As 
if top of head would be taken off by hashes of throb-like pain. As if 
bewildered with pain in back of head. Feeling of looseness or 
quivering of brain. As if head falling to pieces. As if head sur- 
rounded by a tight band. Eyes as if full qf sand. As if pepper in 
mouth and throat. As of a bunch in throat. Tongue as if expanding 
and contracting. As if throat swollen and enlarged. Throat as if in 
a vice. Back of neck as if stiff. Coccyx as if elongated. As if 
floating in the air. As if walking on wool. As if sunk deep in bed. 
As if body expanded. Many pains are radiating ; some are sudden, 
arouse from sleep, and cause the patient to catch her breath. Pains 
are excruciating, unbearable, and are accompanied with red, hot face ; 
but the heart pains ss pallor. The symptoms are : < By moving 



1574 


XANTHOXYLUM 


head suddenly. Neck pain is > by pressure and by throwing head 
back. Lying down >. Drink of ice-water >. Headache is, > by 
cold water and in open air. Pains are < in morning ; 4 a.m'. 

Relationa. — Compare : Head, heart, and uterus, Act. r. Lack of 
eruption in measles, Bry. Dysmenorrhoea with reflex neuralgia, 
Coloc, Dysmenorrhoea and sciatica ; numbness, Gnaphal. Dysmenor- 
rhoea, Vib. o., Caulo, After-pains, Pul., Cham., Cup. Pains increase 
and decrease gradually, Stan. Levitation, Can. i., Stic, p., Ph, ac. 
Headache over root of nose, Ign. Headache over righi^ eye, Sang. 
Heart and uterus, Cact, 

Causation. — Injury to nerve. Wetting (getting feet wet). Sup- 
pression of menses. "" 

SYMPTOMS. 

X. Mind. — Nervous, frightened feeling.— Easily startled, hysterical. — 
Depression and weakness. — Indifference and malaise. — Did not care if she 
lived or died. — Seemed entirely void of ideas. 

2. Head. — Giddiness with nausea, < after rising, had to go to bed. — 
Pain over eyes, with throbbing above root of nose. — Head dull and aching. — 
Frontal headache. — Intense burning, pressing, frontal headache, waking her 
at 4 a.m. ; < moving head suddenly ; extending into vertex and orbits ; with 
hot flushes over head and face. — Severe frontal headache ; with dizziness. — 
A dull headache, in a space not larger than half a dollar, over nose, — Diffused 
pain in upper part of forehead ; < in r. side ; pain extends to base of brain, 
with soreness. — At 6 p.m. sudden and violent pain over r. eye, with burning 
through temples ; after it, vision blurred, — Throbbing headache over r. eye, 
with nausea. — Darting pain in 1. temple, recurring again and again. — ^A 
tightening of scalp and heavy pain in temples ; increase of head difficulties, ' 
with a great heat and quiet flowing (menstrual), being two days in advance of 
proper time ; some headache. — Pain in 1. side of head and 1. elbow. — Heavy , 
feeling in top of head. — About upper part of cranium an aching feeling, 
accompanied by flashes of throb-like pain, as if top of head were about to be 
taken off. — Pain in back of head, also a bewildered sensation.— Head feels 
full. — Pressure in head, with fulness of veins. — Tightness of head, with pain 
increasing over eyes. — L. side of head (and body) numb, the division made 
perceptible in head, affecting half the nose. — Headache, with sleepy feeling 
in morning. — Shaking head produces a feeling of looseness or quivering of 
brain, followed by dizziness. — As if head were surrounded by a tight band 
(dysmenorrhoea). — Head seemed falling in pieces. 

3. Eyes. — Watering of eyes and nose. — Eyes bloodshot, with red 
margins, and feel as if full of sand. — Lachrymation, pain in lid of r. eye,— • 
Eyes twitched, pupils dilated. — Dull, heavy, grinding pain in 1. eye. — 
Ophthalmia.— Vision blurred, as if looking through blue lace.— Atmosphere 
appeared blue, and there were flashes of (blue) light before eyes. — Objects 
seem a long way off, 

4. Ears. — Ringing in ears, esp. in r. — Loud noise in r. ear, as of a valve 
constantly opening and shutting. — Loud noise like a windmill in 1. ear. — Dull 
pain in r. ear, seeming to affect jaw socket ; does not know whether his tooth 
or his ear aches.— Darting pain under and back of r. ear. 



XANTHOXYLUM 1575 

5 , Nose. — (l. nostril seems filled up ; discharge of dry and bloody 
scales of mucus. — Numbness throughout 1 . side of body, division felt in nose. 
— Dryilfess of both nostrils.—Discharge of mucus from nose, with congested 
feeling, as if it were about to bleed, — Slight nose-bleed. — Fluent coryza. 

6 . Face. — Pain in r. jaw-socket. — Dull pain in 1. side of lower jaw. — 
Hot flushes over face and head. — Face much flushed.— Pallor even to lips, 
with heart pains. 

8 . Mouth. — Ptyalism ; tongue coated yellow. — Peppery taste in mouth, 
fauces, and tljjoat. — Burning and dry feeling in mouth and tongue. — Tongue 
seemed to alternately expand and contract. 

^ g. Throat. — Peppery sensation in throat ; soreness, with expectoration 
of tough muc«s. — Feeling of a bunch in 1. side of throat when swallowing, 
$hifting«to r. — Throat felt as if in a vice. — Pain and soreness in r. side of 
throat. — Throbbing in throat and sensation of swelling.— Intense burning 
and stinging in cesophagus, with slight nausea. — Throat dry, very difficult to 
talk. 

10 . Appetite. — ^Very thirsty, drank much at a time. — Unusually hungry, 
— No appetite. — Anorexia, could eat hut a few mouthfuls at breakfast, and 
could only drink half a cup of coffee, which was vomited soon afterward. 

11. Stomach. — Faintness at stomach as if after fasting ; when food was 
brought cared to eat only a few mouthfuls, which nauseated her. — Empty 
eructations, with slight taste of ingesta.— Nausea with headache.— Slight 
nausea, with sense of oppression at stomach ; nausea increased, accompanied 
by frequent chills. — Feeling of fulness or pressure in epigastrium ; fluttering. 

12. Abdomen. — Some pain in r. side below ribs. — Colic pain in r. iliac 
region. — Rumbling, with soreness on pressure. — Flatulence. — Griping pain on 
waking in morning, continued at intervals through day, with general feeling 

. of indifference and malaise. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation in morning.— Griping pains 7 a.m. 
with thin, brown stools, mixed with mucus. — Burning and pressure for an 

^ hour or two after stool. — Epidemic dysentery, characterised by spasmodic 
tenesmus, intestinal spasms, tympanitis, &c. — Inodorous discharges with 
tenesmus. — Cholera, in stage of collapse, 

14. * Urinary Organs. — Urine at night and next morning scanty and 
high-coloured. — Profuse, light-coloured urine ; nervous women. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Ovarian pain ; with scanty and retarded 
menses ; extending down genito-crural nerves ; and sacral pains during preg- 
nancy. — Menses appeared one week before usual time ; attended with a good 
deal of pain. — Menses eight days before time ; flow increased, bright red ; 
bearing-down pain and pain in r. ovarian region. — Severe constant aching 
pain in r. ovarian region, radiating to hip, thighs, and back, with occasional 
shoots, making her cat<ih her breath. —Sharp, cutting pain in r. ovarian region, 
extending about hip and down thigh, awoke her. — Cramp-like pain in 1. groin, 
menses five days early.— Pain in 1. ovarian region gradually increasing and 
gradually decreasing. — Dysmenorrhoea : with agonising pains, driving patient 
almost distracted j neuralgic pain runs along course of genito-crural nerve ; 
in women of spare habit and of a delicate, nervous temperament ; with head- 
ache, esp. over 1. eye, commencing day before menses ; fulness in head ; eyes 
congested, with photophobia ; face flushed and feverish ; agonising bearing 



1576 XANTHOXYLUM 

down ; abundant discharge ; excruciating pain in loins an4 lower abdomen. 
— Menstrual flow : too early and profuse ; pains down thighs ; scanty and 
retarded.— Constant headache, < during menses, at which time She also 
suffered agonising pains in pelvic region, — ^Amenorrhoea for five months; 
face and legs oedematous ; very nervous, sensitive to least noise, hysterical 
mood ; voice tremulous ; fears she is going to die ; general chlorotic appear- 
ance, constipation, scanty, frequent, and dark urine. — Amenorrhoea for five 
months, with severe pains in r. ovary ; constant headache ; bearing down and 
tension in hypogastric region. — Amenorrhoea from getting feejt wet ; lasting 
six months; emaciation with cough; dirty-grey expectoration; pale face, 
night-sweats. — Leucorrhoea ; profuse, milky-white. — ^Great increase of leuci)r- 
rhoea during the time when menses should appear. — After-pains. — Profuse 
lochia.—* Violent hot pricking in r. ovary (produced immediately by a doce of 3x). 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Hoarseness, with husky feeling in throat ; 
obliged to clear throat frequently. — ^Aphonia from cold or general debility. — 
Aphonia and pain in lower r. lung on deep inspiration or coughing. — Short- 
ness of breath. — Constant desire to take a long breath. — Cough : slight hack- 
ing cough ; in spells, only in open air. — Dry cough night and day, from sheer 
exhaustion could scarcely turn herself in bed ; face pale, bloated ; dark rings 
about eyes ; head full and heavy ; lips colourless ; tongue pale and flabby ; 
shortness of breath ; no appetite ; bowels constipated ; urine light-coloured, 
alkaline, sp. gr. 1025 ; fluttering in stomach, pain in 1. side ; limbs weak and 
bloated. — Had to sit up in bed and turn first one way, then another, as in 
a severe fit of asthma, with several spasmodic coughing spells. — Thought she 
could not get air enough into lungs, inspiration was so difficult. 

18. Chest. — Tightening about chest, with inclination to gape. — Pain in 
1. side, under fourth rib. — Sharp pains in r. side of a neuralgic character. — 
Oppression of chest, with desire to take a deep inspiration. — Sharp, shooting 
pains in r. side (like pleurisy pains), occasionally extending through to 
shoulder-blade, continual desire to take a long breath. — Menses irregular and 
scanty ; tight, dry cough, which hurts chest and shoulders ; bowels almost ’ 
constantly loose, profuse night-sweats. 

19. Heart. — Severe momentary pain in region of heart, making her catch 
her breath, and turn pale even to lips ; recurred at irregular intervals of from 
five to thirty minutes ; the pain was cutting, < during inspiration, passed 
directly through thorax in heart region ; immediately after each attack 
thirsty, flushed, exhausted. — Pulse irregularly intermittent.— Startled from 
sleep by severe pain in heart region, followed by violent action of heart and 
feeling of suffocation. 

20. Neck and Back. — (With headache) pain and stiffness in nape," 

somewhat > by hard pressure or throwing head back. — ^Very severe pain in 
cervical and upper sacral region. — Back of neck numbr — Slight pain in 1. side 
and under 1. scapula, also in 1. hip. — Dull pain from nape to r. scapula. — 
Dragging pain in lower part of pelvis and back. — Coccyx seemed elongated, 
extremely sensitive to pressure and ached all the time ; could not sit except 
on cushion. « 

21. Limbs. — Suddenly taken with cramp-like pains in wrists and knees. 
— Pain in limbs, neuralgic, shooting ; numbness and weakness. — Dull pain in 
1. knee ; also in 1. elbow, extending to hand, then in 1. side and top of 1. foot. 



XANTHOXYLUM 


1577 


22. Upper|Umbs. — Pain in r. shoulder and arm. — Pain and pricking 
feeling in arm, extending to third finger. — Pricking and throbbing sensation 
in 1. afmtand fingers. — Severe pain in r. arm, commencing just above bend of 
elbow, — ^Whole 1. arm and shoulder numb. — Pain in 1. elbow and 1. side of 
head. — Dull pain in 1. elbow, passing to palm of hand, then to shoulder. — Pain 
in both elbows. — Severe pain in wrist, extending to thumb, — A flash of pain 
in r. thumb, extending to hand. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Severe neuralgic pains in course of genito-crural 
nerves (dysgienorrhoea). — Excessive weakness of lower limbs (chlorosis). — 
Pain in 1. leg, between hip and knee. — Weakness in lower limbs, with pain in 
kpees ; pain of extremities increased, accompanied by frequent chills. — Legs 
and feet fee> tired. — Pain in 1. knee very severe ; pain has lasted, without 
cessation, a little more than half an hour. — Dull pain in r. knee. — A flash of 
pain in calf of r, leg. — Pain in ankle. — Pain in 1. heel. — Pain in both feet, 
shooting up to knees. — L. foot numb. 

24. Generalities. — Nerves : acts upon nervous system, mostly upon 
sensory nerves, but causes a marked depression of vitality, a non-reactive 
state ; hence its use in chlorosis, measles, neuralgia, &c., when there is sen- 
sorial and bodily depression. — Paralysis of single members. — Hemiplegia 
(after Nux vom, failed). — Pricking sensation, shocks as from electricity. — 
^Feeling of numbness through whole 1. side of body from head to foot, the 
division*made perceptible in the head, affecting half the nose. — ^Whole 1. side, 
esp. 1. foot, numb. — Body felt as though it were elastic and stretched itself 
out. — Seemed as if floor were soft like wool on walking. — As if floating through 
air on sitting ; as if sunk deep in bed on lying down. — Mucous membrane 
smarts as from pepper. 

25. Skin. — Measles, dulness, bewilderment, drowsiness, want of sufficient 
. development of the eruption. — Old and indolent ulcers. 

26. Sleep. — Continued gaping ; drowsiness.—Slept hard and heavy ; 
dreamed of flying about over tops of houses. — A dream of suffocation woke 

• her. — Dreamed the throat grew up, and woke with fright, finding it difficult 
to breathe. — Awoke in morning languid and depressed. 

27. Fever. — Sense of heat all over veins, with a desire to be bled ; flash 
of heat from head to foot. — Slight chill accompanied by death-like nausea. — 
Frequent chills, with pains in extremities ; nausea. — Typhoid fever in stage 
of collapse. 



Tohimbinum. 

(£1 

Johimbin. A cr^'stalline alkaloid obtained from the bark ®f the 
Yohimbeha, or Yumbehoa tree, of the Cameroons. JV. (>• 
Rubiaceae (?). CajHjaNaO^, or CaaH3oNa04. Trituration. 

01 liiieai.—Diuresis. Heart, palpitation of. Impotence. Priapism. 

Charaoterlstlos. — The natives of West Africa discovered a potent 
aphrodisiac in the bark of the Yohimbeha tree, and from this an 
active principle, Yohintbifty has been isolated and tested in Europe 
(Therapist, December 15, 1900). It is a powerful stimulant of thjt 
genital function in males. In animals it causes increased liveliness 
and cheerfulness, hyperaemia of the conjunctiva, heat and redness of 
the ears, and of the nose also in dogs. Lambreghts (y. Beige 
viii. 188) relates the case of a young man, 28, thin, anaemic, nervous, 
and partially impotent,^^ who took a 5-mgr. tablet one morning, another 
in the evening, and a third the following morning. The symptoms 
of the Schema are his, and they were so severe that he discontinued 
the drug in spite of a certain amelioration of the sexual neurasthenia. 
Yohim, set up symptoms of fever, disordered the digestion, caused 
agitation and tremors, and increased the action of the heart. Eulen- 
burg (DeuL Med, Woch,y April 25, 1901, quoted B, M, J,) used Yohim. 
in lo-drop doses of a i per cent, solution, and in S-mgr. tablets, in 
cases of neurasthenic impotence with excellent results. Yohim. should 

be a homoeopathic remedy in priapism and congestive states of the 
sexual organs. 

Relations. — Compare : Erections, Pic. ac., Pho., Graph., Canth., 
Hdfb. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Intense agitation, with trembling. 

6. Face. — Flying sensations of heat, heightening the colour. 

8. Mouth. — ^Tongue covered with a yellow coat. — Disagreeable metallic 
taste. 

11. Stomach. — Appetite almost completely disappeared. 

12. Abdomen. — Flying heats in abdomen. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Stools frequent, liquid, black, and bilious. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Urine clear, abundant, foamy, no trace of 
albumen ; had to rise three times in the night. 

*578 



YUCCA FILAMENTOSA 1579 

15. Male S&xual Organs. — In the morning strong and lasting erec- 
tions without indrease of desire.— Sexual neurasthenia, with impotence, is 
relievea.— Enlargement of testicles and epididymis (animals). 

ig. Heart. — Flying sensation of heat in heart. — Heart-beats more intense 
and more frequent j pulse, normally 8o, became io8. 

20 * Back. — Flying heat in back. 

ia. Upper Limbs. — Hands trembled, he could scarcely write, and his 
writing was illegible. 

26. Sleep. — No sleep all night. 

27. Fever. — Three hours after the dose (5 mgr.), flying sensations of 
heat, true valours (vapeurs) which heightened the complexion ; afterwards 
the same phenomena in the back, heart region, and lower abdomen, so that 
in spite 'of the cold weather the prover was inconvenienced by the intense 
heat and tendency to sweat. 


Yucca Filamentosa. 

■^ucca filamentosa. Bear Grass. N. 0 . Melanthaceae (Liliaceae). 
Tincture of root and leaves when not in flower. Tincture of 
flowers. 

Glinioal. — Biliousness. Coryza. Diarrhoea. Flatulence, odourless. Head- 
ache ; temporal. Post-nasal catarrh. Throat, granular. 

Charaoteristics. — Yucca was proved by Rowell and four others 
in the 30th. Farrington gives these indications : Biliousness with 
• pain going through upper part of liver to back. Bad taste in mouth. 
Stools diarrhoeic, and contain an excess of bile. Much flatus passed 
by rectum. Frontal or temporal headache with frequent flushing of 
*face. Face sallow. Tongue coated yellow and taking imprint of 
teeth. Dull ache in centre of liver. Abdomen sensitive. Frequent 
passage of flatus and of watery, yellowish-brown stools. The tongue 
of Yuc. is usually a bluish white. As with many liver disorders, 
there is chilliness : cannot bear to be away from the fire. Among the 
Sensations are : As of something hanging down from back of nares. 
As if cold air blowing on left side of scalp. The symptoms are : 
< By noise ; motion ; pressure. Griping pain is > bending forward. 

\ Relations. — Antidoted by: Coccul. Compare: Constriction in 

eart, Lil. t. Biliousness, Bry. Tongue imprinted with teeth, Merc., 
Pod, Blue tongue, Gymnocl. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I, Mind. — ^Very despondent, — Irritable. — Irresolute. — Disinclined to 
study. — Mind wanders ; uses wrong words. — Unable to remember anything 
read, with severe pains, which appear first on r. side, then in apex of heart. — 
Dull sensation in head 1.30 p.m. when others talking to him, hears but doesn’t 
seem to understand, and two minutes after doesn’t know what was said. 



1580 YUCCA FILAMENTOSA 

2 . Head. — Headache : frontal, heavy, pressing ; throlibing. — ^Temples : 
pressing pains in both all day ; < n, and cringing feehng in bot^h, < by 
motion ; dull, heavy pain extending to eyes, with aversion to ligfit ; intense 
aching, < by noise, motion, and heat, but at same time chilly when away 
from stove. — Headache somnolent, > sitting still ; throbs with every step. — 
Strange feeling in temporo-maxillary joint.— Temporal arteries throb. — Head 
itches all evening, very annoying. — ^Sensation of cold air blowing on 1 . side of 
scalp. 

3. Eyes. — Dark rings under eyes. — Eyes feel hot and inflamed. — Itching • 
and smarting 1 . eye ; 1 . inner canthus. — Dull pain over 1 . eye (momentary). 

4. Ears. — Pain behind r. ear, 6.30 p.m. — Very sensitive to least noisu. 

5. Nose. — Nose red. — In evening r. side of nose constantly running, 1 . 

dry. — Profuse, bloody, watery discharge. — Some coryza. • 

6. Face. — Face : pale ; flushed ; burning ; yellow. — Momentary aching 
in zygoma, recurring several times, — Pain in jaw- joints. 

8. Mouth. — Tongue : coated white evening, with raised, scattered 
papillae ; looks parboiled ; white at root ; bluish white ; raised papillae, teeth- 
marks on edge ; pale, flabby. — Bad odour from mouth. — Back of mouth dry. 
— Soft palate dry, had to drink to moisten it. — Taste of rotten eggs. 

9. Throat. — Sensation as if something hanging down from posterior 
nares, cannot get it up or down. — Tonsils dark red, not sore. — Pharynx seei^s 
covered with granules, is dark red. — Strings of mucus hang from mouth to 
root of tongue. — Stringy, greasy-looking mucus back of throat. 

11. Stomach. — Appetite : increased, food relished ; lost. — ^Aching and 
sharp pains in stomach. — Region of stomach sore and sensitive. 

12. Abdomen. — Abdomen bloated ; after dinner, and feels sore. — Much 
flatus emitted ; odourless. — Rumbling. — Colic. — Crampy pains in abdomen 
after breakfast, > lying down, < by movement; followed by diarrhoea. — 
Throbbing, painless, r. side about twelfth rib. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constant desire. — Sudden, violent tenesmus, 
followed by discharge of wind, which > the pain, — Tenesmus after stool. — 
Diarrhoea following pains in abdomen, several yellowish stools in an hour. — 
Stools : increased in number, but natural though small ; at 6.30 a.nx. ; hard 
and large at first, later thin and watery ; copious, thin, yellowish brown, with 
smarting at anus. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Irritable bladder, frequent urination. — Round 
meatus circumscribed oedematous red swelling, raw sensation. — Burning 
when urinating. — Urine increased, high specific gravity. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Erections ; all night long but no emissions,: 
all forenoon, cannot study, mind runs on sexual subjects. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Hard, rattling cough. 

18. Chest. — Constriction in whole chest and iit heart. — Pain in upper 
intercostal muscles, 9.15 p.m.— At 3.30 p.m. extremely severe cramping pain 
in r. chest, < stooping, partially > sitting straight or leaning a little back ; 
lasted five minutes. 

19. Heart. — Constriction in heart. — Morfientary aching in heart region. 
— ^Visible throbbing in arteries of hand. — Pulse : full and heavy ; a little 
irregular. 

20. Neck and Back.— Constriction of neck muscles, seems to draw 



YUCCA FILAMENTOSA 


1581 

head backward. — Tight feeling round neck, evening, had to take off collar. — 
Severe pain in 1 . sipula, 9 p.m.— Backache ever since she took the drug. 

23. Power Limbs.*— Crampy pains in knees.— Sore, crampy pains in 
muscle of Sack of 1. leg, just above ankle ,* as if sprained. 

24. Generalities. — Restless, feverish. 

26. Sleep. — In evening very sleepy. — Restless night, — Lewd dreams. 

27. Fever, — Coldness of scalp, 1 . side, as if cold air blowing on it.— 
Coldness ; cannot bear to be away from fire. — Hot ; feverish. — Face sweats, 
evening 



Zea. 

Zea mays. Maize. Indian Corn. N, 0 . Gramineae (Tribe, Pha- 

larideae). 

1. Stigmata maidis. Corn Silk. Green pistils. Tincture : One part, 

by weight, of the Silk to two of alcohol. Fluid Extract. 

(Z. St.) 

2. Shucks. Decoction or tincture of the husks of Maize after the 

removal of the grain. (Z. sh.) 

Clinical. —Albuminuria (St.). Cystitis (St.). Dropsy (St.). Gonorrhoea, chronic 
(St.). Heart, failure of (St.). Malaria, chronic (Sh.). Renal colic (St.). Pyelitis 
(St.). Urine, retained ; suppressed (St.). ^ . 

Gharacterlstios. — Two parts of Maize have been used in medicine, 
the pistils {Stigmata maidis) and the husks {Shucks)^ but I think it 
best to take them together. I have distinguished them under the 
heading Clinical by (St.) and (Sh.). The grain of Maize in bulk 
appears to be capable of generating a poisonous gas, as four men were 
suffocated, one fatally, on opening a cargo of maize for the purpose of 
discharging it in the London docks (//. IF., xxxv. 436). Corn silk 
has been used in : (i) Irritable conditions of the urinary tract ; ureters, 
bladder, urethra. (2) As a powerful diuretic in renal disorders uncon- 
nected with cardiac involvement. (3) Heart and urinaiy conditions' 
combined. J. H. Cook gives an account of it in Med, Cent, (iv. 589). 
He quotes the results of Dumont’s investigation of its action on the 
heart : (i) It makes the heart’s action slower and stronger. (2) Regu- 
lates its rhythm, (3) Its diuretic action is manifested first. (4) Its 
action is more powerful and evident in cardiac affections with dropsy. 
(5) With the disappearance of the dropsy arterial tension increases 
and venous tension diminishes. Cook gives this case : Mr. X., 63, 
florid, robust, temperate, had been many months under treatment 
with the following condition, traced originally to cooling off too 
rapidly when perspiring : Intense prostration, intermittent pulse, 
dyspnoea. The urine contained much albumen, mucus, and some 
blood ; specific gravity 10 10. Great tenderness over entire abdomen, 
especially in region of ureters. Under remedies he would improve 
for a few days, when a slight chill would be followed by fever, and 
the symptoms would come back in full force. The microscope 
revealed pus cells and granular epithelial cells in abundance. Z. $L 
was now given, a teaspoonful of the fluid extract every four hours. 
In less than a week there was visible improvement. The constant 



ZINCUM 1583 

% 

calls to urinateL(every forty-five minutes) ceased, and the patient could 
go through thfc night without being disturbed more than once or 
twice. The sp^ific gravity of the urine increased, and pus, blood, and 
albunieif disappeared. Only a little abdominal tenderness remained, 
which did not prevent the patient from attending to his business and 
enjoying life, Hansen has confirmed the value of Z, sL in 20-drop doses 
of the fluid extract in organic heart disease with dropsy, much oedema 
of 'lower limbs, and scanty urination. He mentions also as suitable 
cases : (i) Renal lithiasis with nephritic ulcer and discharge of small 
calculi, recl^sand, and blood. (2) Chronic pyelitis from catarrh. (3) 
Chronic retention of urine with great tenesmus after urinating. (4) 
Sj^ppression of urine with lack of solids and low specific gravity. 
(S) Vesical catarrh, tenesmus of neck of bladder, ammoniacal urine, 
much ♦mucus. (6) Chronic gonorrhoea, prostate involved, painful 
urination. The other use of Zea (Z. sA.) was communicated to the 
profession by Dr. J. W. Pruitt {Arkansas EclecL Med, J, quoted 
H. R.y viii. 494). Pruitt learned it from the people. Shuck tea ” is 
a popular remedy for chronic malaria. Pruitt’s son took a chill in 
the Arkansas river bottom. The chills were stopped with the usual 
remedies, Cinchonidiay Irotty PiperinCy &c.,but every fourteen days would 
come back with increased severity. Presently gastric symptoms set in, 
with anaemia, and other symptoms of chronicity. “ Shuck tea ” was 
recommended by a lay friend, and was taken for one day only. 
There was never a chill after. Pruitt thenceforward used Z. sh. largely, 
and he found it was in the chronic cases only that it was beneficial. 

Relations. — Compare : In bladder affections, Trit. r., Sabal ser. 
Renal colic, Oc. c. Heart, Dig., Stroph. Malaria, Malar. 


Zincum. 

Zincum metallicum. Zinc. An Element. Zn. A. W. 64*9. 
Trituration of the metal, 

CHnical. — Alcoholism, Amblyopia. Asthma. Brain-fag. Brain, paralysis of. 
Breasts, affections of. Cataract. Chilblains. Chin, eruption on. Chlorosis. 
Cholera. Chorea. ConsUpatton. Cracks. Dentition. Diarrhoea, nervous; with 
stupor. Diphtheria. Dysentery. Dysuria. Earache. Eczema. Enuresis. Eruptions ; 
suppressed. Eycsy affections of ; granular lids. Fag. Foot-sweat ; suppressed. 
Gastralgia. Headache ; nervous ; chlorotic. Heels, pains in. Hernia, inguinal. 
Hiccough. Hydrocephalus. Hyperpyrexia, nervous. Hypochondriasis. Hysteria. 
Inframammary pain. Joints^ creaking in. Lips, affections of. Lochia; suppressed. 
"Malar bones, neuralgia in. Masturbation. Memory^ weak. Meningitis. Menial 
weakness. Milk, defective ; suppressed. Neuralgia ; intercostal ; subcostal. Neuras- 
thenia. Nipples, sore. Nose, redness of. Nymphomania. (Esophagus, spasm 
of. Otorrhoea. Photopsia. Prostatorrheea. Ptosis. Reaction, defective. Rheu- 
matism. Screaming^ Sleepiness. Somnambulism. Spermatorrhoea* Spinal irrita- 
tion. Spine, affections of. Spleen, neuralgia of. Strabismus. Suppressions. 
Tarsal tumours. Throat, sore. Tibia, burning in. Typhoid fever. Ulcers. Urine, 
hysterical retention of. Varicosis ; during pregnancy ; of external genitals. 
Whooping-cough. Worms. * 

Charaoteristios. — Zincum belongs to the Magnesium group of 
metals, comprising also Cadmium and Glucinum. It has long been 



ZINCUM 


1584 

known in the arts, especially in its combination with Cuprum in the 
manufacture of Brass. Zn, was proved by Hahneman^ and his asso- 
ciates, and it appears among the remedies of his ChronL Diseases. Zn. 
poisons the brain and nerve, and it corresponds to nerve-poisoning of 
varipus kinds. The word fag” covers a large part of Zn. action ; it 
may be nerve- or brain-fag ; or it may be muscle-fag. Fag means that 
tissues are worn out faster than they can be repaired. This leaves 
them poisoned by waste products. Zw. meets the effects of brain-fag 
from over-study ; from night-watching ; fatigue. But there is another 
kind of nerve-poisoning met by Z«. ; the poisoning of ^suppressed 
eruptions or discharges. The common old-school use of Zinc ointment 
to suppress eruptions, and Zinc injections to suppress discharges, ,is 
based on fact : Zn. does suppress them, and it transfers * 4 he morbid 
action to the nervous system, setting up a poisoning there r and, 
conversely, in homoeopathic attenuations Zn. can reverse the process. 
It can restore suppressed eruptions, can cure the consequences of 
suppressions, and can set free the reactive power in conditions of 
undeveloped disease. Some of the keynotes of Zn, will be present to 
give the clue. The most important of these is : “Incessant and violent 
fidgety feeling in feet or lower limbs ; must move them constantly ; 
cannot keep them quiet.” These movements may continue even 
during sleep. Another is: “Too weak to develop exanthemata or 
menstrual function, to expectorate, to urinate ; to understand, to 
remember.” Corresponding to these is : “ Relief to all suffering as 
soon as menses begin to flow,” or as soon as other excretory functions 
are restored. In asthma “ the patient cannot expectorate, but as soon 
as he can he is relieved” (Nash). General twitchings and general 
trembling are, according to Nash, equally characteristic of Zn. He 
records this case : Miss X., 20, had been ill for a week with headache, 
loss of appetite, and especially prostration. Over-study was the cause. 
Under Gels,, and later Bry,, she was improving, when she threw off the 
bedclothes whilst sleeping and perspiring, and took a chill. [Zn. has 
“ cannot bear any covering during the sweat.” — J. H. C.] The bowels 
became enormously distended ; profuse haemorrhage occurred (finally 
controlled by Alumen), a low form of delirium came on, and prostration 
increased in spite of the cessation of haemorrhage. This was the con- 
dition : Staring eyes rolled upward, head retracted ; complete uncon- 
sciousness, lying on back and sliding down in bed ; twitching, “or rather 
intense, violent trembling all over so that she shook the bed,^^ her hands 
had to be held constantly night and day by nurses ; hippocratic face, 
extremities deathly cold to knees and elbows ; pulse intermittent, un- 
countable ; all signs, in short, of impending paralysis of the brain.” 
Two drops of Zn. 200 were mixed in two teaspoonfuls of water. One 
teaspoonful was worked, a little at a time, between the set teeth ; and 
the rest half an hour later. About an hour after the latter dose the 
patient turned down her eyes and said “Milk.” Through a bent tube 
she swallowed half a glass of milk, the first nourishment she had taken 
for twenty-four hours. From that time she improved steadily, and 
received no more medicine for four days. Afterwards she had a dose 
of Nux, Recovery was perfect. A. W. Holcombe {Hahn, Ad., 
xxxviii. 27) reports this case : Man, 40, had gonorrhoea suppressed by 



ZINCUM 


1585 

local treatment three months previously. A week before Holcombe 
saw him first heWas unable to pass water, and had to resort to the 
cathetg:. Since'then could pass urine, but passed almost pure blood 
with it. * Could only urinate when sitting down with knees spread 
apart. Great soreness of perinasum ; on sitting down had to sit side- 
ways on chair. Zn, cm one dose. Five days later perinaeal soreness 
gone, could urinate freely in any position, and had a profuse whitish 
discharge from the urethra. Suppression of foot-sweat ; of lochia ; 
of milk, are all caused and cured by Z«. Weyner (//. /?., x. 152) 
.relates the«jioisoning of cows pasturing near a cadmium mine, near 
which Zinc-smelting was carried on. These were some of the effects : 
General emaciation, skin clinging tightly to the body ; eyes pale 
bluish, drawrt back into the orbits ; horns and ears unequally warm, 
mouth hot and shiny and hanging down, at times dry ; appetite 
undisturbed ; rumination slower ; dung grass-green, thin-flowing and 
fetid ; at times cough. As the disease progressed emacfation in- 
creased, the horns became rough, milk dried upj and diarrhoea 
increased till the animals could no longer rise, and died of total 
prostration. Zn. meets these suppression-effects : paralysis and 
vertigo from brain softening following suppressed foot-sweat ; 
chorea from eruptions suppressed by gout ; puerperal convul- 
sions from suppressed eruption ; nymphomania from suppressed 
lochia. has a strong action on the generative sphere, it excites 
both sexes and causes seminal losses and prostatorrhcea of the male, 
and nymphomania and masturbation in the female. This may be 
associated with varicosis or pruritus of the external genitals. A 
notable symptom of Zw., and one which may indicate it in children 
and in delirious cases, as well as in affections of the genitals them- 
selves, is that the patient is continually pressing on the pubes or 
applying the hand to the genitals. With the emission there is 
backache, which is temporarily > by the emission ; and with the 
female sexual disorders there is also backache and spinal irrita- 
tion. Dull aching in spine, < when sitting. Burning pains all 
along the spine. The burning pains of Zn. appear in many parts. 
Pricking, pressive, cramp-like pains, tension and constriction are 
also present. Neuralgia in malar bones with pressive pains. 
Pressure at root of nose as if it would be pressed in. The constric- 
tion is especially felt in the chest, and is connected both with 
respiration and the heart. ^‘Sudden, spasmodic, bursting .sensation 
about heart ; it appears to be beating regularly, when it suddenly 
seems as if it would burst through the chest.^^ Zn. affects the blood- 
vessels and corresponds to varicosis : varices of the labia ; of the 
thighs, running into the labia ; of the legs, with fidgety feet. Numb- 
ness, tingling, formication, and fainting spe|ls are other nervous 
effects of Zn. It has an insatiable craving hunger and goneness, 
notably at ii a.m. ; thirst quite as great ; and ** hasty eating” and 
hasty drinking ” are among the keynote symptoms. Another of the 
first importance is intolerance df wine : wine aggravates all symptoms. 
This is noteworthy in states of nervous exhaustion, which usually 
crave stimulants. There is the aversion to wine. Other characteristic 
aversions are : Meat (especially veal) ; sweets ; cooked or warm food. 

VOL. II. lOI 



1586 


ZINCUM 


Eating as well as wine-drinking < the pain. There is a tearing 
headache, most in side of head, < from wine, < a^er dinner. In 
meningitis there are sharp, lancinating pains in the head, < from 
the least stimulant. Pain may account for the anxious screaltn which 
accompanies the convulsions of Ziu The child springs up in bed, 
gnashing teeth, eyes rolled up. A characteristic of brain affections of 
children is crossness in the evening ” On waking there is delirium 
as if frightened, knows no one. “ Child repeats everything said to 
it is another leading symptom. Grits teeth occurs in these con- 
ditions, and will often give Zn, a place in worm cases. --'Among the . 
symptoms indicating lack of power is ^4eeth fail to develop/^ The 
fidgety feet of Zn, are not the only automatic movements of the 
remedy, though the most characteristic. There are automatic move- 
ments of mouth, arms, and hands, and general restlessness. ‘Among 
other features of Zn, is blueness of surface. Related to this is the 
tendency to chilblains, which are swollen and painful, and easily 
made worse by rubbing. There is sensitiveness to frost-bite ; the tip 
of the nose is easily frost-bitten, and the nose remains red long after 
it has been frost-bitten. The hands and feet are affected with inflam- 
mation, painful eruptions, cracks. There is also a ^^frost-bitten 
feeling in the toes. All these point to a lowered state of vitality. 
Peculiar Sensations are : As if she had a large goitre which she could 
not see over. As if hair bristled. Uneasy, as if he had comfeiitted a 
-crime. As if he would have apoplexy. As if scalp were drawn 
together. Pains as if between the skin and the flesh. As if head 
were moving up and down, with a similar floating of images of 
his fancy. As if he saw through a mist. As if he would fall 
over to other side. As if head were swaying back and forth. 
Nauseating weakness as after smoking too strong tobacco. As 
if eyes were drawn together by a cord. Stupefying headache as*^ 
from coal gas. As if root of nose would be pressed into head. As if 
head would be drawn backward. As if air forced itself into frontal 
sinuses. As if head would burst. As if strained in occiput. As if 
scalp wrinkled up and kept tightening. As if insects were crawling 
from occiput to forehead. Feeling in eyes as if she had wept- much. 
As if sand in eyes. As if upper lids paralysed. As if teeth would be 
pulled out with neuralgia. As if teeth long and loose. As if a web 
drawn across throat. As if a hard body were opposing pressure frona 
pharynx into abdomen. As if food remained sticking in pharynx 
after dinner. As if stomach compressed or empty. As of a heavy ^ 
weight in hypochondria. As if abdominal walls were retracted ^ 
against spine. As if flatus pressing against coccyx. As from worms 
^ crawling in anus. As if testicles tightly compressed and drawn up. 
As if pudenda swollen. Cough with stitches iii chest and feeling as if 
chest would burst. Chest : as if hollow and cold ; constricted ; cut to 
pieces. As if a foreign substance rising up throat. Emptiness behind 
sternum. As if a cap on heart. Pain in cervical muscles as if head had 
been in uncomfortable position. As if t:old water were poured down 
her back. As if muscles of wrist too short. As if ‘kidney would be 
twisted off. Wrist and foot as if sprained. As if soles swollen. As 
if tendons of right sole too short. As if ball of great toe frozen,' — The 



ZINCUM 


1587 

headache and seye symptoms of are well marked, and Headache 
with sympathe^c amblyopia may be regarded as a keynote : Kafka 
(H. 153) relates the case of a pale yet vigorous lady of forty ” 

who for two years had had a headache recurring periodically every 
ten to fourteen days without warning. Simultaneously with the head- 
ache was a weakness of vision^ she seemed looking through a fog, and 
coyld not distinguish even large objects. The pain, which lasted two 
or three days, now increasing, now diminishing, was a pressure on 
vertex and forehead from without inward. Face pale, appetite 
deficient, hSad muddled, mood cross and peevish. In forenoon the 
pain was bearable, in afternoon <, and still < evening, when reflex 
ndPUsea, and,^ven vomiting, occurred. The amblyopia went pari passu 
with the severity of the pain, and disappeared as the pain left off. 
Pupils'* rather contracted, eyes otherwise normal. Zn. 3 was given 
morning and evening. The pains diminished immediately and were 
gone in twenty-four hours. The remedy was taken in the evening 
daily for a week. There was no relapse. F. W. Payne (AT. A. J, /f., 
xiv, 131, quoting A. M.) reports this case of cataract : Right eye par- 
tially affected, and left practically useless for vision, with bruised, 
sore, smarting, burning, itching, and stinging sensation ; at intervals, 
suddenly, sensation as if pepper had been thrown into it, causing 
scalding lachrymation and spasm of the lids. These spells were < 
in evening. Burning dryness as if a stick under lid scratching eye- 
ball. Flickering before left eye ; blue and green rings ; green halo 
round gas-jet at times. Slight irritation of conjunctiva and tendency 
of lids to adhere. < By warmth, on warm days, by artificial light. 
Patient nervous, tremulous, impatient, < by mental emotion. Choreic 
jerkings of individual muscles. Zn, 200, given occasionally, steadily 
improved the case. In six months right eye was quite clear, and the 
left steadily gaining. Eleven years later vision was practically perfect, 
though some small streaks could still be found in the left lens. 
<jerstel (H./?., x. 97) calls attention to the action of Zn, in fevers with 
inflammation of the brain. In these cases the seat of inflammation 
was the meninges. He refers to a case of a child suffering from scar- 
latina Vho was in this condition : Entirely motionless ; extremities 
icy cold, body cold, skin all over body bluish red, except the parts about 
the cyes^ forehead and chin, which were white. Zn. was given, and the 
child gradually recovered. In a case of typhoid (i6th day) in a man, 
in whom mental .symptoms had set in : “ Muddled feeling in the 
head, an incapacity to relate anything connectedly, and a sort of 
half smiling loquacity and later : Staring look, almost hippocratic 
appearance, pale as wax ; carphologia, subsultus tendinum, constant 
trembling of the hands — Zn. 2 saved the patient. — The symptoms of Z«j| 
are : < By touch. Pressure < ; (> conjunctivitis ; toothache ; left ovarian 
pain). Rubbing and scratching >. Jarring, riding <. Rest <. 
Sitting <. Lying < ; (> vertigo). < By motion, active or pas- 
sive : Child screams out whenever it is moved.^^ Walking ; lifting ; 
exertion <. Lqoking up rs vision of falling luminous objects, and 
dizziness. < Evening and night, ii a.m. to 12 sinking <. Rheu- 
matism < from over-heating. Wails and moans during sweat. < By 
chill when heated. Warm room <. Warm water > conjunctivitis. 



1588 ZINCUM 

Open air < ; (> headache and drowsiness). Verj* sensitive to draught. 

< By cold touch when patient touches anyth^ig cold). Sea 
bathing = herpes in mouth. Approach of storm ss chills. > While 
eating ; < after. Eating <. Drinking < (as soon as liquid reaches 
stomach he vomits). < From : Sugar ; wine ; milk. Emissions > 
(temporarily). Sensitive to others talking and to noise. 

Relations.— by : Hep., Ign., Camph. (Lobel., Teste). 
Antidote to : Baryt. c. Incompatible : Wine, Cham., Nux. Followed 
well by: Sep., Sul. (best — H. N. G.) ; Puls., Ign. Follow^well : Ap., 
Bell. Complementary : In hydrocephalus. Calc. p. Compare : Erratic * 
temperature in fevers, Puls. Colics, Pul., Lyc. Abdominal symp- 
toms, Plb., Pod, Tremors, Arg. n. Spinal pains. Cob., Sep. Asthma 
accompanying great constriction of chest, Cad. s., K. chi.. Cact. 
Boring fingers in nose, Cin., Ver., Ar. t. Scarlatina, Bell. (Zn. lollows 
well when rash fails to come out and child screams whenever moved). 
Hydrocephalus, Calc. ph. Pain in back < sitting than walking, Sep., 
Cob., Arg. n. (Arg. n. has pain when rising). Goneness ii a.m., Sul., 
Nat. c., Pho., Indm. Paralysis and brain softening, Pho., Pb. Sper- 
matorrhoea, testes drawn up, Con. (Con. lacks the excessive irritability 
of Zn., and Zn. has temporary > from the emissions). Fag, nervous 
exhaustion, Pic. ac. Neuralgia, nervous exhaustion, Mg. c. Spinal 
irritation, Act. r. (Zn. has < sitting and < from wine). Sinkmg sen- 
sation, inability to throw out eruption. Hell. Crying out in sleep, 
wakes terrified ; puts hands to genitals, Stram. Suppressed or unde- 
veloped eruption, Bry. Fidgety feet, Trn. Boring in left ovaiy 
ceasing with flow, Lach. Fear of ghosts, Aco., Ars., Bro., Carb. v., 
Cocc., Lyc., Pho., Pul., Ran. b., Sep., Sul. Pain in right chest, Phell. 
Pain in throat > when not swallowing, Ign. Too weak to develop 
exanthemata. Cup., Sul., Bac. Convulsions with pale face^ no heat^ 
except in occiput, no rise of temperature (Bell. opp.). Automatic 
movements of hands and head or one hand and head, Apoc., Bry., 
Hell, Cannot bear back touched, Chi. s., Trn., Ther. Twitching* 
or jerking of single muscles, Agar., Ign. Incipient brain disease from 
suppressed eruptions, Bac., Hell. Unconquerable sleepiness, Nux m.. 
Op. Diarrhoea with stupor, Op. < From sea-bathing, Ars! Too 
speedy ejaculation in coitus. Titan. Burning in spine, Pho., Lyc. 
Headache at root of nose, Ign. Affections of palate, Mang. 

Gauflation. — Grief. Anger. Fright. Night-watching. Opera- 
tions. Frost-bite. Suppressions : eruptions ; otorrhoea ; menses ; 
lochia ; milk. 


SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Hypochondriacal humour. — Thoughts of death, as if the end 
were approaching. — Fear of robbers or of frightful spectres. — Stares as if 
frightened on waking, rolls head from side to side. — Fretful, peevish humour, 
morose, with dislike to conversation, esp. in evening. — Child cross towards 
evening, brain affected. — The patient is powerfully affected by conversation 
or by noise. — Irascibility and impatience. — Tendency to fits of passion, and 
great uneasiness when left alone.— Aversion to labour (and to walk).— Fickle- 



ZINCUM 


• 1589 

ness (very varictble mood), with sadness towards noon and joy (hilarity) in 
evening, and vi<^. versa , — Weakness of memory. — Forgetfulness (forgets what 
has bte^i accomplished during the day).— Weak memory with stinging pains 
in head. — Unconquerable drowsiness after prolonged night- watching. — 
Absence of ideas. — Difficult conception. — Incoherent ideas. — Thoughtlessness 
and dulness of intellect. — Repeats all questions before answering them. 

. 2 . Head. — Continued confusion and cloudiness in head. — ^Vertigo 
deeply seated in brain, principally in occiput (cerebellum), causing patient 
to fall sideijgng (to 1.). — Vertigo : as if he would have apoplexy , as if head 
moving up and down ; as if he would fall to r. when on a height ; with flushing 
heat ; on staying up late, as after smoking too strong tobacco. — ^Vertigo, as if 
the seat were undulating when sitting up in bed in morning. — ^Vertigo and de- 
lirious^eelihg : kept continually talking in his sleep (agg. from 3 X trit. — R. T. C.). 
— Stupefying vertigo, with clouded sight (everything gets black before the eyes ; 
< in morning in warm room and after eating ; > in open air) ; and general 
weakness. — Frequent attacks of vertigo, preceded by sharp pressure at root of 
nose, and a sensation of drawing together of eyes, as if by a cord, followed 
immediately by excessive nausea, faintness, and trembling of hands.— Pain as 
from a tearing in whole brain. — Headache at night, or in evening after lying 
down. — Headache after drinking (even small quantities of) wine.— Fit of 
. headache, with nausea and vomiting. — Sharp pressure on a small spot in 
forehesrtl, evening. — Pressure at root of nose as if it would be pressed into 
head. — PressiVe cephalalgia, principally in morning and in forehead, with 
confusion ; or else in temples and occiput. — Pain in sinciput, with dulness, 
extending into the eyes. — Compressive boring, or expansive pressure in head. 
— Drawing in occiput and forehead. — Shootings and tearing in the head, esp. 
in the sides, temples, forehead, and occiput, < after dinner.— Heniicrania ; < 
after dinner ; tearing and stinging. — Frequent screwing together pain in both 
sides of head in evening. — Chlorotic headaches, esp. in patients saturated with 
iron. — Cerebral and nervous exhaustion ; brain-fag ; anaemia, — Pain as from 
«* excoriation in head. — Pulsative pains in head. — Buzzing in head.— The head- 
aches are > in open air and < in a room. — Itching and sensation of excoria- 
tion in the scalp, or pain as from ulceration. — Sensitiveness of vertex, as from 
sorerfess or ulceration, without regard to touch ; < in evening in bed and 
after eating ; > in open air. — Forehead cool, base of brain hot, — Sensation as 
if hair were standing on end, — The hair falls off from the vertex causing 
• complete baldness, with sensation of soreness of the scalp.— Hydrocephalus. 

3. Eyes. — Pain in the eyes in evening after lying down or drinking 
wine. — Pressure on eyes or sensation as if pressed or sunk into head. — Pres- 
sive and lancinating tearing in eyes. — Photophobia ; dread of sunlight with 
watery eyes. — Sensitive to light ; brain affected. — Burning and biting in eyes, 
esp. in r., as from c^ist ; photophobia and lachryniation ; < evenings. — 
Itching, smarting, and feeling of excoriation in eyes, eyelids, and internal 
canthi ; < evening and night ; also during menses. — (Pterygium.)— Burning 
and inflammation of eyes and lids. — Redness and inflammation of internal 
canthi, with suppuration. — Dryness of eyes. — Agglutination of lids at night, 
with pressing, sore feeling. — Intense burning in eyes after operations. — Falling 
down and paralysis of upper eyelids. — Pupils contracted.— Luminous flakes 
befote eyes when looking into the air (at the sky). — On looking up felt 



ZINCUM 


1590 

giddy and saw showers of gold descending (cured with hysterical retention 
of urine. — B. Simmons). — ^When looking up, a dark, diago^ial line before 1 . 
eye, directed upwards and to the r., about six feet in length.— Diplopia, 1, 
eye most affected ; strabismus developed. — ^Amaurosis : during severe head- 
ache, passing away with headache. 

4. Ears. — Earache, with tearing lancinations and external swelling, esp. 
in children.— Frequent, acute stitches in r, car, near tympanum.— Earache of 
children, esp. boys. — Increased ear-wax, 1 . ear, thinner than usual. — ^Tickling 
in 1 . ear not > by rubbing. — Itching in r. ear, > by boring intojt. — Flow of 
fetid pus from ears. — Noises: humming; whizzing; ringing; crash as from 
breaking glass on falling asleep. 

5. Nose. — Pain as from excoriation in interior of nose.— ^Troublesome 
pressure at the root of nose, as if it were squeezed. — Cutting, crawling in 
evening, then sneezing,— Swelling of nose, internally and externally, some- 
times semilateral, with anosmia. — Obstruction of nose. — Fluent coryza, with 
hoarseness and burning sensation in chest. — Redness of nose, remaining after 
freezing ; tip of nose easily frosted. 

6. Face.— Pale and earthy countenance. — Pale; alternating with red- 
ness. — Face : cadaverous ; pinched ; unnatural ; earthy, as after long illness ; 
cachectic, bluish-white ; waxy, white or yellow ; pewter-like. — Gloomy and 
wandering look ; vacant ; apathetic. — Tearing, pressing, stitches, and pain as. 
of a fracture in the bones of the face. — Sudden pressing stitch from r.'zygoma 
to upper margin of orbit, deep in bone, followed by great sensitiveness on 
the spot ; evening. — Neuralgia of fifth pair of nerves, < from touch and in 
evening. — Spasmodic twitching of musculi risores, with constant inclination 
to laugh. — Cracks in lips and commissures, with internal ulceration. — Lips : 
swollen; dry, — Upper lip : violent muscular twitches in 1 . side ; sore ; ulcera- 
ting in middle ; jerking tearing in r. side ; fine stitches. — Lower lip : tensive, 
painful smarting : burning smarting on inner surface. — Sticking pain in jaw- 
joint, beneath and in front of 1, ear, on moving jaw back and biting strongly, 
and on pressing finger on joint.— Thick, viscid, tasteless mucus on lips. — 
Itching eruption and redness on chin. 

7. Teeth. — Toothache during mastication. — Tearing, lancinating, or 
drawing toothache, esp. in molars. — Pain in teeth, as from excoriation. — 
Frequent toothache, a drawing pain in roots of incisors. — Painful jerking in a 
tooth. — Looseness of teeth. — Teeth : feel sore ; feel elongated. — Grits teeth, — 
Copious bleeding of teeth and gums (on slightest touch). — Gums white and® 
swollen, with pain as from excoriation. — Ulcers in gums. 

8. Mouth. — Small yellow ulcers in mouth, on internal surface of 
cheeks. — Tingling (crawling) of internal surface of cheeks, and copious 
secretion of saliva, having a metallic taste.— Sticking, biting on palate, close 
to and in the roots of incisors, — Vesicles on tongue.— Tongue : dry, doesn’t 
want to talk ; coated at root and edges (brain diseases ) ; swollen 1. side, hin- 
dering talking ; covered with vesicles ; white or yellowish white ; white as 
from cheese, without taste ; covered with white mucus ; blistered, painful on 
eating. — Inflammation of palate. — Pain in palate and velum palati, esp. on 
yawning. — Herpes in mouth from sea-bathing. 

g. Throat. — Drawing tearings in bottom of gullet, more frequently 
when not swallowing than during deglutition (or worse between acts of 



ZINCUM 


1591 


swallowing than on empty swallowing).— Sensation of contraction and cramp 
in oesophagus, ^near pit of throat. — Dryness and roughness in palate and 
throa^k, jvith rawness, smarting, and scraping.— Pain as from excoriation in 
throat. — Copious accumulation of mucus in the throat, which frequently 
enters the mouth through the posterior narcs. — Bluish herpes in throat after 
suppressed gonorrhoea.— Pain in throat as from an internal swelling. 

. 10* Appetite. — Taste of blood in mouth.— Salt taste in mouth, — ^Taste : 
sweetish ; metallic ; like spoiled cheese ; as after raw peas. — ^Violent thirst : 
from forengon till evening ; with heat in palms ; in afternoon ; in afternoon 
during menses; with hasty drinking; for beer in evening. — Diminution of 
appetite ; loss of appetite. — Insatiable voracity.— Hunger : ravenous, esp. 

1 1 a.m. or >2 noon, with weakness of legs and trembling ; greediness and 
hasty f wallowing. — Loss of appetite, with a perfectly clean tongue. — Dislike 
to meal (veal), sweet things, fish, cooked and hot food ; to wine and brandy. 
— Pressure at stomach, with nausea, after eating bread. — Hypochondriacal 
humour, with aching under false ribs ; choking, clawing in abdomen, and 
fulness, pressure, or burning in the stomach after a meal. — < From sugar 
(heartburn) ; wine ; milk (loud eructations). 

11. Stomach. — Rising, with pressive pain in chest. — Sour risings after a 
meal, esp. after drinking milk. — Pyrosis after taking things sweetened with 
sugar. — Hiccough, esp. after brealrfast. — Nausea, with retching and vomiting 
of bittdt* mucus, renewed by slightest movement. — Nausea and headache from 
least drop of wine. — Vomiting : as soon as first spoonful of liquid reaches 
stomach ; of pregnancy ; easy, of watery bile, followed by great relief ; acrid, 
causing burning on face and rawness in throat ; almost continuous.— Vomiting 
of blood. — Stomachache.— Unpleasant sensation in cardia and along oeso- 
phagus. — Squeezing and pressure in scrobiculus. — Tearing and shootings in 
scrobiculus; from both sides towards each other. — Burning in stomach. — 
Burning sensation in epigastrium (extending to cxjsophagus). — Sudden oppres- 
sion of stomach, has to unfasten dress. — Spasm in stomach and constriction of 
oesophagus ; < during inspiration. 

12 . Abdomen. — Spasmodic pains in the hypochondria, alternating with 
oppression of chest (dyspnoea) after eating. — Sticking in r. hypochondrium. 
— Enlarged liver. — Violent pressure in hypochondria and sides of abdomen, 
< by movement and walking, — Squeezing, pressure, and shootings in the 
hepatic region, — Shootings in region of spleen. — Pressure, shootings, and 
pain as from excoriation in lumbar region. — Sticking in diaphragm. — Pains in 
abdomen in evening after lying down. — Violent pressure and tension in 
abdomen (and sides), with distension.— Pain after a light meal, with tym- 
panites.— Pressure under short ribs, after eating, with depression of spirits.— 
Pain as from an internal induration in a spot beneath navel. — Sensation of 
pressure on internal surface of trunk, of a nervous character, without flatu- 
lency. — Spasmodic pain in umbilical region. — Squeezing in abdomen. — 
Gripings and pinchings in abdomen, with diarrhoea. — Griping after breakfast 
or cutting after dinner. — Tearings and shootings in abdomen.— Severe stab- 
bing pains in abdomen. — Acc^^mulation of much flatulence, with grumbling 
(loud rumbling, gurgling rolling) and borborygmi in abdomen, esp. after a 
meal. — Flatulent colic, esp. in evening. — Frequent expulsion of hot and 
putfid flatus, — Inguinal hernia. — Pressive aching in pubic region. — (Eroto- 



ZINCUM 


1 592 

mania ; patient always pressing on pubes.) — Cutting upward in 1. iliac region, 
in paroxysms ; in a pregnant woman. — Swelling of i^iguinal glands ; 
buboes (I.). f 

13. Stool and Anus.—Constipation.— Hard, dry (crumbling), insuffi- 
cient fasces, often evacuated with violent straining. — Constipation of the new- 
born. — Loose, soft evacuations of consistence of pap, or liquid, and often 
accompanied by a discharge of bright red (or pale) blood.— Diarrhoea with 
stupor. — Nervous diarrhoea from depression of nerve centres. — Involuntary 
evacuation. — Pain in abdomen during and after evacuation. — Tearings, shoot- 
ings, burning, feeling as of excoriation, and violent itching in amis. — Burning 
in anus during stool. — Feeling in rectum as if flatus pressing against coccyx, 
by which it is retained. — Crawling tingling in anus, as from worms. 

14. Urinary Organs.— Pressing, stinging, and soreness in the kj^dneys. 
— Pressure in region of 1. kidney. — Stones (gravel) of kidneys and bladder. — 
Retention of urine when beginning to urinate. — Sitting with legs crossed, 
bending forward, and cannot pass water, or but very little, and feels as if 
his bladder would burst. — Can only pass urine (which she must do every 
hour) while sitting bent backwards. — Hysterical retention of urine (with 
vision of a golden shower on looking up. — B. Simmons). — Excessive desire 
to urinate, also at night. — Violent pressure of urine on the bladder. — Pain- 
ful emission of urine. — Involuntary emission of urine, esp. when walking, . 
coughing, or sneezing. — Frequent emission of a clear yellow urine; which 
afterwards deposits a white, flocky sediment. — The urine becomes turbid, 
like clay-water, after standing. — Sanguineous urine. — Burning sensation during 
and after emission of urine. — Acute drawing in forepart of urethra and in 
penis. — Incisive pains in orifice of urethra. — Discharge of blood from urethra 
after painful micturition. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Testes retracted, swollen, painful. — Draw- 
ing in testes and along spermatic cord (one or the other testicle is drawn up). 
— Pain as from excoriation in scrotum. — Contraction of scrotum and shudder- 
ing in that part. — Orchitis ; from suppressed otorrhoea. — Strong sexual desire, « 
with difficult or too speedy emission. — Permanent erections at night. — Emis- 
sions at night, without lascivious dreams. — Easily excited; the emission 
during an embrace is difficult or almost impossible. — Flow of prostatic- fluid 
(without any cause). — Great falling off of hair of genital organs. — Hands con- 
stantly on the genitals. — The child grasps the genitals when coughing. 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Sensation of bearing down towards the < 
genital organs. — Complaints coming on while the menses are absent, but feels 
perfectly well during the flow : suffers much pain, particularly in ovaries, will 
lie so as to press on the affected side, and dangling the limb will swing it 
about, patient can’t keep still.-— Menses flow more at night.— Nymphomania 

i i lying-in women, with great sensitiveness of the genitals. — Hands constantly 
on the genitals. — Irresistible sexual desire at night; desire for onanism.— 
Menses too early. — Discharge of large clots during the menses. — Menstruation 
too late. — Catamenia premature ; suppressed. — Suppressed menstruation with 
painfuhiess of the breasts and genitals. — Cajamenia retarded. — Spasmodic 
colic on appearance of catamenia. — During the catamenia : distension of the 
abdomen, cuttings, and pressure towards abdomen and loins, with great 
heaviness and lassitude in legs ; cough. — Leucorrhoea of thick mucus (bldody 



ZINCUM 


1593 


mucus ; excoriating after menses), sometimes preceded by pains in abdomen. 
— Leucorrhcea with much itching ; pain in 1. ovary, only > by menstrual 
flow.-HiPruritus vulvae ; causes masturbation.— Itching of vulva during menses. 
—Varicose veins of external genitals, with fidgety feet.— Piofuse falling off of 
hair of genitals.— Varices during pregnancy; stagnation of blood in 1. leg.— 
Tendency to miscarry. — Puerperal convulsions with suppression of (chronic) 
ert^tion. — Suppressed lochia; nymphomania. — Pain as from excoriation in 
nipples. — Suppressed secretion of milk. 

17. Re|||piratory Organs. — Roughness and dryness in throat and 
chest, esp. in morning and after dinner.— Hoarseness; with burning in 
trachea as if chest filled with mucus.— Frequent tickling in region of larynx, 
—discharge sf black blood when hawking. — Cough, with oppression. — Violent 
cough.:y-Cough, with stitches in the head.— Dry cough also at night, with 
violent stitches in chest and feeling as if it would burst. — Cough, with ex- 
pectoration of viscid mucus, followed by a sinsation of coldness and excoriation 
in chest as if it were raw.— Cough, with expectoration of blood, burning sensa- 
tion, and pain as from excoriation of chest. — Debilitating, spasmodic cough 
from tickling in larynx, extending to middle of chest, with expectoration of 
yellow, purulent, blood-streaked, tenacious mucus, tasting disagreeably, 
sweetish-putrid, metallic ; or of pure blood in morning or during day. — The 
cough is < after eating, during rest, sitting, standing, from milk, sweets, 
spirituous liquors, during menstruation. — ^Child grasps genitals when coughing. 

18. Chest. — Difficult respiration and oppression, with pressive pain in 
the chest, esp. in evening. — Constrictive sensation around the chest, with pain 
in the chest, as if cut to pieces. — Dull stitches in r. side of chest. — Stitches in 
a spot in 1. side of chest, with feeling as if corroded and bruised. — Tightness 
in evening, with pressure in middle of sternum ; small, rapid pulse. — Spas- 
modic dyspnoea. — Shortness of breath, caused by flatulence after a meal. — 
Sensation of emptiness in the chest. — Chest loaded with mucus. — Pressure at 
chest, — Tensiye pain in sternum. — L. intercostal neuralgia < by motion ; 

•fatigue; at times with palpitation. — Sticking beneath 1. breast. — Tearings in 
chest. — Shootings in chest, esp. in region of heart. — Burning sensation in 
chest. — Pain beneath costal arches. 

XQ.* Heart. — Palpitation of heart, with or without anguish.— Irregular 
movements of heart. — Shocks in heart and intermittent palpitation, with 
suffocation.— Tension and stitches in the praecordial region, < by violent 
•expiration.— Stitches at apex,— Sudden, spasmodic, bursting sensation about 
heart. — Feels as if a cap were over heart ; spine affected. — Violent pulsations 
in blood-vessels during heat. — Rapid pulse. 

20. Neck and Back. — Lancinating tearings, stiffness, and tension in 
nape, — Tearing in r. side of neck. — Nape of neck feels weary from writing or any 
exertion. — Spinal irritation with prostration ; numbness of lower limbs. — PainSo 
in loins, esp. when walking and seated. — Sensation of paralytic v/cakness in 
back and loins. — Rheumatic pains in back. — Itching tetters on back. — Tension 
and shootings in and between shoulder-blades. — Burning in scapulae.— Pres- 
sive tension beneath the r. sqapula. — Burning pressure upon spine above 
small of back. — Burning along whole spine, < when sitting. — Pains at last 
dorsal vertebra. — ^Violent, long-lasting ache about last lumbar vertebras.— 
Stiffness and pain in upper dorsal muscles.— Pushing, aching, at times pinching 



1594 ZINCUM 

pains in coccyx ; lancinating in sacrum ; pressive tension and weakness in 
lumbar and sacral regions. 

21. Limbs,— Tearing in limbs, < when over-heated or wl^en taking 
exercise. — Drawing tearing in hollow bones, with pain so violent that the 
limbs can give no support. — StifEness of joints, with sharp, lancinating pains 
above joints, always transverse, not lengthwise of the limb. — Coldness of 
extremities.— Drawing, tearing pains in all limbs.— Violent itching in all 
joints. — Spasmodic pain and cramp in the limbs. — ^Visible quivering and 
jerking in different parts of the muscles. — Tingling in the limbs. 

22 . Upper Limbs. — Rheumatic drawing and lancinating tearing in ' 
shoulders, arms, elbows, joints of hands and fingers, — Painful sensation of 
paralysis in arms, — Furunciili in arms. — Burning in 1. forear<m at niglit. — 
Paleness and paralysis of hands. — Weakness and trembling of the hands 
when writing. — Spasmodic tension in r. hand. — Lameness and deadness of 
hands; they look bluish. — HerpAic, rough, and itching spots on hands.— 
Dry skin, with rhagades on hands. — Dry herpes on the hands and fingers ; 
they are rough and itch. — Chilblains itch and swell. — Cracks between the 
fingers. — Numbness of fingers when rising in morning. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Rheumatic drawings and tearings in legs, knees, 
ankles and joints of the feet. — Varices in thighs and legs. — Legs oedematous. 
— Itching of thighs and hollow of knees.— Tensive pain in knees. — Nocturnal 
pains in knees. — Sensation as if the blood did not circulate in the legs. — 
Drawing and tensive stiffness in calves when walking. — Tingling in calves. — 
Burning pain in tibia. — Erysipelatous inflammation and swelling of tendo 
Achillis. — Intolerable boring pain in heel after drinking wine. — Stiffness of 
joint of the foot after being seated for some time. — Wrenching pain in joints 
of feet and toes. — Burning sensation in feet. — Inflammatory swelling of feet. 
— Weakness and trembling of feet. — Paralysis of feet : from spinal or chronic 
nervous disease, softening of brain or cerebral haemorrhage ; from suppressed 
foot-sweat. — Feet sweaty and sore about toes ; fetid suppressed foot-sweat 
with much nervous excitement, — Coldness of the feet at night. — Nervous, 
fidgety movement of the feet ; after retiring and during sleep. — ^Tearing in 
margin of r. foot. — Painful chilblains on feet. — Itching, heat, redness, and 
swelling of toes as if they were frozen,— Pulsative lancinations in^toes. — 
Sprained pain in bends of toe- joints. — Ulcerative, boring pains in heels ; < 
when walking than when sitting, — Profuse sweat on the feet. 

24. Generalities.— [Affections in general appearing in the 1. inguinal 
ring ; L side of back ; upper jaw, and troubles of the teeth in lower jaw ; 
loins ; posterior surface of thigh ; tendo Achillis ; big toe ; joints of toes, — 
Patient can't keep still, must be in motion all the time. — Chilblains of the 
hand, much swollen, very painful. — In fevers or nervous complaints one keeps 
the feet in continual motion. — ^Variable mood ; clay-like sediment in the 
urine ; biting, pungent pain ; lancinating pains ; exanthema of long standing, 
esp* with a biting sensation. — < In the evening, sometimes lasting all night ; 
after swallowing food. — > While eating. — H. N. G.] — Pain as from excoria- 
tion. — ^Varices. — Pain, which sometimes seems to be between the skin and the 
flesh. — Formication on the skin. — The symptoms are aggravated to an extra- 
ordinary degree by Chamomile, Nux, and wine, substances which also 
excite them, particularly the nocturnal uneasiness and constipationT— The 



ZINCUM ACETICUM 


1595 


majority of the symptoms manifest themselves after dinner and towards 
evening.—Sensation of soreness in internal and external parts.*— General 
insensibijity of the body.— Sensation of coldness in bones.— Violent pulsation 
throughout body. — ^Violent trembling (twitching) of whole body, esp. after 
mental emotion. — ^Twitching of children. — Chorea. — Heaviness, lassitude, and 
excessive weakness, < when walking or on waking in morning. — ^Aversion to 
moyement 

25. Skin. — Itching in bends of joints. — Itching, with violent lancinations, 
esp. in eveijjng in bed, disappearing immediately on being touched. — Tingling 
between the skin and the flesh. — Chronic eruptions. — Eczema of back of 
r. hand with terrible irritation, little oozing and fissuration, < in cold weather 
an^ excited hy rubbing (R. T. C.). — Tetters and herpetic ulcers. — Ganglia, 
chilblains, and liability of the external parts to become frozen. — Rhagades. — 
Small furunculi. — ^Varicose veins. 

26. Sleep. — Sleep by day, and continued disposition to sleep, esp. in 
morning or after a meal; with inclination to yawn. — Unconquerable drowsi- 
ness. — Retarded sleep. — Disturbed sleep, with frequent waking. — Unrefresh- 
ing sleep (with unpleasant dreams). — Fantastic, frightful, agitated, or 
disgusting and terrific dreams, with talking and cries during sleep, — 
Excessive coldness of the feet at night. — Shocks in body during sleep and 
.frequent starts. 

27. Tever,— Febrile shuddering along back.— Constant shivering, with 
increased internal heat. — Chill begins generally after eating, and continues 
till late in evening and during. the night. — Chilliness in open air and when 
touching a cold object. — Chilliness on approach of stormy weather. — Febrile 
shuddering, with flushes of heat ; violent trembling of limbs, short and hot 
breath, and pulsation throughout the body. — Pulse small and rapid in the 
evening, slower in morning and during the day. — Pulse at times intermitting. 
— Violent pulsations in the veins during the heat. — Internal heat, with sensa- 
tion of coldness in abdomen and on feet. — Tendency to perspire in the day. — 

^Night-sweat. — Profuse perspiration during whole night, with inclination to 
uncover oneself. — Badly-smelling perspirations. — [“Brass-founders ague,” 
which is supposed to be due to inhalation of Zinc fumes, begins with malaise 
and fueling of constriction across the chest, nausea occasionally, the symptoms 
. occurring in after part of day are followed in evening at bed-time by shiver- 
ing, sometimes by an indistinct hot stage, but always by profuse sweating ; the 
* worse the sweating, the less violent the attack ; attacks always irregular. 
(R. T. C.).] 


Zincum Aceticum. 

Acetate of Zinc. Zn(C 2 H 30 a)a 3 Ha 0 . ’ Solution. 

Clinioali — Diarrhoea. Erysipelas. Gastritis. Night-watch ing, effects of. 
Toothache. 

Charaotei^istics. — Zw. ac. was proved by Hahnemann and others* 
The most Peculiar Symptoms were these : Brain feels sore and as if 
spriakled with salt.” “ Throat seems too tight and tongue too short.” 



ZINCUM ACETICUM 


1596 

There was toothache < by touch. Shaking chill during and after 
vomiting. Empty, hungry sensation. Pain and paralytic condition 
of arms. The symptoms were < in evening. < By motion. < 
Walking in open air. The only clinical uses of Zn. ac. I am acquainted 
with I learned from Burnett. He used Rademacher^s solution of 
Zinc in Acetic Acid, and gave 5-drop doses three times a day in water 
to nurses and others who were compelled to work on an insufficient 
amount of sleep. I have verified the great utility of this. Another 
use to which Burnett put it was in erysipelas of old people. In the 
provers it produced a pustular eruption on forehead and knee ; and 
the latter was attended with voluptuous itching. 

Causation. — Night- watching. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Anxious, quiet, does not speak a word ; asked how she feels, 
says, Let me alone, I shall soon be better.” 

2. Head. — Heaviness of head. — ^Throbbing headache, as if it would 
come out at forehead.— Frontal headache, as if brain sore and sprinkled with 
salt. — Dull, sticking, painful sensation in forehead. — Stitches : in forehead ; 
needle-like in 1. temple. 

4* Ears. — L. ear swollen internally, painful on inserting fingei* and on 
external touch. 

6. Face. — Face pale ; look anxious. 

8 . Mouth. — Tearing pain in teeth, esp. when touched. — Blister on fore- 
part of gum, painful as if burnt. — Mouth feels burnt. — Bitter taste in mouth. 

9. Throat. — Throat feels too tight and tongue too short. 

11. Stomach. — Eructations : empty ; ineffectual ; sour, with shaking 
chill ; tasting of food eaten three hours before. — Nausea followed by needle- 
like stitches in throat, then vomiting of bitter, sour mucus, whereby the stick- 
ing was < ; afterwards chilliness of back. — ^Vomit with salivation. — Sensation 
of a small swelling in pit of stomach, painful to touch, previous to menses. — 
Pressure ; and sticking in pit of stomach, < by motion, late in evening. — 
Empty, hungry sensation two hours after dinner. 

12. Abdomen. — Violent griping in abdomen, obliged to lie down. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Urging to stool a few times at night, followed 
by pasty stool. — Diarrhcea every hour during day. — Diarrhoea of black colout 
after dinner. 

14. Urinary Organs.— Urethra : contraction of ; biting in. — Frequent 
increased desire to urinate and irritation to urinate (like a burning). — Much 
watery urine. 

18. Chest. — Much mucus comes from chest in afternoon, with a kind of 
nausea. 

20. Back. — Back much affected, on stooping sudden shooting in it as if 
all strength had left him. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Weakness in both arms. — Pain in 1 . arm, heavy, 
wrist hurts, no position easy at night (from injection into urethra). — Drawing, 
trembling, loss of power in r. arm. — Pressing, tearing, and stitches in muscles 
of r. arm during rest and motion.— Pressing pain in ball of r. hand. 



ZINCUM CYANATUM 


1597 


23. ^ Lower Limbs. — Pressive sticking in muscles of 1. thigh while 
walking in open air. — ^Tensive pain in upper r. calf while walking in open air, 

24. , Generalities.— -She wishes to walk, contrary to habit,— Frequent 
alternatioh between sitting and walking about. — Feels bad in afternoon. — 
(Effects of insufficient sleep.) 

25. Skin. — Papular eruption filled with pus on forehead and neck ; 
when opened it discharged pus and blood (from external application to 
urethra). — Red, papular eruption about both knees, which caused a tickling 
and voluptuous itching. — (Erysipelas of old people.) 

26. Sle&p . — Sleepy during day, frequent yawning. 

27. Fever. — Shaking chill ; during and after vomiting. — Several times a 
daj^eels hot,^as though throat had been burnt with alcohol. — Burning heat 
in face, evening, and heat over whole face and redness of cheeks without 
sweat.— N ight«sweat. 


Zincum Bromatum. 

Bromide of Zinc. Zincic bromide. ZnBr,. Solution. 

Olinieal. — Chorea. Dentition. Hydrocephalus. 

CharacteristicB. — Hale has used Z«. br. on its double indications 
for teething children who suffer intensely from pain in nerves of 
head and face, pains which throw the children into a state of stupor 
alternating with wakefulness. He uses the 3rd and 6th attenuations. 


Zincum Gyanatum. 

* Cyanide of Zinc. Zincic Cyanide. Zn(CN)a. Trituration. (Low 
attenuations should be freshly made.) 

CHnlcal.— Chorea. Convulsions. Epilepsy. Hysteria. Meningitis. Paralysis 
agitans. Petit mal. 

OharaoteristiOB. — z«. cy, produces the nervous and mental 
‘symptoms of Zn, with great intensity, and it has been chosen in 
consequence as the salt for use in convulsions and paralytic conditions 
in which Zn, is indicated. The few symptoms of Kopp’s proving 
show its suitability. 


. SYMPTOMS. 

1, Mind. — Great excitement. — Bad temper. — Great sensitiveness. 

2. Head. — Congestion to head. 

6. Face. — Face suddenly changes colour. 

13. Stool and Anus.— Constipation. 

24. Generalities. — Great physical agitation. — General trembling from 
tim^to time. 



1598 


ZINCUM lODATUM 


Zincum lodatum. - 

Iodide of Zinc, Zincic iodide, Znl,. Solution in syrup. 

Trituration, 

Clinioalt— Constipation, Cough. Phthisis. 

Characteristics. — Zn, u has been proved by American provers, 
and some well-defined symptoms were produced (C. D. Pj). Among 
them were : Splinter-like pain in throat. Coldness in stomach and 
bowels with tendency to perspire. A cough from tickling in "cne 
throat, and the more he coughed the worse the tickling became. 
A peculiar tingling in right side of face to vertex, with tension in 
skin of the part. Undulating pain at border of right free ribs, extend- 
ing to third rib on same side. 

Relations. — Compare : Splinter pain in throat, Hep., Arg. n. The 
more he coughs the < it tickles, Ign. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Brain seems clouded, hard to remember what he reads. 

2. Head, — Vertigo and belching of wind, attended with coldness in 
lumbar region. 

5. Nose. — At 8.30 a.m. constant tickling in nose, causing ineffectual 
desire to sneeze. 

6. Face. — Peculiar tingling r. side of face, extending to vertex ; skin of 
same region feels tense. 

8 . Mouth. — Taste in mouth like carbonate of soda. 

9. Throat. — Splinter-like pain in throat at intervals. 

n. Stomach. — Emptiness in pit of stomach accompanied all symptoms. 
— Coldness in stomach and bowels, with tendency to perspire. 

12. Abdomen. — Cold sweat in umbilical and lumbar regions. — I anci- 
nating pains in r. groin. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Constipation ; ineffectual efforts for stool ; stool 
when passed scanty and insufficient. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Tickling in throat giving rise to a dry 
cough : the more he coughs the worse the tickling becomes. 

18. Chest. — Painful undulation from free border of r. ribs up to 3rd r. 
rib, — ^Tingling in region of 1. nipple. 

20. Back.— Slight pain in 1. lumbar region. — Coldness (and cold sweat) 
in lumbar region. — Aching in lumbar vertebrae. 

21. Limbs. — ^Trembling feeling in lower limbs, later in arms. — Tired, 
aching sensation in legs and arms. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Cold, clammy sweat of palms. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Cramp-like pain in 1. thigh. — Shifting, crampy 
pains in muscles of legs. — Creeping sensation in backs of legs and soles 
of feet. 



ZINCUM MURIATICUM 


’■599 

25^ Skin. — Skin very dry ; scattered over face are scaling patches, giving 
the appearance of whitish spots. 

26., Sleep.~*Very sleepy, with slight headache.— Slept very uneasily. 

27. Fever.— Coldness : in stomach and bowels ; umbilical and lumbar 
regions. — Tendency to sweat. — Cold sweat on palms. 


• Zincum Muriaticum. 

•Chloride of Zinc. Zincic Chloride. ZnCh. Solutions in water 

or alcohol. 

Olinioal. — Bright’s disease. Constipation. Convulsions. Cramps. Diphtheria. 
Dysentery. Emaciation. Haematemesis. Hiccough. Hydrocephalus. Smell, per- 
verted. Taste perverted. Typhoid fever. Wounds. 

Charaoteristios. — The bulk of the symptoms of Zn. m. are 
derived from poisoning cases. Chloride of Zinc is an active poison 
and a powerful disinfectant, and being readily accessible in the form 
of Sir Wm. Burnett’s Disinfectant Fluid/’ has occasioned many 
poisonings, both accidental and suicidal. Most of the symptoms 
are the^ usual effects of a corrosive poison, but some characteristic 
symptoms appear. One of them was the perversion of the senses of 
smell and taste : Things had a putrid smell and taste which were not 
putrid ; and faeces had no odour at all. Quinine had no bitter taste, 
and acids and alkalies had no acid or alkaline taste. Insipid things 
were most relished. Other symptoms were : No natural appetite, 
but a morbid craving for something to allay the irritation at the 
stomach.” Vomiting of all food except boiled milk.” Occasional 
attacks of tetanic spasms of right forearm and hand.” “ Emaciation ; 
skin looked as if stretched tightly over bones of face and hands.” 
' Bluish and blue-mottled skin.” Sleeps on right side with legs 
drawn up, grinds teeth.” Spasmodic twitchings of face and hands, 
sprains and convulsions were prominent features. De Noe Walker 
used a dilution of Zn, m. as an application to fresh wounds, and found 
it very effectual in securing rapid healing. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Excessive nervous derangement and prostration. — Picks 
bedclothes.— Anxiety, dulness.— Depressed.— Intellect clear by day, wanders 
at night. — Semi-comatose. 

2. Head. — Vertigo : and fainting ; and rush of blood to head. — Head- 
ache, occipital and frontal. 

3. Eyes. — Eyes sunken. — Pupils : widely dilated ; contracted. — Sight 

lost. 

5. Nose. — Smell perverted : putrid and faecal matter had no odour ; 
scents smelt like hemlock ; meats if the least bit burnt smelt intolerably 
putrid. 



i6oo 


ZINCUM MURIATICUM 


6. Face. — Face ; distorted with agony and livid ; pale and arxious ; 
dusky ; flushed ; convulsed and twitching, — Swelling of lips, with thick, 
transparent mucus adhering. — Vesication of lips and tongue. 

8. Mouth. — Toothache in carious teeth. — Gums : spongy ; red and 
covered with white sordes. — Tongue : coated with white fur ; thick yellow 
fur ; intensely red ; covered with brown sordes. — Frothing at mouth. — 
Peculiar fetor of breath. — Taste: astringent; metallic; perverted not less 
than the sense of smell, roast things intolerable, most foods, esp. raw oysters, 
tasted of burnt flour, quinine was not bitter, nor acids acid. 

9. Throat. — Throat : inflamed ; painful ; burning. — Diphtheritic-like 

membrane on fauces. — Constriction of throat. — Burning along oesophagus. — 
Swallowing difficult. I ^ 

11. Stomach. — No natural appetite, had a morbid craving to allay 
irritation of stomach. — Anorexia. — Constant thirst, but aversion to swallowing 
any fluids. — Nausea. — Vomiting : distressing ; violent ; of all food except 
boiled milk ; of shreds of membrane ; most offensive ; of blood. — In stomach : 
clawing and burning pain. 

12. Abdomen. — Severe pain in 1. hypochondrium, < by food. — ^Abdo- 
men shrunken, edge, of liver sharply defined. — Intense abdominal pain and 
tenderness. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Diarrhoea : violent, with vomiting and collapse. 
— Stools : thin, dark brown ; fetid ; coffee-ground ; pitchy ; olive-gre^n ; pale* 
clayey, dry, crumbling. — Constipation. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Nephritis (H. IF., xxxii. 428). — Urine excessive, 
seven pints in five hours. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Voice : in whispers ; lost, — Breathing : 
difficult; thoracic, rapid. 

19. Heart. — Pain in praecordial region ; pulse rapid, fluttering. 

21. Limbs. — ^Tremor in limbs. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Spasmodic pains at shoulders and back. — Tetanic 
spasms occasionally in r. forearm and hand. 

23. Lower Limbs. — Legs drawn up on belly. — Severe cramps. 

24. Generalities. — Emaciation extreme. — Nervous prostration, hyper- 
aesthesia. — Spasmodic movements of muscles of face and arms. — Convulsions. 
—Faintness. — Collapse. 

25. Skin. — Skin : dusky ; ghastly bluish green ; harsh and dry, with 
odour as in starvation ; bluish mottled ; dry ; hot. — Skin of legs covered with ; 
thick scales. 

26. Sleep. — Utter inability to sleep. — Slept restlessly, lying always on r. 
side with legs drawn up, and ground teeth during sleep. 

27. Fever. — Surface cold, wet, and clammy. — Alternations of cold and 
heat. — Complained of cold though skin moderately warm to touch. — Fore- 
head bathed in sweat, general surface warm. — Cold, clammy sweat. 



ZINCUM OXYDATUM i6or 


Zincum Oxydatum. 

Flowers of Zinc, Oxide of Zinc. Zincic oxide. ZnO. Trituration. 

Clinical.;— Coryza. Debility. Deltoid, pain in. Diaphragm, neuralgia in. 
Elbow, pain in. Hiccough. Hypochondriasis. Laughter, involuntary. Sleeplessness. 

« 

Charaoteristios* — An extensive proving of Zn. o. was made by 
Wernek, Juchner, and Michaelis. These symptoms have been in- 
cluded by Allen in the pathogenesis of Zincum^ and some of them 
will be found in my Schema of Zinmm. Jahr kept a separate record 

Zn. 0. •! append his account. The contracting, shrivelling- up 
effect ^of Zinc was marked in these provings. Among the more Pecu- 
liar Symptoms were : Undulating movement in some muscles. Con- 
traction of the risible muscles and constant impulse to laugh. Teeth 
blunted ; incisors feel soft and glued together. Hiccough, > after 
regurgitation of bile. Liquid stools which > all symptoms. In these 
provings the left lung was very markedly affected. There was coryza 
< after a meal, with difficulty of respiration and nasal secretion. 
Stoppage of the nose was much complained of. Anorexia > after a 
meal. Farrington says Zn. o. is very like Con. in hypochondriasis 
and mdancholy from masturbation, the difference being that Zn. o. is 
irritating as well as weakening and depressing, 

SYMPTOMS, 

1. Mind. — Anguish and agitation, as from a consciousness of having 
committed some crime. — Ill-humour, sometimes very great. — Unfitness for 
.serious occupation. — Spasmodic laughter (sardonic). 

2. Head. — Confusion in head : on awaking, with vertigo ; with aching 
^in forehead, in occiput, with heaviness ; giddiness ; violent, with transient 

heat. — Vertigo, sometimes with transient heat. — Headache: with slight 
vertigo ; tension in forehead, sometimes with pressure ; at night, lancinations 
and tearing pains in r, side of head, above temple. 

4. Ears. — Pulsation and noise in ears, esp. in 1., with increased secie* 
tion of liquid cerumen and hardness of hearing. 

5. Nose. — ^I'ickling in nose and impulse to sneeze.— Inability to breathe 
through nose (nose stopped), with anxiety and oppression ; or else as during 
a violent coryza. — Coryza < after a meal, with difficulty of respiration and 
nasal secretion. 

6. Face. — Paleness of complexion ; convulsive drawing in facial 
muscles, sometimes with constant nausea ; or else with contraction of the 
risible muscles, and con!5tant impulse to laugh. — DryncS"^ of lips. 

7. Teeth. — Teeth as if blunted on closing them ; the incisors appear *0 
be soft and glued together. 

8. Mouth. — Flow of an acrid and bitter water into mouth ; frequent 
flow of saliva, with nausea ; salivation increased. 

9. Throat.— Pressure in throat ; accumulation of mucus, with tickling 
in lar}(nx. 

VOL. II, 


102 



i 602 ZINCUM OXYDATUM 

10 . Appetite. — Anorexia : total, with violent thirst ; at breakfas^^with 
loathing, > after a meal. — Disgust, which, however, may be overcome. — 
Ardent thirst.— Strong desire for cold water, which affords gi-eat relief. 

11. Stomach. — Frequent risings : empty ; bitter ; after partaking of 
broth, with hiccough. — Regurgitations : of a yellow, bitter, bilious water after 
a meal. — Violent hiccough, ceasing after a regurgitation of bile. — Nausea : 
after supper, proceeding from the stomach, with acidulated taste in mouth 
and flow of acid water ; with heat, followed by vertigo ; with transient heat, 
spasmodic pulse, and general depression. — Nausea, with loathing. — Retching, 
with risings and want to evacuate. — ^Vomiting : often sudden and hivoluntary, 
in the case of children ; of a mucous water after the nausea, succeeded by 
another fit of nausea, and then the headaches are dissipated ; bilious vomithig, 
sometimes very violent, of a yellow colour and bitter ; vomiting and diarrhoea. 
— Pressure in stomach : after supper, with risings ; spasmodic, sometimes 
chiefly in pit of stomach, or else with tension and sensitiveness of the 
stomach ; burning pain in region of stomach, sometimes with loathing. — 
Fulness of stomach, sometimes with sweat on hands and head, followed by 
easy vomiting of contents of stomach, which are rather acrid, and occasioning 
a burning of the parts touched ; the throat also preserves a long time after- 
wards a sensation of roughness, which is succeeded by a keen appetite. — 
Lancinations in diaphragm. 

12. Abdomen. — Colicky pains below navel, tearing pains froiro side to 
side until evening ; dull pain in umbilical region ; spasmodic drawing in 
abdomen, with dull pain. — Lancinations in hepatic region. — Pinohings in 
abdomen. — Inflation of abdomen. — Borborygmi in abdomen, sometimes with 
aching. — Boil above the genital parts, first red then dark-blue, with hard 
areola ; later, discharge of a yellow foul pus, after which the areola remains 
for a long time, red and hard. 

13. Stool. — Liquid stools : with tenesmus and pinchings in abdomen, 
and followed by a marked > of all symptoms. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Abundant accumulation of mucus in larynx, 
with dryness of throat and constant want to hawk, with viscid and mucous 
saliva. — Impeded respiration, esp. in the 1. lung. 

18. Chest. — Great oppression of chest. — Constriction of the «sntire 
thorax. — Spasmodic sensation in lungs and heart. — Spasmodic aching in chest 
and pit of stomach. — Lancinations in 1. side of chest, sometimes with aching, 
or else with soreness of the 1. nipple. — ^The 1. lung is affected. — Externally ■ 
ribs painful to touch. 

19. Heart. — Frequent palpitation of heart, with anguish, sometimes 
chiefly in evening, and with spasmodic pulse ; pulsations more rapid. — Sensa- 
tion of pressure, weight, and spasmodic tension in the heart itself. 

20. Back. — Sacral pains : at night on turning body in bed ; on stooping, 
extending to lumbar vertebrae. — Sensation of paralysis, extending to hips. — 
Tearings and lancinations between shoulders ; or else pains extending to 
loins and sacrum. — ^Throbbing below 1. shoulder-blade. — Pressure on the 
shoulders on waking in morning, with confusion in head. 

21. Limbs. — Drawing pain in the limbs, sometimes with sacral pains. — 
Tearing pains in limbs. — ^Tingling which passes along limbs. — Undulating 
movement in some muscles. — ^Trembling of limbs, sometimes with jerking of 
muscles of legs. — Lassitude in limbs. 



ZINCUM PHOSPHORICUM 1603 
. » 

22 \ Upper Limbs. — ^Arms : Pain as if broken, sometimes chiefly in 
deltoid muscle, or else in bend of elbow ; heaviness and paralytic aching in 
the bead of the l^lbow. 

23. Lower Limbs.— In lower extremities : permanent debility, pain as 
if broken, sometimes chiefly in the 1. leg, or else in joints of hip and knee ; 
pulsations in the 1 . buttock ; tension in the 1 . leg, in the 1 . knee-joint, frequent 
tingling in 1. foot ; drawing pains in the bones ; trembling of the feet. 

24. Generalities. — Tension in muscles and painful sensation during 
movement ; pain throughout body > during repose; pains in all limbs. — 
Depressed state of whole body, sometimes with lassitude. — Perceptible failing 
of the strength, sometimes with general internal uneasiness. — Conversation 
occasions fatigue. — Turgor vitalis sensibly diminished. 

26.,^ Sleep. — ^Very restless nights. — Agitated sleep, with concourse of 
dreams of all kinds; with dreams of Are, of falling, of false coin; with 
fanciful ideas, and towards morning general perspiration. 

27. Fever. — Sensation of coldness: of the extremities; constant, with 
general uneasiness ; followed by febrile movement throughout the body, with 
shuddering and drawing pains in back ; with shivering of whole body. — 
Shivering which passes over the whole body. — Coldness of hands and feet. — 
Shuddering over the whole abdomen, with retching. — Pulse small and hard, 
sometimes to a very great degree ; spasmodic, and sometimes small at the 
same tifne ; wiry, accelerated, irregular, hard, and dull. — Perspiration, esp. 
towards morning, sometimes while sleeping. 


Zincum Phosphoricum. 

Phosphide of Zinc. Zincic Phosphide. ZojP^. Trituration. 

• Clinical.— Brain-fag. Delirium tremens. Headache. Herpes zoster. Impo- 

tence. Kidneys, irritable. Neuralgia, Paralysis. Sleeplessness. Tremors, mer- 
, curial. 

*Charaotepistlos. — ^Ashburton Thompson gave pills, each contain- 
ing ^ gr. of Zn, ph,f to two patients, and both experienced a severe 
frontal headache with frequent stabs of pain backward, deep in the 
• head, to occiput. Hale has used it on a combination of the indica- 
tions of the elements, and especially in brain-fag of business men. 
Hammond has cured with it nervousness, and vertigo > lying down. 
In some patients the 3rd potency has caused sexual excitement and 
sleeplessness after 3 a.m. According to him, Zn. ph, removes the 
mental depression and paralysis following cerebral congestion and 
apoplexy. J. E. Baldwin {N, A, J, H., xiii. 266) I’eports this case : A 
lady in perfect health prepared a long report and read it to a large 
audience without undue excitement. Next day had some pressure in 
occiput to cervical spine, lasting four days. Feeling of fatigue with 
disinclination to any menfal exertion. Zn, ph. 2x cured in a few 
doses.. Zn, pL 6x has cured irritable kidney with* loss of memory in 
an ^Id man. 



i6o4 ,Z1NCUM pros.— ZINCUM PIC. 


SYMPTOMS. 

2 . Head. — (Vertigo > lying down.) — Severe frontal headache, accom* 
panied by frequent stabs of pain, apparently darting from before backward to 
occiput, but intra-cranial, and not attended with altered sensation in scalp. — 
Bursting headache. 

II. Stomach.— Vomiting. 

14. Urinary Organs. — (Irritable kidneys with loss of brain-power even 

when calculus is present.) * 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Erections with unusual voluptuousness 
and desire. — Emissions with voluptuous dreams and intense nervous thrill.,/* 

18. Chest. — Neuralgic pains and skin symptoms like those of zoster 
(Mohr, A/. A., xxi. 259). * 

26. Sleep.— Sleepless after 3 a.m. ; “ it wakes me at three, and I feel as if 
under the influence of pleasant and quick music ” (from third trit.) 


Zincum Picricum. 

Picrate of Zinc. Zn[C6Ha(N02)30]2. Trituration. 

Ollnie&L— Bright’s disease; headaches of. Exhaustion. Facial paralysis. 
Headaches. Nymphomania. Piiralysis agitans. Priapism. Satyriasis. rvSeminal 
emissions. Spinal weakness. 

Characteristics. — Hale gives this indication of Zn.pi : “Cerebro- 
spinal troubles of the crethistic character.^* Hugh Pitcairn (quoted 
N, lV,f xix. 366) gives these indications : (i) Brain-fag. (2) Nervous 
exhaustion from over-worked brain or sexual excess. (3) Chronic 
occipital headaches, periodic. (4) Headache occurring in Bright's 
disease. (5) Threatened cerebral paralysis, especially in children. , 
(6) Profound neurasthenia, when nervous exhaustion has passed 
beyond stage of erethism. (7) Seminal emissions. (8) Erotomania. 
He gives this case : Mr. M., 36, merchant. Above ordinary intelli- 
gence. Single ; correct in his habits, but subject to seminal emis- 
sions since early manhood, occurring about 3 a.m. every third night, 
leaving him very weak and debilitated ; < every change of weather, 
especially in hot weather and before and during thunderstorms. 
Never masturbated. Complains of loss of memory and energy ; dull, 
heavy feeling in head ; sticky, pasty mouth ; dry throat, poor appetite. 
Belches torrents of tasteless flatus after eating, followed by relief and 
diarrhoea. At other times inclined to constipation. Languid, heavy 
feeling throughout body. Dull, aching pain in back. Zn. pi, 2nd trit. 
caused steady improvement, the emissions being reduced in frequency 
to one in six weeks. Halbert (Clinique; H. W,y xxxiv. 51 1) reports : 
(i) A case of recent facial paralysis from cold cured by Zn. pi. 3X, 
and (2) Paralysis agitans in lady, 45, very greatly improved by the 
sanxe. 

Relations*— ; Fag, Pic. ac., Fe. pic., and picrates 
generally. * 



ZINCUM SULPHURICUM 


1605 


Zincum Sulpharicum. 

White Vitriol. Sulphate of Zinc. Zincic Sulphate. ZnS047Ha0. 

Solution. T rituration . 

“ Clinical. — Convulsions. Cornea, opacity of. Dysentery. Granular lids. Head^ 
ache. Heartburn. Laughter, involuntary. Metrorrhagia. CEsophagus, stricture of. 
Prurigo. Tongue, paralysis of. 

Gharacteristics. — A large number of poisonings with Zn, s, are 
os\ record, and these have furnished the symptoms of the Schema. 
The use of Zn, s. in solution as an eye lotion is founded on a specific 
relationship, and in homoeopathic attenuations it has cured corneal 
opacities. Severe gastric and dysenteric symptoms were induced, 
^ and Zn, s. has cured many cases of dysentery. Farrington says it is 
* chieliy in subacute cases that it is indicated, when the pains are con- 
fined to the sides of the abdomen, probably to the colon. Peculiar 
Symptoms are : Burning, acute pain in head. Immediately sensation 
as if a strong electric shock passed through head, he expected his 
brains would have burst through his skull. Abdomen contracted. 
She felt as if the blood could scarcely struggle through the veins. 
‘ Titilla[tion all over, with an irresistible desire to laugh. A “ milk-like 
pallor of the surface looks like a characteristic.” Gerstel (H, i?., x. 155) 
relates^ this case, treated by Arnold : A lady had suffered from head- 
ache from childhood. During childhood she was unable to study in 
consequence of it. Menses began in her sixteenth year, were weak 
and irregular, recurring only every six weeks. In her eighteenth 
year she had serious inflammation of the brain, with unconsciousness, 
and was treated by venesection and leeches. When Arnold saw her 
she was married and a mother, the state being as follows : Dull, 
pressive pain running right across forehead, as if head compressed in 
a vice. (Formerly it had been more throbbing and shooting.) Eyes 
inilamed. Forehead red and swollen. She was compelled to lie 
down, and had most frightful visions, saw her child with its head 
shattered, while she heard everything that passed around her. It 
required a strong effort to realise the emptiness of the visions. With 
them the headache reached its highest point, an abatement would 
follow, then sleep. The head during the attacks was cold and dry to 
touch. The acute stage lasted one day, but the whole attack fourteen 
days, during which time the pain would increase and decrease, and 
the patient was well satisfied if it was bearable. Pain < at times 
when menses should appear ; a few days before and after menses 
painful burning and*sensation of weakness in spine. She did not look 
ill, and had a good colour. Puls, did her no good. Bell, 6 strengthened 
the periods and diminished the frequency and severity of her head- 
aches considerably ; but she was now seized with an irresistible drowsy 
nessy and troubled with a frequently recurring vomiting. Zn. s. 2nd trit. 
was given for sixteen days, one dose daily, then intermitted for eight 
days. The headaches now appeared before, during, and after the 
penod in a moderate degree but in the intermediate time she was 



i6o6 ZINCUM SULPHURICUM 

free from pain. Zw. s. was repeated in the same way three tinioi, and 
then she was free from all pain. She wrote the doctor three months 
later, You have radically cured me of a great bodily ailmeijt, and 
what is more, you have saved my mind from a yet more dreadful 
one.'’ 


SYMPTOMS. 

1. Mind. — Delirium. — Great nervous anxiety and depression, — Frightful 
visions during headache ; saw her child with its head shattered (cured with 
the headache). 

2. Head. — Dizziness. — Headache ; violent, with thirst. — Bu.ning, acute 
pain in head. — Immediately felt as if a painful electric shock had gone 
through his head ; he expected his brains would have burst through his skull. 

3. Eyes. — Bluish rings round eyes. — Eyes : heavy, dull ; staring ; fixed, 
with peculiar bright lustre ; convulsed, with upper limbs. — Lachr3miation. — 
Obstinate keratitis in r. eye goes away from a 3X lotion (R. T. C.). — Diffuse 
opacity of each cornea goes away on using a lotion round both orbits externally. 
— Pupils dilated. 

4. Ears. — Roaring in ears. 

6. Face, — Face ; pale ; sunken ; with cold extremities and convulsed 
pulse ; leaden tint, contracted features. 

8 . Mouth. — Tongue : moist, a little blanched ; partially paralysed. — 
Tongue, mouth, and lips greatly swollen. — Gums swollen and red on outer 
edge. — Irritation of whole buccal membrane. — Very sour taste. 

9. Throat. — Inflammation of throat, threatening suffocation. — ^Tender- 
ness in throat. — Burning and constriction in fauces. — (Esophagus so contracted 
he fears choking, 

11. Stomach. — Thirst: intolerable; and dry mouth. — Heartburn. — 
Vomiting ; and purging ; with cramps, severe pain, and burning in stomach, 
and extreme prostration. — Burning heat in stomach; with acute pain in 
epigastrium. 

12. Abdomen. — Inflammation of abdomen, with retraction of umbilicus 
and terrible colic. — Sharp, continuous colic. — Pain ; in abdomen and esp. in 
bladder region ; in groin. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Rectal tenesmus. — Constant desire for stool. — 
Purging and vomiting. — Bilious diarrhoea, — Stools infrequent. — After three 
months stools became bloody, with sticking and cutting pains in both sides of 
abdomen and along colon. — Obstinate dysentery, with emaciation ; pale, 
bloody stools ; painful tenesmus, and desire for food that failed to nourish 
(cured.—A. E. Small). 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Has been given for metrorrhagia 
<R. T. C). 

17. Respiratory Organs. — ^Violent cough, with bloody and purulent 
expectoration.—Breathing ; weak, slow ; difficult. 

18. Chest. — Pains in chest, with vomking. — ^Violent burning pains 
beneath chest. — Sense of choking and constriction round chest. 

19. Heart. — Palpitation on every motion. — Pulse : fluttering ; indis- 
tinguishable ; dicrotic ; almost lost, as in cholera. 



ZINCUM VALERIANICUM , 1607 

21. Limbs. — Trembling and cramps. 

Upper Limbs. — Convulsive movements of upper limbs and eyeballs. 

24. ^ Generalities. — Anaemia. — Tremors. — Convulsions. — Prostration. — 
Heaviness. — Feeling as though her blood could scarcely struggle through her 
veins. — Titillation all over body, with irresistible inclination to laugh, 

25. Skin. — ^Skin pale yellow. — Deadly pallor, skin milky white. — Blisters 
on neck discharge first bloody water, later thin, green, ill-smelling pus.— 
Frightful prurigo of children affecting the back (cured with diluted lotion. — 

. R. T. C.). • 

26. Sleep,— Sleepy and stupid, wanted to sleep and die in peace. 

••♦27. F^yer. — Coldness. — Shivering: violently, and slight quivering of 
lips. — Skin and extremities cold and clammy. — Fever followed by profuse 
sweatf— Constant heat, preventing sleep. — Burning heat of extremities. — 
Profuse sweat. — Hands covered with cold, clammy sweat, but to herself they 
• felt hot, and she tried to get hold of anything to cool them. 


Zincum Valerianicum. 

Valerianate of Zinc. Zincic Isovalerate. Zn(C5H90a)2. Trituration. 

Clivical. — Angina pectoris. Asthma, Brain-fag. Deltoids, pain in. Di.'rrrhcea. 
Emaciation. Epilepsy. Hiemorrhoids. Hypochondriasis. Hystero - epilepsy. 
Priapism. Seminal emissions. Stiff-neck. , 

CharaoteristioB. — Zn, v, is a favourite anti-hysteric medicine in 
old-school practice. There is one proving with substantial doses by 
C. B. Finney, which brought out a strong action on the genital 
sphere, the usual starting-point of hysteria. Finney had the brain-fag 
symptoms of Zn.^ and gastro-intestinal disturbance. The abdominal 
pains waked him from sleep, and he had to rise at 6.30 to stool, 
which was partly foecal and partly fluid. Later he was constipated 
and had tenesmus. Hale quotes C. Dradwick as saying that a con- 
siderable number of patients having piles, who were taking Zn, v. for 
other troubles, had their piles relieved by the remedy. Finney had 
distinct heart pains, and Hale mentions angina pectoris as having 
been cured by Zn, v. Other conditions named by him are : Proso- 
palgia, spinal neuralgia, sciatica, ovarian neuralgia, cerebro-spinal 
meningitis, and tubercular meningitis. Zn, v, is indicated in hysteria 
with fidgety feet ; hypochondriasis ; groundless fears. Hansen gives 
epilepsy without aura.” Finney had ** Sensation as if a very heavy 
weight on chest l» and dull headache and stiffness of muscles of 
neck. 


SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind. — Dulness of ihind and headache with erections. — Great ful- 
ness of head, with difficult thinking. — Distressed mentally, mind all mixed up. 

#2, Head. — Slight pain in 1 . temple and 1 . mastoid process. — Fulness in 
head, e.sp. occiput. 



i6o8 'ZINCUM VALERIAN.— ZINGIBER 


3. Eyes. — Slight pain over r. eye, with dull headache. 

5, Nose,— Hard sneezing. 

8. Mouth. — ^Tongue coated white. 

n. Stomach. — No appetite. — Belched up bitter fluid, — Woke with 
empty feeling in pit of stomach. 

12. Abdomen. — Rose 6.30 a.m. with colicky pains. — ^Abdominal pains 
> by passing flatus. — Crampy pain in abdomen. — Drawing pain at umbilicus 
and sense of pressure in rectum when standing. — Pain in bowels while 
dressing and after breakfast. 

13. Stool and Anus.— At 2 p.m. evacuation of faecal matter, followed 
by watery flow, with pain in belly. — Pressure on rectum when sliding. — At 
6.30 had to get up to stool, which was small, brown, and mushy, discharged 
with much wind.— Ineffectual desire for stool. — Stool scanty, much tenesmus. 

15. Male Sexual Organs.— Tendency to erections all day. — Strong 
erection 8.15 a.m. ; with dulness of mind and headache. — Nocturnal emissions • 
on several successive nights ; after them weight and constriction in perinaeum. 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Spell of coughing, with sense of fulness in 
chest. 

18. Chest. — Sensation as if very heavy weight lying on chest. 

19. Heart. — Cramp-like pain in heart. 

20. Neck.— Dull headache and stiffness of muscles of neck, lasting all- 
evening. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Pain in 1 . deltoid ; later in r. 


Zingiber. 

Zingiber officinale. Ginger. N. 0, Zingiberaceae. Tincture of 
dried rhizome. 

OUnical. — Albuminuria. Asthma. Breath, offensive. Deltoid rheumatism. 
Diarrhoea. Dropsy. Flatulence. Ozaena. Post-nasal catarrh. Seminal emissions. 
Spleen, pains in. Urine, suppressed. 

Characteristics. — Zng, was proved by Franz and others, and < 
their symptoms make a full pathogenesis. The genito-urinar^^ and 
respiratory systems were strongly affected. Farrington ^ays ginger is 
not a safe food to give in kidney affections, as it has caused Bright^s 
disease. Prolonged retention of urine ; or complete cessation of the 
function of the ladneys is an indication for Zng. In the provers it 
produced a cheerful, good-humoured state of mind ; and when this 
occurs when the opposite might rather be expected, Zng. will pro- 
bably be the remedy. For instance, in asthma, Farrington gives this 
indication : Asthma, of gastric ori^n ; attacks come in the night, 
towards morning. Patient must sit up to breathe ; but despite the 
severity of the paroxyswy there is no anxiety. The nasal mucous mem- 
brane is affected as markedly as that of the lungs. Ozaena and post- 
nasal catarrh are among the symptoms. Like most condiments, Zng, 
has a specific action on the digestive organs, causing flatulence and 



ZINGIBER 


1609 

. 

other symptoms of indigestion ; pressure in stomach as from a shot. 
Zng. has < frc/m eating bread ; and especially from eating melons. 
It causes diarrhoea or constipation, and sets up some irritation of the 
rectum. Peculiar Sensations are : As if head too large. Confused and 
empty in head. As if contents of head pressed into forehead and root 
of nose on stooping. As if right eye were pressing out, with headache.* 
As if a board pressing through head. As if head were pressed. As 
from a grain of sand in eye. As if there were an obstacle in throat to 
^swallow ot^er. As of a stone in stomach. Empty feeling in stomach. 
As if beaten in lower back. A shock-like moving downward as from 
airdropping fluid in left loin. Pain as from weakness in sacral region* 
Pain as from over-work in left deltoid. As from over-strung muscles 
in behd of knee. As if going to faint. The symptoms are : < By 
touch. < Lying. > Sitting ; standing. Motion <. Rising <. 
Xaughing and talking < headache. < Evening and night. > Un- 
covering. < In cold air ; cold, damp air. < From bread ; from 
melons. 

Relations. — Antidoted by : Nux. Compare : Weight in stomach, 
Ab, n. Prepuce cold (Sul. glans cold). Wakes 3 a.m., Bels., Nux. 

Causation. — Melons. Bread. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1. *Mind. — Cheerful, good-humoured, a pleasing sensation in her system. 
— ^Asthma without anxiety. — Increased activity of brain.— Forgetful ; ,weak 
memory. — Irritable and chilly in evening and during menses. — Nervous and 
fidgety. — Feet very uncomfortable, and did not know what to do. 

2. Head. — ^Vertigo, limbs heavy. — Feels confused and empty in his 
head.— Head feels too large. — Frontal headache (drawing and pressive pains) 
over eyes and at root of nose ; also when he exerts himself. — Headache (pres- 

• sure) < over 1. eye ; aching (drawing) over eyebrows, followed by nausea ; later 
over r. eye and pressing in 1. occiput ; < in warm room, but continued in 
cold, damp air, in motion or sitting. — Pressive drawing headache as if r. 
eye'* pressing out. — Pain encircling head ; dull, heavy pain, like a board 
.pressing through whole head, ii a.m. — Heavy pressure in head from without 
inward, when walking in cold, damp air. — Hemicrania ; nervous headache. — 

* Congestion of blood to head, esp. temples. — Itching on scalp, head, and 
cheeks. 

3. Eyes.— Smarting and burning in eyes ; sensitive to light, with sting- 
ing pain in them ; feeling as of sand in eyes. — Pressure on eyes ; on 1 . — 
Weakness of sight; dimness of cornea. 

5. Nose. — Coryza, watery, sneezing, more in open air. — Insupportable 
itching, tingling in nostrils. — Dryness and obstruction in posterior nares, with 
discharge of thick mucus. — Ozaena. 

6. Face. — Hot, red face. — Exhausted look, blue under eyes, before 
menses. — Dry lips and mouth.^ 

7. Teeth./— Painful sensibility of teeth, with pressive, drawing pain in 
their roots. 

%. Mouth.— Slimy, bad taste in mouth in morning.— Mouth smells foul 
to herself, as from disordered stomach. 



ZINGIBER 


1610 

9, Throat.— Dryness of throat and difficulty of swallowing, as from an 
obstruction, with dryness of posterior nares,— Increased mucous secretion ; 
no fever. 

xo. Appetite. — Much thirst; mouth dry.— Headache and pressure in 
stomach after eating bread. — Complaints from eating melons. 

11. Stomach. — Belching and diarrhoea.— Nausea ; vomiting of mucus 
in drunkards. — Acidity of stomach. — ^Weak digestion, stomach heavy, like a 
stone. 

12. Abdomen. — Stitches in spleen. — Unbearable sore pain 'on a smalls 
place in r. side of abdomen. — Contractive pain passes through abdomen while 
standing ; soon after, desire for stool. — Sharp pain in 1. iliac reiiion. — Gf^at 
flatulency ; in gouty persons. — Constipation. 

13. Stool and Anus. — Diarrhoea : from drinking impure water ; of 
brown mucus ; < mornings ; < from deranged stomach ; from damp, cold 
weather. — Diarrhoea in morning, followed by nausea. — Belching with con-» 
stipation. — Redness, inflammation, burning-itching at anus and higher up 
back. 

14. Urinary Organs. — Increased secretion of urine. — Urine thick, 
turbid; dark brown, of strong smell. — Retention of urine (after typhus). — 
Acute pain in orifice of urethra while urinating. — Dull aching in both kidneys, 
with frequent desire to urinate. — Dull aching, with sensation of heat in 1. 
kidney ; < while sitting, with frequent desire to urinate. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Itching on prepuce, which feels cold.— 
Painful erections, — Increased sexual desire ; nightly emissions. ^ . 

16. Female Sexual Organs.— Menstruation too early and too profuse; 
irritable ; blood dark, clotted, 

17. Respiratory Organs. — Burning, smarting sensation below larynx, 
followed by a cough, with rattling of phlegm, and sometimes with expectora- 
tion of thick mucus. — Asthma humidum. — Painful respiration ; < at night, 
must sit up in bed ; < two or three hours every morning ; asthma. — Dry, » 
hacking cough, from tickling in larynx on 1. side of throat ; from smarting or 
scratching ; with pain in lungs ; difficult breathing ; morning sputum, which 
is copious. 

18. Chest. — Stitches in (through) chest ; pleuritic pains. 

19. Heart. — Violent stinging-pressing pain in 1. side of chest, in region 

of heart. 1 

20. Neck and Back. — Stiffness of back of neck, with headache and 
nausea. — Backache, as from weakness ; sitting and leaning against some- 
thing ; lower part of back lame, as if beaten, or from walking or standing ; 
feels sti£f. 

21. Limbs.-^Dull, heavy, lame feeling in limbs ; numbness. — Rheumatic, 
drawing pains. — Joints feel weak, sti£f, lame. 

22. Upper Limbs. — Rheumatic drawing in backs of hands. 

23. Lower Limbs.— Painful swelling of feet— Soreness of heels after 
standing a long time. 

24. Generalities. — Foaming at mouth ; free urination ; spasms. — Faint, 
weak, wants to lie down. — Nervous, fidgety feeling at night. 

26. Sleep. — Sleepy and exhausted ; coma.— Sleepless, wakes at 3 L,m. ; 
falls asleep again late in morning. 



ZIZIA 


i6ii 

27. sFever. — Chilliness beginning in lower limbs, going upwards. — Chilly 
in evening. — Chilliness and sensibility in open air. - Hot and chilly at same 
time. •• * 


Zizia. 

Zizia aurea. Thapsium aureum. Carum aureum. Meadow Par- 
®snip. N. 0. Umbelliferae. Tincture of root. 

Clinical. — Asthma. Brain, affections of. CaUrrh. Chorea, in sleep. Convul- 
sions. Drop^. Epilepsy. Hypochondriasis. Hysteria. Influenza. Leucorrhcea. 
Menses, suppression of. Migraine. Ovary, intermittent neuralgia of. Pleurisy. 
Stye. 3 

Characteristics. — The Meadow Parsnip is a common plant 
iudigenoiis to the United States on the moist banks of streams and in 
■^open wet woods, where it flowers in June and July. Rafinesque 
speaks of it as vulnerary, antisyphilitic, and sudorific (Millspaugh). 
Marcy proved Ziz. on himself and some others, and symptoms of 
poisoning have been added. Exhilaration with increased physical 
strength was noted ; but a slight amount of exercise caused fatigue. 
The spasms and convulsions of the Umbelliferae were elicited. The 
generative organs in both sexes were excited. Ziz, is indicated in 
uterine affections characterised by increased nervous and vascular ex- 
citement. The menses are profuse, and followed by acrid leucorrhcea. 
Burning, smarting backache. Spasmodic movements of face gnd 
limbs. Mind first exhilarated, then depressed, finally indifferent. 
The restlessness of Ziz, runs into chorea ; and the chorea has this 
distinguishing feature, that the movements continue or are even < 
during sleep. Connected with the uterine congestion there is 
migraine, the region of the right eye being most affected. There 
•was rush of blood to the head. Marcy considered Ziz, especially suit- 
able in brain affections ; catarrhal, asthmatic, and pleuritic diseases ; 
in ovarian neuralgia. Among Peculiar Symptoms are ; Surface of body 
paler than natural ; white, puffy appearance of whole body. Laughs 
and weeps alternately. One cheek red. Cravgs acids and stimulants. 

‘ 'The symptoms arc : < By touch. Pressure =: pain in intercostal 
I muscles ; on stomach s: nausea and faintness. < Lying ; stooping ; 
motion ; coughing. 

RelationB. — Anhdoied by: Puls, (migraine), Carb. an. (stye). 
Compare : One cheek red, Cham. Uterine congestion, backache, 
indifference, Sep. Chorea in sleep, Trn. As if in a dream, Ainb., 
Anac., Calc., Can. i., Con., Cup., Med., Rhe., Val, Ver. Laughing 
alternately with weeping. Calc., Ign., Merc., Nux m., Puls., Stram. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I. Mind.— rExhilaration ; like intoxication ; followed by strong desire 
to sleep. — Depression following exhilaration. — Laughing and weeping alter- 
nately. — Depression followed by exhilaration. — Irritable, low-spirited, indif- 



ZIZIA 


1612 

ferent. — Nervous irritability and depression, culminating in a parox^’sm of 
self-dissatisfaction with weeping. — Indolence with contentment. — Behaviour 
quiet, with much apparent suffering and sadness. ^ ^ 

2, Head. — Giddiness ; swimming ; light-headedness. — Rush of blood 
to head and face, with feeling of fulness. — Sensation of tightness round 
head. — Intensely painful, sharp headache over r. eye ; Puls, > first days, not 
later ; fully developed seventh day, must lie still in dark room ; < eveoing 
(the usual headache is < morning) ; associated with backache ; < by cough- 
ing. — Severe pain in r. temple, with nausea. — Pressure on top of ^rain. — Dull 
pain in occipital region, extending down neck muscles. 

3. Eyes.—Redness of both eyes.— Pain affects r. eye most.— Shooting 
pains through orbits.—Sharp pain through r. orbit, < moving eyeballs, stoop- 
ing, or stepping. — Eyelids agglutinated on rising by yellowish muco-pnrulent 
secretion.— Stye, r. lid.— Stye middle of upper lid, very painful, > Curb, an. - 
Eyes sensitive to light. 

5. Nose. — Nasal catarrh, with sneezing and coughing from first inhala- 
tion. — Nasal discharge of thick mucus. — R. nostril congested, sore; wnth 
injection of pharynx and conjunctiva. 

6 . Face.— Face : pale and puffy.— One cheek red, other pale.— Boring 
pains in cheek-bones. — Dull pains in jaws. — Painful tenderness in lower jaw- 
bone, an inch below root of ear. 

8. Mouth.— Tongue : red and unusually sensitive to cold anti warm 
drinks; covered with whitish fur; yellow fur on tongue and oppressed 
respiration ; broad, furred in middle, red at tip and sides. — Mouth dry. — 
Tas/^e ; bitter ; bilious. 

9. Throat. — Mucus increased. — Slight redness of tonsils and palate, 
with soreness. — Inflamed pharynx. 

II. Stomach. — Craving for acids and stimulants. — Appetite : diminished ; 
lost. — Thirst — Nausea. — ^Vomiting : acid, bilious ; immoderately. — Stomach 
sensitive to, touch ; pressure ss nausea and faintness. 

15. Male Sexual Organs. — Involuntary emission two nights in succes- * 
sion. — Excitement. — Lassitude and prostration after coitus, which had existed 
a long time, was completely removed in the proving. 

16. Female Sexual Organs. — Increased vascular and nervous excite- 
ment. — Leucorrhoea : bland ; acrid ; acrid at first, later copious and blandk — 
Profuse menses one day, followed by acrid leucorrhoea. — Menses appeared in 
due time but ceased after twelve hours. — Sudden suppression of menses. 

17. Respiratory Organs.— Roughness in upper part of larynx when 
inspiring or coughing,— Larynx raw from coughing. — Trachea sensitive to 
touch. — Dry cough, with shooting pains in chest. — ^Tight cough, from deep 
breath ; from dryness of larynx. — Short, dry cough, with severe stitching in 
r. side and sense of suffocation. — Breathing oppressed, cannot keep lying 
down. — Asthma. 

18. Chest. — Severe pains in pleurae. — Bruised feeling in muscles of 

chest. — Pressure rs pain in intercostal muscles. — On and around xiphoid 
cartilage pain and tenderness to touch. — Dull;^^ aching pain under r. scapula. — 
Severe shooting from front of thorax to scapula. — Sharp pains from sides and 
chest to both scapulae.— Severe stitching pains accompanied by feverish 
symptoms. — Pleuritic stitches < by coughing or deep breath. ^ 



ZIZIA 


1613 

2oi ^ Back, — Pains in posterior margin of scapulae, aching, smarting, 
stinging, with aching in small of back when at their worst. — Dull pains in 
loins, < by movement.—Smarting burning in small of back.^ 

22, *Upper Limbs. — Lameness in muscles of both arms, from shoulder 
to elbow. — Pricking sensation in r. arm, with steadily diminished sensibility of 
the part. 

2^. Lower Limbs. — Dragging sensation in both hips. — Unusually tired 
feeling in legs after slightest exertion. 

24. Generalities. — Increased strength with inclination for exertion. — 
Aspect of gJaveand chronic illness. — ^Wholc body white and puffy. — CEdema 

’ of face and ankles. — Convulsions, epilepsy. — Spasms, swooning convulsions, 
ancT fainting fits, ending in death in three hours. — Spasms of face and 
extren^ties. — Surface of body sensitive to touch. — Pains fixed, < by move- 
» m^nt, noise, light, contact ; < evening. 

25, Sl^in.— Itching pimples on forehead, wrists, and legs. 

^ 26. Sleep. — Drowsiness ; with sense of fatigue. — Sleep prevented by 

pains. — During sleep : spasmodic twitches ; talking ; unpleasant dreams. 

27. Fever. — Chilliness and heat alternating with faintness, nausea, pain 
in r. temple, redness of eyeballs, dry and red tongue, and thirst for cold water. 
* — Chilliness accompanied by spasmodic twitchings of muscles of face and 
. .upper limbs, followed by fever. — Fever, with headache, pain in back, thirst. — 
Fever ■vtflth stitching pain in chest. — Some sense of heat and fulness in both 
‘Cheeks. — Flushed cheeks, hot head, visible pulsations of carotid and temporal 
arteries, coldness of hands and feet, drowsiness and irritability. — Redness and 
heat of checks. — Hot flushes in face and head followed by perspiration. 

# 


END OF VOL. II. 







