This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


BOSTON   UNIVERSITY 


'""^i 


tool  ofi,  Jijietltctne* 


LROJ^ 


I 


I 


<•    -•   # 


G/T  C^'^ 


DICTIONAR 


OF 


PRACTICAL 

MATERIA    MEDICA 


BY 

JOHN    HENRY  CLAEKE,    M.D. 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES 


1,~T.1, 


VOLUME  I. 


LONDON 
THE   HOMCBOPATmC  PUBLISHING   COMPANY 
13,  WABWICS  LANE,  PATEBNOSTEB  BOW,  E.G. 
1900 


'"""N  ««HI«M1.  UBBARY 


[Entered  at  Stationers'  Hall.] 


PREFACE 


In  the  preface  to  the  fourth  edition  of  my  PrescribeTf  which  appeared 

in  1893, 1  mentioned  that  I  was  then  engaged  in  writing  a  '*  Materia 

liedica,"    and   I   stated  that  it  was  to  take  the  form  of  a  Materia 

Medica  Companion  to  the  Presaiber.    Such,  indeed,  was  the  original 

idea  vrith  which  I  started  the  work,  soon  after  the  first  edition  of  the 

Prescriber  was  published  in  1885.     But  as  the  materials  accumulated, 

the  scope  of  the  work  developed  beyond  the  original  intention,  and 

it  became  apparent  that  to  produce  anything  short  of  a  complete 

Materia  Medica  would  only  be  to  add  to  the  number  of  condensed 

and  abridged  Materia  Medicas,  of  which  there  is  already  a  sufficiency 

of  exceUent  examples.     I  therefore  determined  to  include  in  the  new 

work  aH  the  remedies  of  which  definite  use  hatt  been  recorded  in 

homoeopathic  literature.    If  some  are  inclined  to  object  that  I  have 

inserted  too  many,  I  reply  that  my  work  is  a  Dictionary ^  and  I  have 

never  yet  found  a  dictionary  that  explained  too  many  words.    Under 

the  name  of  each  remedy  will  be  found  all  practical  information 

regarding  that  remedy  that  I  have  been  able  to  bring  together,  so 

arranged  that  eveiy  part  of  it  is  at  once  accessible,  the  iiSormation 

about  one  remedy  in  no  way  interfering  with  the  information  about 

any  other.     In  Farrington's  classical  work,  A  Clinical  Materia  Medica, 

to  which  I  am  very  deeply  indebted,  the  matter  is  so  arranged  that 

in  order  to  find  ^  the  author  has  to  tell  about  a  single  remedy, 

search -must  be  made  under  a  large  number  of  different  headings; 

in  the  case  of  Ipecacuanha,  for  example,  twelve  other  remedies 

must  be  consulted.     The  plan  on  which  the  Dictionary  is  based 

obviates  this  result. 

Name  of  the  Work. 

I  have  named  this  work  a  Dictionary  of  ''  Materia  Medica '' 
because  no  other  name  would,  have  been  intelligible^  But  the 
name,  nevertheless,  in  homoeopathy,  is  somewhat  of  a  misnomer. 
We  are  dealing  with  forces  which,  though  derived  from  materials, 
are  anything  but  ''material''  in  the  common  acceptation  of  the 
word.  Our  agents  are  forces  of  a  higher  order  than  any  known 
to  Old  Physic,  and  it  is  important  that  homoeopathists  should  know 
tbem  as  such.  Homoeopathy  is  from  first  to  last  an  art  of  indi- 
vidualising. We  have  to  individualise  patients,  and  individualise 
remedies.     However  convenient   it   is   to   think   of   remedies   in 


iv  PREFACE 

connection  with  the  diseases  in  the  treatment  of  which  they  are 
most  frequently  called  for,  it  must  never  be  forgotten  that  this 
is  a  convenience  and  nothing  more.  To  allow  our  conception  of 
our  remedies  to  be  limited  by  any  list  of  nosological  terms  is  to 
accept  again  the  mental  fetters  of  old-school  therapeutics.  To 
understand  and  utilise  our  remedies  to  the  fullest  extent,  we  must 
know  them  as  powers  ready  to  serve  us  in  any  case,  no  matter 
what  the  name  of  the  disease  may  be,  when  the  indications  for 
them  come  to  the  front.  And  we  must  be  prepared  to  find  these 
powers  hidden  in  common  articles  of  food  and  drink,  which  we 
are  constantly  taking  into  our  bodies  in  large  quantities  with 
complete  impunity ;  and  even  in  the  tissues  and  secretions,  morbid 
and  nealthy,  of  our  bodies  themselves.  My  object  in  the  Dictionary  has 
been  to  so  present  the  picture  of  each  remedy  that  it  may  be  at  once 
recognised  and  distingmshed  from  any  other  by  those  who  consult 
its  pages.  In  doing  this  I  have  considered  first  those  points  which 
seem  to  me  to  have  a  practical  bearing ;  points  which  have  seemed 
of  academic  interest  only  I  have  left  in  the  main  to  other  works. 

The  Schema. 

The  body  of  every  homceopathic  Materia  Medica  must  consist 
of  a  Schematised  list  of  the  Symptoms  belonging  to  each  remedy.  This 
is  known,  in  brief,  as  '*  The  Schema."  In  the  Dictionary  it  comprises 
all  that  portion  given  under  the  heading.  Symptoms. 

Abridged  Materia  Medicas  and  lists  of  kevnotes,  though  of  very 
great  value,  cannot  take  the  place  of  a  full  Schema.  The  prescriber 
is  constantly  requiring  to  know  the  exact  symptoms  produced  or 
cured  by  a  drug,  and  very  often  these  are  not  to  be  found  among 
the  recognised  keynotes.  Again,  when  a  prescriber  has  found  his 
correspondence  in  some  leading  svmptom,  he  may  wish  to  test  the 
correspondence  in  other  particulars.  For  these  purposes  nothing 
short  of  a  detailed  list  of  symptoms  in  each  section  of  the  Schema 
is  of  any  service.  My  work  in  no  way  lessens  the  value  of  the 
abridged  works ;  on  the  contrary,  it  very  greatly  enhances  it,  by 
providing  the  necessary  complement  to  tneir  usefulness. 

The  Schema  arrangement  adopted  by  Hahnemann  was  a  neces- 
sary evolution  of  his  method.  Day-to-day  records  of  provings,  though 
of  much  interest,  are  of  little  use  in  practice,  from  the  impossibiUty 
of  finding  individual  symptoms  in  them.  The  Schema  adopted  by 
me  is  arranged  under  27  numbered  headings  :  i.  Mind ;  2,  Head 
^ndudins  sensorium  and  scalp) ;  3,  Eyes ;  4,  Ears ;  5,  Nose ;  6, 
Face ;  7,  Teeth  j  8,  Mouth  ;  9,  Throat ;  10,  Appetite  ;  11,  Stomach  ; 
12,  Abdomen  ;  13,  Stool  and  Anus ;  14,  Urinary  Organs ;  15,  Male 
Sexual  Organs ;  16,  Female  Sexual  Orgsms ;  17,  Kespiratory  Organs  ; 
18,  Chest ;  19,  Heart ;  20,  Neck  and  Back ;  21,  Limbs  (in  general) ; 
22,  Upper  Limbs ;  23,  Lower  Limbs  ;  24,  Generalities ;  25,  Sldn ; 
26,  Sleep ;  27,  Fever.  The  sources  from  which  the  Sdbema  is 
compiled  are  mainly,  Timothy,  Field  Allen's  Emyclopasdia  of  Pure 
Materia  Medica,  and  Constantine  Hering's  Guiding  Symptoms.  With- 
out these  two  monumental  works  my  work  would  have  been  scarcely 


PREFACE  V 

posmble.    Allen  includes  all  the  symptoms  of  Hahnemann's  Materia 

Medica  Pura  and  Chronic  Diseases,  with  all  the  later  provings  up  to 

the  date  of  his  work's  completion  (1879).    Hering's  Guiding  Symptoms 

includes,  iu   addition   to  the  chief  symptoms  of  the  older  works, 

many  clinical    additions  and  glosses.      Hale's  New  Remedies,   2nd 

and  5th  editions,  have  rendered  me  services  scarcely  less  important. 

In  my  Schema  I  have  sometimes  indicated  when  symptoms  are  of 

diniol  origin  but  not  always,  as  the  distinction  is  more  academical 

&an  practical.     I  have  also  sometimes  inserted  in  the  Schema  names 

of  diseases.    These  will  be  taken  as  clinical  suggestions  depending 

for  their  value  on  the    appropriateness   of  the   remedy  in  other 

respects. 

Clinical  Symptoms. 

In  regard  to  the  inclusion  of  Clinical  Sytnpioms  without  always 
distinguishing  them,  my  reasons  are  these :  I  know  that  symptoms 
removed  by  a  remedy  in  a  patient  who  is  taking  it  are  an  indication 
of  the  remedy's  power,  even  though  the  remedy  may  not  have  pro- 
duced those  symptoms  in  a  prover.  I  know  that  many  of  the  best 
indications  we  possess  for  di£Ferent  remedies  were  found  out  during 
the  provings  by  the  disappearance  of  symptoms  from  which  the 
provers  themselves  were  at  the  time  suffering.  I  know  that  a  remedy 
when  being  taken  by  a  patient  will  often  produce  some  new 
^mptoms  of  its  own  whilst  removing  the  others.  I  know  that 
tnese  new  symptoms  are  available  for  practice ;  and  what  is  more 
than  this,  I  know  that  the  practitioner  who  cannot  recognise  drug 
symptoms  in  his  patients  loses  the  best  materia  medica  teacher  he  is 
ever  likely  to  find,  and  will  spoil  many  of  his  cases  by  supposing  them 
worse  when  they  are  really  doing  well  on  the  ri^t  medicine  and 
only  require  to  have  the  medicine  suspended  or  partially  antidoted. 
Those  who  have  scruples  about  prescribing  on  clinically  observed 
symptoms  have  die  Cyclopedia  of  Drug  Pathogene^  at  their  disposaL  It 
is  a  work  which  has  rendered  me  excellent  service  in  compiling  much 
of  my  Dictionary  ;  but  it  seems  to  me  to  need  digesting  and  schema- 
tising if  it  is  to  be  of  much  use  in  daily  practice.  Those  again,  who 
Kkc  to  know  the  authority  for  every  symptom,  have  Allen's  Encyclo- 
pedia to  supply  their  want  so  far  as  the  vast  bulk  of  the  materia 
medica  is  concerned.  In  the  case  of  the  less  well  known  remedies,  I 
have  named  the  authorities ;  in  regard  to  the  old-established  remedies, 
I  take  for  granted  that  the  authorities  for  these  are  known. 

Authorities. 

In  addition  to  the  works  of  Allen  and  Hering  and  the  Cyclopedia 
of  Drug  Path^enesy,  Dr.  Curie's  edition  of  Jahr's  Materia  Medica,  the 
Materia  Medicos  of  Lippe  and  Guernsey,  Cowperthwaite's  well-known 
Text-Book,  and  many  others  have  been  consulted.  But  the  account 
of  many  of  the  remedies  in  the  Dictionary  has  been  compiled  from 
sources  inaccessible  to  the  general  reader,  being  scattered  up  and 
down  the  periodical  literature  of  Homceopathy,  and  throughout  the 
writings  of  original  workers,  among  whom  I  may  name  Dr,  Comp- 


vi  PREFACE 

ton  Burnett  and  Dr.  Robert  T.  Cooper  as  pre-eminent,  each  in  a  tine 
of  his  own.  Throughout  the  Diciionaty  will  be  found  accredited  to 
these  authorities  many  guiding  symptoms  of  their  observation,  some 
already  recorded  in  their  pubtished  works,  veiy  many  communicated 
to  me  in  private  conversations,  and  verified  by  myself  in  practice. 
And  I  am  no  less  indebted  to  Dr.  Thomas  Skinner  for  generous  help 
in  materia  medica  studies.  Years  ago  when  I  was  making  a  special 
investigation  into  the  action  of  the  high  attenuations,  Dr.  Skinner 
gave  me  the  greatest  possible  assistance.  We  went  over  a  large  part 
of  the  materia  medica  together,  and  the  notes  I  then  made  have  been 
of  great  service  in  compiling  this  work,  especially  the  introductory 
sections. 

The  Introductory  Sections. 

Whilst  the  Schema  is  the  essential  feature  of  the  materia  medica, 
it  is  of  great  assistance  in  the  understanding  and  using  of  it,  to  have, 
in  addition,  some  introductory  guide.  This  I  have  supplied  in  each 
instance,  and  the  combination  ot  the  two  is  one  of  the  main  objects 
of  this  work.  Hitherto  narrative  accounts  of  remedies  have  been 
provided  independently  in  works  tike  Dr.  Hughes's  classic  PharmacO' 
dynamics;  and  through  no  fault  of  their  authors,  practitioners  have 
endeavoured  to  make  these  works  do  service  for  a  complete  materia 
medica,  dispensing  with  the  use  of  both  schema  and  repertory.  I 
think  my  method  will  obviate  this  risk. 

Names  and  Preparations  of  the  Remedies. 

Under  the  name  of  each  remedy  I  have  given  the  synonyms, 
mentioned  its  place  in  nature  and  the  preparations  of  it  that  have 
been  used.    In  regard  to  the  last,  I  wish  it  to  be  understood  that  I 

f've  the  actual  preparations  used  in  the  experiments  or  in  practice. 
ofiFer  no  opinion  as  to  whether  these  may  be  the  best  or  not. 
Some  contend  that  acetic  acid  is  a  better  solvent  of  the  native 
alkaloids  of  plants  than  is  alcohol.  When  acetic  preparations  have 
been  used  I  have  mentioned  the  fact  Dr.  Cooper  has  used  fresh- 
plant  tinctures,  made  from  young  shoots,  with  other  actively  growing 
parts  of  plants,  in  the  case  of  remedies  of  which  the  usual  prepara- 
tions are  made  from  roots  or  dried  specimens  ;  and  he  maintains 
that  in  such  cases  the  fresh-plant  tinctures  are  superior.  The  same 
may  be  said  of  animal  preparations.  I  have  used  a  preparation  of 
Sepia  made  from  the  fresh  ink-bag,  given  me  by  Dr.  R.  Swallow,  of 
Ningpo,  and  I  can  confirm  his  opinion  that  it  is  a  better  preparation 
than  that  made  from  the  ordinary  dried  ink. 

"  Clinical." 

Next,  under  the  head  Clinical,  I  have  given  an  alphabetical 
Ust  of  the  diseases  in  relation  to  which  the  remedy  has  manifested,  or 
seems  Ukely  to  manifest,  some  curative  power.  This  Ust  is  of  no 
independent  authority,  many  of  the  items  being  merely  suggestions 
of  my  own.    It  is  not  to  be  regarded  either  as  inclusive  or  exclusive, 


PREFACE  vii 

bat  rather  as  suggestive.  But  the  list  serves  further  purposes ;  and 
first,  it  enables  me  to  save  space.  If  I  were  to  descrit>e  the  sphere 
of  a  remedy  in  each  of  the  diseases  in  which  it  has  been  used,  I 
should  be  obliged  to  repeat  the  same  indications  many  times  over  in 
sli^tly  varied  form.  The  main  indications  of  a  remedy  are  the  same 
in  any  disease,  and  the  fine  indications  will  be  found  on  referring  to 
the  headings  under  which  they  occur  in  the  Schema.  Further,  the 
list  enables  me  to  relate  the  Dictionary  to  the  Prescriber.  A  number 
of  the  names  of  diseases  in  the  Ust  will  be  found  printed  in  itahcs. 
This  does  not  mean  that  the  medicine  is  more  indicated  in  these 
diseases  than  in  the  others ;  it  is  merely  to  indicate  that  under  that 
particular  heading  the  drug  will  be  found  mentioned  in  the  Prescriber^ 
and  that  there  its  special  indications  are  given  and  compared  with 
those  of  other  remedies.  For  example,  under  Atropinum  is  the 
following  Ust :  ^'Blepharospasm.  Convulsions.  Enuresis.  Epilepsy. 
Eyes,  affections  of.  Gastric  ulcer.  Locomotor  ataxv.  Mania. 
Neuralgia.  Pancreatitis.  Spinal  irritation.  Tetanus.  Vision,  dis- 
orders of."  On  referring  to  the  Prescriber,  under  Gastric  ulcer  and 
Pancreatitis,  Atropinum  will  be  found  mentioned  along  with  other 
remedies.  Finally,  the  lists  will  afford  a  convenient  basis  for 
compiling  a  clinical  index. 

"  Characteristics." 

Following  the  heading  Clinical,  comes  one  which  I  have 
named  Characteristics,  under  this  I  have  endeavoured  to  bring 
together  the  leading  individual  featiures  of  each  remedy,  sketching  its 
outlines  with  as  firm  a  hand  as  I  can  command.  It  is  not  a  bare  list 
of  keynote  symptoms,  although  it  includes  all  of  these  that  are  known 
to  me.  But  it  is  written  in  a  more  or  less  connected,  narrative  form, 
so  that  it  will  not  have  the  effect  of  a  catalogue  on  the  reader's 
mind.  This  part  will  contain  an  account  of  the  leading  Conditions 
of  aggravation  and  amelioration  which  chai-acterise  the  remedy  ; — ^an 
essential  portion  of  a  practical  knowledge  and  understanding  of 
homoeopathic  remedies.  In  indicating  these  I  have  made  use  of  the 
signs  "  <  "  (aggravation)  and  "  >  "  (amelioration),  for  the  double 
reason  that  they  readily  catch  the  eve,  and,  at  the  same  time,  save 
space.  These  and  other  signs  and  abbreviations  are  explained  more 
fully  on  p.  xi.  This  section,  more  especially,  I  intend  to  supply  a 
kind  of  introduction  and  guide  to  the  Schema. 

"  Relations." 

Following  this  section  is  another  headed  Relations.  Under 
this  will  be  found  an  account  of  the  chief  allies  of  each  remedy.  The 
older  homoeopaths  appreciated  the  value  of  this  knowledge  much 
more  than  do  the  modems ;  and  a  very  great  assistance  it  often  is  in 
prescribing.  When  a  remedy  {e.g.j  Belladonna)  has  done  all  that  it 
can  in  a  case,  it  is  of  very  great  use  to  know  of  a  remedy  {e,g., 
Mercurius)  that  is  likely  to  follow  out  and  complete  its  action,  where 
both  are   related   to  the   case.     When   this  relationship   is   very 


viii  PREFACE 

close  the  two  related  remedies  are  said  to  be  complcmcniary  to  one 
another,  as  is  the  case  with  Iodine  and  Lycopodium.  On  the  other 
hand  some  remedies  have  a  very  injurious  effect  on  each  other's 
action  when  one  is  given  immediately  after  the  other.  I  have  known 
a  chronic  case  which  was  doing  well  on  Calcarea,  irretrievably  spoiled 
by  a  prescription  of  Bryonia  immediately  following.  Further,  it  is 
necessary  to  know  the  antidotal  relations  of  remedies  in  order  to  be 
able  to  control  the  over-action  of  any  remedy  administered.  I  once 
experienced  very  disagreeable  symptoms  from  a  dose  of  Natrum  mur. 
in  potency,  and  suffered  for  some  days  before  I  realised  the  cause.  As 
soon  as  I  did,  I  looked  up  Jahr,  and  found  that  smelling  Sweet  Nitre 
was  one  of  the  antidotes.  I  put  it  to  the  test,  and  the  magical  way 
in  which  the  symptoms  were  wiped  out  was  a  revelation  to  me  of  the 
importance  of  this  branch  of  homoeopathic  knowledge.  In  this 
section  I  have  also  pointed  out  many  of  the  characteristic  differences 
distinguishing  between  medicines  that  have  symptoms  in  common. 

"  Causation." 

Under  the  further  heading  Causation  I  have  mentioned  (when 
such  relation  is  known  to  exist),  the  conditions  to  the  effects  of  which 
the  action  of  a  remedy  is  particularly  suited.  For  it  not  unfrequently 
happens  that  the  cause  of  any  state  is  the  keynote  indication.  A  case 
of  Rheumatism,  for  example,  supervening  on  a  wetting,  will  probably 
not  be  cured  by  the  same  remedy  which  would  have  cured  u 
exposure  to  dry  cold  had  been  the  cause.  The  effects  of  over-eating 
may  resemble  the  effects  of  over-drinking,  but  a  different  remedy  win 
probably  be  needed  in  each  case.  Shock  due  to  physical  injury  will 
probably  need  Arnica  ;  if  due  to  fright.  Opium  will  most  likely  be 
called  for.  I  have  often,  in  practice,  wished  for  a  tabulated  list  of 
"  causes,"  and  I  think  this  section  will  be  found  of  value. 

Type. 

It  will  possibly  be  remarked  that  I  have  seldom  indicated  the 
relative  importance  of  symptoms  by  difference  of  type.  My  reason 
is  this :  while  not  denying  the  utility  of  emphasising  by  con- 
spicuous type  symptoms  of  proved  characteristic  value,  this  can 
only  be  done  at  the  cost  of  apparently  depreciating  symptoms  not  so 
marked.  I  have  so  often  found  my  indications  in  symptoms  not 
distinguished  by  special  type  at  all,  that  I  hesitate  to  put  any  under 
this  ban.  My  arrangement,  however,  meets  the  difficulty  to  a  great 
extent.  If  it  is  considered  that,  in  a  general  way,  all  the  symptoms 
I  have  mentioned  under  the  heading  Characteristics  are  deserving 
of  heavy  type,  and  that  the  symptoms  mentioned  only  in  the  Schema 
are  worthy  of  italics,  a  very  fair  estimate  of  their  value  will  be 
obtained. 

Grades  of  Homceopathy. 

Having  had  experience  of  every  grade  of  homoeopathic  practice, 


PREFACE  ix 

and  knowing  the  possibilities  that  lie  in  all,  I  have  sought  in  this  work 
to  supply  the  materials  needful  for  the  application  of  the  Law  of 
Similars  in  any  of  its  modes.  It  is  possible  to  obtain  the  needed 
correspondence  in  a  great  variety  of  ways  and  degrees,  and  one 
practitioner  will  find  it  in  one  way  and  another  in  another.  Homoeo- 
pathy uses  phenomena  as  guides  to  reach  the  unseen  activities 
operating  below  the  surface.  Keeping  my  attention  steadily  on  the 
I^ane  of  phenomena,  and  disregarding  all  the  hypothetical  and 
ever-changing  explanations  of  pathology  and  physiology,  I  have 
endeavoured  to  portray  every  feature  of  drug-activity  that  is  likely  to 
find  its  correspondence  in  the  manifestations  of  disease.  It  may  be 
in  organ-affinity ;  it  may  be  in  coarse  tissue  changes  ;  it  may  be  in  the 
finest  sensations :  m^  object  has  been  to  supply  the  practitioner  of 
every  grade  with  sufficient  data  for  practice. 

Repertories. 

If  time  serves,  I  may  in  the  future  provide  a  special  Repertory 
to  this  work.  In  the  meantime  all  the  fuller  repertories  now  in  use 
will  be  available.  It  is  impossible  to  practise  homoeopathy  as  it 
should  be  practised  without  the  aid  of  repertories,  and  the  best 
repertory  is  the  fullest. 

The  Test  of  a  Homceopath. 

Complaints  are  not  unfrequentiy  made  that  the  homoeopathic 
materia  medica  is  too  vast  for  practical  utiUty ;  that  the  schematised 
lists  of  symptoms  are  unprofitable,  if  not  impossible  reading.  I  do 
not  think  so.  Indeed,  I  think  that  the  test  of  a  genuine  homoeopath 
might  not  unfairly  be  said  to  lie  in  his  capacity  to  read  through  a 
Schema  with  both  profit  and  enjoyment — ^because  of  the  possibilities  it 
reveals  of  dealing  with  cases  occurring  every  day  in  practice.  Again 
and  again  in  the  course  of  my  work  I  have  come  across  symptoms  in 
the  Schemas  of  remedies  reminding  me  of  cases  in  the  past  which 
I  might  have  cured  had  I  but  known  the  remedies  then.  And  many 
a  time  a  case  has  turned  up  in  my  practice  caUing  for  a  particular 
remedy  at  the  very  time  I  have  been  working  upon  it,  and  a  cure  has 
resulted,  when,  but  for  my  study  of  the  Schema,  I  might  more  than 
likely  have  failed  to  find  what  was  wanted.  I  tihink  that  the 
introductory  sections  preceding  each  Schema  will  make  the  study  of 
the  Schema  profitable  and  enjoyable  to  some  who  have  hitherto  only 
found  it  dry.  And  when  we  consider  that  the  Materia  Medica  is 
the  very  raison  d^etre  of  the  homoeopathist,  and  that  in  it  he  must  live 
and  move  and  have  his  being,  it  is  not  too  much  to  expect  of  him 
that  he  shall  at  least  give  as  much  mind  to  its  cultivation  as  is 
required  for  maintaining  high  proficiency,  say,  in  billiards,  or 
in  golf. 

Every  Homceopath  his  own  Materia  Medica  Maker. 

And  now  I  have  a  final  word  to  my  readers.  Every  homceopath, 
in  the  last  resort^  must  make  his  own  materia  medica  for  himself. 


X  PREFACE 

It  is  not  alone  what  an  author  offers  to  a  reader,  it  is  what  the  reader 
can  get  out  of  his  author  that  tells.  I  have  done  my  best  to  put  the 
matter  in  an  orderly  and  tangible  shape,  but  nothing  short  of  hard 
work  can  make  a  proficient  homoeopath,  no  matter  how  handy  hisi 
tools  may  be.  I  have  selected  paper  for  the  book  which  will  take  ink, 
so  that  any  reader  may  make  annotations,  corrections,  or  additions,  as 
his  experience  or  reading  may  suggest.  If  I  had  chosen  to  wait  a  few 
more  years  before  publishing,  I  have  no  doubt  I  could  have  improved 
my  work  ;  but  if  I  had  waited  till  doomsday  I  could  not  have  made  it 
perfect  In  the  meantime  I  want  it  every  day  for  my  own  use  ;  and 
if  I  could  have  found  any  one  else  to  do  the  work  for  me  I  should 
most  gladly  have  spared  myself  the  task. 

Acknowledgments. 

I  have  already  named  some  of  the  authorities  whose  labours 
have  been  freely  drawn  upon,  but  there  are  many  others  to  whom 
my  acknowledgments  are  adso  due.  Among  these  must  be  mentioned 
that  therapeutic  genius  only  recently  departed  from  us,  Alphonse 
Teste,  whose  Homcsopaihic  Materia  Medica  Arranged  Systematically 
and  Practically,  I  have  largely  quoted  from.  Whenever  Teste's  name 
is  mentioned  in  the  Dictionary^  this  is  the  work  in  which  the 
reference  will  be  found.  I  have  used  C.  J.  HempeFs  translation. 
To  Dr.  £.  B.  Nash's  Leaders  in  Therapeutics  and  Leaders  in  Typhoid 
I  am  indebted  for  many  illustrations  of  remedial  action.  When 
not  otherwise  specified,  all  references  to  "  Nash  "  will  be  found  in 
the  Leaders  in  TherapeuUcs.  Dr.  Oscar  Hansen's  Rare  Homoeopathic 
Remedies  has  supplied  me  with  useful  information  regarding  some  of 
the  less  well-known  remedies.  Dr.  H.  C.  Allen's  Keynotes  of  Leading 
Remedies,  his  Intermittent  Fever,  and  the  pages  of  his  journal,  the 
Medical  Advance,  have  been  constantly  drawn  upon.  Lastly,  I  must 
express  my  indebtedness  in  numberless  ways  to  Dr.  Dudgeon,  whose 
unique  knowledge  of  the  Materia  Medica  has  time  and  again  stood 
me  in  good  st^d  at  the  bedside ;  and  whose  original  works  and 
translations  of  Hahnemann's  writings  have  become  part  of  the  daily 
bread  of  modern  homoeopathy. 

JOHN  HENRY  CLARKE. 
30,  Clarges  Street,  London,  W., 
ytt/^4,1900. 


PREFACE  xi 

EXPLANATION  OF  ABBREVIATIONS  AND  SIGNS. 

Books. 

M.  M.  P. — Materia   Medica    Pura   of    Hahnemann,    Dudgeon's 

translation. 
C.  D.  P. — Cyclopasdia  of  Drug  Pathogenesy. 
B.  P. — British  Pharmacopoeia. 


Words. 

N.  O. — Natural  order. 
A.  W. — ^Atomic  weight. 
E^p. — Especially. 
R.— Right. 
L.— Left 


journals. 

H.  »r.— Homoeopathic  World. 
H.  R. — Homoeopathic  Recorder. 
H.  P. — Homoeopathic  Physician. 
Med.  Adv. — ^Medical  Advance. 
Amer.  Horn. — ^American  Homceo- 

pathist 
N.  A.  J.  H. — North   American 

Journal  of  Homoeopathy. 
H.  M. — Hahnemannian  l^nthly. 

Roman  figures  following  the  name  of  a  work  signify  the  volume 
of  the  work,  Arabic  figures  signify  me  page. 

Signs. 

<  means  "  aggravation/'  "worse,"  or  "increase." 
>  means  "  amelioration,"  "  better,"  or  "  decrease." 
These  signs  are  used  in  the  sense  indicated,  either  as  nouns, 
verbs  (present  or  past  tense),  or  adjectives.  For  instance  :  "  Pain  < 
by  rest"  may  be  translated  "  Pain  aggravaUd  by  rest,"  or  "  Pain  worst 
by  rest"  Here  the  sign  is  used  in  the  adjective  way.  "  <  By  rest " 
means  that  there  is  "  aggravation  by  rest."  Here  <  takes  the  place 
of  a  noun.  "  Motion  <  pain  "  means  "  Motion  a^avaUs  or  increases 
pain."  Here  it  is  a  verb.  The  idea  is  the  same  m  all  cases,  and  the 
sense  obvious.  "  >  By  rest "  means  amelioration  or  relief  by  rest. 
"  Motion  >  pain "  means  "  Motion  relieves  or  decreases  pain." 
"  Toothache  >  by  cold  "  means  "  Toothache  relieved,  ameliorated,  or 
lessened  by  cold."  Sometimes  the  particle  is  omitted,  but  the  sense  is 
the  same.  "  >  Rest"  means  "  Relief  by  rest."  "  Rest  >  "  means 
•'  Rest  relieves."  "  Kali  bi.  has  blindness  with  headache ;  blind- 
ness >  as  headache  <."  This  means  that  the  blindness  of  the  Kali 
bi,  headache  becomes  better  as  the  headache  becomes  worse.  I  think 
tiie  utility  of  these  signs  vnH  be  generally  recognised,  and  the  sense 
cannot  be  in  doubt  in  passages  where  they  occur. 

Another  sign  which  I  have  often  found  useful  in  my  private 
notes  I  have  introduced  occasionally  into  the  Dictionary.  I  mean 
the  equation  sign  "ss''  in  the  sense  of  causation.  "  Causation  "  and 
"aggravation  '^  are  not  always  identical,  though  the  influences  which 
set  up  a  morbid  condition  will  generally  aggravate  the  condition  if 
existing  already.  I  have  used  "=:"  as  an  indeclinable  verb: 
"  Motion  zr  vomiting"  means  "Motion  catis^  vomiting."  "Heat::: 
all  eruptions  to  itch  intolerably,"  means  "  Heat  causes  sdl  eruptions  to 
itch  intolerably." 


LIST  OF  REMEDIES 


PAOB 

Abies  Canadensis i 

Abies  Nigra 2 

Abrotanum 3 

Absinthium  5 

Acal3rpha  Indica 6 

Acetaniiidum  (see  Antif  ebrinum) 

Aceticum  Acidum   7 

Aconitinum  ^ 9 

Aconitum  Cammarum    11 

Aconitum  Ferox  12 

Aconitum  Lycoctonum 13 

Aconitum  Napellus 15 

Actaea  Racemosa 25 

Actaea  Spicata  29 

Adonis  Vernalis   30 

Adrenalin  31 

^sculus  Glabra  31 

iEsculus  Hippocastanum  32 

iSthiops  Antimonialis 35 

iEthusa  Cynapium 3^ 

Agaricus  Emeticus 38 

N  Agaricus  Muscarius 39 

Agaricus  Phalloides    44 

Agave  Americana    45 

Agnus  Castus   46 

Agraphis  Nutans 48 

Agrostema  Githa^o 48 

Aiianthus  GJandiuosa 49 

Aletris  Farinosa   51 

Allium  Cepa 53 

Allium  Sativum 56 

Alnus 59 

Aloe  Socotrina 60 

Alstonia  Constricta 65 

Alumen 65 

Alumina 67 

AmbraGrisea  74 

Ambrosia  Artemisiaefolia  79 

Ammoniacum  79 

Ammonium  Aceticum 81 

Ammonium  Benzoicum 82 

Ammonium  Bromatum 82 

Ammonium  Carbonicum   84 

Anmionium  Causticum 90 


xii 


PAOB 

Ammonium  Muriaticum 91 

Ammonium  Phosphoricum 95 

Ammonium  Picricum  90 

Ampelopsis 96 

Amphisoaena  97 

Amygdalae  Amaras  Aqua 98 

Amylenum  Nitrosum    98 

Anacardium  Occidentale zoi 

Anacardium  Orientale loi 

Anagallis  Arvensis 107 

Anantherum  Muricatum  109 

Ancistroden  Contortrix  {see  Cen- 

Chris  Contortrix) 

Angophora iii 

Angustura  Vera  , 112 

Angustura  Spuria  {see   Brucea 

Antidysenterica) 

Anhaionium  Lewinii 115 

Anilinum 117 

Anisum  Stellatum  {see  Illicium) 

Anthemis  Nobilis  117 

Anthoxanthum   118 

Anthracinum  118 

Anthrokokali  119 

Antifebrinum 120 

Antimonium  Arsenicicum   121 

Antimonium  Crudum   121 

Antimonium  lodatum  126 

Antimonium  Muriaticum 127 

Antimonium  Sulphuratum  Au- 

reum 127 

Antimonium  Tartaricum 1 28 

Antipyrinum  13^ 

Aphis  Chenopodii  Glauci 130 

Apis 138 

Apium  Graveolens 145 

Apocynum  Androsaemif olium ...  146 

Apocynum  Cannabinum 147 

Apomorphinum 149 

Aqua  Marina  150 

Aquilegia  Vulgaris 150 

Aralia  Racemosa    150 

Aranea  Diadema    152 

Aranearum  Tela 154 


LIST   OF   REMEDIES 


xin 


PAGB 

Anmea  Scinencia  154 

Arbatns  Andrachne  155 

Arctium  Lappa 155 

Areca   156 

Argentum  Cyanatum 157 

ArgentQm  lodatum   157 

Argentmn  Metallicam  157 

Aigenlum  Nitricum  161 

Anstolochia  MUhomens  168 

Aristolochia  Serpentaria  168 

Armoracia  Sativa  169 

Arnica 171 

Arsenicuin  Album 177 

Arsemcom  Bromatnm 187 

Arseoicam  Hydrogenisatum   ...  187 

Arsenicnm  lodatum 188 

Arsemcnm  Metallicum 191 

Arsenicum  Stibiatum  {see  Anti- 

monium  Ars.) 
Arsemcom  Snlpnuratum  Flavum  193 
Arsenicnm  Sulphnratum    Rub- 
rum  193 

Artemisia       Abrotanum       (see 

Abrotannm) 
Artemisia  AlKintbium  (see  Ab- 
sinthium) 
Artemisia  Contra  and  Judaica 
(sctf  Cina) 

Artemisia  Vulgaris 

Arum  Dracontium 

Arum  Draconculus    198 

Arum  Italicum   199 

Arum  Ifaculatum  199 

Arum  Triphyllum 200 

Arundo  Maoritanica 202 

Asafoetida    203 

Asamm  Europoeum  206 

Asdepias  ^naca  209 

Asdepias  Tuberosa  210 

A'ttmina  Triloba 213 

A^Mvagus    213 

Astacns  Fluviatilis 216 

Asterias  Rubens 217 

Astragalus  Menziesii 220 

Atfaamaotha    • 220 

Atropinum  221 

Anrantium  223 

Anmm  Arsenicicum 223 

Anrum  Bromatum 224 

Anram  lodatum 224 

Aurum  Metallicum 224 

Anmm  Muriaticum    229 

Anmm  Muriaticum  Kalinatum ..  231 

Anrum  Muriaticum  Natronatum  231 

Anrum  Sulphnratum 233 

Afena  Sativa  234 

AmiFe 235 


PAOK 

Azadirachta  Indica    235 

Bacillinnm  237 

BacUlinum  Testium  239 

Badiaga   239 

Baisamum  Peruvianum    242 

Baptisia  Confusa  Acetica 242 

Baptisia  Tinctoria 243 

Barosma  247 

Baryta  Acetica  (see  Baryta  Car- 

bonica) 

Baryta  Carbonlca  248 

Baryta  lodata 253 

Baryta  Muriatica   254 

Belladonna 256 

Bellis  Perennis  269 

Benzinum    270 

Benzinum  Dinitricum  272 

Benzinum  Nitricum 273 

Benzoicum  Addum  274 

Benzoin   277 

Berberis  Aquifolium 278 

Berberis  Vulgaris 280 

Bismuthum 287 

Blatta  Americana  290 

Blatta  Orientalis 290 

Boletus  Larids  290 

Boletus  Luridus 291 

Boletus  Satanas 291 

Bomb^  Processionea 292 

Boracicum  Addum  292 

Borax  ••• • 294 

Bothrops  Lanceolatus 298 

Bovista 299 

Brachyglottis  Repens  303 

Brassica  Napus  ....^ 305 

Bromium 30^ 

Brucea  Antidysenterica    308 

Brudnum    310 

Bryonia    310 

Buchu  (see  Barosma) 

Bufo • ^«....  321 

Bursa  Pastoris  (s^^Thlaspi  Bursa 

Pastoris) 

Cadus  Grandifiorus 323 

Cadmium  Bromatum    327 

Cadmium  Sulphuratum    320 

Cainca 330 

Cajuputum  330 

Calabar  (see  Physostigma) 

Caladium ,  332 

Calcarea  Acetica    335 

Calcarea  Arsenicosa 335 

Calcarea  Bromata 337 

Calcarea  Carbonica  337 

Calcarea  Caustica 351 


XVI 


LIST  OF  REMEDIES 


PAGE 

Filix  Mas 780 

Fluoricum  Acidum    782 

Formica  786 

Fragaria  Vesca  788 

Franciscea  Uniflora  789 

Franzensbad  790 

Fraxinus  Americana 791 

Fucus  Vesiculosus ^ 792 

Gadus  Morrhua 793 

Galega  Officinalis  794 

Galium  Aparine  ...» 795 

Gallicum  Acidum  795 

Galvanismus   796 

Gambogia    000 

Gastein 802 

Gaultheria   804 

Gelsemium  805 

Genista 814 

Gentiana  Cruciata 815 

Gentiana  Lutea 816 

Gentiana  Quinqueflora 819 

Geranium  Maculatum  819 

Gettysburg  820 

Geum  Rivale  820 

Ginseng    820 

Glonoinum  824 

Gnaphalium 829 

Goss3rpium  Herbaceum 831 

Granatum 832 

Graphites 835 

Gratiola    845 

Grindelia : 849 

Guaco  851 

Guaiacum 852 

Guarana 856 

Guarea 857 

Gummi  Gutti  (see  Gambogia) 

Gymnema  Sylvestre 859 


PAGE 

Gymnocladus  Canadensis 859 

Haematoxylon 862 

HaU  86a 

Hamamelis 866 

Hecla    870 

Hedeoma 872 

Hedera  Helix 873 

Hedysarum  Ildefonsianum 874 

Helianthus  874. 

Heliotropium 870 

Helix  Tosta 877 

Helleborus  Foetidus 877 

Helleborus  Niger  878 

Helleborus  Onentalis 884 

Helleborus  Viridis 884 

Heloderma 885 

Helonias  ....; 890 

Hepar  894 

Hepatica 902 

Heracleum 903 

Hippomanes  905 

Hippozsninum 906 

Hoang-nan 909 

Homarus 910 

Homeria  .-. 914 

Hura  Brasiliensis  91A 

Hura  Crepitans  910 

Hydrangea  Arborescens  917 

Hydrastininuni  Muriaticum 918 

Hydrastinum  Muriaticum    918 

Hydrastis  Canadensis   919 

Hydrocotyie  Asiatica    92A 

H  y  drocy  ante  urn  Acidum 926 

Hydrophobinum    930 

HydrophyllumVirginianum    ...  938 

Hyoscyaminuni 938 

Hyosc^amus  940 

Hypericum 947 


BOSTON  UNIVERSITY 


^hool  of  Medicine. 

A   DICTIONARY  OF 
PRACTICAL  MATERIA  MEDICA 


Abies  Canadensis. 

Pinos  canadensis.    Hemlock  Spruce.  Canada  Pitch.    N.  O.  Coniferse. 
Tincture  of  fresh  bark  and  young  buds. 

ClhiiWfcU — ^Indigestion.    Liver  disorder.    Uterine  displacement. 

Chaneterifltios. — Abies  can.  has  been  only  imperfectly  proved, 
but  it  has  marked  symptoms  which  wiU  serve  to  indicate  it  in  any 
case  of  disease  in  which  they  may  be  prominent :  Great  appetite, 
tendency  to  over-eat ;  gnawing,  hungry,  faint  feeling  in  epigastrium. 
According  to  Hale  it  has  cured  :  "  A  light-headed  feeling,  attended 
with  a  gnawing,  hungry,  faint  feeling  at  epigastrium,  craving  hunger 
which,  if  gratified,  was  followed  by  distension  of  the  stomach  and 
hard  beatinjg  of  the  heart."  Among  the  peculiar  sensations  are  :  A 
feeling  as  if  the  right  lung  and  liver  were  small  and  hard ;  pain 
beneath  right  scapula.  The  patient  lies  with  the  legs  drawn  up. 
Shivering  as  if  the  blood  turned  to  cold  water. 

BeiatiODM*--^ompare :  Abies  nig.,  Sabina,  Thuja,  and  other 
Conifers,  Nux  vom. 

STMPTOHS. 

I.    Mind. — Quiet,  careless,  but  easily  fretted. 
9.    Head. — ^Tipsy  feeling,  a  swimming  of  the  head ;  light-headed. 
3.    Eyes. — Sensation  as  of  a  stye  in  outer  canthus  of  1.  eye. 
8.    Mottth.— -Dryness  of  the  mouth. 

10.  Appetite. — Gnawing,  hungry,  faint  feeling  at  the  epigastrium. — 
Craving  for  meat,  pickles,  and  other  coarse  food. — Some  thirst. — A  tendency 
to  eat  far  beyond  the  capacity  for  digestion. 

XI.     Stomach. — Distension  of  the  stomach  and  epigastrium  ;  burning. 

12.  Abdomen. — ^Sick  feeling  in  the  bowels. — Rumbling  in  the  bowels 
after  eating  with  great  appetite. — Sensation  as  if  the  liver  were  small  and 
haid  ;  as  if  bile  were  deficient. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Burning  in  rectum. — Constipation. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urinates  frequently  day  and  night;  urine 
stnw-coloured. 

VOL,  I.  2  ^ 


2  ABIES   NIGRA 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Thinks  the  womb  is  soft  and  feeble 
(thinks  would  cause  abortion). — Sore  feeling  at  the  fundus  of  uterus ;  >  by 
pressing. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Breathing  laboured. — Sensation  as  if  the 
right  lung  were  small  and  hard. 

19.  Heart. — ^Action  of  the  heart  laboured. — Increased  action  of  the  heart 
with  distension  of  the  stomach. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Pain  behind  the  right  shoulder  blade. — ^Weak 
feeling  in  sacral  region. — Feeling  as  of  cold  water  between  the  shoulders. 

84.  Generalities. — Hands  cold,  shrunken. — Skin  cold  and  clammy. — 
Lies  with  the  legs  drawn  up. — Great  prostration,  wants  to  lie  down  all  the 
time.— Very  faint,  as  if  top  of  head  were  congested. — ^Twitching  of  the 
muscles. 

26.  Sleep. — Gaping,  drowsy. — Great  restlessness  at  night,  with  tossing 
from  side  to  side. 

97.  Fever. — Cold  shivering  all  over  as  if  blood  turned  to  ice-water. — 
Chills  down  back. 


Abies  Nigra. 


Black  or  Double  Spruce.    (Northern  part  of  North  America.)    N.  O, 
Coniferse.    Tincture  of  the  gum. 

CliniOftL — Constipation.  Cough.  Dyspepsia.  Eructations.  Haemorrhages. 
Hypochondriasis.    Slalarial  fevers.    Tea,  effects  of.    Tobacco,  effects  of. 

CharaoteriBtios.— The  grand  characteristic  of  Abies  nig.  is  a 
sensation  in  the  cardiac  end  of  the  stomach,  or  in  the  oesophagus 
where  it  enters  the  stomach,  as  if  a  hard  body,  as  a  hard-boiled  egg, 
had  lodged  there.  {China  has  the  lump  under  the  sternum,  but 
higher  up.  FeeUng  in  the  epigastrium  as  if  food  were  lying  there. 
Pu/.,  Bry,)  Where  this  symptom  is  present,  whether  in  dyspepsia, 
lung  disease  (when  the  sensation  is  as  if  there  was  a  hard  substance 
to  be  coughed  up)  with  or  without  haemopt3rsis,  constipation,  &c. 
Ab.  n.  will  be  the  most  likely  remedy.  The  dyspepsias  caused  by 
abuse  of  tea  or  tobacco  have  been  cured  by  it.  Wakeful  at  night 
with  hunger.  Distress  in  the  head,  with  flushed  cheeks,  often  accom- 
panies the  dyspeptic  symptoms  of  this  remedy.  In  one  patient  to 
whom  I  gave  it  chilliness  round  stomach  was  removed  and  general 
chilUness  greatly  lessened.  <  After  eating.  "  Pain  in  the  stomach 
always  comes  after  eating,"  says  Guernsey. 

Relations. — Compare :  Abies  can.,  Cupressus,  Thuja,  Sabina  (all 
have  painful  indigestion),  and  other  Conifers ;  Nux  v.,  Bry.,  Puis., 
KaU  c,  Nat.  m. ;  (effects  of  tea)  Thuja. 

Causation.— Tea.    Tobacco. 

STMPTOHS. 

I.  Mind. — ^Very  low-spirited  and  melancholy. — Nervousness. — Unable 
to  think  or  study. 

3.  Head. — Dizziness. — Bad  feeling  in  head. — Dull  headache ;  severe.  — 
Head  hot,  with  flushed  cheeks. 


ABROTANUM  3 

4.   Sar.— Pain  in  L  external  meatus. 

9.  Throat. — Choking  sensation  in  throat.— Sensation  of  something 
stiddi^  in  oesophagus  toward  its  lower  end. 

10.  Apx>etite. — Hungry  and  wakeful  at  night.-— Total  loss  of  appetite  in 
the  morning,  bat  great  craving  for  food  at  noon  and  night. 

11.  Stomach. — Pain  in  the  stomach  always  comes  after  eating. — Pain- 
ful sensation  as  if  something  were  lodged  in  chest,  mostly  on  r.  side  of 
sternum,  which  had  to  be  coughed  up,  though  nothing  comes,  after  taking 
food  that  disagreed. — Frequent  eructations. — Continual  distressing  sensation 
about  stomach  as  if  everything  was  knotted  up ;  worse  whenever  debilitated. 
— Sensation  of  an  undigested  hard-boiled  egg  in  the  stomach. 

13.    Stool. — Constipation. 

i6.    Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menstruation  delayed  three  months. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs. — Easily  gets  out  of  breath. 

19.    Heart. — Heavy,  slow  beating  of  heart ;  sharp,  cutting  pains. 

so.    Back. — Pain  in  small  of  back. 

S4.  G^eneralities. — Rheumatic  pains,  and  aching  in  the  bones. — ^Alter- 
nate heat  and  cold. 

s6.  Sleep. — Sleepy  during  the  day,  but  wakeful  and  restless  at  night — 
Very  bad  dreams. 


Abrotannm. 

Artemisia  abrotannm.     Lady's  Love.     Southernwood.      (Southern 
Europe.)    N,  O.  Compositse.    Tincture  of  fresh  leaves  and  stems. 

^^M"*^- — Boils.  Chilblains.  Epilepsy.  Gout.  Hsemorrhoids.  Hectic  fever. 
Hydrocele.  Indigestion.  Lienteria.  Marasmus.  Myelitis,  chronic.  Nose-bleed. 
Paralysis.    Rheumatism.    Umbilicus,  oozing  from.    Worms. 

Charaeteristios. — ^The  most  prominent  symptom  of  AbroL  is  the 
wasting  it  causes,  most  marked  in  lower  extremities.  It  has  also  an 
intense  indigestion  and  morbid  appetite.  There  are  burning,  gnaw- 
ing, constricting  pains,  and  sometimes  vomiting  of  offensive  mattens. 
A  peculiar  sensation  is  as  if  the  stomach  were  hanging  or  swimming  in 
water.  After  a  checked  diarrhoea,  rheumatism  may  ensue.  Another 
great  characteristic  of  AhroL  is  metastasis ;  metastatic  rheumatism. 
Metastasis  of  rheumatism  from  joints  to  heart ;  to  spine.  There  is  a 
sudden  aching  pain  in  back  >  by  motion.  Symptoms  are  <  at  night 
and  in  cold  air.  The  face  is  wrinkled,  pale,  old-looking ;  feels  cold  ; 
blue  rings  round  eyes.  It  is  suited  to  affections  of  newborn  children, 
and  especially  little  boys  ;  hydrocele  ;  epistaxis  ;  emaciation.  Oozing 
of  blood  and  moisture  from  navel  of  newborn.  I  have  cured  with  it 
indigestion  with  vomiting  of  large  quantities  of  offensive  fluid  in  a 
middle-aged  woman. 

BelattoilB.-— Cofit^ar<s :  Absinth.,  Cham.,  Cina,  Gnaphal.,  and 
other  Compositae  ;  Nux  and  Agar,  (chilblains) ;  Bry.,  Bar.  c.  Follows 
melt:  Aeon,  and  Bry.  (pleurisy) ;  Hep.  (boils). 


ABROTANUM 


STHPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — Great  anxiety  and  depression. — Child  cross,  depressed,  very 
peevish. — Feels  she  would  like  to  do  something  cruel ;  no  humanity. — 
Thinking  difficult. — Feels  as  if  brain  softening. — Excited,  loquacious,  like 
shouting,  good-humoured,  happy  (secondary,  after  ceasing  the  drug). 

2.  Head. — Cannot  hold  the  head  up. — The  1.  brain  seems  esp.  weak, 
easily  tired  by  conversation  or  mental  effort. — Sensation  as  of  creeping  chills 
along  the  convolutions  of  the  brain,  accompanied  by  prickling  sensation. — 
Scalp  sore,  esp.  1.  side  ;  itching. 

3.  Eyes. — Blue  rings  around  dull-looking  eyes. 

5.  Nose. — Nose  dry. — Nose-bleed  with  boys. 

6.  Face. — Face  wrinkled,  as  if  old. — Comedones,  with  emaciation. 
8.    Mouth. — Slimy  taste ;  acid. 

10.  Appetite. — Gnawing  hunger;  craves  bread  boiled  in  milk. — 
Ravenous  appetite,  and  all  the  while  emaciating. — Gastralgia  with  loss  of 
appetite. 

11.  Stomach. — Sensation  as  if  stomach  were  hanging  or  swimming  in 
water,  with  coldness. — Pains  cutting,  gnawing,  burning  ;  <  at  night. 

12.  Abdomen. — Great  distension  of  abdomen. — Weak,  sinking  feeling  in 
bowels. — Hard  lumps  in  different  parts  of  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Food  passes  undigested. — Rheumatism  after 
suddenly  checked  diarrhoea. — ^Alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation. — Pro- 
truding piles,  with  burning,  from  touch  or  when  pressing. — Piles  appeared, 
and  became  worse  as  rheumatic  pains  abated,  with  frequent  inclination  to 
stool,  hardly  anything  but  blood  being  passed. — Destroys  worms,  esp. 
ascarides. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Hydrocele  of  children. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Darting  pain  in  left  ovary. — ^Twitching 
in  both  ovarian  regions,  seems  to  extend  to  back. — Blood  and  moisture  oozing 
from  navel  of  newborn. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Cold  air  causes  a  raw  feeling  in  respiratory 
tract. — In  pleurisy  when  a  pressing  sensation  remains  in  affected  side, 
impeding  free  breathing  (after  Aeon,  and  Bry.). 

19.  Heart  and  Pulse. — Pain  across  chest  sharp  and  severe  in  region  of 
heart;  rheumatism. — Metastasis  of  rheumatism  to  heart. — Pulse  weak  and 
small. 

20.  Back. — Pains  in  sacrum. 

21.  Limbs. — Inability  to  move. — Marasmus  of  lower  extremities  only. — 
Soreness  and  lameness ;  worse  mornings. — Chilblains  itch  ;  frost-bitten  limbs. 
— Gout  in  wrists  and  ankles. — Inflammatory  rheumatism  before  swelling 
begins. 

24.  Generalities. — Weak,  sickly  feeling ;  when  excited,  trembling. — 
Lame  and  sore  all  over. — Weak  and  prostrated  after  influenza. — Inability  to 
move. — Numbness. 

25.  Skin. — Flabby ;  hangs  loose  ;  marasmus. — Furunculus  ;  after  Hep.  s. 

26.  Sleep.— Restless  ;  frightful  dreams. 

27.  Fever. — High  fever  (rheumatism). — Hectic  fever,  with  chilliness, 
very  weakening ;  (marasmus). 


ABSINTHIUM 


Absinthiam. 

Artemisia  absinthium,  Linn.  Common  Wormwood.  (Europe.)  Not 
to  be  confounded  with  Artemisia  vulgaris,  which  is  also  called 
Wormwood,  AT.  O.  Compositse.  Tincture  of  fresh  young 
leaves  and  flowers. 

QiwlwfcL — ^Brain,  congestion  of.  Chlorosis.  Dyspepsia.  Epilepsy.  Nervous- 
ness.   Otorrhcsa.    Restlessness.    Sleeplessness.    Spine,  congestion  of.    Typhoid. 

Charaoterigtios^ — Absinthium  has  been  proved,  but  a  number  of 
the  symptoms  are  taken  from  observations  made  on  absinthe  drinkers. 
The  convulsions  of  Absinth,  are  preceded  by  trembling ;  the  patient 
makes  grimaces  ;  bites  tongue  ;  foams.  Halbert  regards  Absinth,  as 
of  especial  service  in  cases  of  minor  epilepsy,  where  consciousness  is 
not  entirely  lost  The  characteristic  is  *'  a  peculiar  vertigo  on  rising, 
with  a  tendency  to  fall  backward."  In  a  case  of  epileptoid  vertigo, 
signs  of  constant  cerebral  and  spinal  congestion  ;  nausea  and  tendency 
to  frequent  vomiting,  persistent  tremors ;  epileptoid  attacks  of  hys- 
terical character  and  opisthotonos,  Absinth,  first  in  ^,  and  later  in  3, 
completely  cured.  Tremor  is  a  marked  feature  of  the  remedy  : 
tremor  of  tongue  ;  of  heart.  Magnan,  who  has  studied  absinthism, 
says  the  characteristic  symptoms  of  absinthe  are  :  Sudden  and  severe 
giddiness,  epileptiform  seizures,  delirium  with  hallucinations,  and  loss 
of  consciousness.  For  some  time  after  the  attack  there  is  loss  of 
memory.  The  giddiness  and  epileptiform  attacks  are  the  most 
important  of  the  symptoms.  He  adds  that  those  who  take  absinthe 
are  liable  to  hysterical  manifestations.  There  is  exhilaration  followed 
t>y  horrible  delirium  (Bell.) ;  patient  obliged  to  walk  about  (Artem^y 
Cham.f  Cin  have  >  moving  about).  Patient  walks  about  in  distress, 
seeing  all  sorts  of  demons.  Sleeplessness  ;  typhoid  with  congestion 
of  base  of  brain.  It  corresponds  to  nervousness,  excitement,  and 
sleeplessness  in  children. 

BelattOBB. — Compare :  Artem.  vulg.,  Abrot,  Cicut.,  Hyosc,  BelL, 
Stram.    Strong  urine,  Benz.  ac..  Nit*  ac. 

STMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — ^After  recovery  has  no  recollection  of  taking  the  poison,  nor 
of  the  cause  of  his  doing  so. — Forgets  what  has  recently  happened. — Insane  ; 
idiotic;  brutaL — Idiotic  manner^  doesn't  care  whether  she  dies  or  not — 
Wants  nothing  to  do  with  anybody. — Frightful  visions  and  terrifying  halluci- 
natioDS. — Stupor  alternating  with  dangerous  violence.— Insensible  with  the 
convulsions. 

s.  Head. — ^Vertigo ;  when  she  rises  up  ;  tendency  to  fall  backward. — 
Confusion  in  head. — Headache. — ^Wantsto  lie  with  the  head  low. — Congestion 
of  the  brain  and  spinal  cord. 

3.  Eyes. — Injected  conjunctiva. — Pain  in  the  eyes. — Itching. — Lids 
licawy. 

4.  Ears.— Otorrhoea ;  esp.  after  hemicrania. 


6  ACALYPHA   INDICA 

6.    Face. — Foolish  look.— Rush  of  blood  to  the  face.— Makes  grimaces, 
and  foams  at  the  mouth  in  epilepsy. 

8.    Mouth. — ^Jaws  firmly  fixed. — Bites  his  tongue  in  epilepsy. — ^Tongue 
thick,  protruding ;  can  scarcely  talk.— Tongue  trembling ;  feels  paralysed. 

g.    Throat.— Scalded  feeling  in  the  throat. 

u.  Stomach. — Loss  of  appetite ;  loathing  of  food. — Food  lies  heavy. — 
Stomach  feels  cold  and  oppressed. — Eructations ;  nausea ;  vomiting. — 
Nausea,  apparently  in  region  of  gall  bladder. — Uncomfortable,  irritated 
feeling  of  stomach. 

13.  Abdomen. — Liver  feels  swollen. — Pain  in  spleen ;  it  feels  swollen. 
— Bloated  around  waist  and  in  abdomen,  as  after  ague. — Immense  accumula- 
tion of  flatulence  in  abdomen ;  wind  colic. 

14,  Urinary  Organs. — Constant  desire  to  urinate. — Urine  deep  orange, 
of  a  strong  smell,  like  horse's  urine. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Pains  in  uterus.— Darting  pain  in  right 
ovary.— Chlorosis. — Promotes  menses. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs.— Cough  with  liver  complaint 

19.  Heart.— Tremor  of  the  heart  felt  toward  the  back. — Heart  thumps ; 
can  be  heard  in  scapular  region. 

24.  Generalities. — Feet  very  cold. — Falling  down,  as  in  epilepsy,  un- 
conscious, with  distortion  of  the  features,  followed  by  spasms  of  the  body 
and  limbs,  bloody  foam  at  mouth,  and  biting  of  the  tongue ;  stupidity  and 
loss  of  memory  afterward. — Opisthotonos ;  grinding  teeth ;  follow^  by 
stupor. — Paralysis  of  inner  organs.— (Horses  kick  with  hind  legs  towards  the 
belly. — ^Ascarides.) 


Aoalypha  Indica. 


Cupameni.     Indian  aoalypha.    (East  Indies.)    N.O.  Euphorbiaceas. 
Tincture  of  fresh  plant. 

CHnt<ial.— Cough.    Diarrhoea.    Flatulence.    Hasmoptysis. 

CharaoteristiOB. — ^The  chief  employment  of  this  Euphorbian 
has  been  in  violent  dry  cough  followed  by  bloody  expectoration. 
Expectoration  of  pure  blood  in  the  morning,  and  dark  clotted  blood 
in  the  evening.  Cough  most  violent  at  night.  Dulness  of  chest  on 
percussion  ;  constant  severe  pain  in  chest.  Progressive  emaciation. 
A  proving  by  several  Indian  physicians  has  brought  out  a  number  of 
symptoms  in  the  alimentary  tracts  characterised  by :  burning,  sense 
of  weight  at  stomach,  flatulence,  and  sputtering  diarrhoea. 

Relations.-— Com^ard ;  Mercurialis  ann.,  Mancin.,  and  other 
Euphorbians.    Ham.,  Ipec,  Millefol.,  Phos.,  Aco. 


Acetanilidom,  see  Antifebrinom. 


ACETICUM  ACIDUM  7 

Aceticum  Acidam. 

Gbdal  Acetic  Acid.  HC,H303.  (Distilled  water  is  used  for  attenuations 
I X  and  I  ;  very  dilute  spirit  for  3X  and  up  to  4  ;  rectified  spirit 
for  5  and  higher.) 

CHaieaU — ^Anaemia.  Anaesthetics,  antidote  to.  Ascarides.  Bums.  Corns. 
Croup.  Debility.  Diabetes.  Diphtheria.  Dropsies.  Fevers.  Hydrophobia. 
Kaevi.  Narcotics,  antidote  to.  Phthisis.  Sausage-poisoning,  antidote  to.  Scalds. 
Sdngs.    Stomach,  cancer  of.    Varicosis.    Warts. 

Chaneteristios. — ^The  leading  features  of  acetic  acid  are  exces- 
sive wasting  and  debility ;  anaemia  with  waxy  pallor  of  face  ;  intense 
thirst ;  burning  in  throat ;  nausea ;  retching,  and  sour  rising  as  met 
with  in  cases  of  cancer  and  debility.  There  are  gnawing,  ulcerative 
pains  in  stomach  ;  pain  and  burning  in  abdomen.  Profuse,  exhausting 
diarrhcea.  It  has  been  used  in  diabetes.  It  corresponds  to  putrid 
and  hectic  fevers  with  night  sweats ;  haemorrhages,  varicose  swellings, 
and  dropsies.  As  a  type  of  vine^  efiFects  may  be  mentioned  ue 
following :  A  plump  and  blooming  young  woman  took  a  small  glass 
daily  to  reduce  size.  Soon  lost  flesh  and  colour.  In  a  month  cough 
set  in  with  white  concocted  phlegm,  fever,  dyspnoea,  night  sweats, 
anorexia,  dropsy,  diarrhoea,  death.  Lungs  after  death  were  found 
staffed  with  non-suppurating  tubercles.  A  young  German,  after 
working  twelve  months  in  a  vinegar  factory,  was  obhged  to  leave  from 
indigestion,  dyspnoea,  and  ready  fatigue.  It  is  suited  to  children  and 
old  people  ;  to  lax,  pale,  lean  persons.  (Equal  parts  of  vinegar  and 
hot  water  make  a  refreshing  sponge-down  for  many  conditions  of 
feven  with  or  without  perspiration.) 

BftlatloiiB. — Compare:  Apis,  Ars.  (but  Acet  ac.  has  more  pre- 
ponderant gastric  symptoms  than  either)  ;  Carbol.  ac,  Lac.  defl.,  I^t. 
ac,  Uran.  nit.  Large  doses  of  Acet.  ac.  are  best  antidoied  by 
Magnesia  or  Calcarea  either  as  fluid  magnesia  or  as  lime-water. 
Antidotes  to  potencies  are  :  For  depressing,  agonising  feeling, 
Tabac,  Aeon. ;  for  gastric,  pulmonary  and  febrile  symptoms,  Nat.  m., 
and  afterwards  Sep.  It  aniidoics :  Anaesthetics,  Aeon.,  Asar.,  CofiEea, 
Euphorb.,  Ignat,  Opium,  Plumb,  (colic),  Sep.,  Stram.,  Tabac  It 
counteracts  sausage-poisoning.  //  aggravates  the  effects  of  Bell., 
Merc.,  Am.,  Lach.  Disagrees  when  given  after  Borax,  Caust.,  Nux  v.. 
Ran.  b.,  Sars. :  Sdlla,  Colch.,  and  Sang,  have  more  effect  in  curing 
some  diseases  when  prepared  with  Acet  ac  than  with  Alcohol. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — ^Very  doll  and  low-spirited;  irritable. — ^Alternate  stupor  and 
delirium. — Confusion  of  ideas. — Grieves  much ;  sighs  often.— Horrible  attacks 
of  anxiety  with  difificult  breathing. — ^Vertigo  with  feebleness  and  fainting. 

s.  Head. — Heaviness  and  dull  pains  in  forehead  and  vertex. — Headache 
from  abuse  of  tobacco,  opium,  coffee,  or  alcohol 

5.  Nose. — Liable  to  frequent  catarrhal  attacks.— Nose-bleed,  esp.  from 
a^l  or  a  blow. 

0u    Face.— Expression    wild,    pupils    dilated.  —  Face    pale,    waxen. 


8  ACETICUM   ACIDUM 

emaciated.— Left  cheek  (csp.)  very  red  during  fever.— Bright  red  flush  on  both 
cheeks. — Sweat  on  forehead  in  spots. 

8.  Mouth.— -Teeth  feel  dull,  breath  foul.— Scorbutic  ulcers ;  toothache. 
— Taste  sour. — Epithelium  of  mouth  quite  white. — ^Tongue  pale  and  flabby. 

9.  Throat.— Children  thirsty,  but  swallow  with  difficulty  even  a  tea- 
spoonful  of  water. — ^White  false  membranes  in  throat. 

II.  Stomach. — Insatiable  burning  thirst. — Shrieks  for  water  at  night. — 
Intense  thirst ;  nausea,  and  frequent  vomiting. — Disgust  for  salted  things  and 
cold  victuals. — Cold  drinks  lie  heavy. — ^Vegetables,  except  potatoes,  disagree, 
also  bread  and  butter  still  more. — Contents  of  stomach  feel  as  if  in  a  ferment ; 
violent  burning  pain  in  stomach  and  in  chest,  followed  by  coldness  of  the 
skin  and  cold  sweat  on  forehead. — Indurations  in  stomach. — Scirrhus  of 
pylorus. 

X2.  Abdomen. — Distension  of  the  abdomen ;  colicky  pains. — ^Ascites. — 
Abdomen  feels  as  if  sunken  in  when  lying  on  his  back. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Diarrhoea,  with  great  thirst,  drinking  large 
quantities  with  apparent  impunity. — Diarrhoea,  with  swelling  of  legs  and  feet 
(phthisical  subjects). — Diarrhoea,  with  colic  pains  and  tenderness  of  the 
abdomen. — Haemorrhage  from  bowels.— Chronic  constipation. — ^Ascarides. — 
Chronic  diarrhoea  of  children  with  great  emaciation. — Constipation,  with 
great  thirst  and  excess  of  pale  urine. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  increased  in  quantity ;  pale  ;  phosphatic  ; 
diabetes,  with  intense,  burning,  unending  and  unquenchable  thirst  and  great 
debility. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — ^Weakening  emissions;  semen  passes  at 
stool. — Prepuce  thickened,  fissured,  can't  be  retracted  and  itches  fearfully. — 
Sexual  passion,  but  feeble  erection. 

lO. — Female  Sexual  Organs. — Metrorrhagia ;  after  parturition,  with 
great  thirst. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarse,  with  laryngeal  irritation. — Lining 
membrane  of  larynx  and  trachea  covered  with  a  fibrinous  exudation  as  in 
true  croup. — Hissing  respiration,  with  rattling  in  the  throat. — Croup-like 
cough  ;  a  hollow  sound  with  each  inhalation.— Haemoptysis. 

20.  Back. — Myelitis,  with  profuse  urine ;  the  pain  in  the  back  relieved 
only  by  lying  on  the  abdomen. 

21.  Limbs. — QSdematous  swelling  of  the  feet  and  legs. 

24.  Generalities. — Convulsions. — ^Jumps  out  of  bed  like  a  madman,  and 
crawls  on  the  ground,  howling  with  pain. — Great  emaciation. — Skin  pale  and 
waxen. — General  anasarca  and  dropsical  a£Fections. — Burning  in  inner  and 
outer  parts. 

25.  Skin.— Sugillations.— Tetter-like  eruptions.— Naevi ;  warts  ;  corns. 
s6.    Sleep.— Sleepless. 

27.  Fever. — Skin  cold. — Slow  fever  with  night  sweats. — Profuse  perspi- 
ration.— Hectic. — Putrid  and  typhous  fevers. 


ACONITINUM  9 

Aconitiimm. 

Acooitine.  Aconitia.  C^  H45  NO„.  An  alkaloid  obtained  from  the 
roots  and  stems  of  Aconitum  napellus.  It  is  contained  in  all 
^)ecies  of  Aconite  except  A.  lycoctonum. 

[German  Aconitine  is  amorphous ;  French  Aconitine  is  crystaUine, 
and  170  times  stronger  than  the  German.  Morson's  "  English 
Aa>nitine  "  is  a  secret  preparation  believed  to  be  made  from  A.  Ferox. 
The  alkaloid  in  A.  Ferox  differs  somewhat  from  ordinary  Aconitine 
chemically^  and  is  called  pseudo- Aconitine.  Aconitine  of  T.  H. 
Smith,  of  Edinburgh,  is  probably  identical  with  Morson's.  Symptoms 
from  Morson's  are  marked  (M)  in  the  Schema.] 

OWniitaU — ^Blindness.  Chill.  Convulsions.  Deafness.  Dyspnoea.  Ears,  noises 
in.  Hemicrania.  Hydrophobia.  Landry's  paralysis.  Liver,  enlargement  of. 
Neuralgia.  CEsophagns,  spasms  of.  Spasms.  Spleen,  enlargement  of.  Tetanus. 
Tongue,  affections  of.    Trismus.    Vomiting. 

CharaeteristiGS. — Our  knowledge  of   this   alkaloid    is   chiefly 
derived  from  cases  of  poisoning  and  over-dosing.    The  numbness, 
tinging,  prickling  and  heat  of  the  Aconite  provings  are  produced  by 
the  alkaloid,  but  with  increased  intensity.    On  local  application^  first 
there  is  sensation  of  warmth,  then  of  burning  with  sharp  pains  and 
itching ;  finally  numbness  and  anaesthesia.      The  symptoms  often 
proceed  from  below  upvrards :    "  A   tingling,  prickling    sensation, 
running  up  leg  to  spine  and  head,  and  tingUng  of  fingers.'*    *'  Ice-cold 
sensation  creeps  up  from  his  feet."    Fear  of  death,  anguish,  intense 
chilliness ;  feeling  of  sickness  ;  constricting  burning  sensation,  ex- 
tending from  mouth  to  stomach.    Twitchings  and  spasms  over  whole 
body,  especially  in  face.    All  symptoms  are  >  by  vomiting.     In  one 
poisoning  case  "  vomiting  recurred  every  two  or  three  minutes,  and 
was  performed  by  a  sudden  jerking  action  of  abdominal  muscles, 
accompanied  by  a  loud  shout,  probably  dependent  on  a  sudden 
contraction  of   the  diaphragm.      Every  attempt    to    swallow  was 
followed  by  the  spasmodic  contractions  so  characteristic  of  hydro- 
phobia, but  they  were  not  renewed  by  the  sight  of  water.    The 
sli^test  tooch  renewed  the  spasms."    Aconitine  should  be  helpful  in 
cases  of  hydrophobia,  whether  of  the  convulsive  or  the  paralytic  kind. 
The  senses  are  disordered  or  lost — sight,  hearing,  smell.     In  one 
poisoning  case  the  blindness  was  coincident  with  sudden  dilatation 
of  the  pupils,  and  sight  partially  returned  as  the  pupils  contracted. 
A  heavy  feeling  as  of  lead  all  over  the  body.    All  parts  except  head 
and  stomach  feel  as  if  filled  with  lead.      Neuralgia  of  5th  nerve. 
Creeping  on   face   with  feeling   of  swelling  and   tension.      Pains 
in  supiaorbital    nerve  were   especially   prominent.      Post-mortem 
examinations  show  the  spleen  veiy  much  enlarged ;  posterior  part 
(tf  liver  dark  and  almost  black.    Kidneys  hyperaemic. 

The  symptoms  of  Aconitine  set  in  with  great  rapidity,  and  develop 

with  extreme  intensiW.    If  recovery  occurs  it  is  rapid  and  complete. 

Tbere  is  relaxation  of  the  limbs  and  every  exertion  <  the  symptoms. 

<  By  mental   exertion ;  by  agitation.  <  By  touch.    Erect  position 

s  nausea  (M). 


lo  ACONITINUM 

BelatioiiB. — See  Aeon.  n.  Hydrophobia  symptoms,  Bell.,  Canth., 
Hyo.,  Lach.,  Fagus. 

STMPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — ^Anguish  ;  fear  of  death. — Intellect  perfect,  even  vivid. — Flow 
of  ideas  sluggish,  long  reflection  impossible,  power  of  attention  impaired. — 
Feels  like  one  sleeping  and  dreaming. — Forgetfulness  and  trembling  of  limbs. 

8.  Head. — ^Vertigo  and  confusion,  with  ringing  in  ears ;  falls  almost 
immediately. — ^With  giddiness,  dimness  of  vision,  and  muscular  weakness  (M). 
—Fulness  in  the  head,  with  noises  in  the  ears. — Head-  and  faceache ;  often 
darting  pains  in  face,  sometimes  accompanied  by  vomiting. — (Hemicrania 
cured). — Weight  about  head ;  unable  to  hold  it  up. 

3.  Eyes. — Strained  feeling  in  eyes. — Pupils  dilated  (both  from  internal 
and  external  use).~03mplete  blindness ;  accompanying  dilatation  of  pupils, 
sight  returning  when  pupils  contract — ^Vision  hazy,  with  giddiness  and 
nausea  (M).— Pupils  insensible  to  light 

4.  Ears. — Sense  of  pressure  in  ears. — Roaring  in  cars. — Complete 
deafness. 

6.  Face. — Fulness  in  cheeks  and  temples  gradually  changing  to  painful 
sense  of  tension,  formication,  and  prickling. — Face  tense  and  swollen.— Creep- 
ings  in  face  and  forearms. — Peculiar  drawing,  stretching,  pressing  sensation 
in  cheeks,  upper  jaws,  forehead — ^in  shorty  through  whole  tract  of  trigeminus, 
increasing  by  degrees  in  intensity,  alternating  with  actual  pain,  which,  at  first 
occasional  and  fugitive,  finally  became  steady  and  severe. — Pain  at  temple 
and  along  course  of  supraorbital  nerve. — Darting  pains  in  face  accompanied 
by  vomiting. — Beginning  in  fingers,  then  in  face,  tonic  contractions,  trismus ; 
after  a  while  clonic  convulsions  over  whole  body. — Eyes  closed,  lips  dry 
and  fissured,  tongue  stiff ;  felt  chilly  and  as  if  dying ;  breathing  became 
rattling,  moaning,  quick. — Facies  hippocratica. 

8.  Mouth.— Burning  on  tip  of  tongue  and  lips.— Burning,  constricting, 
acrid,  dry  sensation  in  mouth  and  fauces.— Tongue  stifF. — ^Taste  disagreeable 
and  disgustingly  bitter. — ^Taste  completely  lost^Taste  impaired  ;  teeth  more 
sensitive  when  biting. — Salivation. 

9.  Throat. — Burning  anguish  in  throat — ^Constriction  and  burning 
from  mouth  to  stomach. — Every  attempt  to  sv^ow  followed  by  spasms 
like  hydrophobia  but  not  renewed  by  sight  of  water. — Difficulty  of  swallow- 
ing and  a  pain  in  back  of  neck  and  behind  jaws  in  parotid  region,  so  that  in 
eating  he  had  to  press  back  of  neck  with  hand  (M).— Burning  in  gullet  as  if 
a  hot  coal  were  there  (M). 

xz.  Stomach. — Eructations  immediately. — Severe  vomiting,  which 
recurred  every  two  or  three  minutes  and  was  performed  by  a  sudden, 
jerking  action  of  abdominal  muscles  accompanied  by  a  loud  shout. — Nausea 
induced  by  erect  position  (M). — ^Vomiting  relieves  all  symptoms. — Warmth 
most  marked  in  region  of  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Rumbling  in  bowels  (immediately  in  one  case,  two 
hours  after  dose  in  another). — Sudden  contraction  of  diaphragm. — Liver  and 
spleen  greatly  enlarged. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Copious  diuresis.— Difficulty  in  voiding  urine 
(M).— Dysuria  and  occasionally  retention  with  hypogastric  pain  (M). 


ACONITUM  CAMMARUM  ii 

15.    Male  Sexual  Organs. — Nocturnal  pollutions  (onosual  to  prover). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Respiration  difficult. — Oppressive  anguish 
in  precordial  region. — Sighing  breathing. 

19.  Heart. — Pulse  at  first,  on  entering  a  warm  room,  more  frequent, 
then  sinks  far  below  normal,  small,  weak,  intermittent. — Sounds  of  heart  only 
heard  at  apex. 

SI.  Limbs. — ^Weakness,  trembling,  burning,  creeping,  tingling,  numt>- 
ness  of  limbs. 

24.  Generalities. — Malaise  ;  feebleness ;  muscular  prostration. — 
Twitchings  and  convulsions  over  whole  body. — Heaviness  as  of  lead  all 
over  body. 

85.  Skin. — General  formication. 

86.  Sleep. — Somnolence. — Sleep  disturbed. — Throws  himself  continually 
around  in  bed. 

87.  Fever. — Surface  cold,  sweating,  and  quite  pale.— Intense  coldness. 
— Head  and  face  became  suddenly  warm;  warmth  extended  over  rest  of 
body,  was  more  intense  in  region  of  stomach,  and  was  accompanied  by  sweat. 

Aconitom  Cammarom. 

A.  cammarum,  Linn,  (includes  A.  neomontanum,  Willd. ;  A.  inter- 
medium, D.C.,  and  A.  stoerckianum,  Reich.).  N.  0.  Ranuncu- 
laceae.    Tincture  of  root. 

GUnlcsL— Catalepsy.  Eruption.  Headache.  Neuralgia.  Pollutions.  Saliva- 
tion.   Tongue,  paralysis  of.    Vomiting. 

GharaoteristiGS.— The  main  symptoms  of  Aconitine  are  repro- 
duced in  A.  camm.  Formication  begins  on  tongue  and  lips  and 
spreads  to  face  and  thence  over  whole  body ;  with  this  are  distortion 
Off  features  and  dry  skin.  There  is  headache  <  by  bending  body 
forward  ;  and  faceache  accompanied  by  tinnitus  aurium  and  vertigo. 
Walking  causes  weariness  and,  if  continued,  causes  pains  in  elbows, 
knees,  and  hips.  Violent  eructations  ;  inclination  to  vomit  without 
vomiting  ;  spasmodic  contraction  of  stomach  and  abdominal  muscles. 
Great  sensitiveness  to  light.  Erections  and  poUutions  without  volup- 
tuous dreams.  On  lower  extremities  small  papules  and  vesicles, 
filled  with  serous  fluid,  very  painful.  Memory  weakened ;  sense  of 
touch  diminished. 

A,  ncomonL  produced  :  Peculiar  sharp  taste  followed  by  violent 
shooting  pains  from  lips  to  stomach.  The  eructations  and  rumbling 
in  bowels  of  the  alkaloid  were  reproduced,  but  in  addition  the  mucous 
niembrane  of  the  mouth  vras  red,  studded  with  small  whitish  yellow 
vesicles  surrounded  with  bright  red  areola ;  salivation  came  on. 
Pupils,  at  first  mobile,  became  persistently  dilated  ;  vision  dim  ;  unable 
to  look  at  highly  illuminated  objects  without  vrinking ;  near  and 
distant  objects  seem  to  swim.  Extreme  restlessness ;  it  seems  as 
if  it  were  a  tickling  which  impds  him  to  constant  movement ;  >  in 
equable  temperature,  <  on  entering  warm  air  from  cold  and  vice  vend. 
Apathetic,  indifferent  to  all  the  world.  Sleep  disturbed  or  impossible. 
Vomiting  >  all  symptoms. 


12  ACONITUM   FEROX 

STHPTOHS. 

I.    Mind.^Rage. — Fear. — ^Apathy    and    indifFcrencc— Thought    and 
power  of  concentration  disturbed. — Memory  weak. 

6.    Face. — Blackish   blue  colour  of   face ;    blue  swollen  lips. — Most 
remarkable  sensation  of  contraction  of  face. 

8.    Mouth. — Paralysis  of  tongue. — Salivation. — Fuzzy  sensation  where 
the  crawling  was. — ^Taste  and  sensation  diminished. 

12.    Abdomen. — Burning  in  abdomen  and  sensation  of  ants  crawling 
round  im  it. 

17.  Respiratory    Organs. — ^Voice    hoarse    and    rough. — Respiration 
slow,  difficult,  with  sensation  as  if  chest  and  throat  constricted. 

zg.    Heart. — Pulse  frequent ;   afterwards  depressed ;  slow  ;  irregular  ; 
intermittent. 

24.    Generalities. — Subsultus  tendinum. — ^Twitchings. — Catalepsy. 


Aconitum  Ferox. 

A.  ferox,  Wall.  A.  virosum,  Don.  Bisch,  or  Bikh,  Ativisha.  (The 
most  poisonous  species  known,  containing  greatest  proportion 
of  Aconitine ;  from  the  Himalaya  Mountains.)  N.  0.  Ranuncu- 
laceae.    Tincture  of  root. 

Clinical.— Burning  pains.  Cheyne-Stokes  breathing.  Chill.  Dyspncsa.  Gas- 
tralgia.    Neuralgia.    Numbness. 

CharaoteristiOB. — A,  ferox  was  proved  by  Dworzack,  who  also 
proved  Aconitine.  The  Ferox  developed  burning  pains  in  greater 
intensity  than  the  alkaloid  ;  more  intense  mental  activity  followed  by 
greater  depression.  The  Aconite  note  of  unendurability  of  suffering 
was  marked.  Anxiety  and  fear  of  suffocation  from  paralysis  ot 
respiratory  muscles  ;  obliged  to  breathe  half-sitting  up  with  head 
resting  on  palms  of  hands.  Cold  drinks  >  ;  sitting  up  >  ;  warm 
food  <  ;  coffee  >. 

RelationB. — Compare:  Curare  and  Phosph.  (respiratory  paralysis ; 
Cheyne-Stokes  breathing). 

STHPTOHS. 

z.  Mind. — Mind  very  active ;  sequence  of  ideas  rapid ;  talked  con- 
stantly, remembered  easily  the  minutest  circumstances  of  his  former  experi- 
ment, compared  them  with  present  one,  and  readily  drew  conclusions  (6  h.). 
In  intervals  of  relief  from  distressing  symptoms  laughed  and  joked  about  his 
very  comical  condition ;  but  when  the  dyspnoea,  anxiety,  &c.,  returned,  he 
could  not  seem  to  endure  them,  and  abused  heartily  Aconite  and  toxicology 
in  general  (4  to  6  h.). — Incapable  of  any  mental  work,  even  the  simplest 
addition ;  comprehension  and  understanding  confused  (2nd  day). 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  almost  insensible  ;  feels  like  a  piece  of  raw  leather 
in  mouth  (6  h.). — ^Tongue  covered  with  a  thick  yellowish-white  fur. — ^Violent 
burning  in  mouth  (in  two  minutes),  renewed  by  eating  (2nd  day) ;  >  by 
drinking  cold  water. 


ACONITUM   LYCOCTONUM  13 

9.    Throat. — ^Violent  burning  in  pharynx. 

11.  Stomach. — Pressure  in  stomach  with  pain. — ^Warmth  in  stomach. — 
Violent  drawing  pain  in  region  of  stomach  and  sacral  region,  soon  spreading 
over  whole  abdomen;  <  by  pressure  on  epigastrium. — On  pressing  in 
stomach,  an  internal,  dull  pressing  pain. 

12.  At>doinen. — Rumbling  in  bowels  (5  m.) ;  constant  gurgling  (4  h.). 

13.  Stool. — ^Two  half -watery,  dark,  not  copious  stools  (2nd  d.). 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  and  copious  evacuations  of  urine. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Dyspnoea  increased  to  such  a  degree  that 
he  was  obliged  to  breathe  half-sitting  up,  with  head  resting  on  palms  of 
hands ;  constantly  feared  su£Focation  from  respiratory  paralysis. 

SI.  Limhs. — Gait  tottering ;  remarkable  weakness  in  lower  extremities, 
esp.  r. 

S4.  Generalities. — Formication  spread  over  whole  body,  least  notice- 
able on  parts  that  had  been  cold  ;  <,  or  excited  by,  change  of  temperature 
or  motion.  Having  changed  from  one  nerve  to  another,  reached  its  greatest 
severity  from  7  to  7.30  p.m.  It  caused  a  painful  unrest  so  that  he  could  not 
possibly  lie  quietly  more  than  a  few  minutes.  Getting  up  set  up  all  the  train 
of  symptoms^  which  were  >  immediately  on  lying  down. — Benumbed  sensa- 
tion, as  if  he  had  on  gloves ;  on  pinching  cheeks  no  pain  felt ;  seemed  to 
walk  on  woollen  carpets  (2nd,  3rd,  and  4th  d.). 

s6.  Sleep. — Sleeplessness. — On  waking,  violent  burning  in  mouth  and 
throat,  warmth  in  stomach,  dull  sensation  in  head. 

S7.  Fever. — Icy  coldness  of  body  (4  h.),  objective  and  subjective,  no 
amount  of  wraps  and  external  warmth  relieved.  Desire  to  get  warm  drove 
him  to  get  out  of  bed  and  sit  near  stove.  Tottered  to  stove  and  warmth  was 
pleasant,  bot  vertigo,  trembling,  oppression,  and  nausea  ensued  and  com- 
pelled him  to  return  to  bed.  This  experience  was  repeated. — Fierce  heat 
(caior  mordax)  on  forehead,  cheek,  and  hands,  with  sensation  as  if  numerous 
glowing  hot  wires  were  stuck  into  him  ;  >  by  perspuration  (4  to  6  h.). 

Aconitum  Lycoctonam. 

A.  lycoctonum,  Linn.  A.  telyphonum,  Reich.  Wolfsbane.  N.  0. 
Ranunculaceae.  Tincture  of  fresh  plant  when  coming  into 
bloom.    (The  only  aconite  which  does  not  contain  Aconitine.) 

GttaiasL— Breasts,  inflammation  of.     Constipation.    Diarrhoea.    Glands,  en- 
brgement  (rf.    Hodgkui's  disease.   Liver,  disorders  of.    Pork,  effects  of.  Strangury. 

CSiaraflteristios. — ^The  symptoms  of  A,  lycocLj  whilst  resembling 

those  of  the  other  aconites  in  some  respects,  show  a  marked  absence 

of  the  cutaneous-nerve  affections  so  prominent  in  their  provings. 

The  most  notable  symptoms  are  swelling  of  the  cervical,  axillary,  and 

mammary  glands.     I   have  used  it  with  good  effect  in  cases  of 

scrofulous   glands,   and    even  where   Hodgkin's  disease  has  been 

suspected.     Diarrhoea  after  eating  pork.     Itching  is  prominent  in 

the  proving :  of  eyes,  nose,  anus,  vulva.     The  skin  of  the  nose  is 

cracked.    There  is  a  cough  leaving  a  taste  of  blood  in  the  mouth. 

TTie  symptoms   are  <  in  afternoon  (like  Lycop.) ;   <  from  mental 


14  ACONITUM   LYCOCTONUM 

exertion ;  <  during  digestion,  especially  of  pork,  onions,  and  after 
wine. 

Relatioiis.— Ccwf^arr ;  Cistus,  Lap.  alb.,  Con.,  lod.,  Spo.,  Lye, 
Carb.  an. ;  Puis,  (effects  of  pork). 

8THPT0MB. 

1.  Mind. — Mania. — Ferocity. — Laughter. — Distraction. — Instability  of 
ideas. — Dread  of  work. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo  with  nausea. — Lancinating  pain  in  head  extending 
across  eyes. — Sensation  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  head  when  moving  it. — 
Hammering  in  temples. — Pain  like  rheumatism  in  scalp  <  by  touch. 

3.  Eyes. — Lancinating  pain  in  eyes  from  without  inward. — Painf ulness 
of  lids. — Itching  in  lids. — Pressure  on  lids  and  difficulty  of  raising  them. — 
Smarting  in  canthi ;  dryness  at  inner  canthus. 

4.  Ears.  ^Purulent  discharge  from  ears ;  redness  behind  them. 

5.  Nose. — Itching  on  nose ;  sensitiveness  ;  lancinations. — Compression 
at  root  of  nose. — Skin  of  nose  cracked. — Muco-purulent  discharge  from  nose. 

6.  Face. — Face  pale  ;  shining. — Pain  of  excoriation  round  mouth. — 
Pain  in  facial  bones. — ^Tension  in  facial  muscles. — Hard  tuberculous  pimples 
on  face. — Pimples  on  lips. — Skin  of  face  becomes  light  brown. — Numbness  of 
jaw,  like  incipient  paralysis,  >  by  compression  and  by  drinking  wine. 

7.  Teeth. — Burning  pain  in  upper  teeth. — Pressing  in  teeth. — ^Tearing 
in  lower  teeth  when  opening  mouth.— -Gums  bluish ;  ulcerated. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Taste,  clayey ;  astringent. 

10.  Appetite. — Strong  relish  for  dainties,  fruits,  cabbage. — Increased 
relish  for  tobacco  in  a  smoker. — Aversion  to  food  in  general,  esp.  fatty  things 
and  milk ;  they  cause  uneasiness. — Keen  hunger  very  soon  satisfied. — Constant 
thirst  even  when  drinking.—Burning  thirst. — Thirst  at  night. 

11.  Stomach. — Risings  :  rancid  ;  like  rotten  eggs ;  acid  with  weight  on 
stomach. — Painful  eructations. — Hiccough. — Inclination  to  vomit  after  eating ; 
with  shivering ;  with  vertigo. — ^Vomiting  :  of  mucus  on  getting  out  of  bed  ; 
yellowish  after  drinking ;  with  copious  urination. 

12.  Abdomen. — R.  h3rpochondrium  :  bruised  pain  ;  tearing  pain ; 
starting. — ^When  breathing  both  hypochondria  feel  bruised. — Sensation  of 
compression  referred  to  diaphragm. — Anxiety ;  beatings  in  abdomen. — Lanci- 
nating pain  after  milk. 

13.  Stool. — Constipation  ;  anus  feels  as  if  strongly  contracted. — Diar- 
rhoea, with  violent  cutting  after  eating  pork. — ^Whitish  stools. — After  stool, 
pain  in  anus  as  if  there  was  a  crack  there;  shivering. — Cramp  at  anus. — 
Itching  at  anus. — ^Tenesmus  during  night. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Desire  to  urinate  with  copious  emissions. — 
Urging  with  ineffectual  efforts. — Urine  :  hot ;  turbid,  depositing  a  white 
sediment. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Itching  at  vulva. — Menstrual  blood 
fetid. — Excoriation  of  bend  of  thigh  after  menses.— Leucorrhcea :  viscid. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Difficult  respiration. — Slight  cough  with 
watery  expectoration. — After  a  slight  chill,  cough  leaving  a  taste  of  blood  in 
the  mouth. 

18.  Chest.— Swelling  of  the  mammary  glands. 


ACONITUM   NAPELLUS  15 

M.  Neck  and  Back. — Swelling  of  the  cervical  glands.— The  neck 
seems  to  grow  larger. — Swelling  of  the  neck  on  one  side  only. — Pressing  pain 
at  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Shivering  in  the  back.— Jerking  in  the  region  of 
the  kidneys. 

tt.  Upper  Llint>8. — Swelling  of  axillary  glands. — Pressure ;  lancinating 
pains  in  shoolder  joints. — ^Tearing  pain  in  elbow  joints. — Sti£Fness  in  elbows 
and  wrists. — Sensation  of  fulness  in  hands. — Sweat  on  hands. 

13.  Ix>^Nrer  Limbs. — On  stretching  legs  ham-muscles  feel  as  if  much 
shortened. — ^Jerking  in  legs. — Itching  at  ankles  in  evening. — Lancinating  pain 
at  instep  when  standing. — Eruption  of  hot,  red,  slightly  painful  spots  on  legs 
and  toes. 

26.  Sleep. — Drowsiness;  he  sleeps  too  long. — ^Aberration  of  hearing 
daring  sleep. — During  sleep,  numbness  of  the  parts  he  lies  on. 

S7.  Fever. — Horripilation.— Chilliness  of  one  side  only  as  soon  as  he  is 
uncovered. — In  morning  external  coldness  with  feeling  ctf  heat. — Coldness 
alternating  with  heat,  succeeded  by  sweat. — During  heat,  pale  face,  strong 
appetite,  thirst,  pain  in  bowels,  restlessness. — Sweat  continues  after  fever. 

Aoonitum  Napellns. 

Common  Aconite.  Monkshood.  Wolfsbane.  (Moist  pastures 
and  waste  places  in  mountainous  districts,  Central  and 
Southern  Europe,  Russia,  Scandinavia,  and  Central  Asia.) 
N.  O.  Ranunculaceae.  Tincture  of  whole  plant  with  root  when 
beginning  to  flower. 

GUateaL— iifMoiirosfs.  An^r,  ApojOexy,  Asthma,  Blindness,  sudden.  Bronchitis. 
Citalcpsy.  Catheter  fever.  Chest,  affections  of.  Chicken-pox.  Cholera.  Cholera 
itifantum.  Cold,  Coldness,  Consumption.  Convulsions.  Cough,  Croup,  Cystitis. 
DemgKte  fever.  Dentition,  Diarrhoea.  Dropsy.  Dysentery.  Dysmenorrhoea.  Ear^ 
agediomsof.  Enteritis.  Erythema  nodosum.  Excitement.  Eye,  affections  of ,  Pace, 
AOnng  of.  Fear,  effects  of.  Fever.  Fright,  effects  of.  Glands  swollen.  Glossitis. 
Gonorrhoea.  Haemorrhages.  Hcemorrhoids ;  strangulated.  Headache.  Heart, 
ejections  of.  Hip-joint,  diseased.  Hodgkin's  disease.  Hyperpyrexia.  Influenza. 
Jaundice.  Joints,  affections  of.  Labour.  Lactation.  Laryngitis.  Liver,  inflamma- 
tiooof.  Lumbago.  Lungs,  affections  of .  Mania.  Measles.  Meningitis.  Menstrua- 
tion, disorders  of.  Miliaria.  Miscarriage.  Mumps.  Myalgia.  Myelitis.  Nephritis. 
Keuraigia.  Numbness.  (Esophagus,  inflammation  of.  Paralysis.  Peritonitis, 
PkUgnuisia  alba  dolens.  Pleurisy.  Pleurodynia,  Pneumonia.  Pregnancy.  Puer- 
peral fever.  Purpura,  Quinsy.  Remittent  fever.  Roseola,  Scarlatina.  Shivering. 
SleepUssness.  Smell,  disorders  of.  Stiff-neck.  Testicles,  affections  of.  Tetanus. 
Tetany.  Thirst.  Throat,  affections  of.  Tongue,  affections  of.  Toothache.  Trau- 
matic fever.  Urethra,  spasmodic  stricture  of.  Urethral  fever.  Urine,  suppression  of. 
Uterus,  prolapsus  of .  Vaccination,  effects  of .  Vertigo.  Whooping-cough.  Yawning. 
Ydkmfcoer. 

Chaneteristios.— The  Wolfsbane  "grows  in  the  damp  and 
covered  parts  of  almost  every  mountainous  country  in  north  or 
middle  of  Europe,  especially  in  the  Jura,  Switzerland,  Germany,  and 
Sweden."  Teste  mentions  that  it  has  the  reputation  of  being  much 
more  poisonous  to  carnivorous  animals  than  to  the  herbivora.  This 
bepaflly  endorses,  and  it  has  recently  been  apparently  confirmed  by 
a  vain  attempt  to  poison  an  elephant  with  Aconiiine  in  this  country. 
A  carrot  was  scraped  out  and  enough  Aconitiiie  to  poison  2,000  men 
W2S  put  in.    The  elephant  ate  it  readily,  but  nothing  at  all  happened. 


i6  ACONITUM   NAPELLUS 

and  three  hours  later  a  large  dose  of  prussic  acid  had  to  be  adminis- 
tered, which  proved  fatal  in  a  short  time. 

Before  Hahnemann's  time  Aconite  had  a  reputation  as  a  sudorific, 
and  in  cases  of  rheumatism,  sciatica,  and  tumours,  but  it  was  not  till 
Hahnemann  proved  it  that  its  properties  were  really  understood. 
Aconite  is  more  closely  associated  with  the  rise  and  progress  of 
homoeopathy  than  any  other  member  of  the  materia  medica.  If 
Cinchona  was  the  **  Newton's  apple  "  of  the  homoeopathic  discovery, 
Aconite  was  the  remedy  by  means  of  which  Hahnemann  was  able  to 
meet  most  of  the  conditions  which  in  his  day  were  treated  by  blood- 
letting. It  was  Aconite  more  than  any  other  remedy  which  paved 
the  way  for  the  disappearance  of  blood-letting  from  general  medical 
practice.  One  of  the  deadUest  and  most  rapidly  acting  of  poisons, 
through  Hahnemann's  discoveries  has  been  turned  into  the  best 
friend  of  the  nursery.  Aconite  in  potencies  above  the  3rd  is  a  per- 
fectly safe  medicine  for  any  age.  Sensitive  patients  complain  of  its 
depressing  action  when  repeated,  and  I  have  known  instances  in 
which  the  characteristic  prostration  of  mind  and  body  has  occurred 
after  Aconite  had  been  given  in  the  potencies.  But  such  cases  are 
exceptions,  and  are  not  attended  with  danger  when  they  do  occur. 
The  great  majority  of  patients  to  whom  Aconite  is  given  in  the 
potencies  experience  nothing  of  the  kind. 

The  rapidity  of  action  of  Aconite  determines  its  appropriateness 
for  conditions  in  which  the  symptoms  set  in  with  great  intensity,  such 
as  Asiatic  cholera,  certain  fevers,  and  acute  inflammations.  To  this 
list  may  be  added  attacks  of  sudden  blindness.  But  it  must  not  be 
supposed  that  the  sphere  of  Aconite  is  limited  to  acute  cases.  When 
the  symptoms  correspond  it  will  cure  cases  of  great  chronicity — ^for 
example,  cases  of  indurated  glands. 

Dr.  Hughes  has  acutely  remarked  that  the  condition  to  which 
Aconite  is  homoeopathic  is  one  of  tension  ;  and  this  word  gives  the  best 
idea  of  the  action  and  sphere  of  Aconite,  There  is  emotional  and 
mental  tension,  as  shown  in  fright  or  fear  and  its  consequences, 
anxiety,  and  fear  of  death  ;  tension  of  the  systemic  vessels,  as  in  the 
effects  of  a  chill,  Asiatic  cholera,  and  haemorrhages ;  muscular 
tension,  as  in  tetanus ;  tension  of  involuntary  muscles,  as  in  heart 
spasms,  and  tension  of  the  semi-involuntary  muscular  apparatus  of 
respiration,  as  in  asthma  ;  and  finally  tension  of  the  special  senses  in 
heightened  sensation  and  heightened  sensitiveness  to  pain  ;  in  a  feel- 
ing of  numbness  in  parts,  as  if  bound  tightly,  and  also  a  sensation  of 
being  tightly  bound  in  the  limbs  and  in  other  parts.  Hence  it  is  that 
Aconite  in  its  therapeutic  action  corresponds  to  the  effects  of  a 
number  of  conditions  which  excite  a  state  of  tension.  Plethora  may 
be  classed  imder  this  head.  Plethoric  persons  of  a  lively  character, 
bilious  and  nervous  constitutions,  high  colour,  brown  or  black  hair, 
are  specially  suited  to  Aeon.  Active,  sanguineous  congestions  of  all 
kinds,  especially  those  following  chill.  Guernsey  puts  it  in  another 
way :  "  The  pure  and  fully  developed  blood  globule,  in  its  most 
peitect  type,  when  diseased,  has  a  great  affinity  for  Aeon.  When  the 
blood  globules  are  disorganised  it  is  seldom  indicated.  We  think  of 
Aeon,  in  sudden  inflammation,  especially  if  caused  by  cold,  dry  air, 


ACONITUM   NAPELLUS  17 

suppressing  exhalations  of  the  body."  Teste  relates  a  remarkable  case 
of  an  Englishman  who  had  been  obliged  to  take  a  long  sleigh  journey 
in  North  Russia  in  midwinter,  who  suffered  thereafter  for  two  years 
from  violent  paroxysms  of  palpitation  and  acute  stitching  pains  in  the 
heart  region,  threatening  cerebral  apoplexy.  Aneurism  had  been 
diagnosed  by  leading  physicians  in  England  and  on  the  Continent. 
Teste  localised  the  affection  to  neurosis  or  spasm  of  the  pectoralis 
major  muscle,  and  proved  his  diagnosis  by  promptly  curing  it  with 
Aeon.  The  keen,  cutting  winds  of  Uie  mountains  amongst  which  the 
plant  flourishes  give  the  signature  of  this  remedial  action. 

There  are  not  many  drugs  which  have  causation  so  strongly 
marked  among  their  characteristics.  Chill,  fright,  injury,  or  surgical 
operation — ^the  effects  of  these  will  be  met  in  large  majori^  of 
cases  by  Aeon,,  the  timely  administration  of  which  will  ward  off 
serious  results. 

The  reaction  from  the  primary  effect  of  chill  gives  another 
characteristic  of  Aeon. — ^that  of  fever.  With  the  Aeon,  fever  there 
are :  Restlessness  and  tossing  about,  and  the  tension  state  is 
evidenced  sttU  in  the  anxiety  with  which  it  is  accompanied,  some- 
times amounting  to  fear  of  death.  The  mental  exaltation  sometimes 
goes  so  far  as  to  the  predicting  of  the  day  and  hour  of  death.  Clair- 
voyance. Extreme  sensitiveness  to  light  and  sound  and  all  sensations 
including  pain.  When  the  sickness  is  borne  with  calmness  and 
patience  Aeon,  is  not  likely  to  be  required.  It  was  the  feverish  rest- 
lessness of  the  Aeon,  provings  that  led  Hahnemann  to  infer  its 
homosopathicity  to  so  many  fever  states ;  and  it  is  the  presence  of 
this  restlessness,  anxiety,  fear,  and  exalted  sensibility  which  are  its 
leading  indications  in  cases  of  all  kinds. 

Some  characteristics  of  Aeon,  are  the  following  :  Active  haemor- 
rhages in  stout,  plethoric  people.  Passes  almost  pure  blood  by  stool. 
In  haemoptysis  the  blood  comes  up  with  great  ease  by  hemming  and 
coughing,  bright  red  in  large  quantities,  from  cold,  dry  winds,  with 
great  fear,  anxiety,  and  palpitation.  Every  inspiration  increases  the 
cough.  After  the  cough  tingling  sensation  in  chest.  Unquenchable 
thirst :  everything  tastes  bitter,  except  water  {Chi.  everything, 
including  water).  In  croup  the  child  grasps  the  throat  with  every 
coughing  fit.  Coldness,  numbness,  and  tingling  characterise  the 
paralyses  and  neuroses  of  Aeon.  Facial  paralysis  from  exposure  to 
cold,  dry  winds.  The  fear  and  apprehension  of  Aeon,  is  shown  in 
dread  of  crossing  streets.  There  is  intolerance  of  music.  Some 
curious  symptoms  are :  Imagines  some  part  of  body  is  deformed. 
Imagine  they  do  all  their  thinking  from  the  stomach.  Predicts  the 
hour  of  death  (clairvoyance). 

Aeon,  is  one  of  the  great  pain  remedies,  vying  with  Cham. 
and  Cqffea  in  the  intensity  of  the  pain  it  causes.  Pains  are  intolerable, 
driving  to  desperation.  The  pains  of  Aeon,  are  tearing,  cutting  ;  are 
attended  with  restlessness  ;  accompanied  by  numbness,  tingling,  or 
formication.  Aeon,  cannot  bear  the  pain,  cannot  bear  to  be  touched, 
cannot  bear  to  be  covered.  The  toothache  of  Aeon,  is  one-sided, 
with  red  cheek  on  same  side. 

Guernsey  gives  the  following  excellent  directions  :  "  If  a  child  is 

VOL.  I.  3 


i8  ACONITUM   NAPELLUS 

suffering  from  a  watery  diarrhcea,  is  crying  and  complaining  veiy 
much,  biting  his  fists  and  is  sleepless,  Aeon,  will  usually  setUe  this 
trouble  in  a  short  time.  The  disturbed  condition  of  the  mind  will 
cease  and  quiet  sleep  will  follow.  The  mother  will  now  remark : 
'  Doctor,  he  is  all  right,  except  his  bowels,  and  they  are  as  bad  as 
ever.'  Now,  do  not  give  another  remedy,  but  wait  and  see  if  Aeon, 
will  not  complete  the  cure  by  itself."  Again  :  Scanty,  red,  and  hot 
urine,  arising  from  taking  cold,  especially  in  children.  The  child 
screams  and  appears  to  be  in  great  pain  because  it  cannot  urinate. 
Aeon,  will  ease  the  pain,  (}uiet  the  child,  and  the  urine  will  flow  some 
time  after.  In  adults,  incontinence  of  urine  will*  sometimes  be 
relieved  by  Aeon, 

There  is  a  great  and  sudden  sinking  of  strength ;  fainting  on 
attempting  to  get  up  ;  with  anxiety,  restlessness,  numbness,  tingling, 
formication. 

Aeon,  has  a  very  wide  sphere  of  usefulness  in  affections  of  the 
eye.  Inflammations  of  many  kinds,  from  cold,  injury,  dust,  surgical 
operations,  scrofulous  inflammation  with  enlarged  glands,  all  come 
within  its  range.  Some  remarkable  cases  of  sudden  blindness  have 
been  cured  by  it.  Hirsch  of  Prague  records  two  such  cases,  one  in  a 
man  of  thirty,  who  went  to  bed  well,  having  walked  home  in  rough 
and  stormy  weather  after  spending  the  evening  in  a  hot  room. 
Aeon.  3  was  given,  and  the  following  night  he  perspired  freely,  and  in 
the  morning  his  sight  was  thoroughly  restored.  Hirsch  himself 
suddenly  lost  his  sight  whilst  bathing  in  hot  weather.  He  took 
Aeon.  3  in  water  as  he  had  given  it  to  his  patient.  In  two  hours  he 
began  to  perspire,  and  after  a  six*hours'  sleep  awoke  welL  Lippe 
has  recorded  the  case  of  a  lady  whom  he  found  much  distressed, 
anxious,  fearing  paralysis.  In  her  usual  health  she  had  taken  a  full 
dinner,  and  when  reading  afterwards,  the  letters  danced  before  her 
eyes,  and  the  print  became  blurred ;  then  face  and  nose  became 
numb  ;  pulse  small,  120  a  minute.  One  dose  Aeon.  cm.  (Finke)  was 
given.  The  numbness  disappeared  in  half  an  hour  ;  pulse  72  ;  the 
sight  was  perfect  when  she  closed  either  eye,  but  everything  looked 
indistinct  when  she  kept  both  open.  This  symptom  disappeared 
next  morning ;  a  slight  lightness  of  the  head  remaining  that  day. 

The  time  of  the  aggravation  of  Aeon,  symptoms  is  chiefly  night 
and  about  midnight.  Heat,  as  well  as  coldj  is  injurious  to  the  Aeon. 
patient ;  sunstroke  is  among  the  conditions  which  call  for  it ;  and 
Aeon,  will  cure  many  headaches  caused  by  exposure  to  the  sun,  and 
also  sun-erythema.  Headaches  are  generally  >  in  open  air,  <  in 
warm  room  ;  toothache  and  cough  <  in  open  air.  >  From  uncover- 
ing. Warm  room  <  chill ;  in  fever,  the  bed  is  intolerable ;  he  wants 
to  uncover.  Sweat  on  affected  or  covered  parts.  There  is  <  from 
wine  or  stimulants  ;  <  from  drinking  (any  kind  of  liquid).  Rest  >  the 
symptoms  generally,  but  during  the  night  the  pains  are  intolerable, 
limbs  feel  tired  and  rigors  are  worse.  Lying  relieves  headache  and 
vertigo,  and  aggravates  other  complaints.  Lying  on  back  >  cough 
and  stitches  in  chest ;  lying  on  side  <  stitches  in  chest  and  cough  :  the 
cheek  lain  on  sweats.  Rising  from  a  seat  =  vertigo.  Vertigo, 
pallor,  faintness   on  sitting  up  in    bed.     Bending  double  >  colic 


ACONITUM   NAPELLUS  19 

and  dysmenorrhoea  pain.      Motion  <  pains  in  muscles,  joints,  and 
stifiiiess. 

BaUUioiis. — ^Aconitum  napellus  is  related  in  its  action  to  the 
other  Aconites  and  to  Aconitinum,  and  also  to  the  Ranunculaceae, 
Actaea  nux,  Actasa  spnc,  Paeon.,  Podoph.,  Ranunculus,  Staph.    Teste 
places  in  the  Aconite  group  :  Coccul.,  Cham.,  Dulc,  Cannab.  i.,  Con. 
But  he  admits  that  the  relationship  is  not  dose,  and  that  Aeon,  is 
really  without  analogues.    It  is  antidoted  &y :  Acet.  ac..  Alcohol, 
ftttis.    It  antidotes  :  BelL,  Cham.,  Coff.,  Nux  v..  Pet.,  Sep.,  Spo.,  Sul. 
It  is  often  indicated  after:  Am.,  Cofif.,  Sul.,  Verat    //  is  complementary 
to :  Coff.  (in  fever,  sleeplessness,  intolerance  of  pain)  ;  Arn.  (bruises, 
injury  to  eye)  ;  Sul.    It  relieves  ailments  from :  Act.  rac,  Cham.,  Coff, 
Nux  v.,  Pet,  Sep.,  SuL    Abuse  of  Aeon,  calls  for  Sul.    Aeon,  should 
be  compared  with  Stram.  and  Op.  in  effects  of  fright ;  and  with  Sul.  in 
most  of  its  symptoms.    Sul.  is  the  chronic  of  Aeon. ;  it  will  often 
complete  an  action  that  Aeon,  begins,  and  will  cure  eases  in  which 
Aeon,  is  apparently  indicated  but  fails  to  relieve.    Compare  also  :  PuL, 
Lye,  Sec,  and  Camph.  (>  from  uncovering).    Hep.  and  Coff.  (intoler- 
ance of  pain).     Chi.  (white  stool).    Gels,  (effects  of  bad  news,  fright, 
anger).    Nux  and  Bry.  (diarrhoea  from  anger).     Bry.  (effects  of  cold, 
dry  winds). 

Canaatton. — Fear.     Fright     Chill.     Cold,  dry  winds.     Heat; 
especially  of  sun.    Injury.    Surgical  operation.    Shock. 

BTHPTOMB. 

X.    Mind. — Great  agitation  and  tossing  of  the  body  with  anguish,  incon- 
solable irritability,  cries,  tears,  groans,  complaints,  and  reproaches. — Sensitive 
irritability. — Fearful  anticipations  of  approaching  death ;  predicts  the  day  he 
is  to  die. — Sadness. — Presentiments,  as  if  in  a  state  of  clairvoyance. — ^Anthro- 
pc^hobia  and  misanthropy ;  has  no  affection  for  anybody. — Maliciousness. — 
A  strong  disposition  to  be  angry,  to  be  frightened,  and  to  quarrel. — The  least 
noise,  even  music,  appears  insupportable. — Humour  changeable ;  at  one  time 
sad,  depressed,  irritable,  and  despairing ;  at  another  time  gay,  excited,  full  of 
hope,  and  disposed  to  sing  and  dance. — Vexed  at  trifles ;  takes  every  joke  in 
had  part. — Dislike  to  talk;  answers  laconically.— Alternate  paroxysms  of 
laughter  and  tears. — Great,  inconsolable  anxiety. — ^Anxiety  respecting  one's 
malady,  and  despair  of  a  cure. — Fear  of  spectres. — Fear  of  the  dark. — Disposi- 
tion to  run  away  from  ones  bed. — Mind,  as  it  were,  paral3rsed,  with  incapa- 
bility of  reflection,  and  a  sensation  as  if  all  the  intellectual  functions  were 
performed  in  the  region  of  the  stomach. — Paroxysms  of  folly  and  madness. — 
Unsteadiness  of  ideas. — In  the  delirium  is  unhappiness,  worry,  despair  and 
raring,  with  expression  of  fear  upon  the  countenance ;  but  there  is  rarely 
unconsciousness. — Delirium,  chiefly  at  night;  with  ecstasy. — Weakness  of 
memory.— Ailments  from  fear,  fright,  vexation. 

S.    Head. — Head  afiFected,  as  if  the  brain  was  nailed  up,  principally  in 

the  heat  of  a  room. — ^Vertigo,  particularly  on  rising  from  bed,  or  else  on 

getting  up  from  one's  seat,  on  stooping,  on  moving  or  shaking  the  head,  and 

oftai  with  a  sensation  of  intoxication  or  dizziness  in  the  head,  loss  of  con- 

sdoasness,  dimness  of  the  eyes ;  nausea,  and  sensation  of  weakness  at  the  pit 


20  ACONITUM   NAPELLUS 

of  the  stomach.— Vortigo,  with  inclination  to  fall  to  r.;side.— Vanishing  of  sight  ; 
bleeding  of  the  nose.— Sensation,  as  though  the  brain  were  rolling  loosely  in 
the  skull ;  increased  by  the  least  motion,  and  even  by  speaking  and  drinking. — 
Pain  in  the  head,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  also  vomiting. — Head,  as  if  bruised, 
with  sensation  of  bruising  in  the  limbs. — Stupefying  pain  in  the  head  with 
sensation  of  compression  and  drawing  together  as  from  cramp,  principally  in 
the  forehead  and  at  root  of  the  nose. — Weight  and  fulness  in  the  forehead  and 
in  the  temples,  with  expansive  pressure,  as  if  everything  was  going  to  issue 
forth  through  them,  chiefly  on  stooping  forward.  —  Feeling  as  of  a  board 
before  forehead. —  Shooting,  blows  and  beatings  in  the  head. — Drawing 
cephalalgia,  sometimes  semi-lateral. — Sensation  as  if  a  ball  were  mounting 
in  the  head,  and  spreading  a  coolness  over  it. — Congestion  of  blood  in  the 
head,  with  heat  and  redness  of  face,  or  with  a  sensation  of  heat  in  the  brain, 
sweat  on  a  shrivelled  skin,  and  paleness  in  the  face. — Sensation  of  heat  in  the 
head,  which  perspires,  with  pale  face. — ^Inflammation  of  the  brain. — Sensation 
of  fulness  and  heaviness  in  the  forehead,  with  the  sensation  as  if  the  whole 
brain  would  start  out  of  the  eyes,  with  nausea  and  giddiness,  aggravated  by 
talking  and  from  motion. — Heat  and  ebullition  in  the  head,  as  if  there  were 
boiling  water  in  the  brain. — ^A  roaring  and  cracking  in  the  head. — Sensation 
in  the  vertex,  as  if  dragged  by  the  hair. — Sensation  as  if  the  hair  were  standing 
on  end  all  over  the  head.— Pain  in  the  head,  as  if  in  consequence  of  cold  or 
suppressed  perspiration,  with  a  buzzing  in  the  ears,  cold  in  the  head  and 
colic^Aggravation  of  the  pains  in  the  head  by  movement,  by  speaking,  by 
rising  from  a  recumbent  position,  and  by  drinking ;  relief  experienced  in  the 
open  air. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  red  and  inflamed,  with  deep  redness  of  the  vessels, 
and  intolerable  pains. — Profuse  lachrymation.— Heat  and  burning  in  the  eyes, 
with  pressive  and  shooting  pains,  esp.  on  moving  the  balls. — Swelling  of 
the  eyes. — Dilated  pupils. — Lids  feel  dry,  hard,  heavy  ;  sensitive  to  air.— Red, 
hard  swelling  of  the  lids. — Eyes  sparkling,  convulsed,  and  prominent. — Look 
fixed. — Cannot  bear  the  reflection  of  the  sun  from  the  snow ;  it  causes  specks, 
sparks,  and  scintillations  to  dance  before  the  eyes. —Excessive  photophobia ; 
or  a  strong  desire  for  light. — Black  spots  and  mist  before  the  eyes. — Disturbed 
by  flickering ;  fears  he  may  touch  others  passing  by. — Vision  as  if  through  a 
veil ;  difficult  to  distinguish  faces ;  with  anxiety  and  vertigo. — Sudden  attacks 
of  blindness.— A  sensation  of  drawing  in  the  eyelids  with  drowsiness. — 
Ophthalmia,  very  painful,  with  blear-eyedness,  or  from  foreign  bodies  having 
come  into  the  eyes  (dust,  sparks) ;  from  operations. 

4.  Ears. — Tingling  and  buzzing  in  the  ears. — Tickling  and  sharp  pain 
in  the  ears. — Sensation  as  if  something  was  placed  before  the  ears. — Excessive 
sensibility  of  hearing;  all  noise  is  intolerable.- Music  goes  through  every 
limb ;  makes  her  sad. — ^Tearing  (1.  ear).    Roaring  in  the  ears. 

5.  Nose.— Stunning  compression  or  cramp  at  the  root  of  the  nose. 
— Bleeding  at  the  nose ;  bright  red ;  esp.  in  plethoric  persons. — Excessive 
sensibility  of  smelling,  esp.  for  unpleasant  odours.  —  Violent  sneezing, 
with  pain  in  the  abdomen,  and  in  the  1.  side. — Coryza,  with  catarrh,  pain  in 
the  head,  buzzing  in  the  ears  and  colic. — Coryza  caused  by  cold,  dry  winds. — 
Checked  coryza  with  headache ;  >  in  open  ah*,  <  from  talking. — Fluent 
coryza,  frequent  sneezing ;  dripping  of  a  clear,  hot  water ;  fluent  mornings. 


ACONITUM   NAPELLUS  21 

0.  Face. — Anxious  expression ;  frightened. — Face  bloated,  hot,  and  red, 
or  bluish ;  or  alternately  red  and  pale ;  yellow. — On  rising,  the  face,  previously 
red,  assumes  a  deadly  paleness;  afterwards  becomes  red. — Red  and  pale 
alternately. — Redness  of  one  cheek,  with  paleness  of  the  other,  or  red  spots 
on  both  cheeks. — Sweat  on  the  forehead,  upper  lip,  and  on  the  cheek  which 
has  pressed  the  pillow. — Distortion  of  features. — Crawling  pain  and  sensation 
of  swelling  in  the  cheeks. — ^Tense  drawing  in  trigeminus  nerve,  then  shoot- 
ing, wandering,  intermittent,  then  constant  pain,  sometimes  pressure. — Pain, 
as  of  ulceration,  in  the  cheek-bones. — Semi-lateral  prosopalgia,  with  swelling 
of  the  lower  jaw. — Lips  black  and  dry,  peeling  oflF. — ^Tingling  in  the  cheeks. — 
Burning,  tingling,  and  shooting  pains,  with  successive  drawing  in  the  jaws. — 
Dropping  of  jaws. — ^Trismus. 

7.  Teeth. — Lancinating  shocks  or  throbbing  pains  in  the  teeth,  often 
with  congestion  of  blood  towards  the  head,  and  heat  in  the  face. — Toothache 
from  cold,  with  throbbing  in  one  side  of  the  face,  intense  redness  of  the  cheek, 
and  great  restlessness.— Grinding  teeth. 

8.  Mouth. — Sensation  of  dryness,  or  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  on  the 
tongue. — ^Tongue  white. — Coated,  or  thick  yellow-white. — Itching,  prickings 
and  burning  sensation  in  the  tongue ;  with  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the 
mouth. — ^Paralysis  of  the  tongue. — Numbness  of  tongue;  also  about  lips. — 
Speech  tremulous  and  stammering. — Pain,  as  of  excoriation,  in  the  orifices  of 
the  salivary  ducts,  as  if  they  were  ulcerated. — Trismus,  with  salivation. — Uvula 
feels  elongated  and  coming  in  contact  with  tongue. 

9.  Throat. — Pain  in  the  throat,  with  deep  redness  of  the  parts  affected, 
and  difficult  deglutition.  —  Tingling  in  the  oesophagus. — Scraping,  tingling 
sensation  of  strangling,  burning  and  pricking  in  the  throat,  chiefly  in  swal- 
lowing.— Acute  inflammation  of  the  throat  (palate,  tonsils  and  fauces)  with 
high  fever,  dark  redness  of  the  parts,  burning  and  stinging  in  the  fauces. — 
Burning  and  numbness  in  throat ;  throat  almost  insensible. — Pricking,  burning 
in  throat  and  along  Eustachian  tubes,  compelling  swallowing. — Sensation  of 
contraction  in  the  throat,  as  if  caused  by  acrid  substances. — Stinging  in  the 
throat  when  swallovinng  and  coughing. — Almost  entire  inability  to  swallow, 
with  hoarseness. 

10.  Appetite. — ^Taste  in  the  mouth  bitter ;  or  putrid. — ^All  kinds  of  food 
and  liquids,  except  water,  tasting  bitter. — Burning  and  unquenchable  thirst ; 
sometimes  with  a  desire  for  beer.  —  Excessive  hunger  and  thirst,  but  eats 
slowly. — Generally  <  from  drinking. — Gastric  catarrh  from  drinking  ice- 
water  when  over-heated. — ^Generally  >  from  cold  drink,  esp.  anxiety. — Loss 
of  appetite  and  a  distaste  for  food.— Beer  lies  heavy  on  the  stomach. — Desires : 
wine  ;  brandy ;  beer ;  bitter  drinks.— Wine  generally  >. 

11.  Stomach. — Hiccough.— Eructations  of  wind,  and  abortive  risings  in 
the  throat. — Flow  of  water  from  the  stomach,  as  in  water-brash,  with  nausea. 
— Inclination  to  vomit,  as  after  having  eaten  something  sweetish  or  fat. — 
Bilious  vomitings,  greenish,  or  mucous  and  bloody. — ^Vomiting  of  pure  blood. 
— ^Vomiting  of  bloody  mucus,  or  of  what  has  been  drunk,  followwi  by  thirst. 
— Gagging  and  retching.— Vomiting  of  lumbrices. — ^Vomiting,  with  nausea 
and  thirst,  heat,  profuse  perspiration  and  increased  micturition. — Pains  in  the 
stomach  ofter  eating  or  drinking. — Sensation  of  swelling,  tension,  and  pressure 
as  of  a  weight  in  the  precordial  region  and  in  the  stomach,  sometimes  with 


22  ACONITUM   NAPELLUS 

difficult  respiration. — Pressure  in  the  stomach  and  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  from 
a  hard  stone. — Pit  of  stomach  sore  to  touch  and  meteorismic. — Sensation  of 
contraction  in  stomach,  as  is  from  acrid  substances. 

12.  Abdomen. — Constriction,  tension  and  pressure  in  the  hypochondriac 
region,  sometimes  with  fulness  and  a  sensation  of  weight. — Burning  pain, 
shootings,  stinging  and  pressure  in  the  hepatic  region,  with  difficult  respira> 
tion. — Painful  sensibility  to  touch  in  the  region  of  the  liver. — Inflammation 
and  sensation  of  soreness  in  the  liver. — Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  liver, 
with  obstruction  of  breathing. — ^Jaundice  :  of  newborn ;  from  fright ;  from 
chill. — Drawing  pains  in  the  abdomen  while  in  a  crouching  posture  (as  when 
at  stool). — Constriction,  pinchings  and  burning  in  the  umbilical  region,  some- 
times with  retraction  of  the  navel. — Unbearable  cutting  pains  in  the  morning 
while  in  bed. — ^Tension  and  painful  throbbing  in  the  abdomen,  principally  in 
the  epigastrium. — Swelling  of  the  abdomen  as  in  ascites. — Painful  sensibility 
of  the  abdomen  to  the  touch,  and  to  the  least  movement. — Flatulent  colic, 
chiefly  at  night,  and  pressure,  tension,  and  borborygmus,  with  rumbling  in  the 
abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Suppression  of  stools. — Frequent,  soft,  small 
stools,  with  tenesmus. — ^Loose,  watery  stools. — Stools  like  chopped  spinach. — 
White  stools,  with  dark  red  urine. — Choleraic  discharges  with  collapse,  deathly 
anxiety,  and  restlessness. — Involuntary  stools,  from  paralysis  of  the  anus. — 
Constipation ;  clay-coloured  stools. — Nausea  and  sweating  before  and  after 
loose  stools. — Pains  in  the  rectum. — Violent  pain  in  rectum,  with  chill  and 
fever,  inflammation,  tenesmus,  bloody  discharges  (dysentery).— Pressure  and 
pricking  in  the  anus. — Bleeding  piles,  with  heat  and  sharp  stitches ;  blood 
bright. — Diarrhoea,  with  flux  of  urine  and  colic. — Sensation  as  of  a  warm  fluid 
escaping  from  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Suppression  of  urine,  with  pressure  in  the 
bladder  and  pains  in  the  loins. — ^A  frequent  desire  to  discharge  urine, 
accompanied  by  anxiety  and  pain. — Flow  of  urine,  with  sweat,  diarrhoea, 
and  colic. — Involuntary  emission  of  urine,  from  relaxation  of  the  neck  of  the 
bladder. — Enuresis,  with  thirst. — Urine  scanty,  burning,  deep  red,  and  with 
a  sediment  of  a  brick  colour  (arising  from  taking  cold,  esp.  in  children) ;  sup- 
pression of,  from  cold. — Bloody  sediment  in  the  urine. — Scanty,  red,  hot  urine, 
without  sediment. — Heat  and  tenesmus  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — ^Venereal  inclination  alternately  increased 
and  diminished. — ^Amorous  paroxysms. — Smarting  in  the  parts. — Contusion- 
like pains  in  the  testicles. — ^Testicles  feel  swollen,  hard,  as  if  surcharged  with 
semen. — Orchitis. — Gonorrhoea, first  stage. — Itching  in  the  prepuce. — Shootings 
and  pinchings  in  the  glans  when  making  water. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  too  abundant  and  too  pro- 
tracted.— Suppressed  menstruation  from  fright ;  from  cold  feet. — ^After-pains 
too  painful  and  too  protracted. — Milk  fever  (with  delirium). — Puerperal 
peritonitis. — Maniacal  fury  on  the  appearance  of  the  menses. — Stitching  pains 
move  to  r.  of  fundus  uteri;  sharp  shooting  pains,  abdomen  exceedingly 
sensitive. — Ovaritis  from  suddenly  checked  menstrual  flow.  —  Labour-like 
pressing  in  womb  (dysmenorrhoea).  —  Uterine  haemorrhage;  active,  much 
excitability ;  giddy,  cannot  sit  up ;  fear  of  death. — ^Vagina  dry,  hot,  sensitive. — 
Leucorrhoea,  copious,  tenacious,  yellow. — Increase  of  milk  in  breasts. 


ACONITUM   NAPELLUS  23 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— -Sensation  of  numbness  in  the  trachea.— 
Attecks  of  paralysis  in  the  epiglottis,  with  a  tendency  to  choking. — Pain  in  the 
laiynz. — Larynx  sensitive  to  touch  and  to  the  inspired  air,  as  if  denuded. — 
Laryngeal  complaints  after  straining  the  voice. — ^A  croaking  voice. — ^A  constant 
deske  to  cough,  produced  by  an  irritation  or  a  tickling  in  the  larynx. — Inflam- 
mation of  larynx  and  bronchia. — Cough  from  having  drunk  or  smoked. — Short 
and  dry  cough,  principally  at  night.-^A  convulsive  cough,  hoarse  or  croaking 
sometimes  with  danger  of  suffocation,  and  constriction  of  the  larynx. — ^Angina 
memfaranacea,  with  dry  cough  and  quick  breathing. — Croup. — Expectoration 
of  thick  and  whitish  matter,  or  of  bloody  mucus,  or  spitting  of  blood  while 
oonghing. — Shootings  and  pains  in  the  chest  on  coughing. — Cough,  with  stitches 
in  the  chest  or  small  of  the  back. — Cough  :  <  after  eating  or  drinking ;  when 
lying ;  evening ;  night,  more  after  12  ;  during  sleep ;  from  tobacco  smoke ; 
from  vexation,  esp.  fright ;  when  over-heated ;  from  dry,  cold  winds ;  from 
walking  in  open  air ;  assuming  upright  position ;  from  deep  inspiration ;  from 
peaking. 

18.  Chest. — Short  breathing  chiefly  during  sleep,  and  on  getting  up. — 
Breathing  painful,  anxious,  and  attended  with  groans,  rapid  and  superficial,  or 
full,  noisy,  and  with  the  mouth  open. — Breathing  slow  during  sleep. — Breath 
hot — Breath  fetid. — Constriction  and  anxious  oppression  of  the  chest,  with 
difficulty  of  breathing. — ^Asthma  of  Millar. — ^Attack  of  suffocation,  with  anxiety. 
— Sensation  of  heaviness  and  of  compression  at  the  chest. — Painful  pricking 
in  the  chest,  chiefly  when  breathing  coughing  and  moving  (even  the  arms).^- 
Stitches  through  the  chest  and  side,  esp.  when  breathing  and  coughing. — 
Prickings  in  the  side,  with  a  lachrymose  and  plaintive  humour,  soothed,  in 
some  degree,  by  lying  on  the  back.  Pleurisy  and  pneumonia,  esp.  with  great 
heat,  much  thirst,  dry  cough  and  great  nervous  excitability,  only  somewhat 
relieved  when  lying  on  the  back. — Itching  in  the  chest. — Pains  as  of  a  bruise 
in  the  sternum  and  in  the  sides. — Sensation  of  anguish  in  the  chest,  which 
interrupts  respiration. 

19.  Heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  great  anxiety,  heat  of  body, 
diiefly  in  the  face,  and  great  weariness  in  the  limbs. — Shootings  in  the  region 
of  the  heart  when  moving  or  going  upstairs. — Sensation  of  compression  and 
blows  in  the  region  of  the  heart. — Inflammation  of  the  heart. — Chronic  diseases 
of  the  heart,  with  continuous  pressure  in  the  1.  side  of  the  chest,  oppressed 
breathing  when  moving  fast  and  ascending  steps,  stitches  in  the  region  of  the 
heart,  congestions  to  the  head ;  attacks  of  fainting  and  tingling  in  the  fingers. 
—Painting  with  tingling. — Pulse  full,  strong  hard  ;  slow,  feeble ;  threadlike 
frith  anxiety ;  quick,  hard,  small. 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — ^Weakness  and  pain,  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  nape 
of  the  neck. — Pain,  as  if  from  a  bruise,  in  the  back  and  loins. — Painful  stiffness 
in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  the  loins,  and  the  hip  joints. — Pain,  as  of  boring  in 
the  back  and  in  the  loins,  tingling  and  of  pricking  in  the  back. 

as.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  and  weakness  in  the  arms, 
principally  in  the  shoulders,  with  swelling. — Heaviness  in  the  arms,  with 
numbness  in  the  fingers. — Numbness  of  the  left  arm  ;  he  can  scarcely  move 
flie  hand.— Paialjrtic  weakness  of  the  arm  and  hand,  esp.  in  writing. — ^A  sensa- 
tk»  of  drawing  in  the  arms.— Hands  dead. — Swelling  of  the  hands. — Heat  in 
tbe  bands  with  cold  in  the  feet. — Cool  sweat  on  the  palms  of  the  hands.^-Icy 


24  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS 

coldness  of  the  hands.— Tingling  in  the  fingers,  particularly  when  writing. — 
Inflammatory  swelling  of  the  elbow,  with  numbness,  and  a  paralytic  state  of 
the  fingers. 

^.  Lo^er  Limbs. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  hip  joints,  esp.  after 
having  slept,  or  having  lain  down  for  some  time. — ^A  sensation  of  drawing 
with  paralytic  weakness  in  the  legs. — Shooting  pain  in  the  hip  joint,  even  to 
the  knee  ;  pain  which  forces  a  cry  at  every  step, — ^Want  of  strength  and  of 
stability  in  the  joints  of  the  hip  and  of  the  knee. — Drawing,  tearing  pains  in 
the  knee-joint. — Inflammatory  swelling  of  the  knee,  with  shining  redness, 
shooting  pains,  stifiFness,  and  great  sensibility  to  touch. — Sensation  of  stifiFness 
in  the  legs  on  moving  them. — Pain  in  the  insteps,  with  despair  and  fear  of 
death. — Numbness  in  the  legs. — Heaviness  of  the  feet. — Cold  in  the  feet,  chiefly 
in  the  toes,  and  sweat  on  the  soles  of  the  feet. — ^Tingling,  commencing  in  feet 
and  spreading  upwards. 

24.  Generalities. — Shooting,  or  rheumatic  pains,  which  are  reproduced 
by  wine  or  other  stimulants. — Sufferings  which,  particularly  at  night,  seem 
unbearable,  and  which  generally  disappear  in  a  sitting  posture. — Attacks  of 
pain  with  thirst  and  redness  of  the  cheeks. — Distressing  sensibility  of  body, 
and  esp.  of  the  parts  affected,  on  every  movement,  and  on  the  slightest  touch. — 
Pain  as  from  a  bruise,  and  sensation  of  heaviness  in  all  the  limbs. — ^A  sensation 
of  drawing  with  paral3rtic  weakness  in  the  arms  and  legs. — Failure  of  strength 
and  stability,  pains  and  cracking  in  the  joints,  principally  of  the  legs. — Rapid 
and  general  decay  of  strength. — Fainting,  esp.  when  rising,  with  paleness  of 
the  cheeks,  which  were  red  when  lying. — ^Attacks  of  fainting,  chiefly  on  rising 
from  a  recumbent  posture,  and  sometimes  with  congestion  of  blood  in  the 
head,  buzzing  in  the  ears,  deadly  paleness  of  countenance,  and  shuddering. — 
Congestions  (head,  chest,  heart). — Uneasiness,  as  if  from  suppressed  perspira- 
tion, or  in  consequence  of  a  chill,  with  pain  in  the  head,  buzzing  in  the  ears, 
colic  and  cold  in  the  head. — Sensation  of  cold  and  of  stagnation  of  blood  in 
all  the  vessels. — Shaking  in  the  limbs. — Cataleptic  attack,  with  cries,  grinding 
of  the  teeth,  and  hiccough ;  rigor  of  the  body  and  loud  lamentations. — 
Tetanus. — Swelling  of  the  whole  body,  which  assumes  a  blackish  colour. 

35.  Skin. — Crawling  sensation  in  the  skin,  with  itching  and  desquama- 
tion, principally  in  the  parts  affected. — Skin  dry  and  burning. — Swelling  and 
burning  heat  of  wounded  parts. — ^Yellow  face. — ^Yellowish  colour  of  the  skin. — 
Red,  hot,  swollen  and  shining  skin  with  violent  pain. — Shootings,  with  a  sensa- 
tion of  excoriation  here  and  there. — Spots  similar  to  flea-bites  on  the  hands, 
on  the  body,  &c. — Small  pimples,  red  and  broad,  attended  by  itching. — 
Morbilli. — Rash  of  children. — Purpura  miliaris. 

26.  Sleep. — Great  desire  to  sleep,  even  while  walking,  and  principally 
after  dinner. — Drowsiness,  with  anxious  thoughts  and  rapid  respiration. — 
Confused  reveries,  in  which  the  eyes  are  closed,  without  sleeping. — Sleepless- 
ness from  anxiety,  with  constant  agitation  and  tossing. — Sleeplessness,  with 
restlessness  (eyes  closed)  and  constant  tossing  about. — Startings  in  sleep. — 
Anxious  dreams,  with  nightmare. — ^Anxious  dreams,  with  much  talking  and 
moving  while  sleeping. — Dreams  with  a  sort  of  clairvoyance.— Light  sleep. — 
Impossibility  of  lying  on  the  side. — During  sleep,  lying  on  the  back,  with  the 
hand  under  the  head ;  or  in  a  sitting  posture,  with  the  head  inclined  forward. 

27.  Fever.— Dry,  burning  heat,  with  extreme  thirst,  sometimes  (esp.  at 


ACTiEA   RACEMOSA  25 

tbe  bcguming  of  the  disease),  preceded  by  shiverings,  with  trembling. — Heat, 
chiefly  in  the  head  and  face,  with  redness  of  the  cheeks,  shuddering  over  the 
entire  body,  oppressive  headache,  temper  lachrymose,  disposed  to  complaining 
and  to  contradiction  ;  or,  a  sensation  of  heat  in  the  whole  body,  with  redness 
of  the  cheeks,  pain  in  the  head  on  turning  the  eyes,  and  levity  of  mind. — 
Shivering,  if  uncovered  in  the  least  while  the  heat  exists. — Cold  over  the  whole 
body  with  internal  heat,  forehead  cold,  and  tips  of  the  ears  hot ;  or  with  red- 
ness of  cheeks  and  pains  in  the  limbs ;  or  with  stiffness  of  the  whole  body, 
heat  and  redness  of  one  cheek,  and  coldness  and  paleness  of  the  other ;  eyes 
open  and  fixed,  pupils  contracted,  and  dilating  with  difficulty. — Sensation  of 
cokiness  in  the  blood  vessels. — Cold  and  shivering  in  the  fingers,  followed  by 
cramps  in  the  calves  of  the  legs  and  in  the  soles  of  the  feet. — Heat  of  face, 
with  mournful  and  despairing  thoughts,  and  an  inclination  to  vomit,  preceded 
by  cold  and  shiverings  in  the  feet  and  hands. — Shuddering  runs  up  from  the 
feet  to  the  chest. — Frequent  shudderings,  with  burning  heat  and  dryness  of 
the  skin.  —  Inflammatory  fevers  and  inflammations,  with  much  heat,  dry, 
burning  skin,  violent  thirst,  red  face,  or  alternate  red  and  pale  face,  nervous 
excitability,  groaning  and  agonised  tossing  about,  shortness  of  breath,  and 
congestion  to  the  head. — Continual  sweat,  esp.  on  parts  that  are  covered. — 
Sour  sweat — Pnlse  hard,  frequent,  and  accelerated;  full,  sometimes  inter- 
mitting ;  when  slow,  almost  imperceptible  (threadlike). 


ActsBa  Racemosa. 

Cimicifuga  racemosa.  Actaea  monogynia.  C.  serpentaria.  Macrotys 
racemosa.  Botroflus  serpentaria.  Black  snake  root.  Black 
Cohosh.  (Canada,  Georgia,  Western  States  of  America.)  N,  0, 
Ranmiculaceas.  Tincture  of  the  root.  Trituration  of  the 
resinoid,  Macrotyn. 


L — ^Abortion,  tendency  to.  Ani^na  pectoris.  AppetiUy  disordered.  Back 
pains.  Breast,  affections  of,  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.  Change  of  life.  Chesty 
pains  in.  Chorea,  Delirium  Tremens.  Diaphragm^  rheumatism  cf.  Dyspepsia. 
Epilepsy,  Faintness.  Headache.  Hearty  affections  of  Hyperpyrexia,  Hypochon- 
driasis. Hysteria.  Lumbago.  Melancholia.  Meningitis.  Menstruation,  disorders 
of.  Myalgia.  Neuralgia.  Ovaries,  affections  of.  Perichondritis.  Pleurodynia, 
Preguan^,  disorders  of.  Puerperal  mania.  Rheumatic  gout.  Rheumatism,  Sciatica. 
Side,  pain  in.  Sinking  sensation.  Sleeplessness.  Spitial  irritation.  Stiff-neck, 
Tinnitus  aurium.    Tremors.    Uterus^  affections  of.    Vomiting  of  pregnancy. 

Charaeteristios. — One  of  the  most  marked  symptoms  of  Act{ca 
roc.  is  found  in  the  mental  sphere  :  a  sense  of  gloom  and  dejection, 
as  if  there  was  a  black  pall  over  everything  ;  showing  the  appropriate- 
ness of  the  remedy  in  hysteria  and  hypochondriasis.    There  is  also 
fear  o{  death,  as  with  Aeon.    Incessant  talking,  changing  from  one 
subject  to  another,  as  in  delirium  tremens.    I  have  greatly  relieved 
an  inveterate  case  of  epilepsy  in  which  the  aura  was  a  "  waving 
sensation  in  the  brain,"  which  is  a  leading  symptom  of  the  remedy. 
Many  symptoms  appear  in  the  head  and  eyes.    Feeling  as  if  going 


28  ACTiEA  RACEMOSA 

zz.  Stomach.— Nausea,  eructations,  headache,  and  tremor  (more  in 
women). — Nausea  with  uterine  a£Fections. — Sharp  pains  across  the  h3rpogas- 
trium. — Sinking  or  goneness  in  the  epigastrium. 

Z2.  Abdomen. — Periodical  colicky  pains,  better  bending  double  and 
after  stool. — Excruciating  pains  in  the  bowels,  small  of  back,  and  limbs. — 
Abdominal  muscles  sore. — ^Sharp  pains  across  hypogastrium. 

13.  Stool. — Alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation. — Frequent,  thin,  dark, 
o£Fensive  stools. 

Z4.  Urinary  Organs. — Incessant  flow  of  urine. — Urine  frequent  and 
quantity  increased. — Pressing  in  region  of  kidneys  and  small  of  back. 

z6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  profuse,  early ;  dark,  coagu- 
lated; scanty,  irregular,  delayed,  or  suppressed. — Hysterical  or  epileptical 
spasms  at  time  of  menses. — Feels  strange,  talks  incoherently,  screams,  tries  to 
injure  herself. — Pains  in  uterine  region  shoot  from  side  to  side. — Pains  in 
ovarian  region  shoot  upward. — Bearing-down  in  uterine  region  and  small  of 
back ;  limbs  feel  heavy,  torpid. — Severe  pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen. — 
Rheumatic  dysmenorrhoea. — Leucorrhcea,  with  sensation  of  weight  in  the 
uterus. — During  pregnancy  :  nausea  ;  false  labour-like  pains ;  sharp  pains 
across  abdomen  ;  sleeplessness. — During  parturition  "  shivers,"  first  stage  ; 
pains  too  strong;  spasmodic  cardiac  neuralgia;  lochia  suppressed  (by 
cold  or  emotions);  rigid  os;  puerperal  mania. — ^Tendency  to  abort  at 
third  month. — Infra-mammary  pains,  worst  on  1.  side. — Burning  in  the 
mammse. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Night  cough,  dry,  constant,  short,  <  on 
every  attempt  to  speak. — ^Tickling  in  throat,  with  violent  cough. — Pains  in  (r.) 
side  of  chest,  <  from  motion,  extorting  cries.— (Rheumatism  of  diaphragm. 
— Pleurodynia.) 

ZQ.  Heart. — Pain  in  region  of  heart,  followed  by  palpitation  ;  pains 
extend  down  1.  arm,  which  is  numb  as  if  bound  to  side. — Pulse  vtesik  and 
irregular ;  or  quick  and  full. — Palpitation  from  least  motion. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Severe  pain  in  nape  of  neck  (rheumatic  fever  ; 
cerebro-spinal  meningitis). — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck  and 
back ;  a  feeling  of  stiffness  and  retraction. — ^Violent  lightning-like  pains  in 
posterior  spinal  sclerosis. — Stiff-neck  from  cold  air,  from  moving  even  the 
hands. — Sensitiveness  of  the  spine;  esp.  in  the  cervical  and  upper  dorsal 
regions. — Severe  aching  pain  in  the  lumbar  and  sacral  regions ;  down  the 
thighs  and  through  the  hips,  with  heavy  pressing  down. — Head  and  neck 
retracted  (in  spotted  fever). 

2Z.  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  joints,  with  heat  and  swelling. — 
Aching  in  the  limbs. — Excessive  muscular  soreness. — Rheumatism  affecting 
the  bellies  of  the  muscles. — ^Trembling  of  the  fingers  when  writing. — 
Trembling  in  the  limbs,  is  scarcely  able  to  walk. — Uneasy  feeling  in  limbs, 
causing  restlessness. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Pains  down  arms  with  numbness  as  if  a  nerve 
compressed. — L.  arm  feels  as  if  bound  to  side  (chorea). — Constant  irregular 
motion  of  1.  arm ;  is  useless  (chorea). — Cold  sweat  on  hands. — Trembling 
of  fingers,  esp.  when  writing. 

23.  Lo^er  Limbs. — ^Aching  in  sacrum,  lumbar  region,  and  down  1. 
leg. — Pressure  round  hips  with  pain  in  sacrum. — ^Towards  evening  soreness, 


ACTiEA  SPICATA  29 

aching,  and  stifitness  in  region  of  tendo  Achillis. — Dull,  aching,  burning  in 
second  joint  of  r.  great  toe,  extending  up  the  limb. 

84-  (generalities.-— Rheumatism.— Weakness,  trembling,  and  spasmodic 
action  of  the  muscles. — Nervous  shuddering ;  tremor  all  over  the  body. — 
Alternate  tonic  and  clonic  spasms. — Epileptic  and  hysterical  convulsions. — 
Sharp,  lancinating  pains  in  various  parts,  associated  with  ovarian  or  uterine 
irritation. — ^A£Fects  the  1.  side  most — Pains  come  on  suddenly. — Pains  like 
electric  shocks  here  and  there. — Chorea. — General  bruised  feeling  of  the 
whole  body,  as  if  sore. 

26.    Sleep. — Obstinate  insomnia. — Sleepless,  cannot  rest,  must  change 

position,  jerking  of  limbs. — Unpleasant  dreams  of  being  in  trouble. — Restless 

sleep. 


ActsBa  Spicata. 


Baneberry.     Herb  Christopher.    (Europe  and  Asia.)    N,  0. 
Ranimculaceae.    Tincture  of  root  obtained  in  autumn. 

CainloaL— Cancer  of  stomach.    Fright,  effects  of.    Hepatitis.    Pleurisy.    Rheu- 
matism.   Toothache. 

CharaeteriBtios. — ^This  is  a  rheumatic  remedy  like  the  other 
Actaea,  but  affecting  more  prominently  the  small  joints  and  wrists.  I 
have  several  times  cured  wrist-rheumatism  with  it.  The  joints  swell 
after  slight  fatigue.  The  pains  are  tearing,  drawing.  The  right  arm 
and  right  wrist  are  specially  affected  ;  and  there  are  pains  like  rheu- 
matism in  face.    Pains  are  of  a  violent,  tearing,  drawing  character, 

<  by  touch  or  movement.  Pains  of  this  kind  running  from  decayed 
tooth  to  temples.  Swelling  of  the  joints  from  slight  fatigue  may  be 
regarded  as  very  characteristic.  It  is  especially  suited  to  men 
{AcL  r.  to  women).  <  From  motion  ;  from  change  of  temperature  ; 
cold  air. 

Belatioiuu — //  follows  well :  Nux  v.  Compare  :  Other  Ranuncu- 
laceae ;  Am.,  Bry.,  Caulo.  (rheumatism  of  fingers),  Lye,  Rhus  t,  Salic, 
aa,  and  Sticta  (small  joints). 

Causation.— Fright.    Fatigue. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Fear  of  death,  esp.  at  night  in  bed. — Furious  delirium ;  also 
during  the  fever. — Effects  of  exertion  of  mind  ;  fright ;  mental  anxiety. 

9.  Head. — ^A  kind  of  drunkenness. — Dizziness  ;  forehead  feels  empty 
when  stooping. — Twitching  in  temples ;  pain  from  a  decayed  tooth  to 
temples. — Pressure  in  forehead  after  having  been  in  sun. — Head  symptoms 

<  at  night ;  from  walking ;  return  periodically  ;  also  after  fever. — ^Warm 
sweat  on  head. — Small  pimples  on  scalp. 

3.  Byes. — Objects  seem  coloured  blue. — Sharp  pains  through  eyes  into 
head. 


30  ADONIS 

4.    Ears.— Twitching  pain  in  ears  when  blowing  nose  or  sneezing. 

6.  Face.— Pains  as  of  rheumatism  in  face  ;  violent  tearing  and  drawing 
pains  in  the  upper  jaw  ;  pulling,  tearing  from  a  decayed  tooth  to  temples  ; 
<  from^slightest  touch  or  movement  of  the  muscles. — ^The  cheek  he  lies  on 
sweats. — ^Yellow  round  mouth. — Lips  chapped. — Submasdllary  glands  hurt 
when  chewing. 

8.  Mouth. — Increased  salivation. — Fetid  odonr. 

9.  Throat. — ^Throat  sore  when  speaking  ;  when  breathing  cold  air. 

11.  Stomach. — ^After  drinking,  shuddering. — Sour  vomiting. — ^Tearing, 
darting  pain  in  epigastric  region  with  vomiting. — Cancer  of  the  stomach, 
with  characteristic  pains — tearing,  drawing,  &c, 

12.  Abdomen. — Pain  and  tenderness  in  liver  region. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.  —  Throbbing  in  region  of  kidneys.  —  Urine 
deposits  a  white  sediment — Urinary  calculi. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  suppressed  by  fright ;  by  cold. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Difficult  inspiration ;  stitches  in  epigastrium 
during  deep  breathing  or  a  painful  shock  ;  or  pain  in  the  hip. 

XQ.  Heart. — Urging  sensation  in  heart  towards  abdomen  and  region  of 
liver,  with  great  anxiety  at  night. — Pulse  120. 

21.  Limbs. — Swelling  of  joints  after  slight  fatigue  (after  walking). — 
Rheumatism  of  small  joints  (ankle,  toe-joints,  and  esp.  joints  of  hands). — 
Pain  as  from  paralytic  weakness  of  hands. — Lameness  of  r.  arm. — R.  wrist 
pains  intolerably,  swollen,  red,  touch  intolerable ;  motion  impossible ;  pres- 
sure on  palm  intolerable. 

27.  Fever.— Shuddering  after  drmking. — Belching  during  the  chill. — 
Shuddering  followed  by  heat,  during  which  vomiting  supervenes. 


Adonis. 


Adonis  vemalis.    N.  0.  Ranunculaceae.    Infusion  or  tincture  of  fresh 
plant ;  an  extract,  Adonidin. 

OlinlcaL— Albuminuria.    Dropsy.    Heart,  affections  of. 

Charaoteristics. — Like  Convallaria,  Adonis  is  a  popular  heart 
remedy  in  Russia.  It  has  not  been  proved,  but  the  indications  for  its 
use  have  been  defined  by  experience  as  follows  :  Rapid  and  feeble 
action  of  the  heart ;  dropsy ;  scanty  urine  with  albumen  and  casts. 
Valvular  disease  and  cardiac  asthma.  There  is  no  record  of  its  use 
in  the  potencies.  Cash  gave  great  relief  to  "  a  water-logged  patient 
of  seventy-four"  with  mitral  regurgitation,  with  one-grain  doses  of 
Adonidin  at  eight-hour  intervals,  after  failure  of  Arsenicum  and 
Digitalis,  Urinary  secretion  rose  from  half  a  pint  to  2^  pints  in 
twenty-four  hours.    Breathing  was  relieved  ;  sleep  returned. 

Belations. — Compare  :  Digit.,  Conval.,  Stroph. 


iESCULUS  GLABRA  31 

Adrenalin. 

Extract  of  supra-renal  bodies.    A  Sarcode.    Tincture  or  trituration. 

GIlBlaaL — ^Addison's    disease.    Adrenal   neuralgia.    Bronzed    skin.    Debility. 
ffximlmia.    Hyperaeznia.    Palpitation.    Tachycardia. 

Gbaraeteristios. — Adrenalin  has  cured  a  number  of  cases  of 
Addison's  disease  and  has  arrested  others.  The  leading  features  of 
this  a£Fection  may  be  taken  as  guides  for  its  use  :  Bronzing  of  skin  ; 
loss  of  strength  ;  wasting ;  exceedingly  rapid  pulse.  It  has  cured  a 
case  of  h^ematuria  accompanied  by  pain  in  the  adrenal  region.  It  has 
been  used  locally  in  cases  of  hyperaemia  of  the  conjunctiva,  dissipating 
it  almost  immediately,  and  thus  rendering  operations  possible.  It 
appears  to  possess  a  very  powerful  local  action  over  dilated  blood- 
vesseb.  When  injected  into  the  circulation  blood  pressure  rises,  the 
arteries  t>eing  contracted.  The  general  muscular  system  is  affected, 
a  dight  stimulus  producing  prolonged  contraction. 


JEsculus  Glabra. 

Fetid  or  Ohio  Buckeye.     (States  of  North  America  watered  by  Ohio 
River.)    N.  O.  Sapindaceae.     Part  employed,  whole  ripe  fruit 

flM^»*imV — Constipation.  Cough.  Cramp  in  stonuch.  Haemorrhoids.  Menin- 
gitis.   Paralysis.    Speech,  thick.    Vertigo.    Wry-neck. 

Charaoteristios. — /Esculus  glabra,  like  the  Horse-chestnut,  has  a 
marked  action  on  the  rectum.  It  produces  hard,  knotty  stools  ;  very 
painful.  Dark  purple  haemorrhoidal  tumours,  with  lame  back  and 
lower  limbs.  Hale  gives  the  indication : "  Very  painful  external  tumours, 
dark  purple,  with  constipation  and  vertigo  ;  weakness  of  sacrum 
and  lower  limbs."  At  the  same  time  there  is  fulness  and  heaviness  of 
the  head  without  pain  ;  the  sight  may  be  dim  or  lost ;  eyes  fixed  and 
expressionless.  The  speech  is  thick  and  the  tongue  as  if  lame.  In 
cattle  it  produces  wry-neck  and  paresis  of  hind  limbs.  There  is  a 
cough  produced  by  sudden  irritation  of  throat,  sensation  as  of  a 
feather  tickling  the  throat,  causing  hawking  and  raising  of  mucus 
finally  streaked  with  blood. 

BalationB. — Compare  :  JEsc.  hipp.,  Alo.,  Collins.,  Ign.,  Nux  v. 

BTMPTOHB. 

z.  Mind.— Confusion,  with  vertigo,  often  followed  by  stupefaction  and 
ooma. 

S.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  with  staggering,  reeling,  unconsciousness. — ^Vertigo, 
with  full,  heavy  head,  dim  sight ;  thick  speech,  nausea  and  vomiting ;  f aint« 
aess;  towards  evening. 

3.    Eyes. — Eyes  fixed  and  dead  ;  expressionless. — Sight  dim  or  lost. 


32  .ESCULUS   HIPPOCASTANUM 

8.    Mouth. — Speech  thick,  and  tongue  as  if  lame. 

IX.  Stomach. — Nausea,  with  loathing  of  food  and  vomiting. — Distension 
(in  cattle). — Full  sensation.— Cramp-like  pain. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Hard,  knotty  stools;  constipation. ^- Very 
painful,  dark  purple,  haemorrhoidal  tumours,  with  lame  back  and  lower  limbs. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Sudden  irritation  of  the  throat ;  a  sensation 
of  a  feather  tickling  the  throat  causing  hacking  and  raising  of  mucus,  finally 
streaked  with  blood. 

90.  Neck  and  Back.— Wry-neck  (cattle).— Great  lameness  and  weakness 
of  back. 

93.  Lovrer  Limbs.— Trembling  of  lower  limbs. — Hind  limbs  lame ; 
paralysis. — Strong  tendency  to  contraction  of  legs. 

84.  Qeneralities.— Spasms  and  convulsions,  followed  by  lameness. — 
Trembling. 


iEscnIns  Hippocastannm. 

Hippocastanum  vulgaris.  Horse-chestnut.  (Northern  India  and 
North  America.)  N.  0.  Sapindaceae.  Tincture  of  ripe  kernel ; 
trituration  of  dry  kernel.  Tincture  of  fruit  with  capsule 
(according  to  Hering,  this  is  the  best). 

CUalcal^^Anus,  affectiofis  of.  Back^  affections  of.  CotisUpation,  Cough. 
Htcinorrhoids.  Headache.  Hernia.  Intermittents.  Jaundice.  Liver,  affections  of. 
Lumbago.  Prostate  gland,  affections  of.  Sacrum^  pain  in.  TastCf  altered.  Throat, 
affections  of    Totignc,  affections  of    Uterus,  prolapse  of. 

Gharaoteristics. — Mscul  hip,  is  a  great  pile  remedy.  In  some 
districts  it  is  a  popular  custom  to  carry  a  chestnut  in  the  pocket  as  a 
preventive.  It  produces  many  symptoms  of  disordered  liver :  Malaise  ; 
dulness  of  head  and  mind;  fulness  at  root  of  nose.  Follicular 
pharyngitis  with  dryness  ;  burning  ;  roughness  ;  contraction  in  throat, 
as  in  follicular  pharyngitis.  There  is  soreness  and  fulness  in  liver 
region  ;  the  abdomen  is  sore  to  touch.  There  is  jaundice  with  bile- 
less  stools.    Throbbing  in  abdomen,  especially  hypogastrium. 

The  most  intense  action  is  on  the  lower  bowel  and  pelvic  organs. 
There  are  haemorrhoids,  blind  or  bleeding  ;  if  they  bleed  it  gives 
relief.  Feeling  of  dryness  in  rectum  as  if  little  sticks  or  spUnters  were 
pricking  the  folds  of  mucous  membrane  ;  with  weak  feeling  in  sacro- 
iliac joints,  as  if  legs  would  give  way.  (Arg.  n.  has  also  pain  in  sacro- 
iliac joints  and  sensation  as  if  the  bones  were  loose.)  Constipation, 
stools  large,  hard,  followed  by  feeling  of  prolapse  of  rectum.  General 
aching  in  lumbar  and  sacral  regions,  with  stiffness  in  the  back,  almost 
impossible  to  walk.    Tearing  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  hips. 

Poisoning  with  the  green  rind  of  horse-chestnut  has  produced 
the  following  symptoms  in  a  boy  :  Pupils  widely  dilated  in  bright 
light.  Face  flushed  ;  pulse  full.  Drowsy  and  apparently  slept,  but 
the  sleep  was  interrupted  at  short  intervals  by  sudden  awakenings  and 
screams.    Great  terror  as  from  a  dreadful  dream,  or  apparition  on 


iESCULUS   HIPPOCASTANUM  33 

opening  his  eyes.  Questioning  failed  to  elicit  the  cause  of  his 
terror. 

.£sc.  h,  patients  are,  as  a  rule,  despondent  and  initable.  Walk- 
ing greatly  <  all  symptoms.  Cold  air  and  cold  seasons  <  ;  nose  and 
diroat  very  sensitive  when  inhaling  ;  <  after  washing.  >  Summer  ; 
<  winter  (hsemorrhoids). 

BdttUonB. — Compare:  -^sc.  gl.,  Alo.,  Collins.,  Merc,  Nux  v., 
Pod.,  SoL  Nux  V.  antidotes  the  pile  symptoms.  It  follows  well : 
Collins.,  Nux  v.,  Sul.  Compare  also  :  Kali  bi.  (throat ;  but  i£sc.  h.  has 
not  the  stringy  mucus)  ;  Phytolacca  (follicular  phamygitis). 

SYMPTOMS. 

X.  Mind. — Depressed;  gloomy;  low-spirited;  irritable. — Loses  temper 
easily,  regains  it  slowly. — Unable  to  fix  his  attention. 

2.  HeacL — DuU  pressure  in  forehead ;  slight  nausea  in  stomach,  followed 
at  once  by  stitches  in  right  hypochondrium. — Severe  lancinating  headache  at 
base  of  brain,  as  if  too  full ;  tympany ;  tongue  white. — Confused  feeling,  with 
giddiness ;  <  rising  from  a  seat.  —Frequent  flying  pains  through  the  temples. 
—Flushes  of  heat  over  the  occiput,  neck,  and  shoulders. — Head  too  heavy  to 
hdd  up  without  balancing  ;  all  head  symptoms  accompanied  by  haemorrhoidal, 
rectal,  or  sacral  symptoms. 

3.  £yes. — Weight  in  the  eyes;  they  feel  heavy  and  dull, — Eyes  feel 
heavy  and  hot ;  balls  sore. — Painful  aching  over  1.  eye. — Flickering  before 
the  eyes. 

5.  Nose* — Stin^g  and  burning  in  posterior  nares  and  soft  palate. — 
Dryness  of  posterior  nares  and  throat ;  sneezing,  followed  by  severe  coryza. — 
Pain  in  r.  nasal  bone ;  soreness  in  1. 

Ol  Face. — Pale,  miserable  appearance. — Flying  heat  and  redness  of  1. 
side  of  face. — Face  swells  enormously  after  washing  in  water. 

8.  Mottth. — ^Tongue  coated  white  or  yellow. — ^Thick  yellow  phlegm  in 
the  month.— Taste  sweet ;  bitter ;  metallic  (coppery,  with  salivation).— Tongue 
feels  as  if  it  had  been  scalded. 

g.  Throat. — Pricking,  formication,  burning  and  stinging  in  fauces; 
shooting  in  L  side. — Feeling  as  if  something  had  lodged  in  fauces  causing 
constant  inclination  to  swallow. — Feeling  of  dryness  and  roughness  (or  raw- 
ness and  burning)  in  throat,  as  from  taking  cold. — Constrictive  feeling  in 
fooces. — ^Neuralgic  pains  in  fauces. — Dark  congested  fauces  with  a  full  feeling 
and  irritation. — Sore  throat,  chronic,  with  haemorrhoidal  difficulty. 

n.  Stomacli. — Belching,  nausea,  vomiting. — ^Violent  vomiting;  great 
burmng  distress  in  the  stomach. — Heartburn  and  gulping  up  of  food  after 
eating.— Pressure  as  from  a  stone  in  pit  of  stomach. — Eructations  of  wind  ; 
empty. 

12.  Abdomen. — ^Tenderness  in  the  right  hypochondrium. — Much  distress 
in  fiver  and  epigastrium. — Fulness  in  liver  and  abdomen. — Constant  severe 
adung  from  pit  of  stomach  to  r.  lobe  of  liver. — ^Abdomen  and  liver  region 
tender  to  touch. — Sensation  of  fulness,  flatulencyi  and  colicky  pains ;  haemor- 
rhoidal  colic. — ^Emission  of  fetid  flatus ;  rumbling  in  bowels. — Cutting  in  r. 
ingoinal  region  (hernia). 

13.  Stool  and  Anii8.--Dry,  uncomfortable  feeling  in  rectum,  as  if  it 
VOL.  1.  4 


34  iESCULUS   HIPPOCASTANUM 

were  filled  with  small  sticks. — Soreness,  burning,  itching,  raw  feeling,  and 
fulness  at  anus. — Pain  like  a  knife  sawing  backwards  and  forwards  through 
anus. — Haemorrhoids  Hke  ground  nuts,  purple ;  painful  sensation  of  burning  ; 
generally  blind  ;  aching  and  lameness  or  shooting  in  the  back. — Haemorrhoids 
blind  and  painful ;  rarely  bleeding ;  <  standing  or  walking.— Stool  hard,  dry, 
and  passed  with  difficulty. — Sensation  of  rigid  hardness  before  stool. — Stools 
hard  and  black ;  natural  consistence  and  white. — Backache  after  a  difficult, 
large,  and  hard  stool— Prolapsus  ani  after  stool. — Several  large  piles  which 
seem  to  block  up  the  rectum,  little  or  no  bleeding,  great  suffering,  constipa- 
tion.— Chronic  diarrhoea,  with  characteristic  backache  or  haemorrhoids. — 
Piles  develop  and  become  particularly  troublesome  in  climacteric  years. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pain  in  region  of  1.  kidney. — Frequent  scanty 
urination. — Urine  dark  and  muddy;  dark-brown  sediment;  yellow,  with 
thick  mucous  sediment. — Urine  hot. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  at  every  stool, 
and  at  micturition ;  seminal  loss  during  sleep. — A  variety  of  suffering  about 
the  generative  organs. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Inflamed  cervix  uteri,  retroversion,  pro- 
lapsus, enlargement  and  induration,  when  characterised  by  great  tenderness, 
heat  and  throbbing. — Old  cases  of  leucorrhoea,  of  a  dark  yellow  colour,  thick 
and  sticky,  worse  after  menstrual  period,  increased  by  walking,  corrodes  the 
labia,  with  aching  in  the  sacrum  and  knees. — Uterine  soreness  with  throbbing 
in  hypogastrium. — During  pregnancy  sacro-iliac  s)rmphysis  gives  out  while 
she  walks  ;  must  sit  down  ;  feels  best  lying. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Short  cough,  increased  by  swallowing  and 
breathing  deeply. — Hoarseness. — Raw  feeling  in  chest. — Tightness  in  chest. — 
Abundant  raising  of  mucus  in  morning. — Cough,  with  sensation  of  stiffness  in 
the  throat  and  suffocation  in  the  upper  chest. — Oppression,  stitches,  soreness 
and  other  troubles  of  chest. — Catarrhal  affections  causing  hoarseness  and  cough. 

19.  Heart. — ^Twitching  over  region  of  heart. — Stitches  and  neuralgic 
pains  in  region  of  heart,  esp.  apex ;  and  forehead. — Functional  disturbances 
of  the  heart  from  haemorrhoidal  complaints. 

20.  Back. — Constant  backache  affecting  the  saorum  and  hips,  very  much 
aggravated  by  walking  and  stooping  forward  ;  almost  impossible  to  rise  after 
sitting  down. — Back  gives  out  when  walking. — ^Aching  between  the  shoulders. 
— Spine  feels  weak. — The  sacrum,  back,  neck,  head,  chest,  heart,  and  abdomen, 
all  seem  in  remarkable  sympathy  with  the  rectum  and  its  vessels. 

32.  Upper  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pains  in  r.  scapula  and  r.  side  of  chest ; 
worse  during  inspiration. — Shooting,  drawing,  and  tearing  pains  in  shoulders, 
arms,  hands,  and  fingers. — Paralytic  feeling  in  arms,  legs,  and  spine. 

23.  Lovrer  Limbs. — Legs  so  weak  she  can  hardly  walk. — L.  knee 
swollen,  painful,  stiff  ;  cannot  bear  slightest  pressure. — Tendo  AchiUis  sore. 

24.  Generalities. — Paral3rtic  feeling  in  arms,  legs,  and  spine. — Feels 
faint,  weak,  and  weary. — Disposition  to  stretch  and  3rawn. — Fulness  in  various 
organs,  as  if  they  contained  too  much  blood. — Mucous  membranes  dry, 
swollen  ;  burn  and  feel  raw. 

27.  Fever. — Chill  at  4  p.m. ;  fever  from  7  to  12  p.m. — ^During  fever  no 
thirst,  bursting  headache,  photophobia,  profuse  hot  sweat,  heart  beats 
violently. 


^THUSA  35 

iSthiops  Antimonialis. 

Made  by  triturating  two  parts  of  sulphuret  of  antimony  with  one  of 
qoicksilver.  (Berliner,  Zdt.  f.  Horn,  Aerzte.^  vol.  ii.  Ham. 
Recorder^  1894,  p.  28.)    Trituration. 

CliaiaJ.— Ophthalmia.    Otorrhoea.    Scrofala.    Skin,  affections  of .    Syphilis. 

CShanustaristics. — This  remedy  has  not  been  proved,  but  it  has 
been  used  with  signal  success  in  scrofulous,  herpetic,  eczematous 
eruptions  and  discharges.  Favus-like  eruptions.  Eruptions  from 
fai^t.  Painful,  irritating,  scabby  eruptions  of  face.  Scrofulous 
ophthalmia.  Scrofulous  otorrhoea,  offensive.  Hereditary  syphilis. 
It  seems  to  combine  the  powers  of  its  various  components.  I  have 
confirmed  its  utility  in  many  aggravated  skin  affections. 


iEthusa. 

iEthusa  cynapium.    Fool's  Parsley.    (Eiu-ope.)    N.  0,  Umbellifers. 
Tincture  of  whole  flowering  plant. 


L — Brattp-fag.  Cholera  infantum.  Convulsions,  Cough.  Delirium. 
Diaffrhcea.  Dyspepsia.  Ear,  discharge  from.  Epilepsy.  Excoriation,  Eyes, 
affections  ol.  Glands,  affections  of .  Headache,  Herpes.  Hiccough,  Idiocy.  Infantile 
paralysis.  Mind,  weakness  of.  Sleeplessness.  Stomach,  disorders  of.  Trismus. 
Yomitifig, 

Qiancteristios. — ^The  symptoms  of   jEthusa   are   particularly 
dearly  defined,  in  fact  violence  is  one  of  the  notes  of  its  action — 
violent  vomiting,  violent  convulsions,  violent  pains,  violent  delirium. 
On  the  other  hand  there  is  prostration  and  somnolence.    ''  Fool's 
parsley  '*  has  not  received  its  name  for  nothing — it  is  indeed  a  medicine 
for  "  fools."    There  is  great  weakness  of  mind  or  body.     One  very 
characteristic  symptom  is :  Inability   to  think  or  fix  the  attention. 
Guided  by  this  symptom  I  once  gave  it  to  an  undergraduate  preparing 
for  an  examination,  with  complete  success.    He  had  been  compelled 
to  give  up  his  studies,  but  was  able  to  resume  them,  and  passed  a 
briUiant  examination.    To  a  Uttle  waif  in  an   orphan   home  who 
suffered  from  severe  headaches  and  inability  to  fix  his  attention  on 
his  lessons  I  sent  single  doses  of  JEthus,  at  rare  intervals,  with  very 
Kreat  relief.    The  little  boy  asked  for  the  medicine  himself  subse- 
quently on  a  return  of  the  old  symptoms.    Other  mental  symptoms 
are :  Idiocy ;  in  some  cases  alternating  with  furor.    Hallucinations. 
Ddirium  ;  sees  cats  and  dogs  ;  wants  to  jump  out  of  bed,  or  out  of 
die  window.     Irritability,  especially  in  open  air.     Guernsey  says : 
"The  mental  sjonptoms  peculiar  to  children,  and  frequently  ot  adults, 
vCf  gresit  anguish  and  crying.    As  the  disease  progresses  the  patient 
Iiecomes  more  and  more  retired  in  bis  disposition,  and  more  incline^ 
Jo  weep/'    Somnolence.    Dotage.    Another  marked   characteristic 


36  iETHUSA 

is :  Intolerance  of  milk ;  vomiting  of  everything  taken,  especially 
milk,  which  is  ejected  in  yellowish  or  greenish  curds.  There  is  great 
weakness  and  exhaustion  after  vomiting  ;  the  child  is  so  exhausted  it 
falls  asleep  at  once.  It  awakens  hungry,  eats,  and  vomits  again. 
"  Hungry  after  vomiting  "  is  the  keynote  here.  There  is  also  griping, 
with  diarrhoea,  vomiting,  crjring.  For  adults  who  complain  of  regur- 
gitation of  food  an  hour  after  it  has  been  taken  ^/Af#5.,  says  Guernsey, 
is  invaluable.  Also  copious  vomiting  in  adults,  with  a  great  feeling  of 
distress;  can't  tell  what  the  distress  is  about  but  still  it  exists. 
Adults  complain  of  a  sensation  as  though  the  stomach  was  turned 
upside  down,  accompanied  by  a  burning  feeling  up  to  the  chest. 
Tearing  pains  in  stomach  extending  into  oesophagus ;  abdomen  tense, 
inflated,  sensitive.  There  is  an  herpetic  eruption  on  tip  of  nose. 
Along  with  the  gastric  symptoms  there  is  a  peculiar  expression  of 
great  anxiety  and  pain  {Linea  nasalis)^  a  surface  of  pearly  whiteness 
on  upper  lip  bounded  by  distinct  lines  from  wings  of  nose  to  angles 
of  mouth.  Other  symptoms  are  :  Sensation  of  swelling  in  head  and 
face  on  entering  a  room.  Sunken  cornea.  Eyeballs  convulsed  and 
directed  downwards.  Sleep  after  attacks.  Sensation  of  swelling  in 
hands  after  walking.  Convulsions,  with  cold  limbs.  The  pains  are 
lancinating  Swelling  of  mammary  or  axillary  glands,  with  lancinating 
pains.  Prostration  ;  stupid.  All  symptoms  <  3  to  4  a.m.  Heat  = 
all  eruptions  to  itch  intolerably.  As  with  BovisL  and  Aster,  r.  symptoms 
are  <  by  coffee,  wine,  drunkenness,  cold  water,  and  warmth  of  bed  ; 
>  by  a  walk  in  the  open  air,  and  by  conversation.  >  In  open  air 
(except  mental  symptoms).  The  remedy  is  suited  to  teething-children 
and  choleraic  affections  in  old  age. 

Belations. — Compare  :  Cicut.  ;  Coni. ;  CEnan.  croc. ;  Ant.  crud. 
and  Calc.  c.  (vomiting  of  milk) ;  Ars. ;  Asar.  ;  Cupr. ;  Ipec.  ;  Op.  // 
antitodes  Opium  ;  and  is  antidoted  by  vegetable  acids.  Teste  places 
^thus.  in  the  Sulphur  group  with  Cicuta,  Con.,  Aster.,  Bov.,  Lobel, 
Merc,  Kreas. 

STHPT0M8. 

z.  Mind.— Incapacity  to  think  ;  confused.— Loss  of  comprehension ;  as 
if  a  barrier  between  the  senses  and  external  objects. — Idiocy,  in  some  cases 
alternating  with  furor.— Great  anxiety  and  restlessness,  followed  by  violent 
pains  in  head  and  abdomen.— ^ad  humour  ;  irritability. — Irritabilily,  esp.  in 
the  afternoon,  and  in  the  open  air. — Delirium  :  sees  cats  and  dogs ;  tries  to 
jump  out  of  the  window. — Loquacious  gaiety. 

s.  Head. — Head  confused;  brain  feels  bound  up.— Vertigo,  with 
sleepiness,  can't  raise  the  head. — Headache  in  whole  front  part  of  head. — 
Heaviness  in  the  forehead. — Sensation,  as  if  both  sides  of  the  head  were  in  a 
vice. — Distressing  pains  in  the  occiput,  down  nape  of  neck,  and  spine. — Heat 
rises  to  the  head ;  the  body  becomes  warmer ;  the  face  becomes  red  and  the 
giddiness  ceases. — Stitches  and  pulsations  in  the  head. — ^Can't  hold  head  up,  or 
sit  up. — Sensation  as  if  constantly  pulled  by  the  hair.— The  head  symptoms 
are  >  by  expelling  flatus. 

3.    Eyes. — Looking  up  <  headache  and  vertigo. — Dilated   pupils.** 


vETHUSA  37 

Pupils  dilated  but  sensitive  to  light — Eyes  brilliant  and  prominent— Cornea 
sanken. — Pustules  on  cornea. — Scrofulous  ophthalmia ;  edges  of  lids  inflamed 
and  agglutinated  at  night ;  swelling  of  Meibomian  ^ands. — Chronic  photo- 
phobia. 

4-  Ears. — Stitches  in  the  ears,  esp.  in  the  r.  ear,  as  if  something 
hot  were  streaming  from  it — ^Yellow  discharge  from  r.  ear,  with  stitching 
pains.—- There  is  great  >  by  inserting  the  finger  and  drawing  the  parts 
asonder. 

^    Nose. — Herpetic  eruption  at  tip. 

6l  Face. — A  drawn  condition  beginning  at  the  alae  nasi,  and  extending 
to  the  angles  of  the  mouth,  giving  the  face  an  expression  of  great  anxiety  and 
pain. — ^Tearing  in  the  face,  in  the  malar  bones. — ^Jaws  spasmodically  fixed. — 
Face  pale,  puffed,  and  spotted  red.— Chin  and  comers  of  mouth  feel  cold. 

8.  Mouth. — Sticking  and  tearing  in  gums.— Taste  :  bitter ;  like  cheese ; 
like  onions  ;  sweetish  in  morning  when  awaking. — ^Tongue  :  moist ;  white 
coat;  black ;  feels  too  long. — Speech  slow ;  embarrassed. — Aphthae  in  mouth 
and  throat — Copious  salivation  which  >  poisoning  symptoms. 

9.  Throat. — Sensation  of  constriction,  preventing  deglutition. — Stinging 
in  the  throat,  between  the  acts  of  deglutition. — Soft  palate  red,  swollen. — 
Pongent  heat  in  mouth  and  throat— While  eating,  sudden  heaviness  in  fore- 
head.— Spasmodic  hiccough. 

IX.  Stomach. — Intolerance  of  milk  ;  it  is  forcibly  ejected  almost  as  soon 
as  swallowed ;  then  weakness  causes  drowsiness ;  in  nursing  children. — 
Violent  vomiting  of  curdled  milk  and  cheesy  matter.— Violent  vomiting  of  a 
frothy  matter,  white  as  milk.  This  we  may  find  in  men,  children,  or  pregnant 
women. — ^Violent  vomiting  of  green  mucus. — ^Violent  vomiting,  with  diarrhoea, 
of  9reen  mucus,  or  (in  children)  bloody  substances. — ^Af ter  vomiting,  cold  and 
clammy. 

IS.  Ahdomen.— Coldness  of  the  abdomen  and  lower  limbs,  esp.  1.,  with 
aching  in  bowels ;  >  by  warm  wet  applications. — Sensation  of  coldness  in  the 
abdomen. — Swollen  and  tense  abdomen. — Cutting,  with  distension. — Cutting, 
with  violent  vomiting. — Black-bluish  swelling  of  the  abdomen. — Colic,  followed 
bj  vomiting,  vertigo,  and  weakness. 

13.  Stool. — Diarrhoea:  stools  bright  yellow,  or  greenish,  watery,  and 
slimy,  with  violent  tenesmus. — Undigested  stool  or  partly  so. — Loose  stools, 
preceded  by  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  with  tenesmus  in  the  morning,  after 
rising. — Diarrhoea :  discharges  green,  thin,  bilious,  with  violent  tenesmus. — 
Bloody  stools. — ^Most  obstinate  constipation,  with  feeling  as  if  all  action  of  the 
bowels  had  been  lost 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Sufferings  of  patient  render  him  almost 
speediless. — Respiration  very  difficult  and  short — Sensation  as  if  chest  were 
eacirded  by  a  band,  causing  difficult  breathing. — Stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest. 
— CoD^  producing  stunning  pain  in  head. 

IQ.  Heart  and  Pulse.— Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  headache. 
—Poise  full  and  rapid  ;  hard,  small,  and  rapid ;  small  and  frequent ;  irregular ; 
m^Mrceptible. 

io.  Neck  and  Back. — Distressing  pain  in  occiput  and  nape  of  neck, 
extending  down  the  spine,  >  by  friction  with  hot  whisky. — Swelling  of  glands 
roood  neck  like  a  string  of  beads.— Sensation  as  if  the  small  of  the  l>ack  were 


38  AGARICUS  EMETICUS 

in  a  vice. — ^A  feeling  as  if  psun  in  back  could  be  >  by  straightening  out  and 
bending  stifiBy  backward. 

21.  Limbs. — Eruption  round  the  joints,  esp.  knee,  elbow,  and  ankle. — 
Axillary  glands  swollen. — Stiffness  of  elbow  joints. — Swelling  of  forearms 
and  hands. — ^Thumb  and  fingers  bent  inwards. — Excoriations  of  thighs  from 
walking. — Paraljrtic  pains  in  lower  extremities ;  formication  in  feet. 

24.  Generalities. — Epileptiform  spasms,  with  clenched  thumbs ;  red 
face ;  eyes  turned  downward ;  dilated,  staring,  immovable  pupils ;  foam  at 
the  mouth  ;  teeth  set ;  pulse  small,  hard,  accelerated. — Spasms,  with  stupor 
and  delirium. — Cold  limbs  and  body  convulsed. — Great  weakness ;  children 
cannot  stand ;  cannot  hold  up  their  heads. 

25.  Skin. — ^Tettary  eruptions,  which  bleed  easily. — Black  and  blue  spots, 
sometimes  like  ecchymoses  all  over  body. — ^The  whole  body  may  be  of  bluish- 
black  colour. — ^Anasarca. 

26.  Sleep. — Dozing  of  child  after  vomiting  spells,  or  after  the  stool. — 
On  falling  asleep,  rolling  of  the  eyes,  or  slight  convulsions. — Sleepiness  all  day ; 
sometimes  >  in  open  air. — Sleep  prevented  by  pains  in  limbs. 

27.  Fever, — Complete  absence  of  thirst,  though  there  is  great  heat. — 
Cannot  bear  to  be  uncovered  during  the  sweat. — Fever,  esp.  in  morning,  with 
shuddering ;  shuddering,  weariness  in  extremities,  internal  coldness  with  hot 
and  flushed  face ;  malaise  ;  disposition  to  delirium  during  cold  stage  ;  sweat, 
after  the  breaking  out  of  which  the  previous  symptoms  disappear.— ^weat  on 
least  exertion. 


Agaricas  Emeticas. 

A  small  acrid  species,  found  in  woods  in  Europe.    N.  O.  Fungi. 
Tincture  of  fresh  fungus. 

Clinleal.— Gasttitis*    Vertigo. 

Gharaoteristios.— The  symptoms  of  Agar.  etneU  resemble  those 
of  the  other  Agarics,  but  they  have  this  characteristic,  that  whilst  cold 
water  <  the  symptoms  of  Agar.  muse,  ii  speedily  and  permanently  relieves 
those  of  Agar.  emct.  Violent  burning  pains  are  caused  in  the  stomach. 
There  is  sudden  and  violent  longing  for  ice-cold  water  (during  the 
worst  attacks  of  anxiety),  which  causes  gradual  relief  ;  violent  vomit- 
ing, with  anxious  sensation,  as  if  the  stomach  hung  on  threads  which 
would  be  momentarily  torn  in  two,  with  ice-cold  sweat  of  face,  and 
faintness  <  by  moving  head  ;  <  by  smelling  vinegar,  which  is  un- 
bearable. Most  marked  is  the  vertigo,  which  is  so  severe  one  must 
be  carried  to  bed  ;  is  not  able  to  sit  or  stand. 

Relations. — Anxiety  partially  >  by  cold  drinks,  Aeon.,  Sul. 
<  From  vinegar,  Ant.  c,  Ars.,  BeU.,  Brom.,  Fer.,  Sep.,  Sul. 


AGARICUS   MUSCARIUS  39 


igaricus  Huscarius. 

Amanita  musatrisL     Agaricus  muscarius.    Flv  Agaric.    Bug  Agaric. 

Cbmpigaon  f  ou.    (Europe,  Asia,  and  America  ;  in  dry  places, 

cspedafly  in  dry  pine  woods.)    N,0,  Fungi.     Trituration  of 

the  carefully  dried-iap  cap  (pUeus) ;  or  tincture  of  the   fresh 

iuDgas, 

QktktiL-^Acne  rosacea.  Blepharospasm.  Brain,  softening  of.  Bnnion. 
Qttlikdns.  Chorea,  CoUiness.  Cough,  Cramp.  Delirium  tremens.  Dysmenorrhoea. 
Entoic  fever,  Epilepsy  (^v^itli  great  exertion  of  strength).  Gangrene.  General 
paraljsk  Hyperpyrexia.  Itcbing.  Jaundice.  Lachrymal  fistula.  Lichen.  Lumbago, 
Ifeaiogftis.  Myopia.  Neura.lgia.  Numbness.  Nystagmus.  Phthisis.  Rheumatism. 
Sacnmt  pains  in.  Sebaceous  tumours.  Sexual  excess,  effects  of.  Spinal  Irritation. 
5^,  affections  of.  Starting.  Stitch  in  side.  He  Convulsif.  Toothache.  Tremors* 
fypkudfofer.    Typhus, 

QianotfiFistios. — ^As   Agaricus  is  used  in  many  parts  for  making 
an  intoxicating  driixk,  ^^we  find  in  alcoholism  a  sphere  for  its  action,  and 
also  in  all  states  of  deliriuiny  mania,  and  even  idiocy.    A  peculiarity  of 
the  delirium  is  to    malce  verses  and  prophesy ;  also  silly  merriness, 
and  incoherent  talk,   >vith    mania  ;  kisses  companions.    Talcott  con- 
siders Agaric,  gives  the    nearest  approach  to  general  paralysis  of  all 
teme^es;  exalted    notions  of  grandeur  and    power,   hilarity,  and 
adtcment  follo^ved    biy    depression,  confusion,  imbecility.    Accom- 
panying bodily  symptoms   are  vertigo  (marked  and  persistent),  with 
constant  impulse    to   fall  backward ;  twitching  about  eyes  and  &ce, 
tedness  without  lieat,  puffy  and  distorted.   Ravenous  appetite,  with 
AcJUag  (k  food.      Sexual   appetite  enormous  and  enthusiastic,  with 
fthxed  penis    and     impotence.     Throughout  the   body  there  are 
spasmodic  twitchings,   followed  by  waning    tremulousness ;    finally 
relaxation  and  exhaustion-      In  all  these  respects  the  drug  accurately 
conesponds  with  the   disease.    Typhoid  states  often  call  for  it,  and 
also  epilepsy.    Rolling   of  the  head  is  a  leading  indication  for  it  in 
brain  afiections  and    fever.     Pecuhar  headaches  are :  *'  Throbbing 
headache,  with  sensation  of  sti£Fness  of  muscles  of  face."    "  Dull, 
drawing  headache  in  the  morning,  extending  into  root  of  nose,  with 
nose-bleed  or  thick    mucous  discharge."     "  Pain  as  from  a  nail  in 
right  side  of  bead."      One  of  the  most  characteristic  of  the  Agaricus 
rfedsis  the  muscular  jerking  and  twitching  it  sets  up.    This  renders 
it  appropriate  in  large   numbers  of  cases  of  chorea.    Twitchings  are 
especially  marked    in   the  eyes,  eyelids,  and   facial  muscles  ;  and 
Affiricus  has  cured  many  cases  of  blepharospasm  and  tic  convulsif. 
Pain  as  if  touched  or  pierced  by  needles  of  ice  is  very  characteristic. 
Belon^ng  to  a  low  order  of  vegetation  Agar,  produces  fetidity  of 
breath,  eructations,  and  stools.   Sweat  may  be  oily  but  is  not  offensive. 
Agar,  is  a  spleen  medicine,  causing  stitch  in  the  side,  and  it  has  cured 
stitch  in  runners,  enabling  them  to  run  further.    The  symptoms  of 
Agpricus  are  apt  to  appear  at  the  same  time  on  opposite  sides  of  the 
body  twt  diagonally  (right  upper  and  left  lower,  or  vice  vend).    The 


40  AGARICUS   MUSCARIUS 

nervous  patients  requiring  Agar,  pass  little  urine  (opp.  Ign.)^  though 
the  bladder  may  be  irritable. 

Mushrooms  are  among  the  articles  of  diet  forbidden  by  Granvogl 
to  persons  having  the  "  hydrogenoid  constitution,"  as  described  by 
him,  in  ivhich  the  patients  are  exceedingly  sensitive  to  cold   and 
damp.    Agreebly  with  this  we  find  in  the  provings  of  Agaricus  great 
sensitiveness  to  cold  air.     All  symptoms  are  <  in  cold  weather, 
especially  headache.    Looking  out  of  an  open  window  causes  tooth- 
ache and  pains  in  the  Umbs.    Drinking  cold  water  <.    Symptoms 
are  <  before  a  thunderstorm.    At  the  same  time  many  symptoms  of 
intense   coldness   are   produced  :  cold  and   blue ;  sensations    as  if 
touched  with  ice,  or  ice-cold  needles.    All  the  symptoms  of  frostbite 
and  chilblains  (itching,  redness,  and  burning).    Somewhat  aUied  to 
chilblains  is  bunion,  for  which  Agar,  has  been  found  specific  by  many 
practitioners.    Many  symptoms  appear  when  walking  in  the  open 
air ;  this  is  a  very  general  and  characteristic  aggravation.  On  the  ottier 
hand,  all  svmptoms  are  <  indoors  and  at  rest,  except  vertigo,  which 
may  be  either  <  or  >  in  a  room.    Conversely  to  sensitiveness  to  cold 
there  is  sensitiveness  to  the  rays  of  the  sun,  and  sunstroke  is  within 
the  curative  range  of  Agaric.  <  After  moving,  and  by  pressure  from 
without 

BelationB.— Com^ar^ ;  Bovista  ;  Sticta  pulmon. ;  Act.  r.  ;  Can. 
ind. ;  Op. ;  Stram.  (alcoholism,  chorea) ;  Co£F.  (ecstasy) ;  Cicut. 
(spasm  of  eyes) ;  Codein  (spasm  of  eyelids) ;  Mygale  ;  Tarent.  ; 
Verat  alb.  (icy-cold  feeling  in  head) :  Ars.  (hoi  needles  ;  Agar,  ice-cold 
needles)  ;  Agar,  stands  between  Siram.  and  Lach.  //  is  aniidoted  by  : 
Charcoal ;  cofifee  ;  wine ;  brandy  ;  cariiphor  ;  fat  or  oil  (relieves 
stomach) ;  Calc.  c.  (relieves  icy  coldness) ;  Puis. ;  Rhus  (nightly  back- 
ache). //  follows  well :  Bell.,  Calc.  c,  Merc,  Op.,  Puis.,  Rhus,  Sil. 
Is  followed  by  :  Tarent.  (typhoid  with  "rolling  of  the  head  ").  Teste 
includes  Agar,  in  his  Belladonna  group. 

Causation. — Coitus,  subjective  symptoms  arising  after.  Frost. 
Sun.  Fright.  Mental  application  or  excitement.  Over-exertion. 
Sexual  excess.     AlcohoUsm.      Blood  poisoning. 

8THPT0MS. 

X.  Mind. — ^Aversion  to  conversation. — Indisposed  to  perform  any  kind  of 
labour,  esp.  mental. — Exuberant  fancy. — Ecstasy. — Inclination  to  make  verses 
and  to  prophesy. — Mania,  timid,  or  furious,  with  great  display  of  strength. — 
Embraces  companions  and  kisses  their  hands ;  alternately  with  vexation. — 
Silly  merriness. — Great  loquacity ;  sings,  talks,  but  does  not  answer  questions. 
— Delirium,  tries  to  get  out  of  bed. — Delirium  constant,  knows  no  one,  throws 
things  at  the  nurse. — Delirium  tremens. — Morose,  self-willed,  stubborn,  slow 
in  learning  to  walk  and  talk. 

a.  Head. — Dizziness,  as  from  intoxication,  principally  in  the  open  air, 
in  the  morning,  and  on  reflecting. — ^Vertigo,  with  impulse  to  fall  backward. — 
The  bright  light  of  the  sun  instantly  produces  a  dizziness,  so  as  to  occasion 
falling. — Piercing  pains  in  the  head  when  seated. — Dull  pain,  chiefly  in  the 
forehead,  with  drawing  of  the  eyelids. — Drawing  pains  in  the  head,  extending 


AGARICUS   MUSCARIUS  41 

to  the  eyes  and  root  of  nose,  principal^  on  waking  in  the  morning. — Pain,  as 
if  a  nail  were  driven  into  the  head ;  <  when  sitting  quietly ;  >  by  slowly 
movnig  about — Digging  pain  and  sensation  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  brain. — 
Semilatefal  cephalalgia ;  pulling  and  pressing  with  confusion  in  the  head. — 
Beating  in  the  vertex,  with  ahnost  furious  despair. — Pressure  in  the  head  to 
the  bottom  of  the  brain,  increased  by  pressure  or  contact  of  the  hair,  and 
aooompanied  by  a  complete  loss  of  energy. — Sensation  of  icy  coldness  in  the 
head ;  oo  the  scalp,  r.  side  of  frontal  bone. — ^A  jerking  sensation  in  the  fore- 
head and  in  the  temple. — Great  sensitiveness  of  the  scalp,  as  from  subcutaneous 
ulceration. — Itching  of  the  hairy  scalp,  esp.  early  in  the  morning. 

3.  Byts. — Itching  in  the  eyes. — Burning  sensation  in  the  internal 
corners  of  the  eyelids,  which  are  painful  on  being  touched. — Pressure  in  the 
eye& — Hnmonr  in  the  corners  of  the  eyes,  and  agglutination  of  the  lids. — 
Twitching  of  the  eyelids  and  eyeballs.— The  cleft  of  the  eyelids  growing 
narrower. — Canthi  itch,  bum,  are  red ;  <  from  touch ;  stick  together 
(hcfarynial  fistula). — ^A  viscid  yellow  humour  glues  the  eyelids  together. — 
Weaimess  and  confusion  of  vision,  as  from  a  mist  before  the  eyes. — Brownish 
spots  (like  flies)  before  the  eyes.  —  Black  motes  before  the  eyes.  — 
Myopia. —  Diplopia.  —  Muscular   asthenopia  ;   nystagmus  ;    squint. — Clonic 


4*  £ars. — Otalgia  excited  and  aggravated  on  the  admission  of  free  air. 
^Itching  in  the  ears,  with  redness  and  burning  pain,  as  from  chilblains. — 
Buzzing  in  the  ears. 

5.  Nose.— Excoriation  and  inflammation  of  the  nostrils,  with  painful 
aeosilnlity. — Itching  in  the  interior  and  on  the  exterior  of  the  nose. — Blood 
on  blowing  the  nose,  and  bleeding  at  the  nose. — Increased  acuteness  of  smell. 
—Frequent  sneezing  without  coryza.— Dryness  of  the  nose. — Flow  of  dear 
vater  from  the  nose,  without  coryza. 

6l  Face. — ^Tearing  in  the  face  and  jaw  bones. — Twitching  in  the  (r.) 
cheek.— On  waking,  pain  in  L  jaw-joint,  so  violent,  he  can  scarcely  open  his 
moolfa. — Itching,  redness,  and  burning  in  the  cheeks,  as  if  from  chilblains. — 
Palpitatioiis  and  pulsations  in  the  cheeks. — Bluish  lips.— Burning  fissures  in 
the  Qpper  lip. — Herpetic  eruption,  prinoipally  on  upper  lip. — Spasmodic 
drawing  in  the  chin  and  in  the  lower  jaw. — ^Needle-like  prickings  in  chin ; 
dun  cofvered  with  minute  blisters. 

7.  Teeth. — Tearing  pains  in  the  teeth,  aggravated  by  cold. — ^Tearing  in 
the  lower  molar  teeth,  <  from  cold  air. — Shooting  from  r.  lower  teeth  up  to 
r.  side  of  head. — Gums  swollen,  painful,  and  readily  bleeding. 

8.  Mouth. — Pain,  as  from  excoriation  in  the  mouth  and  in  the  palate. — 
Excoriation  of  the  tongue. — ^Tongue,  after  a  meal,  covered  with  aphthas  of  a 
dirty  yellow,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  skin  were  being  taken  off. — ^Tongue 
coated  white. — Neuralgic  splinter-like  pains  in  tongue  with  salivation. — Ulcer 
00  the  fraenum  of  the  tongue. — Offensive  smell  of  the  mouth,  as  after  eating 
horse-fadish. — Foam  about  the  mouth. — Flow  of  bitter  saliva. — Speech 
inarticnlate. 

9.  Throat. — ^Dry  fauces  and  pharynx,  causing  contraction  and  difficulty 
of  swallowing;  with  ravenous  appetite. — Pressure  in  fauces  as  though  a 
foreign  body  stuck  there  which  could  not  be  removed  by  swallowing. — 
Induratioa  of  tonsils. — Tension  in  thyroid  gland ;  <  towards  evening ;  feels 


42  AGARICUS  MUSCARIUS 

cravat  too  tight. — Throws  up  small  floculi  or  solid  lumps  of  phlegm  almost 
without  any  cough. 

10.  Appetite.— Insipid  and  fetid  taste  in  the  mouth.— Want  of  appetite 
for  bread. — Himger,  with  want  of  appetite.— Attacks  of  bulimy,  chiefly  in 
the  evening. — ^Af ter  a  meal,  pressure  in  the  stomach  and  the  abdomen,  witli 
fulness. — ^Very  drowsy  after  dinner. 

11.  Stomach. — Eructations  alternately  with  hiccough. — Eructations, 
with  the  taste  of  the  food  that  has  been  taken. — Frequent  empty  eructations  ; 
or  with  the  taste  of  apples ;  or  with  the  taste  of  rotten  eggs. — ^Nausea,  with 
cutting  pains. — Inclination  to  vomit  immediately  after  a  meal. — Pressure  on 
the  stomach,  and  in  the  precordial  region,  after  a  meal. — Pain  resembling 
cramp  and  oppressive  heaviness  in  the  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Shootings  (sharp  needle-like  pains)  in  the  hepatic 
region. — Prickings  in  the  region  of  the  spleen  during  and  after  inspiration. — 
Stitch  in  side  from  running. — Cutting  and  pinching  psuns  in  the  abdomen  as 
from  diarrhoea. — Moving  about  and  rumbling  noise  in  the  abdomen. — 
Abundant  expulsion  of  flatulency  of  a  fetid  odour,  like  that  of  garlic. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Hard  stools  of  a  dark  colour  after  a  period  of 
constipation.— Loose  stools  in  the  form  of  pap,  with  flatulency  and  severe 
colic. — Loose  stools,  a  painful  drawing  in  the  stomach  and  in  the  abdomen. — 
Tingling  in  the  anus. — Itching  in  the  anus,  as  from  worms. — Dysenteric  flux. 
— Diarrhoea  of  children,  with  grass-green,  bilious  stools. — Fetid  stools. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  scanty  and  infrequent. — Urine  clear,  and 
of  a  yellow  (lemon)  colour. — Flow  of  viscous  mucus  from  the  urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Increase  of  sexual  desire,  with  flaccidity 
of  the  penis. — Scanty  emission  in  coition. — ^Af  ter  coition  great  weakness  and 
nocturnal  sweat. — Itching  in  the  genitals. — ^A  sensation  of  drawing  in  the 
testes. 

i6«  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Awfully  bearing-down  pains  almost 
intolerable. — Menses  too  profuse  and  early,  with  tearing,  pressive  pains  in  back 
and  abdomen. — Itching  and  irritation  of  the  parts  with  strong  desire  for  an 
embrace. — During  menses  :  headache,  toothache,  pain  and  itching  in  1.  ear, 
>  by  boring ;  labour-like  pains,  ;  pains  in  1.  arm ;  itching  ;  palpitation  ; 
salivation. — Leucorrhoea,  with  much  itching  internally  and  externally. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Expectoration  of  small  globules  of  mucus, 
almost  without  cough. — Spasmodic,  convulsive,  nervous  cough,  which  may 
provoke  secondary  haemorrhage. 

18.  Chest. — Respiration  short  and  laboured,  with  difficulty  of  walking, 
even  slowly. — Respiration  difficult,  as  if  the  chest  were  full  of  blood. — 
Oppressive  constriction  of  the  chest,  with  a  necessity  for  frequent  and 
deep  inspirations.  Pain  principally  in  the  lower  part  of  the  chest,  as  if  its 
contents  were  compressed. — Prickings  in  the  chest. — Copious  nocturnal 
sweat  upon  the  chest. — Itching  of  the  nipples. 

19.  Heart. — Stitches  ;  burning,  shooting  pains  in  region  of  heart, 
extending  to  1.  shoulder  blade  ;  <  by  coughing,  sneezing,  or  deep  inspiration. 
— Oppression  in  cardiac  region  as  if  thorax  narrowed. — Painful  palpitations  of 
the  heart. — ^With  heart  symptoms,  paralysed  feeling  in  1.  arm  and  hand. — 
Pulse  weak,  dicrotic,  intermittent. 

90.    Neck  and  Back.— Pain  as  from  fatigue  and  dislocation  m  the 


AGARICUS    MUSCARIUS  43 

bock,  at  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  in  the  loins,  esp.  when  sitting  or  lying 
domL—Painfol  weakness  in  the  muscles  of  the  back. — Sensation  of  soreness 
and  great  weakness  in  the  back.— Paralytic  pain  in  the  loins,  increased  by 
miking  or  by  standing. 

n.  Limbs. — Limbs  afiFected  diagonally ;  L  forearm,  r.  thigh  ;  r.  knee, 
L  hand— Tearing  in  limbs,  <  in  rest  or  sitting,  >  moving. — Cracking  in 
jomt&— Subsoltns  tendinum.— Feels  as  if  her  limbs  did  not  belong  to  her. 

2a.  Upper  Limbs.— Arms  weak  and  without  vigour.— Burning  pain 
in  tiie  arms,  followed  by  an  eruption  of  small  pimples  with  scaling  of  the 
epidermis. — Irregular  and  hurried  movements  of  arm.— Upper  arms  shaken 
as  from  an  electric  shock. — Prostration,  weariness,  and  paralytic  feeling  in  1. 
arm.— Tearing  in  both  hands  ;  on  L  wrist. — ^Trembling  of  hands  ;  and  cold- 
ness.—Tearing  in  the  fingers. — Cramp-like  pain  in  the  thumb. — Paleness  and 
numbness  of  the  fin^rs,  which  are,  at  the  same  time,  very  sensitive  to  cold. — 
Itching,  burning  pain,  and  redness  in  the  fingers,  as  if  from  chilblains. 

Q.  Lo^wer  Limbs. — Legs  heavy  and  fatigued,  esp.  in  the  thighs. — 
Twitching,  quicksilver  sensation,  in  gluteal  muscles. — Pains  in  legs  like  electric 
shocks. — On  o-ossing  thighs  feels  a  violent  pain  in  them. — Drawing  in  the 
legs,  as  if  in  the  interior  of  the  bone,  esp.  when  sitting  or  standing,  >  by 
motion. — Painful  sensation  in  the  hip  on  walking.— Drawing  in  the  legs. — 
Darting  pain  in  the  feet  and  in  the  toes. — Drawing  pressure  in  the  malleolae. 
—Burning  itching  and  redness  in  the  toes,  as  if  from  chilblains. — Bunion. 

84.  Generalities. — Painful  cramps  in  the  muscles  when  seated. — 
Seosatkm  of  tearing  in  the  limbs,  principally  during  repose,  whether  seated 
or  standing  and  which  disappears  on  movement — ^Twitchings  in  the  eyeballs, 
eyeiidSy  dieeks,  posteriorly  in  the  chest,  in  the  abdomen. — Symptoms  which 
exhibit  themselves  transversely  (for  instance,  in  the  r.  arm  and  in  the  1.  leg), 
>  fay  walking  slowly.— Great  sensibility  in  the  whole  body ;  the  softest 
pressure  produces  continued  pains. — Pains,  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  limbs  and 
in  an  the  joints,  after  even  moderate  exercise. — ^Soreness  and  sensation  of 
rawness  (nose  and  month). — Piercing  pains  in  different  parts  of  the  body, 
chiefly  in  the  head,  with  desire  for  sleep,  and  faintness  when  seated.— Tearing 
pains  (face,  legs)  continuous  while  at  rest,  dis^pearing  while  moving  about — 
Great  weakness  and  heaviness  in  all  the  limbs. — ^Trembling. — Convulsions. — 
EpOeptic  fits. — Epilepsy  (with  great  exertions  of  strength). — Great  sensibility 
to  cool  air. — Great  sensitiveness  of  the  body  to  pressure  and  cold  air. 

25.  Skin. — Itching  and  titillation,  which  force  the  su£Ferer  to  scratch 
himself. — Itching,  burning  psun,  and  redness  as  from  chilblains  in  di£Ferent 
parts  of  the  body. — ^Miliary  eruption,  whitish  and  close-grained,  with  excessive 
itching. 

sOl  Sleep. — Desire  to  sleep  in  the  day,  particularly  after  a  meal. — 
Vk)lent  yawning,  followed  by  dizziness. — In  the  morning,  a  sense  of  dizziness, 
and  great  difficulty  in  rising. — ^As  a  rule  sleeps  badly  and  unrefreshingly. 

S7*  Feyer. — Disposition  exceedingly  chilly,  and  shiverings  in  the  open 
air,  or  on  niisiag  the  t>ed-clothes,  although  the  limbs  may  be  warm. — ^Shiver- 
iog  throiigh  the  body  from  above  downwards. — Easy  chilliness  on  slight 
movemeot— Violent  shivering  and  trembling  over  the  whole  body,  with  heat 
m  the  face  and  cold  in  the  hands.— Sweat  from  even  a  moderate  walk  and 
s^t  aertioQ. 


44  AGARICUS  PHALLOIDES 


Agaricus  PhaUoides. 

A.  bulbosus.    Amanita  bulbosa.    (A  small  stinking  fongus  common 
in  Europe  and  U.S.)    N.  O.  Fungi.    Tincture  of  fresh  fungus. 

Cllaleal.^  Cholera.      Chorea.      Cramps.      Dtarrhoca.      Gastritis.     Trismus. 
Urine,  suppression  of.    Vomiting. 

GharaoteriBtios. — Symptoms  observed  in  poisoning  cases  give  a 
complete  picture  of  Asiatic  cholera.  There  is  extreme  prostration 
and  chiUiness ;  the  sweat  is  cold  ;  the  hippocratic  face  is  marked  ; 
the  tongue  is  cold  ;  and  there  is  violent  thirst.  Very  frequent  bilious 
vomiting.  Incessant  cramps  in  stomach.  Hard,  tense  abdomen. 
Frequent  whitish  watery  stools  ;  or  bihous,  bloody  stools.  The 
unne  is  suppressed  ;  the  voice  is  hoarse.  Pulse  small,  intermittent, 
hardly  perceptible.  The  extremities  are  cold,  and  there  are  violent 
cramps  in  legs,  feet,  and  calves.  Convulsions  are  another  prominent 
feature.  There  is  mental  excitement,  which  has  in  some  cases  lasted 
for  three  days.  Sometimes  there  is  stupor,  at  other  times  conscious- 
ness remains  till  death. 

The  e£Eects  do  not  come  on  till  ten  or  twelve  hours  after  taking 
the  drug  (in  this  it  is  like  Colchicum).  At  times  the  development  of 
choleraic  symptoms  saves  the  patient  General  cholera  symptoms 
are  developed  as  with  A.  muscarius.  ChiUiness  also  predominates. 
Agaric,  phal  is  a  poison  of  great  intensity  and  fatality. 

STMPT0H8. 

8.    Head.— Vertigo  always  on  rising  up. — Frightful  pains  in  head. 

3.    Eyes. — Pupils  much  dilated. — Eyes  sunken,  weak,  and  lustreless. 

6.  Face. — Deathlike  pallor ;  face  sunken  ;  cyanotic. — Anxious  coun- 
tenance, hippocratic. — Nose  and  mouth  dry. — Tetanic  closure  of  jaws,  with 
at  times  grating  of  the  teeth. 

8.  Mouth.^Teeth  and  gums  black.— Cold  tongue.— Breath  cold. — 
Trismus. — Speech  slow,  difficult — Stammering. 

g.    Throat.— Dry  throat. 

1I9 18.  Stomach  and  AtKlomen.  —  Violent  thirst ;  nausea ;  vomit- 
ing ;  then  diarrhoea. — ^Very  frequent  mucous  and  bilious  vomiting. — ^Vomiting 
of  an  offensive  greenish-coloured  fluid ;  of  blood. — Pains  in  stomach  and 
hypogastrium  followed  by  anxiety  and  vomiting.  —  Incessant  cramps  of 
stomach.— Violent  pains  in  epigastrium,  which  spread  rapidly  over  the  whole 
abdomen  ;  greatly  <  by  pressure. — Abdomen  tense  ;  swollen ;  painf  uL — 
Unendurable  pain  in  hypogastrium  and  lumbar  region. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — ^Anus  inflamed. — Stools :  frequent,  bilious ;  whitish 
as  in  Asiatic  cholera  ;  frequent,  watery  ;  bloody. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Suppression  of  urine. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs. — ^Voice  hoarse. — Respirations  short 

ig.    Heart  and  Pulse. — Pulse:  small  and  intermittent;  hardly  per- 


AGAVE  AMERICANA  45 

oeptible ;  slow  and  somewhat  irregular ;  hard  and  frequent — Pulse  full  and 
rapid  (bter  action). 

tr.  Iambs. — Cold  extremities. — Skin  of  extremities  lost  its  elasticity. — 
Upper  extremities  swell  and  become  livid  ;  finger-tips  livid.— Cramps  of  the 
J^gs ;  of  the  calves  ;  of  the  feet  with  drawing  back  of  the  limbs. 

l|.    Generalities. — ^Violent  convulsions. — Slight  convulsive  motions  in 
the  l^s  and  arms,  which  generally  extend  to  the  muscles  of  the  trunk  and 
caose  irregular  distortions  of  the  whole  body.  —  Constant   restlessness. — 
Debility;  prostration. — ^Malaise. — Staggers  as  if  intoxicated,  and,  with  odd 
gesticulations,  labours  to  express  his  su£Ferings  but  cannot  articulate  a  syllable. 
95.    Skin. — Body  covered  with  livid  spots. 
sG.    Sleep. — Somnolence. 
17.    Fever. — Marked  chilliness.— Sweat  cold.— Skin  cool,  afterwards  hot. 


AgaTe  Americana. 

American  Aloe.    Centuiy  plant.    N.  0.  Amaryllidaceae.    Tincture  of 
nr^-chopped  leaves. 

WM— I.    Gonorrhoea.    Hydrophobia.    Scurvy.    Stomacace. 

Quupaoteristlos. — Agave  is  an  unproved  remedy.  The  juice  of  it 
fermented  is  the  Mexican  intoxicating  beverage  called  '^  Pulque." 
The  plant  has  a  load  reputation  as  a  remedy  for  hydrophobia.  A 
striking  case  is  quoted  by  the  H.  Recorder  from  El  Sigh  Medico.  A 
boy  developed  the  classical  symptoms  of  hydrophobia  four  and  a  half 
oionths  after  being  bitten  :  Quarrelsomeness,  excitement,  fright, 
inability  to  swallow,  small  frequent  pulse,  great  anxiety.  Finally 
swallowing  was  impossible,  restraint  had  to  be  used  to  prevent  him 
biting  his  nurses  in  the  hospital,  when,  as  a  last  resource,  a  piece  of 
Agitoc  was  ofiFered  to  the  boy  by  the  doctor  in  attendance,  cut  from  a 
hedge  of  the  plant  with  which  the  hospital  grounds  were  fenced.  To 
the  astonishment  of  all,  the  boy  reached  for  it  and  ate  it  greedily, 
almost  without  chewing.  By  evening  a  decrease  in  the  violence  of 
the  nervous  attacks  was  manifest,  though  they  remained  as  frequent 
as  before.  The  improvement  was  slow  but  continued.  On  the  fourth 
day  he  took  some  nourishment,  but  also  continued  chewing  Agave  and 
showing  the  juice.  On  the  fifth  day  he  recovered  consciousness 
by  still  demanded  Agave,  On  the  eighth  day  he  said  he  did  not  want 
any  more  as  "it  tasted  too  bitter  and  caused  a  burning  in  the  mouth." 
He  had  no  {iirther  symptoms  of  the  disease.  According  to  Hansen 
^0^  is  indicated  in  scurvy,  stomacace,  and  painful  erections  in 
gonon-hoa. 

Belstfons. Compare:  Lyssin,  Fagus,  Lach.,  Aloe,  and  other 

'^^"ceoos  plants. 


inched   Cf     ;;rt,.;: 


*  i 


46  AGNUS  CASTUS 


Agnus  Castas. 


Verbena  verticillata,  Vitex  agnus  castus  (Linn.).  The  Chaste 
Tree.  (Shores  of  Mediterranean,  Proven9e,  and  Greece.) 
N.  0.  Verbenaceae.    Tincture  of  ripe  berries. 

CllnioaL^Agalactia.  Anus,  excoriation  and  chaps  of.  Ascites.  Dislocations. 
Gonorrhoea,  secondary.  Gouty  joints.  Gums,  ulcerated.  Impotence.  Knees, 
coldness  of.  Leucorrhcea.  Mouth,  ulcers  in.  Rheumatic  nodes.  Spleen,  swelling 
of;  induration  of.  Sprains.  Sterility.  Testicles,  swelling  of;  induration  of. 
Toothache. 

GharaoteristioB. — ^As  its  name  implies,  Agnus  castus  produces  its 
chief  effects  in  the  sexual  sphere,  causing  depression  of  function. 
General  debility  and  depression  of  vital  power  are  marked.  There 
are  very  characteristic  symptoms  in  the  mental  sphere.  Great  sadness 
with  a  fixed  idea  of  approaching  death.  This  fear  is  not  of  immediate 
death  as  with  AcaniU,  but  ttie  patient  thinks  it  is  sure  to  come  after  a 
while,  and  there  is  no  use  in  doing  anything.  When  this  mental  state  is 
found  after  confinement  and  the  milk  fails  to  appear,  Agn.  c.  is  the  remedy. 
Absent-mindedness.  Drowsiness.  It  corresponds  to  lymphatic  con- 
stitutions. Premature  old  age,  with  apathy  and  melancholy,  self-con- 
tempt from  sexual  abuse.  Nervous  debility  in  unmarried  persons. 
Impotence  and  gleet  in  old  offenders.  Among  other  peculiar  symptoms 
are :  Illusion  of  smell  as  of  herrings ;  or  musk ;  ulcers  in  mouth  and  on 
gums.  Tearing  pain  in  lower  jaw.  Toothache  from  hot  food  or  drink. 
Swelling  and  induration  of  spleen.  Rumbling  of  flatus  during  sleep. 
Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  whilst  straining  at  stool.  Suppressed 
menses  with  abdominal  pain.  Leucorrhcea  staining  yellow.  Sterility. 
Deficiency  of  milk,  with  despair  of  recovery.  Pain  as  if  dislocated  in 
joints.  Joints  easily  twisted.  Rheumatic  and  gouty  nodosities  on 
joints. 

Relations. — Agnus  is  the  only  proved  member  of  the  Verbena 
family,  though  the  Labiatae  or  Mint  family  are  closely  allied.  //  is 
antidoicd  by :  Camphor,  Nat.  mur.  (headache) ;  strong  solutions  of 
table-salt.  It  is  followed  well  by :  Ars.,  Bry.,  Ign.,  Lye.  Pul.,  Sul., 
Selen.  Compare:  (Leucorrhcea  staining  yellow),  Nux,  Chel.,  Carb.  an., 
Kreas.    Teste  groups  it  with  Mur.  ac.  and  Hyo. 

Causation. — Sexual  excesses.  Repeated  attacks  of  gonorrhoea 
or  gleet.    Sprains  or  over-lifting. 

STHPTOHB- 

1.  Mind. — Extreme  absence  of  mind ;  unable  to  recollect  things ;  finds 
it  difficult  to  read  or  keep  up  the  train  of  thought. — Despairing  sadness ;  low- 
spirited  ;  fears  of  approaching  death  ;  keeps  repeating  that  she  will  soon  die. 

2.  Head. — Tearing  pain,  with  pressure  in  the  temples  and  forehead  (in 
the  brain)  ;  <  during  motion. — Pain  in  the  temple,  as  from  a  blow. — Heavi- 
ness in  the  head,  and  pressure,  as  if  the  head  would  fall  forward. — Pain  in  the 


AGNUS  CASTUS  47 

wtex,  as  from  staying  in  a  room  filled  with  a  thick  and  smoky  atmosphere. — 
TeosioD  and  chilliness  in  the  scalp,  which  is  warm  to  the  touch. 

3.  Eyes.— Corrosive  itching  or  gnawing  itching  over  and  on  the  eye- 
brows, on  the  eyelids  and  under  the  eyes;  >  by  scratching,  but  it  soon 
returns— Dilated  pupils  (and  photophobia). 

4.  Ears. — Roaring  in  the  ears. — Hardness  of  hearing. 

5.  Noae. — Odour  before  the  nose,  like  herrings  or  musk. — Hard,  aching 
pgessme  on  the  dorsum  of  the  nose ;  >  by  pressure. 

6l  Faee. — Corrosive  itching  of  the  cheeks,  under  the  eyes,  and  on  the 
dun. — Formication  in  the  cheeks. — Rending,  tearing  pain  under  the  alveoli  of 
the  r.  lower  jaw. 

S.  Mouth. — Ulcers  in  the  mouth  and  on  the  gums. — ^The  teeth  are 
painful  when  touched  by  warm  food  or  drink. 

10.  Appetite  and  Taste.— -Thirstlessness  and  aversion  to  drink. — 
Metallic,  coppery  taste. 

u.  Stomach. — ^Nausea  in  pit  of  stomach  when  standing ;  later  in  the 
abdomen,  with  a  sensation  as  'd  the  intestines  were  pressing  downwards ; 
constant  inclination  to  support  bowels  with  the  hands. 

11.  Abdomen. — ^Abdomen  sore  to  touch. — Swelling  and  induration  of 
the  spleen,  esp.  after  intermittent  fevers. — ^^cites. — Rumbling  of  flatulence 
during  sleep. — Fear  as  if  entrails  were  sinking  down ;  constantly  wants  to 
to  support  bowels  with  hands. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Difficulty  of  passing  soft  stools. — ^When  pressing 
at  stool,  discharge  of  prostatic  fluid. — Sensation  as  of  subcutaneous  ulceration 
near  the  anus,  only  when  walking. — Corrosive  itching  of  the  perineum. — Rha- 
gades  at  the  anus. — Deep  fissures  of  the  anus,  often  giving  pain  when  walking. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  micturition. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Diminution  of  sexual  power. — ^The  penis  is 
small  and  flaccid;  so  relaxed  that  voluptuous  fancies  excite  no  erection. — 
Ped>le  erections  without  sexual  desire. — ^The  testicles  are  cold,  swollen,  hard, 
and  paanfuL — Impotence,  with  gleet  (esp.  with  those  who  have  frequently 
had  gonorrhoea). — Gleet,  without  sexual  desire  or  erections. — Emission  of  pros- 
tatic fluid  when  straining  at  stool ;  during  micturition. — Drawing  along  the 
spennatic  cords. — Pollutions  from  irritable  weakness  with  prostatorrhoea. — 
Itdiing  of  the  genital  organs. — ^Yellow  discharges  from  the  urethra. — Gonor- 
rhoea, with  suppressed  sexual  desire. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — ^Transparent  leucorrhoea;  parts  very 
relazed. — Leucorrhoea  spotting  linen  yellow.— Sterility,  with  suppressed  menses, 
and  want  of  sexual  desire. — Milk  scanty  or  entirely  suppressed. — Deficient 
secretion  of  milk  in  lying-in  women.— -Swelling  and  inflammation  of  the 
uterus.— Retained  placenta. 

18.  Chest. — Hard  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  sternum,  esp.  during 
a  deep  inspiration. — Cough  in  the  evening  in  bed,  before  going  to  sleep. 

2S.  Upper  Limbs. — Hard  pressure  in  right  axilla  and  upper  arm ;  worse 
from  touch  and  motion. — Swelling  of  the  finger  joints,  with  arthritic,  tearing 


Q.  Lower  Limbs. — ^Lancinating  pain  in  the  right  hip-joint — Heaviness 
of  right  foot,  as  from  a  weight— Stitches  in  the  legs  (left  big  toe). — ^Tearing 
pain  in  points  of  toes ;  worse  when  walking. 


48  AGROSTEMA  GITHAGO 

34*  Generalitles.--Great  debility.— Inflammatory,  rheumatic  swelling 
of  the  joints. — Gouty  nodosities. — Sprains,  bad  results  from  lifting  too  much. 
— Feet  turn  under  when  walking. 

25.  Skin.— Corrosive  itching  on  diflFerent  parts  of  the  body,  >  by  scratch- 
ing, but  it  soon  returns. — Itching  around  the  ulcers,  in  the  evening. 

27.  Fever.— Pulse  small,  slow,  imperceptible.— Chilliness,  internal  with 
trembling,  the  external  skin  is  warm. — Much  chilliness,  with  cold  hands. — 
Flushes  of  burning  heat,  principally  in  the  face,  with  cold  knees  in  the  evening 
in  bed. — Perspiration  almost  only  on  the  hands,  when  walking  in  the  open  air. 


Igraphis  Nutans. 


Bluebell.    Wild  Hyacinth.    Scilla  nutans.    AT.  0,  Liliacese.    Tincture 
of  fresh  plant  and  growing  shoots. 

GUnloaL — Adenoids.    Catarrh.    Deafness.    Diarrhoea. 

Gharaoteristiofl. — Agraphis  is  one  of  the  remedies  introduced  by 
Dr.  Cooper.  It  partakes  of  the  characters  of  the  lilies  and  corresponds 
to  catarrhal  conditions.  Obstruction  of  the  nostrils,  especially  from 
adenoids,  and  throat  deafness  I  have  frequently  seen  relieved  by  the 
remedy.  The  action  of  it  is  felt  towards  the  root  of  the  nose.  The 
plant  grows  in  sheltered  places,  and  Dr.  Cooper  gives  >  from  shelter 
as  a  leading  indication.  It.  also  corresponds  to  chill  from  cold  winds, 
and  is  very  like  Silica  in  this.  I  regard  it  as  one  of  the  leading 
remedies  in  cases  of  adenoids.  Dr.  Cooper  gives  :  "  Adenoids  with 
enlarged  tonsils  ;  frequently  accompanying  dentition."  He  has  cured 
with  it  mucous  diarrhoea  following  a  suppressed  cold. 

Relations. — Compare :  AIL  cep.,  All.  sat.,  Scilla,  &c. 


Agrostema  Githago. 

Lychnis  githago.  Corn-cockle.  N.  0.  Caryophyllaceae.  Trituration 
of  the  seeds,  which  are  poisonous  and  contain  Saponine.  Pre- 
parations of  an  active  principle  Githargin. 

GUnloal. — Gastritis.    Paralysis.    Tenesmus. 

GharaoteristioB. — Our  knowledge  of  this  plant  is  derived  almost 
entirely  from  cases  of  poisoning  in  persons  who  have  eaten  bread 
containing  the  seeds.  Sensations  of  burning  predominate.  There  is 
also  vertigo  and  headache  and  in  some  cases  coma.  Locomotion  is 
impaired,  and  there  is  difKculty  in  remaining  erect. 

Belattons.— Com/aris ;  Lathyrus,  Secale. 


AILANTHUS  GLANDULOSA  49 

BTHPTOMS. 

a.  Head.— Vertigo. — Headache. — Sensation  of  heat  and  burning  rises 
into  vertex  from  L  lower  jaw ;  almost  makes  her  crazy. 

8.  Mouth. — ^M  outh  dry  and  hot.— Palate  has  a  red  margin. — Burning 
on  palate  in  a  short  time  (Githargin). 

n.  Stomach. — ^Nausea  and  vomiting. — Burning  from  stomach  along 
oesophagus  to  throat  and  in  chest. — Knife-like  pains  in  stomach  at  times. 

13.  Stool  and  Rectum. — Constipation  with  tenesmus. — Diarrhoea  with 
tenesmus. — Burning  in  lx)wels  and  rectum. 

SOb    Back. — ^Tearing  along  spine. 

S4.   Generalities. — Difficult  to  remain  erect — Locomotion  impaired. 


Ailanthns  Glandnlosa. 

The  Tree  of  Heaven.  (Extern  Asia  ;  cultivated  as  a  shade-tree  in 
North  America.)  N,  O,  Simarubaceas.  Tincture  from  flowers 
beginning  to  open. 


L — ^Acne.  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.  Chancre.  Coryza.  Diphtheria. 
Headache.  Mumps.  Puerperal  fever.  Rheumatic  fever.  Scarlatina,  Syphilis. 
Typhoid  lever.    Typhus  fever. 

GharaeteristiOB. — Corresponds  to  conditions  characterised  by 
certain  livid  or  purpled  appearances  of  the  skin.  Rash  coming 
oat  in  patches.  Eruptions  which  are  slow  in  appearing.  Low 
adyipunic  forms  of  disease  with  extreme  prostration,  torpor, 
vomiting.  Prostration  at  the  outset  of  a  disease  is  a  leading 
indication  for  it  The  patient  is  stupid,  dull,  delirious,  weak.  It 
has  proved  of  signal  service  in  cases  of  malignant  and  suppressed 
scariatina.  The  head  is  burning  hot,  with  piercing  pains.  The  parotid 
dands  are  sensitive  and  enlarged.  The  attacks  are  characterised  by 
nilness  of  head  with  heat;  pains  burning,  darting  in  temples  and 
occtpnt ;  vertigo  and  nausea.  The  rash  of  Ailanth.  often  returns 
annually.  A  feeling  of  fulness  everywhere,  and  a  sensation  of  passage 
of  electric  cnrrent  from  head  into  Umbs  are  prominent  in  the  provings. 
Wtfa  the  low  fever  of  Ailanth.  there  is  stupor  or  indifiFerence  with 
sibling.  There  is  constant  frontal  headache  of  a  neuralgic  character. 
Paroxysmal  headache  with  drowsiness  during  day,  confused  mind, 
depression.  The  throat  is  severely  afiEected :  thick,  oedematous,  dry, 
ehoky  feeling.  Dry,  rough,  scrapy,  <  morning.  Livid,  swollen, 
with  ulcers  oozing  a  fetid  discharge. 

The  symptoms  are  >  lying  on  right  side  (bronchial  affections). 
Sitting  up  ^  vomiting,  dizziness.  Motion  =:  staggering.  Walking 
about  >  toothache. 

It  is  suited  to  nervous,  sensitive  persons.  Bilious  temperament. 
Stout  and  robust. 

Ifatla^^ff- — ^Ailanth.  is  related  botanically  to:  Ptelea  and  the 
VOL.  I.  5 


50  AILANTHUS  GLANDULOSA 

Xanthoxyleae.  //  is  anlidoUd  by  :  Alcohol,  Rhus  t,  Nux.  Compare  : 
Am.  c,  Arn.y  Arum  tr.,  Aloe  (duU  frontal  headache),  Bap.,  Bry.,  Gels., 
Hyo.,  Lach.,  Nit  ac,  Nux  v.,  PhytoL,  Hydrocy.  ac,  Rhus  t.,  Stram., 
Echin.  a 

STMPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — ^Anxiety  and  restlesness. — Low-spirited ;  continually  sighing. 
— Extreme  irritability.— -Semi-conscious,  cannot  comprehend  what  is  said  to 
him. — Stupor,  delirium,  and  insensibility. — Constant  muttering  delirium,  with 
sleeplessness  and  restlessness. — Since  the  poisoning  all  antecedents  are 
forgotten ;  or  remembered  as  matters  belonging  to  another,  or  read  about. — 
Raging  delirium  with  brilliant  eyes. 

2.  Head. — Severe  headache,  delirium,  with  fever  and  anxiety. — Severe 
headache,  with  dizziness,  and  red,  hot  face ;  cannot  sit  up. — Dizzy  when 
rising  up. — Dull,  heavy  pressing  in  forehead ;  disinclined  to  think  or  acL — 
Darting  through  temples  and  occiput,  with  confusion  of  ideas. — Head  burning 
hot  with  piercing  pains. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  sufiFused  and  congested ;  startled  look  when  aroused  ; 
pupils  dilated  and  sluggish. — Photophobia. — Conjunctivitis;  smarting,  aching, 
lachrymation,  purulent  discharge. 

4.  Ears. — Pain  in  ear  when  swallowing. — Parotid  gland  sensitive  and 
enlarged. 

5.  Nose. — Copious,  thin,  ichorous,  and  bloody  discharge  from  the  nose. 
— Nostrils  congested. — Nose  dry ;  secretion  suppressed. — Coryza,  with  rawness 
in  nostrils ;  sneezing. — Loss  of  smell. 

6.  Face. — Face  sallow,  jaundiced ;  blue  circles  round  eyes. — Face  red 
and  hot,  covered  with  a  rash. — Face  mahogany-coloured. — Great  prostration, 
and  countenance  indicative  of  much  distress. — Purphsh  face. — Irregular  spots. 
— Lips  swollen,  cracked ;  ulcers  near  commissures. 

8.  Mouth.— Teeth  covered  with  sordes.— Tearing  in  teeth  (1.)  and  face 

<  lying  down,  >  walking  about,  and  by  external  pressure. — Tongue  dry, 
parched,  cracked. — ^Tongue  moist ;  furred  white  ;  tip  and  edges  livid. 

9.  Throat. — ^Throat  tender  and  sore  on  swallowing,  or  on  admission  of 
air. — ^Throat  sore  on  swallowing,  hawks  up  a  greenish  purulent  matter. — 
Diphtheria,  with  extreme  prostration. — ^Throat  livid,  almost  purple ;  swollen  ; 
tonsils  prominent,  and  studded  with  many  deep,  angry-looking  ulcers,  oozing 
a  scanty,  fetid  discharge ;  external  neck  swollen  and  sensitive. — Irritability  of 
the  throat,  and  hawking  up  of  mucus ;  puruloid ;  hard  white  lumps. — ^Thick, 
oedematous  and  dry  choky  f  eeUng  in  throat — ^Throat  dry,  rough  and  scrapy ; 

<  in  morning. 

11.  Stomach. — ^Vomits  food  speedily  during  the  chill ;  suddenly  and 
violently  when  sitting  up ;  with  stupor. — ^Thirst  for  cold  drinks ;  for  brandy. — 
Peculiar  feeling  of  emptiness  in  stomach. 

12.  .  Abdomen. — ^Tenderness  over  liver  region. — Burning  in  stomach 
and  bowels. — ^Tympanites. 

13.  Stool. — ^Thin,  watery,  o£Fensive  diarrhoea,  passing  involuntarily  with 
the  urine. — Stools  frequent,  watery,  forcibly  expelled. — ^Tapeworm. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Scanty  or  suppressed  urine;  passed  uncon* 
sciously;  acid. 


ALETRIS   FARINOSA  51 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sore  on  prepuce,  looking  like  incipient 
chancre. 

i&  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Malignant  puerperal  fever.— Vomiting 
of  piquancy. 

i^L  Respiratory  Organs. — Breathing  hurried,  irregular,  heavy. — Cough 
deep,  exhausting,  dry,  hacking ;  in  violent  fits,  before  retiring  or  on  rising, 
imt^  spotum  is  raised. — Sputa  :  blood-mixed ;  yellow ;  bitter  ;  <  morning. — 
Aphonia.— Ooupy  choking. 

18.  Chest. — Stitching  and  aching  in  chest — Lungs  sore  and  tender. — 
Tired  feeling  in  lungs,  almost  too  much  exertion  to  breathe. — Burning  in 
r.  long ;  contracted  f eding  in  L — Chest  feels  strapped ;  or  as  if  air-cells  stuck 
together. 

11^  Heart. — Rapid,  small  pulse,  weak,  frequent,  and  irregular. — Dull  pain 
aad  contracted  feeling  in  region  of  base  of  heart  and  through  centre  of 
Liang. 

90.  Meek  and  Back. — Neck  tender,  and  very  much  swollen. — Constant 
sharp  pains  through  small  of  back  and  hips. 

24.  Generalities. — In  low  adynamic  forms  of  disease,  with  extreme 
prostration,  torpor,  vomiting,  pulse  small  and  rapid,  purplish  appearance  of 
the  skuL—Prostration  at  very  onset  of  the  disease.— -Stupid,  dull,  delirious, 
weak.— Puerperal  fever  characterised  as  above. 

25.  Skin. — Skin  cold,  dry,  livid. — Eruption  scanty  with  sore  throat ;  of  a 
bioish  tint ;  livid  ;  forehead  and  face  of  a  purplish  colour. — Body  and  limbs 
covered  with  an  irregular  patchy  eruption  of  a  livid  colour,  disappearing  on 
pressure,  returning  very  slowly. — Large  blisters  filled  with  dark  serum. — 
Eruptions  of  miliary  rash  in  patches  of  dark,  almost  livid  colour ;  most  on 
forehead  and  face. 

96l    Sleep. — Drowsy,  restless,  soon  passes  into  insensibility. 


Aletris  Farinosa. 

Star  Grass.    Blazing  Grass.    Colic  Root.    Unicom  Root.    (United 
States.)     N.  O.  Haemodoraceas.    Tincture  of  root. 


L— Abortion.  Anaemia.  Colic.  Constipation.  Convulsions.  Debility. 
D^fsmenorrhoea.  Dysuria.  Endometritis.  Fever.  Haemorrhoids.  Hysteric  colic. 
iDdigestion.  Leacorrhoea.  Menorrhagia.  Myalgia.  Pregnancy,  vomiting  of. 
Steniity.    Uterus,  pain  in  ;  prolapse  of. 

Charaoteristlcs.— i4/d/.  far.  is  said  to  be  the  most  bitter  of  all 
plants.  It  is  characterised  by  weariness  of  body  and  mind.  Want  of 
appetite,  especially  in  connection  with  uterine  disorders.  The  least 
food  distends  the  stomach.  There  are  fainting  attacks  with  vertigo. 
Emaciation  is  marked  in  some  cases.  Disgust  for  food,  nausea ; 
constipation.  Obstinate  vomiting  of  pregnancy.  Many  s3rmptoms 
appear  in  the  uterine  sphere  :  uterine  atony,  menses  profuse  and 
premature  with  labour-like  pains  or  amenorrhcea,  debility  from  loss 
of  fluids,  protracted  illness.    Menorrhagia,  black  clots,  fulness  and 


52  ALETRIS  FARINOSA 

weight  Leucx)iThoea,  with  debility.  Sterility.  Habitual  tendency  to 
abortion.  Sensation  of  weight  in  uterine  region  and  tendency  to 
prolapse.  Sensation  of  weight  in  occiput  as  if  it  would  draw  the 
head  back.  It  is  most  suited  for  chlorotic  girls  and  pregnant  women. 
Weak,  emaciated  people. 

Relations. — Compare  :  Helonias  dioica  ("False"  Unicom,  not  to 
be  confounded  with  Alet.  f.),  Chin.,  Hydrast.,  Sabin.,  Senec,  Puis., 
Caulo. ;  Dioscor.  (colic  <  bending  forward)  ;  Caust.,  Puis.,  Fer., 
(discharge  of  urine  during  cough) ;  Alumina  (constipation  ;  grasps  the 
seat  tightly,  despairs  of  having  a  stool.  During  stool  terrible  pains  as 
if  a  passage  were  being  forcea,  AL  f.). 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — ^Weariness  of  body  and  mmd. 

2.  Head.— Vertigo,  with  sleepiness,  vomiting,  purging;  even  stupe- 
faction.— ^As  if  head  in  a  vice. — ^Weight  in  occiput ;  as  if  it  would  draw  the 
head  backward. 

3.  £yes. — Eyes  feel  sore  and  look  dim. 

4.  Ears. — Ears  feel  as  if  open  through  from  one  to  the  other. — Deaf  in 
1.  ear  with  shi£Fed  feeling. 

zo.    Appetite. — ^Appetite  lost ;  with  weakness. 

II.  Stomach. — Least  food  distresses  the  stomach  ;  fainting  attacks  with 
vertigo ;  sleepy,  emaciated ;  disgust  for  food,  nausea ;  obstinate  indigestion. — 
Vomiting  during  pregnancy. — Eructations  of  food  in  evening  with  burning  in 
throat — ^All-gone  feeling  in  morning  on  rising,  >  by  eating. — Nausea  is  >  by 
coffee;  is  >  by  dinner,  but  returns  with  gagging  at  sight  or  thought  of 
grease. — Nausea,  with  pressure  in  forehead. 

13.  Abdomen. — Cramps. — Griping. — Pain  all  through  abdomen,  settling 
into  lower  part,  >  passing  flatus  and  scanty  diarrhGcic  stool ;  pain  < 
bending  forward,  >  bending  backward,  tlien  the  pain  increased  and  it 
seemed  as  if  all  the  insides  had  settled  into  lower  abdomen  and  were  cut  with 
knives ;  >  scanty  diarrhoeic  stool. — ^Aching  in  hypogastrium  and  across  back 
of  hips. — Hysteric  colic. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Scanty  diarrhoeic  stool;  tenesmus  during 
and  after  stool,  with  feeling  as  if  lower  part  of  rectum  closed. — Fearful 
pains  in  rectum  and  anus;  during  a  movement  terrible  pain  as  if  forcing 
a  passage. — Inveterate  constipation  as  from  rectal  atony. — Frequent  ineffectual 
urgings. — Stool :  loose,  painful,  offensive,  frequent ;  thin  with  hard  lumps  in 
it ;  hard,  delayed,  small,  scanty,  difficult. — Haemorrhoids. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Micturition  rare. — Incontinence,  <  walking 
fast  or  sneezing. — Urine  scanty,  phosphatic. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Premature  profuse  menses  with  labour- 
like pains. — ^Amenorrhoea  or  delayed  menses  from  atony ;  weariness  of  mind 
and  body ;  abdomen  distended,  bearing-down. — Menses  too  soon  with  colic, 
light-coloured. — Menorrhagia,  profuse,  black  with  coagula;  fulness  and 
weight — Leucorrhcea,  white  stringy. — Prolapsus. — Sterility. — Habitual  ten- 
dency to  abort ;  sensation  of  weight  in  uterine  region  ;  tendency  to  prolapse. 
— ^Myalgic  pains  like  "  false  pains." — ^Before  menses :  cough. 


ALLIUM  CEPA  53 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Raises  a  good  deal  of  froth,  feds  as  if 
iR^anted  to  cough  and  couldn't— Tickling,  short,  dry,  hard  cough  on  waking, 
becoming  spasmodic,)  <  by  talking;  ZZ  discharge  of  urine. — Later,  cough 
incessant,  like  whooping-cough ;  loses  breath ;  cyanotic ;  >  suddenly  on 
occurrence  of  menses  eight  days  too  soon. 

18.  Chest. — Pain  in  1.  breast  as  if  a  knife  ran  into  it. — Pain  in  1.  breast, 
then  extending  through  into  back  to  L  of  lower  part  of  r.  scapula. — Pulse 
irregular  and  intermittent 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Pain  in  centre  of  nape,  running  into  L  shoulder ; 
then  pain  in  nape  moved  up  to  occiput,  and  remained  there  all  evening. — Sharp 
pain  from  point  of  L  scapula  through  to  1.  breast — Sensation  as  if  back  would 
break  just  above  waist;  afterwards  same  pain  higher  up. — Backache  with 
dragging  in  sacral  regions,  and  stringy,  colourless  leucorrhoea,  beginning 
when  walking. 

21.  Limbs. — Sharp  pain  in  r.  shoulder  joint,  streaked  down  arm,  then 
into  1.  chest,  settling  above  nipple. — Knees  painful  sitting. — R.  leg  feels 
paralysed  below  knee,  numb,  could  not  bear  weight  on  it. 

25.  Skin. — Itching  papillary  eruption  across  chest  and  back,  <  by 
scratching,  >  by  rubbing.  • 

96.    Sleep. — Restless  fore  part  of  night 

27.  Fever.— Chilly,  face  flushed.~Limb$  cold,  head  and  face  hot  and 
flushed. 


AUium  Cepa. 


Cepa.    Common  Red  Onion.   N.  O.  Liliaceae.    Tincture  of  the  onion  ; 
or  of  whole  fresh  plant  gathered  from  July  to  August. 

dittioal. — Anus,  fissure  of.  Ascites.  Catarrh.  Cold,  Coryza.  Cough.  Diar- 
rhoea. Facial  paralysis.  Feet,  easily  galled.  Hay-fever.  Hernia.  Influenza. 
Laryngitis.  Panaritium.  Pneumonia.  Trauma.  Whitlow.  Whoopiog-congh. 
Yellow  fever. 

Charactoristicfl. — Allium  cepa  covers  more  symptoms  of  common 
cold  than  any  other  remedy,  as  the  well-known  effect  of  onions  in  pro- 
ducing tears  would  suggest.  It  will  cure  a  large  proportion  of  cases 
of  cold  in  the  head,  but  the  conditions  which  most  particularly  indicate 
it  are  :  Cough,  or  cold,  or  headache  <  in  warm  room,  >  in  open  air, 
<  again  on  returning  to  warm  room.  It  causes  burning  of  eyelids, 
nose,  mouth,  throat,  bladder,  skin.  Inflammation  and  increased  secre- 
tion of  mucous  membranes:  neuralgic  pains  like  a  long  thread;  in 
face,  head,  neck,  and  elsewhere  ;  <  evening  ;  towards  ear  from  deep 
within  head.  The  toothache  of  Cepa  is  >  by  cold  air  or  cold  wash- 
ing. It  is  suited  to  traumatic  neuritis.  Hurts  do  not  heal.  The  feet 
are  easily  galled  t>y  walking.  It  was  recommended  by  Dioscorides  as 
a  remedy  tor  this  condition,  and  homceopathy  has  confirmed  his  obser- 
vation. Desire  for  raw  onions  is  an  indication  for  it.  Thread-like 
pains  are  common  in  various  parts  and  are  characteristic  of  Cepa. 


54  ALLIUM   CEPA 

Thread-like  pains  in  face.  Left-side  facial  paralysis  has  been  cured  by 
Cepa.  The  cough  of  Cepa  is  caused  by  tickling  in  larynx  ;  constant 
inclination  to  hack  in  order  to  relieve  it.  It  has  cured  violent  catarrhal 
laryngitis  ;  hoarse  cough  with  feeling  as  if  it  would  split  and  tear  the 
larynx,  causing  watering  of  eyes.  Cough  from  inhaling  cold  air.  Cepa 
has  yawning  and  drowsiness.  A  raw  onion  eaten  just  before  going  to 
bed  is  a  popular  remedy  for  sleeplessness.  Cepa  is  a  left-side  medicine 
primarily.  Symptoms  go  from  left  to  right.  Left  eye  ;  left  facial 
paralysis  ;  left  inguinal  ring.  Rest  <  ;  motion  >.  <  Afternoon  and 
evening ;  when  lying  down.  Damp  cold  wind  and  weather  r=  colds 
and  toothache.  But  cold  water  and  open  air  >  ;  warm  room  <. 
Picking  or  sucking  teeth  >  toothache.     Eyes  sensitive  to  touch. 

Relations. — Compare:  Al.  sat.,  Alo.,  Conval.,  Lil.  tig,  Scilla 
(botan.) ;  Antidoted  by :  Arn.  (toothache) ;  Cham,  (abdominal  pains)  ; 
Nux  V.  (coryza  recurring  in  August)  ;  Verat  (colic,  with  despondency)  ; 
Thuja  (offensive  breath  and  diarrhoea  after  eating  onions).  Roasted 
coffee  will  remove  onion  breath.  Followed  by  Calc.  c.  and  SiUc.  in 
polypus.  Incompatible :  All.  sat.,  Alo.,  Scilla.  Complementary  :  Phos., 
Puis.,  Sars.,  Thuj.  Compare  also:  Aco.,  Chlorum,  Ipec;  Lach.  (left  to 
right). 

Causatioii. — Effects  of  exposure  to  damp  cold  winds  and 
weather.  Colds  of  spring ;  hay-fever  of  August ;  epidemics  of 
spasmodic  cough  in  autumn.  Wet  feet.  Eating  spoiled  fish.  Injuries. 
Surgical  operations  (fine  shooting  pains  after). 


BTMPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — ^Very  melancholy. — Fears  pains  will  become  unbearable. — 
Often  very  anxious,  with  catarrh,  dulness  of  intellect. 

2.  Head. — Dulness. — Dull  headache,  with  coryza,  <  in  the  evening ; 
>  in  the  open  air ;  but  <  when  returning  to  a  warm  room. — Pains  in  temples, 
most  in  right ;  aggravated  by  winking ;  extending  over  forehead,  worse  on  1. 
side. — Paiin  in  occiput  and  down  the  neck. 

3.  Eyes. — Flow  of  (mild)  tears. — Excessive  non-excoriating  lachryma- 
tion;  I.  eye  worse,  with  redness  of  the  eyeball;  sensitive  to  light;  worse 
evenings.---Sensation  as  if  eye  were  hanging  by  a  string  or  torn. — Itching, 
biting,  burning  in  the  eyes. — Dulness  of  the  eyes,  with  aversion  to  light, 
and  coryza. — Letters  appear  smaller. — Near  objects  seem  distant  with  yawn- 
ing.— Swelling  around  the  eyes. 

4.  Ears. — Earache. — Discharge  of  pus  from  the  ear. — Hardness  of 
hearing. 

5.  Nose. — Profuse  watery  discharge  from  the  nose,  with  sneezing,  acrid 
burning,  excoriating  the  nose  and  upper  lip. — Fluent  coryza,  with  running  of 
water  from  the  eyes,  headache,  heat,  thirst,  cough,  trembling  of  the  hands ; 
<  in  evening  and  in  a  room ;  >  in  the  open  air. — Ichor  oozing  out  of 
nose ;  second  stage  of  scarlatina. — Bleeding  of  the  nose. — ^A  sort  of  hay-fever 
every  August,  morning  coryza,  violent  sneezing,  sensitive  to  the  odour  of 
flowers  and  skin  of  peaches. — Nasal  polypi. 

6.  Face. — Paralysis  of  1.  half  of  face,  also  in  limbs  of  same  side. 


ALLIUM  CEPA  55 

9b  Throat. — Sensation  as  of  a  lump  in  the  throat. — ^Expectoration  of  a 
hnnpy  mociis  through  the  posterior  nares. — Pain  in  throat  extending  to  the 
ear.— Bad  odour  from  the  mouth  and  throat. 

XI.  Stomach. — Canine  hunger. — ^Appetite,  increased  or  diminished. — 
Sxtoag  craving  for  raw  onions ;  cannot  take  any  other  nourishment. — Pressure 
in  stomach. — ^Pain  in  region  of  pylorus. — ^Thirst,  with  heat  and  coryza. — 
Nausea,  coming  from  stomach  up  the  throat  into  the  fauces. — ^Weak,  empty 
feeling  in  stomach. — Sour  eructations. 

xsl  Ahdomen. — Rumbling  in  bowels. — ^Very  offensive  flatus. — Belching, 
with  mmbling  in  and  puffing  up  of  the  abdomen. — ^Violent  cutting  pain  in  the 
left  lower  abdomen,  with  frequent  desire  to  micturate,  and  burning  micturi- 
tioa—Pains  in  hepatic  region,  spreading  into  the  abdomen.—- Violent  pains 
in  L  hypogastrium,  with  urging  to  urinate,  urine  scalding.— {Strangtdated 
hernia  has  been  known  to  follow  the  eating  abundantly  of  cooked  onions.) — 
Abdomen  distended,  rumbling,  urging,  and  finally  diarrhoea. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea  after  midnight  and  in  the  morning. — 
Flatus  very  offensive. — Haemorrhoids,  tearing,  jerking  pains  in  anus. — Stitches 
in  the  rectum. — Rhagades  at  the  anus. — Itching  at  the  anus  (worms). 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Strangury  after  wet  feet. — Dribbling  or  spouting 
of  urine  in  old  people. — Frequent  and  copious  urination. — Urine  red,  with 
much  ur^ng  and  burning  in  urethra. — Pressure  and  other  pains  in  the  region 
of  the  bladder. — Sensation  of  weakness  in  the  bladder  and  urethra. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Oppressed  breathing,  from  pressure  in  the 
middle  of  the  chest ;  worse  in  the  evening. — Cough  when  inhaling  cold  air. — 
Catarrhal  hoarseness. — Acute  bronchitis  going  from  1.  to  r. — ^Tickling  in 
throat,  with  aching  in  larynx. — Constant  inclination  to  hack. — Hacking  cough 
from  inhaling  cold  air. — ^Violent  catarrhal  laryngitis ;  the  hoarse  cough  seemed 
to  split  and  tear  the  larynx. — Much  sneezing ;  he  inflates  the  lungs,  raises  him- 
self on  his  toes,  then  gives  a  hearty  sneeze. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Intense  pain  in  nape  of  neck. — Chilly  crawls  run 
down  the  back,  most  at  night,  with  frequent  urination,  followed  by  heat  and 
thirst 

S2.  Upper  Limbs. — Much  pain  under  r.  shoulder-blade. — Sore,  tired 
feeling  of  the  limbs,  esp.  arms. — ^Trembling  of  the  r.  hand. — Panaritium. 
^Painful  affections  of  the  fingers  about  the  nails,  red  streaks  running  up  the 
ano. 

83.  Lo^eer  Limbs. — Soreness;  the  skin  is  rubbed  off  by  the  shoes, 
esp.  on  the  heeL — Pain  on  most  external  soft  part  of  r.  big  toe  and  1. 
middle  finger. 

S4.  Generalities.— Stitches  and  burnings ;  aching. — Stitches  (head,  eyes, 
earsj  rectum,  skin). — Burning  (eyelids,  throat,  nose,  mouth,  bladder,  skin). — 
Bad  effects  from  wet  feet. — Phlegmasia  alba  dolens. — Traumatic  neuritis, 
pains  violent  and  continuous,  wearing  out  patient. — Inflammation  and  in- 
creased secretions  of  the  mucous  membranes. — Senile  gangrene. — ^Trismus 
after  injuries. — ^Weak  and  tired;  has  to  lie  down.— Aching  throughout  the 
body.— Neuralgia  from  old  injuries. — Neuralgic  pains,  like  a  long  thread,  in 
face,  head,  neck,  and  elsewhere ;  <  evenings. 

25.  Skin.— Pricking  as  from  pins.— Redness ;  nettle-rash,  measles, 
scarlatiiia,  when  the  complaints  are  characterised   by   the    characteristic 


58  ALLIUM  SATIVUM 

gums. — ^During  night,  and  in  the  morning,  troublesome  feeling  as  of  a  hair  on 
her  tongue;  renewed  on  waking.— Tongue  pale-red  with  efiFaced  papillae. — 
Dryness  of  palate. — ^Very  copious  flow  of  sweetish  saliva  into  the  mouth  in 
the  forenoon,  after  meals;  more  esp.  after  supper  and  during  the  night. — 
Hot  taste  in  mouth,  proceeding  from  throat,  strongly  reminding  him  of  garlic, 
immediately  after  taking  the  medicine,  and  returning  after  breakfast  to  such  a, 
degree  as  to  cause  a  flow  of  sahva.^The  symptoms  of  the  mouth  are  <  by 
reading. 

Q.  Throat. — Sensation  as  of  something  cold  rising  in  throat — Sensation 
as  of  a  hot  and  smarting  vapour  rising  in  the  throat. — Mucous  accumulations  in 
the  throat,  in  the  morning,  with  heavy  head. — Sticky  feeling  in  throat  with 
dryness,  tickling,  heat,  and  raw  feeling  in  larynx. 

10,  zi.  Appetite  and  Stomach. — ^Voracious  appetite.— Oreat  hun^^er 
from  weakness  of  stomach  without  appetite. — Desire  for  butter. — ^Thirst ;  pre- 
venting sleep. — Burning  eructations,  after  a  meal. — Eructations  exciting 
copious  salivation. — ^The  slightest  deviation  in  diet  disturbs  the  bowels  and 
digestion. — Complaints  from  bad  water ;  from  gluttony. — Chest  complaints  < 
after  eating. — Burning  in  stomach,  which  is  not  painful  when  not  touched,  but 
is  very  sensitive  to  the  least  pressure. — Lancinations. — ^Weight  in  stomach 
which iprevents  sleep. — Pressure  inward  asif rom  a  stone  in  epigastrium. — Pres- 
sure in  upper  abdomen ;  >  -by  sitting  bent  and  pressing  with  both  hands  ; 
pain  became  unendurable  on  walking  out. 

12.  At>domen. — ^Wind  colic ;  twistings  and  pinchings  round  navel. — In- 
complete (as  if  interrupted)  emission  of  fetid  flatus. — Every  step  on  the  pave- 
ment caused  excruciating  pain  as  if  the  intestines  would  be  torn  apart,  >  by 
lying  down. — Everything  seemed  to  drag  downward. — Weight  in  hypogas- 
trium,  immediately  after  a  meal,  without  urging  to  stool  or  urinate. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Expels  flatus. — Stool  flrst  fecal,  then  watery  and 
hot. — Involuntary  stools. — Diarrhoeic  stool,  3  a.m.,  preceded,  accompanied, 
and  followed  by  cuttings  in  abdomen  and  loins. — Normal  stool  immediately 
after  a  meal. — Stool  delayed  from  morning  until  after  dinner,  great  urging ; 
with  stool  heat  in  rectum. — Constipation  with  almost  constant  dull  pain  in 
bowels. — Haemorrhoids. — Prolapsus  ani.— Worms. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  increased. — Whitish  very  abundant  urine, 
becoming  cloudy  from  nitric  acid. — ^A  kind  of  diabetes. — Dark  brown  with 
copious  sediment. — Lessened  urine. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — ^Menses  too  early ;  headache  and  dizzi- 
ness lessen  as  the  flow  becomes  established. — Suppurating  pimples  on  vulva. 
— Suppurating  pimples  on  vulva  during  menses. — During  menses  extensive 
excoriations  of  skin  of  internal  portions  of  thighs. — Bright  red  spots,  with 
itching  and  smarting  on  the  inside  of  the  labia  majora  and  at  entrance  of 
vagina. — (Said  to  be  injurious  during  pregnancy  and  nursing.>~Retained 
placenta. — Dull  stitches  in  r.  mamma. — Breasts  swell  after  weaning. — Swelling 
of  breasts,  sensitive  to  touch. — Eruption  of  red  blotches  between  the  breasts 
and  around  the  nipples. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Difficult  respiration  as  if  sternum  com- 
pressed.— Periodic  asthma. — Painful  irritation  of  windpipe  when  coughing. — 
Scraping  in  larynx  exciting  dry  cough. — ^Almost  continuous  mucous  rales  in 
bronchi. — Cough  seeming  to  come  from  stomach. — Cough  giving  rise  to  per- 
ceptible fetid  smell. — Dry  cough  after  eating. — Morning  cough,  after  leaving 


ALNUS  59 

his  bedroom,  with  extremely  copious  mucousexpectoration. — Sudden  paroxysms 
of  hard,  dry  cough  while  smoking,  compelling  him  to  desist. — Great  diffi- 
cidty  in  expectorating  a  glutinous  mucus. — Expectoration  of  thin,  yellowish, 
pmknt-lodking  blood-streaked  mucus  of  putrid  odour. — ^Cough  <  bending 
had ;  after  eating ;  by  open  air. 

iS.  Chest. — Pain  in  L  chest  with  dark  urine. — Darting  pain  in  the  chest 
wlucfa  prevents  sleep. 

19.    Heart. — ^Leaping  beats  of  the  heart. 

so.  Back. — Red  spots  like  ringworm  on  the  back. — Itching  between 
sfaoolders. — Tearing  pain  in  sacrum. — Cutting  pain  in  sacrum  in  morning. — 
Simple  pain  in  coccyx. 

sa.  Upper  Limbs. — Painful  feeling  of  contraction  in  arm. — Pain  in  fore- 
arm ;  seems  as  if  paralysed. — Burning  then  moisture  in  palms. — Some  red 
spc^  appear  on  hands.--Skin  peels  off  the  hands. — ^Tearing  pains  in  fingers 
extending  below  the  nails. 

S3.  Lovrer  Limbs. — Rheumatism  of  hip.— Tearing  pain  in  hip. — In- 
ttderable  pain  in  common  tendon  of  psoas  and  iliacus  muscles ;  <  from  least 
movement ;  trying  to  cross  legs  causes  him  to  cry  out ;  but  this  causes  no  pain 
if  he  lifts  the  limb  gentiy  with  his  hand ;  <  8  p.m.  in  bed,  cannot  then 
change  his  position  or  sleep. — ^Weakness  in  lower  limbs ;  painful  weariness  in 
the  thiols. — Legs  do  not  grow  as  rapidly  as  the  rest  of  the  body. — Pain  as 
from  a  sprain  in  ankle-joint;  in  toe-joints. — ^Tin^ing  in  feet;  burning  in 
soles ;  stiffness  in  feet — Pains  <  by  changes  of  temperature. 

25.  Sldn. — Skin  sensitive. — Loose;  dry;  wilted  skin. — Swelling  with 
itdiing  and  burning. — Red  spots ;  on  hands,  on  chest,  on  back. — Herpetic 
itching  burning  red  or  whitish  spots  on  a  swollen  suriace. 

i6l  Sleep. — Drowsiness  after  a  meal. — Muscles  twitch  on  falling  asleep. 
—Seep  prevented  by :  stitches  on  chest ;  weight  on  stomach ;  thirst. — Cold- 
ness felt  in  sleep  and  awakening  him  frequently. — Dreams :  of  water  and 
storms ;  of  rapid  transit  from  place  to  place ;  anxious ;  continuing  after 
midag. 

S7.  Fever. — Chilliness  on  one  side  only. — Shivering  before  midday  and 
m  evening. — During  coldness,  redness  of  face. — ^Vomiting  during  the  fever. — 
Sweat  in  afternoon. — Sweat :  acrid ;  causing  itching ;  fetid. 


Alnns. 

Ahnis  rubra,  Tag  Alder;  and  Alnus  glutinosa,  Common  Alder  of 
Europe.  N.  O.  Cupuliferse.  (Not  to  be  confounded  with 
certain  of  the  Rhamnaceas,  which  are  also  popularly  called 
"Alders.")    Tinctures  of  the  bark,  and  of  the  young  shoots. 

CUlteaL— Amenorrhoea.    Glands,   enlarged.    Gleet.    Haemorrhage.    Herpes, 
laipetifo.    Leucorrhoea.     Pnirigo.    Psora.    Rheumatism.    Scrofula.    Syphilis. 

GharaoteristiOB. — Alnus  is  an   unproved  remedy.     The  bark- 
tmcture  of  Alnus  rubra  is  used  by  eclectics  as  an  "alterative"  in 


6o  ALOE 

scrofulous  conditions,  in  chronic  skin  afiFections,  rheumatism,  syphilis, 
gravel,  and  gleet  The  plant  grows  in  swamps  and  marshes.  Among 
its  indications  are :  Leucorrhoea  with  erosions  which  bleed  easily ; 
amenorrhcea  with  burning  pains  from  back  to  pubis.  Hasmaturia. 
Cooper,  who  has  used  a  fresh  plant  tincture  of  A.  glutinosa^  gives : 
"  Pain  in  rectum  after  stool'' ;  and  '' heaviness  in  head  as  after  being 
drunk  the  night  before  "  as  having  been  produced  by  it.  Hale  gives 
as  particularly  indicating  it :  *'  Eruptions  on  the  skin  alternating  with 
diseased  conditions  of  mucous  membrane." 

Relations. — Compare :  Hamam.,  Stilling.,  Phytol.,  Kali  i.,  Merc, 
Nux  v.,  Bapt    Alternating  conditions,  Alo.,  Pod.,  Kali  bi. 


Aloe. 

Aloe  socotrina.    Common  Aloes.    AT.  0.  Liliaceae.    Trituration  or 
solution  in  spirit  of  the  gum. 

OUnioaL— Abdomen,  plethora  of.  Anus,  affections  of.  Bronchitis.  Colic. 
Constipation.  Cough.  Diarrkcea,  Dysentery.  Gleet.  Gonorrhoea.  Hcemorrhoids, 
Hysteria.  Lumbago.  Onanism,  effects  of.  Phthisis.  Proctitis.  Prolapsus  uteri. 
Prostate,  affections  of.       Sacrum,  pain  in.    Tenesmus. 

Gharaoteristios.— i4 /otf  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  famous  drugs. 
It  is  in  worldwide  use  as  a  purgative  at  the  present  day,  and  forms 
a  leading  ingredient  in  a  large  number  of  patent  medicines  for  regu- 
lating the  bowels  and  menstrual  functions.  The  habitual  use  of  these 
medicines  leads  to  all  kinds  of  pelvic  ailments,  and  the  fact  that 
Sulphur  antidotes  Aloe  accounts  for  the  success  of  SuU  as  a  medicine 
to  commence  with  in  many  chronic  cases  where  purgatives  have  been 
used.  Aloe  resembles  AIL  s.  somewhat  closely.  It  causes  congestion 
of  various  parts,  especially  abdomen,  pelvic  organs,  and  head.  A 
periodicity  enters  into  many  of  its  complaints.  There  is  a  periodic 
headache  which  alternates  with  lumbago.  As  winter  approaches  each 
year  it  manifests  itself.  Aloe  has  the  antipsoric  property  of  throwing 
out  internal  complaints  to  the  skin.  Among  the  leading  mental 
symptoms  are  :  Bad  humour,  especially  in  cloudy  weather.  Dis- 
satisfied and  angry  with  himself  <  when  constipated.  Aversion  to 
labour.  Lassitude  alternating  with  great  mental  activity.  Among 
the  other  head  symptoms  are  :  Darting  pains  in  left  temple  <  every 
step.  Carroll  Dunham  cured  a  heavy  frontal  incapacitating  headache 
in  an  old  man  occurring  in  winter  and  alternating  with  a  diarrhoea 
which  occurred  in  sunmier  when  he  was  free  from  headache.  A 
peculiar  dull,  heavy,  pressing  pain  in  forehead,  but  which  indisposes 
to,  or  incapacitates  for,  all  exertion,  especially  intellectual.  Heaviness 
in  the  eyes  as  with  All.  s.  Pressure  in  vertex  and  forehead  as  from 
a  weight.  Compelled  to  make  the  eyes  small  during  pain  in  forehead. 
There  are  yellow  rings  moving  before  eyes.  As  there  are  illusions 
of  sight,  so  there  are  cracklings  in  the  ears.    One  symptom  is  very 


ALOE  6i 

peculiar:  Just  before  getting  into  bed,  sudden  explosion  and  clashing 
in  left  ear,  as  from  br^ddng  of  glass ;  the  clink  of  the  glass  was  heard 
at  the  bottom  of  the  bead  and  extended  thence  toward  the  ri^ht  ear. 
Aloe  exerts  its  most  marked  influence  on  the  abdominal  and  pelvic 
organs.  It  causes  uneasiness  and  pains  in  liver  region.  Fulness, 
heaviness,  heat  and  inflanmiation*  The  whole  abdomen  is  painfully 
sensitive  to  touch.  Rumbling.  Feeling  as  of  a  plug  wedged  in 
between  pelvis  and  coccyx.  Sudden  and  continued  desire  to  go  to 
stool.  I>esire  for  stool  after  each  meal  {Ars.,  Ckin,^  Lyc.^  Pod., 
Trombid.;  while  eating,  Fer,),  Rumbling  and  cramp  in  abdomen 
before  and  during  stool.  The  hard  stool  falls  out  wittiout  being 
noticed,  urging  to  stool  whilst  passing  water ;  every  time  on  passing 
water  feeling  as  if  stool  would  pass.  A  hard  stool  may  be  passed 
involuntarily.  A  child,  constipated  from  birth,  screams  all  the  time 
he  is  being  held  to  stool,  cannot  pass  it,  even  after  enema ;  yet  when 
not  trying  passes  solid  pieces  in  bed  without  knowing.  Cured  with 
Ah.  200  (Nash).  Involuntary  soft  stool  while  passing  wind.  With 
the  diarrhoea,  flatulency,  pinching  in  abdomen,  pain  in  back  and 
rectum  and  chilliness.  Flatus  offensive,  burning,  copious;  much 
flatus  with  small  stool.  Burning  in  anus  with  passing  of  flatus. 
Stools  like  mush,  bright  yellow,  grey,  hot,  undigested.  Mucus  and 
blood  in  faeces.  Profuse  with  jelly-like  lumps.  Watery  stools 
<  standing  or  walking.  Watery  stool  containing  lumps  "  like  frog- 
spawn."  Bilious  yellow  faecal,  bright  yellow  diarrhoea,  great  rumbling 
in  bowels  and  escape  of  much  wind,  <  morning  ;  evening ;  in  damp 
weather ;  from  overheating ;  after  cold  taicen  in  damp  room ;  after 
chagrin.  Diarrhoea  driving  one  out  of  bed  very  early  in  morning  (Sul). 
Diarrhoea  with  sense  of  insecurity  (Phas,)  Faintness  after  stool ;  with 
cold  sweat  Griping  may  {Nux  v.)  or  may  not  {Merc.)  cease  after  stool. 
Heaviness,  heat,  pressing,  burning  in  rectunu  Itching,  burning, 
pulsating  as  from  fissures  at  anus.  After  stool :  cutting ;  feeling  as 
if  more  would  come ;  protruding  piles.  Haemorrhoicb :  protrude 
like  a  bunch  of  grapes  ;  constant  bearing-down  in  rectum  ;  bleeding  ; 
sore ;  tender,  hot ;  <  by  cold  water.  Carroll  Dunham  has  cured 
incontinence  of  urine  in  an  old  man  with  enlarged  prostate  with  the 
Aloe  diarrhoea.  Increased  sexual  desire  in  males,  with  erections. 
Penis  shrunk  and  testicles  cold.  In  females  pain  in  hypogastrium  as 
if  menses  coming  on.  Labour-like  pains  drawing  into  legs.  Menses 
too  early  and  too  profuse.  During  menstruation  :  headache  >  by 
application  of  cold  water ;  earache  ;  pain  in  small  of  back ;  pressing 
down  in  rectum.  Fulness  in  pelvis.  Leucorrhoea  of  bloody  mucus 
preceded  by  colic.  Pain  in  small  of  back,  <  sitting  or  awaking  at 
night,  >  moving  about  Lumbago  alternating  with  headache.  There 
is  <  in  afternoon,  especially  of  symptoms  of  mucous  membranes. 
Many  symptoms,  again,  appear  in  the  evening,  <  yawning,  or  masti- 
cating. There  is  a  diarrhoea  <  in  the  early  morning  (like  Sulph). 
Diarrhoea  <  immediately  after  eating  ;  <  walking  (^sc,  Thuj.),  or 
standing  (SuL),  Like  Pnos.,  it  has  feeling  of  insecurity  on  passing 
wind  or  before  stool.  Symptoms  are  <  from  heat ;  in  hot,  damp 
weather ;   >  from  cold  applications ;  in  cold  weather.    >  From  pass- 


62  ALOE 

ing  flatus.  //  is  suited  to :  old  people ;  to  women  of  relaxed  phleg- 
matic habit ;  to  persons  of  lymphatic  or  hypochondriac  tempera- 
ment. 

RdattonB. — ^Aloe  is  related  to:  All.  cep.,  All.  s.,  Agave,  Sdlla, 
Colch.  //  is  antidoted  by:  Sul.,  Mustard,  Camph.  reUeves  for  a  while, 
Lye,  and  Nux  v.  relieve  the  earache.  //  resembles:  Sul.  in  many 
symptoms,  and  is  of  equal  importance  with  Sul.  in  chronic  diseases 
with  abdominal  plethora  ;  Ailanth.  (dull,  frontal  headache) ;  Gambog. 
(diarrhcea) ;  Ammon.  mur.  (abdominal  and  diarrhceic  symptoms)  ; 
Nux  V.  (gastric,  abdominal  and  uterine  troubles  :  bad  effects  of 
sedentary  habits) ;  iEsc.  (haemorrhoids) ;  Merc,  (dysentery) ;  Pod. 
(alternations  between  head  symptoms  and  abdominal  symptoms). 

Causatioil.— Sedentary  habits. 

STHPTOHS. 

X.  Mind. — ^Anxiety  and  ebullition  of  the  blood. — Restlessness,  fear,  fear 
of  man. — Bad  humour,  esp.  in  cloudy  weather. — He  is  dissatisfied  and  angry 
about  himself ;  more  so  when  he  is  constipated  or  when  he  suffers  from 
pain ;  better  in  the  open  air. — Suffering  makes  her  frantic,  often  loses 
consciousness.— Seems  to  have  a  presentiment  of  approaching  death. — Angry, 
revengeful,  wishes  to  destroy  the  object  of  her  wrath. — ^Aversion  to  labour. 
— Great  disinclination  to  mental  labour ;  it  fatigues  him. — Disinclined  to  move. 
— Exhaustion,  alternating  with  activity. — Children  much  enlivened,  chat  and 
laugh. — ^Anno3dng  amorous  thoughts  present  themselves. 

2.  Head. — Giddiness  and  starting. — Giddiness,  with  anxiety  when 
moving ;  he  feels  as  if  he  were  sitting  too  high  (after  dinner). — Dulness  in 
the  forehead  with  chilliness. —  Dull  headache  across  the  forehead,  with 
heaviness  in  the  eyes,  and  nausea. — Pressure  in  the  forehead  and  vertex,  as 
from  a  weight  (and  in  occiput). — Pressing  pain  above  the  eyes. — Congestions 
to  the  head,  compelling  one  to  sit  up. — Headaches  are  worse  from  heat  and 
better  from  cold  applications. — Stitches  above  the  eyebrows. — Pressing  out  of 
the  temples,  with  flickering  before  the  eyes  and  heat  in  the  face. — Stitches 
in  the  temples  at  every  step. — Headache  after  pain  in  the  abdomen  ;  after  (an 
insufi&cient)  stool ;  worse  from  heat,  better  from  cold. — Sensitiveness  of  the 
scalp  (in  small  spots). — ^With  the  pain  in  the  forehead  the  eyes  become  smzdl ; 
patient  compelled  to  close  them. 

3.  Eyes. — Congestion  to  the  eyes ;  pressure  in  the  orbits. — Lachryma- 
tion. — :Pain  deep  in  the  orbits,  as  if  in  the  muscles  ;  worse  r.  side. — Occasional 
attacks  of  twitching  of  1.  eyelids  during  the  day,  spasmodic  jerk  of  whole  body 
on  falling  asleep  at  night — Flickering  before  eyes,  with  heat  of  the  face. 
— ^Yellow  rings  moving  before  the  eyes. — Compelled  to  make  the  eyes  small, 
with  pain  in  forehead ;  heaviness  of  eyes,  and  nausea. 

4.  Ears. — Hates  musical  sounds  and  noises,  they  set  her  all  in  a  tremor. 
— Earache. — Stitches  in  the  ears ;  first  in  the  1.  ear,  afterwards  in  the  r. — 
Internal  and  external  heat  of  the  ears. — Cracking  in  the  ears  when  reading 
aloud  or  moving  jaws. — ^Just  before  getting  into  bed,  sudden  explosion  and 
clashing  in  1.  ear,  as  from  breaking  of  glass ;  the  clink  of  the  glass  was  heard 
at  the  bottom  of  the  head  and  extended  thence  towards  r.  ear. 


ALOE  63 

5.  Kose. — Reciness  of  the  nose  in  the  open,  cold  air. — Coldness  of  the 
point  of  the  nose. — Bleeding  of  the  nose  in  bed  after  awaking. — Dryness  of 
the  nose  in  the  morning  in  bed. 

6.  Face. — Heat  of  the  face  when  excited,  or  during  headache. — Face 
pale  during  dotidy  weather. — Lips  dry  ;  cracked ;  swollen  ;  pustular  ;  sore  at 


7.  Teeth. — Great  sensitiveness  of  a  decayed  molar  tooth  (lower)  r.  side. 
—Teeth  yellow. 

8.  Month. — Concave  edges  of  teeth  seem  sharp,  and  hurt  the  tongue. 
—Metallic  taste,  with  dry,  irritative  hacking. — Lips  dry,  peeling  off,  cracked. 
Weeding.— Yellow  spots  in  mouth;  yellow  ulcers  on  the  tongue. — ^Tongue 
painful— When  moving  the  tongue,  stitches  from  belo^  to  the  tip. — Dry 
tongue  and  mouth,  with  increased  thirst  and  greater  redness  of  the  lips. — 
Tongue  red  and  dry. — ^Accumulation  of  saliva  in  mouth. 

9.  Throat. — ^Throat  rough,  scraped,  hot,  as  if  burnt — Pain,  when 
yawning,  masticating  solid  food ;  worse  in  the  evening  and  in  the  morning, 
when  awaking. — ^Thick  lumps  of  tough  jelly-like  mucus  in  the  throat  and 
posterior  nares. 

10.  Appetite  and  Taste.— Taste  bitter,  sour,  like  ink.— Aversion  to 
meat ;  desire  for  juicy  things  (fruits) ;  for  salt  food. — Hunger  unusually  keen 
in  the  evening. — ^Thirst  while  eating,  after  eating,  and  during  the  night. — 
After  eating,  flatulency,  pulsations  in  the  rectum,  and  sexual  irritation. — ^As 
soon  as  he  eats  anything,  must  hurry  to  stool. — Sweats  after  drinking. 

11.  Stomach. — Pain  in  the  stomach  after  drinking  water. — Sour  things 
disagree  with  him. — ^Vomiting  of  blood. — Eructations ;  tasteless,  bitter,  sour. 
—Pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  from  a  mis-step. — Painful  pressure  under  the 
stemnm. 

la.  Atxlomen. — ^Tension  in  the  region  of  the  liver. — Uneasiness,  heat, 
prcssore,  and  tension  in  the  region  of  the  liver. — Pain  in  the  liver,  <  on 
standing,  so  that  he  bends  forward.— Stitches  in  the  liver,  when  drawing  a 
kxig  breath. — Congestion  to  the  abdomen. — Sensation  of  fulness,  heaviness, 
heat  and  inflammation. — ^The  whole  abdomen  is  painfully  sensitive  to  the 
touch.— Abdominal  muscles  pain  when  touched,  when  pressing  at  stool,  or  on 
rising  from  a  recumbent  position. — Bloated  abdomen,  more  on  the  left  side, 
or  along  the  colon,  worse  after  eating. — Distension  of  the  abdomen,  esp. 
the  epigastrium ;  with  flatus  moving  about. — Pulsation  in  the  region  of  the 
navel— Pain  around  the  navel,  worse  from  pressure. — Rumbling  in  the 
abdomen. — ^Discharge  of  much  flatulency,  burning,  smelling  offensive,  relieving 
the  pain  in  the  abdomen ;  after  each  meal,  in  the  evening  and  morning,  before 
stools.— Much  soreness  in  the  whole  abdominal  cavity,  so  that  a  false  step 
hurts  clear  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Cutting  in  the  abdomen  with  disincli- 
nation to  go  into  the  open  air,  which  relieves  the  pain. — Heaviness,  fulness, 
and  pressing  down  in  the  pelvis. — Sensation  of  a  plug  wedged  in  between 
symphysis  pubis  and  coccyx ;  with  urging. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Sudden  or  continued  urging  to  stool ;  <  imme- 
diately after  eating;  feeling  of  fulness  and  weight  in  pelvis ;  only  flatus  passes. 
—Desire  for  a  stool  after  each  meal. — Rumbling  and  cramp  in  the  abdomen, 
before  and  during  stool. — ^The  hard  stool  falls  without  being  noticed. — 
luvobntary  soft  stool,  while  passing  wind.— With  the  diarrhoea,  flatulency. 


64  ALOE 

pinching  in  the  abdomen,  pain  in  the  back  and  rectum,  and  chilliness. — 
Diarrhoea  very  early  in  morning,  driving  him  out  of  bed. — Stools  like  mush  ; 
thin,  bright,  yellow,  grey,  hot,  undigested. — Frequent  stools  of  bloody  wsUer» 
violent  tenesmiis ;  fainting ;  passing  of  mucus  in  jelly-like  lumps,  much  flatus. 
— During  the  stool,  congestion  to  the  head  and  red  face,  or  hunger. — Heavi- 
ness, heat,  pressing,  burning  in  the  rectum. — ^Want  of  confidence  in  sphincter 
ani ;  rectum  seems  full  of  fluid  which  feels  heavy,  as  if  it  would  fall  out. — 
When  passing  wind,  feeling  as  if  stool  would  escape  with  it. — Itching,  burning, 
pulsations,  pain  as  from  fissures,  at  the  anus ;  preventing  sleep. — Haemorrhoidal 
tumours,  protrude  like  bunches  of  grapes,  very  painful,  sore,  tender,  hot,  relieved 
by  cold  water. — Fulness  and  pressing  out  in  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Increased  secretion  of  urine,  esp.  at  night. 
— Frequent  urging ;  burning  when  urinating. — Every  time  on  passing  urine 
feeling  as  if  some  thin  stool  would  escape  with  it. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sexual  desire  increased ;  <  after  awaking ; 
after  eating ;  in  the  evening. — Erections  in  the  morning,  and  after  passing 
water. — Involuntary  emissions  during  the  siesta ;  towards  morning ;  followed 
by  sexual  excitement,  micturition,  and  stool,  and  restless  sleep. — Penis  shrunk, 
and  testides  cold. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  as  if  menses 
were  coming  on. — Fulness  and  heaviness  in  the  uterine  region,  with  labour- 
like pains  in  the  loins  and  groins ;  worse  standing. — Labour-like  pains  drawing 
into  the  legs. — Catamenia  too  early,  and  too  profuse. — During  menstruation, 
headache,  which  is  relieved  by  the  application  of  cold  water ;  earache  ;  pain 
in  the  small  of  the  back ;  dragging  down  in  the  rectum ;  fulness  in  the  pelvis. 
— Fluor  albus. — Leucorrhcea  of  bloody  mucus,  preceded  by  colic. — Prolapsus 
uteri  with  the  above  symptoms. — Uterine  haemorrhage  about  the  change  of 
life. 

18.  Chest. — Congestion  to  the  chest. — Breathing  impeded  by  stitches  in 
the  1.  side  of  the  chest — Expectoration  of  blood. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Lumbago,  alternating  with  headache. — Pain  in 
the  small  of  the  back,  <  sitting,  or  when  awaking  at  night ;  >  moving  about. 

21.  Limbs. — Cold  hands  with  warm  feet. — Lameness  in  all  the  limbs. — 
Pricking,  dull  twitching,  drawing  pain  in  the  joints  (fingers,  knees,  elbows). 
— Sensation  of  weakness  in  the  joints  of  the  hands  and  feet. — Pains  of  short 
duration,  as  if  bruised  or  dislocated  (1.  forearm,  r.  shoulder-blade,  1.  ribs). 

24.  Generalities. — Great  weakness,  and  weak  pulse  after  vomiting. — 
Bad  effects  from  sedentary  habits.— Esp.  suitable  for  persons  of  a  lymphatic 
or  hypochondriac  temperament. 

25.  Skin. — Itching,  esp.  of  legs. — Spots  which,  when  scratched,  pain  and 
become  sensitive. 

26.  Sleep.— Cannot  get  to  sleep  for  a  long  time,  thoughts  crowd  upon 
him  and  keep  him  awake. 

27.  Fever. — Chills,  with  coryza,  in  the  cold  open  air ;  at  stool,  shivering. 
Heat  in  spots,  on  scalp  or  face.  Sweat :  smells  strong ;  offensive  on  genitals ; 
at  night,  after  drinking. 


ALUMEN  6s 

Alstonia  Gonstricta. 

Bitter  Bark.  Native  Quinine  Bark.  (New  South  Wales  and  Queens- 
land. A.  scholarisy  growing  in  India  and  Malabar,  is  probably 
identical  in  e£Fects.)  N.  0.  Apocynaceas.  Tincture  of  the 
bark. 

OBiitaL— Delnfity.  Diarrhoea.  Dysentery.  Fevers.  Lactation,  excessive,  effects 
ot  Leooorrboea.  LIcnteria.  Palpitation.  Pregnancy,  vomiting  of  Uterus,  debility  of . 

GharaoterlBticB. — Alstonia  was  proved  by  Dr.  Cathcart,  of 
Australia,  who  found  it  produce  great  debility  and  prostration,  or 
low  fever,  often  with  diarrhcea.  It  is  exceedingly  bitter.  Dr.  Dietz, 
who  has  tested  it  clinically,  gives  the  following  as  leading  indications : 
Debility  from  lack  of  digestive  power  in  the  stomach  or  general 
assimilative  power.  Tongue  generally  has  a  dirty  white  coat, 
especially  at  base ;  though  it  may  be  clean.  It  has  no  relation  to 
purely  nervous  debility.  The  nausea  is  <  morning,  before  breakfast, 
Gc  at  irregular  times,  especially  when  depending  on  reflex  irritation 
from  disturbance  of  pelvic  organs.  An  empty,  gone  feeling  in  stomach 
or  whole  abdomen  at  irregular  times ;  generally  with  tearing,  dragging- 
down  sensation  in  hypogastrium,  as  if  everything  would  escape  from 
the  vulva.  Pale  face,  flushing  on  least  excitement.  Food  seems  to 
remain  in  stomach  a  long  time  undigested.  Diarrhoea  of  imdigested 
food  immediately  after  eating ;  has  to  leave  table  before  finishing  a 
mcaL  (This  symptom  was  cured  by  Alston,  c.  i  x  in  a  patient  who 
had  taken  much  iron,  after  the  failure  of  Puis.,  Sep.^  SuL,  SiL^  Nat.  m.) 
Leucorrhoea  and  beating-down  <  by  walking.  Swollen  feeling  in  right 
ovarian  region.  Sharp  shooting  pain  from  left  side  of  stomach  through 
to  back  (spleen).  At  the  moment  she  falls  asleep,  wakes  up  suddenly, 
becoming  wide  awake,  with  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart  and 
throbbing  in  blood-vessels,  accompanied  by  a  numb  sensation  of  the 
tongue.    <  By  exertion.     >  Lying  down. 

BdattoBB. — Compare :  Alet  f.,  Lil.  t.,  Helon.,  Cedron,  Ceanoth., 
China,  Fer. 

Mnmen. 

Potassic-Aluminic  Sulphate.    Potash  Alum.    K,  SO4  Al.  SO4  24II9O. 
Trituration  of  the  pure  crystals. 

GHBtotL—Alcoholf  effects  of .  Anus,  affections  of.  Bronchitis.  Catarrh.  Cancer. 
Chilbbins.  Colic,  Constipation.  Cough.  Diabetes.  Diarrhoea.  Dysentery.  Eczema, 
^yot  affections  of.  Eyes,  operations  on.  Gleet.  Gonorrhoea.  Haemorrhages. 
Hoarseness.  Lead  colic.  Leucorrhcea.  Locomotor  ataxy.  Noma.  (Esophagus, 
stricture  of.  Paralysis.  Polypus.  Pruritus.  Scurvy.  Skin,  rough.  Strabismus. 
Teeth,  operations  on.  Throat,  affections  of.  Typhoid,  haemorrhage  in.  Ulcers. 
Utenis,  affections  of.    Uvula,  rcJaxecL    Vaginismus. 

Chaiaotari8tic8«— The  well-known  astringent  action  of  Alum. 
gives  a  leading  indication  for  its  use  in  practice.    Sensations  of  dryness 
VOL.  L  6 


66  ALUMEN 

and  contraction  are  prominent  in  various  parts.  I  have  frequently 
removed  with  it  constipation  of  the  most  aggravated  kind,  as  in  cases 
of  cancer  of  uterus  and  rectum.  Stools  as  hard  as  stones  is  the  leading 
indication.  No  desire  for  stool  for  days.  Contractive  sensation  in 
abdomen  and  pelvis,  and  retraction  of  abdomen  as  in  lead  colic. 
Paralytic  states  with  the  sensation  as  if  bound  with  a  tight  band.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  is  equally  available  for  the  states  of  relaxation, 
which  corresponds  with  its  secondary  action  :  sluggish  action  of 
muscles ;  hemorrhages  of  various  kinds  ;  large  clots  in  typhoid  ; 
relaxed  mucous  membranes ;  relaxed  uvula  ;  hoarseness  anci  bron- 
chial affections  ;  diarrhcea.  Catarrhal  conditions  prevail  throughout 
the  remedy.  The  Alum,  patient  is  very  sensitive  to  cold  ;  exposure  to 
air  roughens  and  chaps  the  skin.  Slight  scratches  bleed  Bleeding 
after  tooth  extraction.  There  is  a  tendency  to  indurations  whenever 
inflammations  occur,  hence :  scirrhous  indurations ;  indurated  glands. 
Pains  are  insupportable.  Attacks  come  and  go  suddenly ;  periodic. 
Many  complaints  come  on  during  sleep.  There  is  nightmare.  Turning 
on  r.  side  >  vertigo.  Lying  on  r.  side  brings  on  palpitation.  There 
is  sensitiveness  to  all  sorts  of  weather  changes,  and  especially  to  cold. 
W.  P.  Wesselhoeft  has  cured  bronchitis  characterised  by  scraping 
from  upper  sternum  to  throat,  with  free  expectoration  of  thick,  yellow 
mucus,  paroxysmal  cough,  morning  cough  with  gagging,  aching  in 
chest  and  in  the  lower  part  of  the  back  in  region  of  lower  ribs.  A 
peculiarity  was  the  profuse  expectoration  with  the  scraping,  for 
scraping  coughs  are  usually  dry.  Cepa  had  helped  the  preliminary 
sneezing  and  coryza. 

Reuktions. — AntidoUd  by  :  Cham,  (cramps  in  abdomen) ;  Nux  v., 
Ipec.  (nausea  and  vomiting);  Sul.  Antidote  to:  Lead  poisoning; 
calomel  and  other  mercurials  ;  Aloe  (vomiting  blood).  Similar  to  : 
Alumina,  Aluminium  ;  Alo.  (rectum) ;  Caps,  (long  uvula) ;  Fer.  (relaxed 
abdominal  walls,  prolapsed  uterus) ;  Kali  bi.  (stringy  discharges) ; 
Merc,  (prolapsed  uterus,  vagina,  rectum ;  tenesmus)  ;  Merc  cor., 
Mur.  ac.  Nit.  ac,  Nux  v..  Op.,  Plat,  (lead  poisoning) ;  Plumb.,  Rhatan., 
Stan.,  Sid.,  Sul.  ac.  Zinc  (eyes). 

Causatioil. — Bad  news.    Operations  on  eyes  ;  on  teeth. 

STHPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — Unpleasant  news  cause  nervous  tremors. — Lectophile. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  lying  on  his  back,  with  weakness  in  pit  of  stomach, 
>  opening  eyes,  >  turning  on  r.  side. — Headache  >  drinking  cold  water. — 
Burning  pain  and  weight  on  vertex  >  ice-cold  cloths  pressed  on  the  part. 

3.  Eyes. — R.  eye  squints  towards  nose. — Prolapse  of  iris  after 
cataract  operation. — Sees  double  by  candle-light. 

4.  Ears. — Purulent  otorrhoea. 

5.  Nose. — Nasal  polypus  1.  side  with  rough  skin  all  over  the  face  and 
body  and  neuralgic  headache. — Lupus  or  cancer  on  nose. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Teeth  loose. — Gums  swollen,  inflamed,  spongy. — Teeth  and 
gums  rather  scorbutic. — Profuse  haemorrhage  after  extraction  of  tooth.^ 
Tongue  dry  (black) ;  burning  in  evening ;  sour  feeling ;  stitches  <  at  tip 
(scirrhus  of  tongue).— Spreading  ulcers  in  mouth ;  noma. — Profuse  ptyalism. 


ALUMINA  67 

9.  Throat.— Tonsils  inflamed.— Uvula  elongated,  relaxed.— Spasm  of 
(esophagus^  liquids  can  scarcely  be  swallowed. — Prickly  sensation  both  sides 
d  throat  and  great  dryness  with  constant  desire  to  drink. — Scraping  in  throat 
with  cough.- Throat  covered  with  mucus,  causing  cough.— Spitting  up  of  a 
coagulated  lump  of  blood  morning  after  rising. — Enlarged  indurated  tonsils 
from  frequent  colds. 

u.  Stomach* — ^Vomits  large  quantities  of  glairy  mucus  or  tough, 
colourless  slime,  and  often  everything  he  eats ;  blood ;  habitual  haematemesis 
in  hard  drinkers. — Sinking  sensation  >  by  eating. — Burning  heat  >  by 
drinking  cdd  water. — ^The  pain  is  >  by  pressing  on  stomach. 

SL  Abdomen. — Colic  <  by  walking,  with  fulness  and  heaviness. 
(Potter's  colic,  lead  colic) — ^Abdomen  retracted,  >  from  pressure. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — No  desire  for  stool  for  da3rs.— Violent,  ineffectual 
urging  to  stool. — Stool  hard  as  stones. — Difficult  stool,  with  some  blood  and 
subsequent  beating  in  anus. — Diarrhoea  ichorous,  mixed  with  blood  of  an 
offensive  odour,  great  exhaustion. — ^Very  exhausting  diarrhoea. — Masses  of 
coagulated  blood  in  typhus. — Putrid  dysentery. — Pains  from  rectum  going 
down  thighs. — ^After  stool :  scarcely  endurable  pain  with  scirrhous  induration 
in  rectum. — Itching  in  anus  all  evening. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Urine  voided  with  difficulty.— (Diabetes  mel- 
litus.}— Oily  iridescent  film  on  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Erections  while  at  dinner.— Frequent 
emissions. — Gonorrhoea ;  gleet. — Shooting  pain  from  middle  line  of  belly,  as 
along  a  thread,  down  into  penis. — Cutting  pain  in  1.  side  of  penis. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Affections  of  1.  ovary  (with  consti- 
pation), insupportable  pain. — Weight  and  prolapse  of  uterus. — Indurations, 
ulcerations,  of  uterus,  even  scirrhus. — Copious  leucorrhoea. — Leucorrhoea  and 
emaciation,  with  yellow  complexion. — Menses  scanty,  watery. — During  menses 
hands  weak. — ^Vagina  very  sensitive,  and  narrowed  by  swellings  of  various 
size  (vaginismus). — Pruritus. — Flooding  after  childbirth;  sore,  inflamed 
nipples;  cancer  of  the  breasts. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness  <  from  talking. — Aphonia.— 
Croup  and  bronchitis. — Cough  from  tickling  in  larynx  caused  by  talking. — 
Scraping  from  upper  stemiun  to  larynx,  thick,  yellow  sputa,  paroxysmal 
cou^— Ropy  sputa. — ^Atonic  haemoptysis. 

19.  Heart.— Pain  from  heart  to  lower  part  of  r.  leg.— Strong  pulsation 
tfanmgh  whole  body. 

as.  Skin.— Proud  flesh ;  chilblains ;  indolent  ulcers.— (This  remedy  is 
particolarly  applicable  to  old  people.) 

87.   Fever. — Slow  pulse. — Furious  delirium. 


Alumina. 

Argilla.     Oxide  of  Aluminium.    Pure  Clay.    AU  O3  3H,0. 
Trituration. 

HMmi^mM — Aftus^  affcciions  of.   Boils.   Bubo.   Catarrh.    Chlorosis.  Constipation, 
Constipation  of  nursing  infants.    Cough.    Disappointments,  effects  of.    Dysentery. 


68  ALUMINA 

Dyspepsia.  Eczema.  Eyes,  afifections  of.  Fissures.  Fistula.  Headache.  Hernia. 
Irri&tion.  Leucorrhoea.  Locomotor  ataxy.  NailSf  affections  of,  Otorrhoea.  Ozaena. 
Paralysis.  Pregnancy,  constipation  of.  Pregnancy,  toothache  of.  I^ostatorrhoea. 
Rhagades.  Scrofula.  Strabismus.  Taste,  disordered.  Tetters,  moist  and  itching. 
Throat,  afifections  of;    Trismus.    Typhus. 

CharaoteriBtios* — Like  its  relative  Alumeftj  Alumina  produces 
irritation  of  mucous  membranes  with  dryness  or  extreme  secretion 
and  paralysis  of  involuntary  muscles,  as  those  of  the  rectum  and  of  the 
nervous  and  muscular  systems  generally.  Alumina  paralyses  the 
bowels  in  the  same  way  as  lead,  to  which  it  is  an  antidote.  Even 
small  and  soft  stools  are  passed  with  great  dif&cultjr.  Pregnant 
women  and  children  are  liable  to  this  kind  of  constipation.  A  very 
prominent  characteristic  is  that  a  person  must  strain  at  stool  in  order 
to  urinate.  Teste  groups  Alumina  with  Sepia  and  Copaiva,  He 
considers  it  the  chronic  of  Sepia  as  Silic.  is  of  Puis.  Paralysis  of  the 
internal  rectus  muscle  of  the  eve,  causing  squint.  Also  ptosis. 
Drawing  pains  appear  in  the  limbs ;  a  sensation  of  constriction  in 
several  organs.  Several  painful  symptoms  show  themselves  after  the 
midday  meal,  and  continue  till  evening,  when  they  disappear  or  are 
replaced  by  others  which  begin  only  then.  On  the  other  hand  the 
pains  which  appear  in  the  morning  or  in  the  evening  are  abated  after 
eating.  Trembling,  convulsive  movements  of  the  Umbs  and  head  ; 
spasms,  with  tears  and  laughter  alternately.  There  is  exaltation  of 
the  whole  nervous  system.  Trembling  of  tie  whole  body  with  desire 
to  lie  down,  which,  however,  <  the  fatigue.  Great  general  fatigue, 
even  after  a  short  walk,  but  chiefly  after  speaking.  Frequent 
stretching  while  sitting.  The  nates  go  to  sleep  while  sitting.  Drags 
legs  (especially  left).  Many  of  the  symptoms  of  locomotor  ataxy 
are  reproduced  by  Alumina^  and  it  is  one  of  the  most  useful  remedies 
in  that  disease.  Bcenninghausen  cured  a  case  with  Aluminiutn. 
Sluggishness  of  action  is  characteristic  of  this  medicine ;  urine  is  slow 
in  passing ;  great  straining  to  pass  even  a  soft  stool ;  can  only  evacuate 
bowels  when  standing ;  has  to  strain  as  if  abdomen  and  rectum  were 
paralysed.  {Caust.  has  defecation  only  when  standing;  but  the 
straining  is  less.)  Sensations  are  slow  in  being  transmitted  to  the 
centres.  In  the  mental  sphere  there  is  confusion.  **  When  he  says 
anything  he  feels  as  if  another  person  had  said  it,  and  when  he  sees 
anything,  as  if  another  person  had  seen  it,  or  as  if  he  could  transfer 
himself  into  another,  and  only  then  could  see."  A  feeling  of  hurry 
follows,  things  do  not  move  fast  enough.  Impulses.  Suicidal  ten- 
dency, a  sudden  impulse  from  seeing  blood  on  a  knife.  Sad  ;  appre- 
hensive ;  wants  to  get  away ;  fears  going  crazy.  Mental  symptoms  mostly 
come  on  in  the  morning  on  waking.  Vertigo  on  closing  eyes.  Catarrh 
is  a  very  general  feature.  Catarrh  with  dryness  of  mucous  membranes. 
The  throat  looks  parched  and  glazed.  The  nose  is  stopped,  feels  diy^ 
and  the  point  of  it  is  cracked.  Aim.  has  the  fish-bone  sensation  in 
the  throat  on  swallowing.  There  is  profuse  leucorrhoea  running  down 
to  the  heels,  sometimes  excoriating.  As  with  the  mucous  membrane 
so  with  the  skin  :  itching  eruptions  <  from  warmth  of  bed. 
Eruptions  of  all  kinds,  indurations,  ulcers.    Granular  eyeUds.    Hairs 


ALUMINA  69 

fan  out  an  over  body.  The  skin  of  the  face  feels  as  if  covered  with 
dried  white  of  egg,  or  as  if  a  cobweb  was  on  it.  Fissures.  Alumina 
has  some  curious  symptoms  in  the  digestive  sphere.  There  is  a 
craving  for  dry  rice  and  dry  food.  It  has  <  from  starch,  especially 
the  starch  of  potatoes.  <  From  salt,  wine,  vinegar,  spirits.  Burning 
pains  in  the  back  are  very  characteristic,  and  especially  a  sensation 
as  if  a  hot  iron  were  forced  through  the  lower  vertebrae. 

There  are  pulsations  in  various  parts.  The  pains  go  upward. 
Upper  left ;  lower  right  affected  (opposite  of  Lye). 

The  symptoms  are  <  on  alternate  days  ;  periodically.  Guernsey 
describes  a  characteristic  periodicity  thus  :  "Patient  gets  along  nicely 
for  a  time,  then,  from  no  apparent  cause,  gets  worse  for  a  time,  then 
better,  and  soon  a  relapse  may  be  worse  than  the  original  illness, 
another  relapse  not  so  bad,  and  so  on  with  longer  intervals  between.^' 
In  afternoons  ;  at  new  or  full  moon  ;  <  in  the  morning  on  waking. 
<  After  coitus.  <  In  cold  air,  out  of  doors  ;  in  dry  weather.  They 
axe  >  by  cold  washing ;  by  moistening  the  part ;  by  warm  food  or 
drink ;  by  warmth  generally. 

Alumina  is  suited  to  persons  of  sedentary  habits  who  suffer  from 
dironic  ailments  ;  to  constitutions  with  diminished  animal  heat. 
Ptoric  persons.  The  action  of  Alumina  is  slow  in  developing,  and  the 
remedy  must  not  be  changed  quickly. 

RelatioilB. — Compare :  Aluminium  (which  has  been  used  on 
indications  taken  from  the  proving  of  Alumina).  Antidote  to: 
Lead.  Antidoted  by :  Bry.,  Camph.,  Cham.,  Ipec.  Complementary : 
Bry.  Follows  well :  Bry.,  Lach.,  Sul.  Simitar  to :  Alumen ;  Arg. 
nit.  (clergyman's  sore  throat,  paralysis)  ;  Bar.  c.  rhypochondriasis 
of  aged ;  constipation) ;  Bry.,  Calc. ;  Cham,  (usetul  as  an  inter- 
mediate remedy)  ;  Con.  (old  people  ;  squint)  ;  Ferrum  (chlorosis  ; 
relaxed  abdomen ;  disgust  for  meat,  &c.)  ;  Fer.  iod.  Tprofuse 
transparent  leucorrhoea) ;  Graphit.  (chlorosis,  skin  rough,  chapped, 
itching ;  nails ;  blepharitis,  &c.)  ;  Ipec.  ;  Kali  bi.  (clergyman's  sore 
tiiroat)  ;  Lach.  (sad  on  waking ;  climaxis)  ;  Lye.  (clergyman's  sore 
throat)  ;  Pic.  ac,  Plumb,  (colic,  constipation) ;  Puis,  (tearful,  peevish  ; 
head,  &c.,  >  in  open  air  ;  ozaena  ;  taste  lost ;  averse  to  meat ;  scanty 
menses  ;  complaints  at  puberty ;  lack  of  animal  heat ;  soles  of  feet 
sore,  <  walking ;  toes  red,  itching,  &c.)  ;  Ruta  (loss  of  power  of 
internal  recti) ;  Sepia  (irritable,  t&urful ;  ozaena ;  scanty  menses ; 
paberty  ;  prolapsus  uteri ;  inactive  rectum  ;  weakness  in  urinary 
organs,  &c.)  ;  Sil.,  SuL,  Zinc,  (inner  canthus  ;  granular  lids  ;  <  from 
wine). 

Camatioiu — ^Anger.  Disappointments.  Lifting.  Bodily  exer- 
tion. 

STHPTOHS. 

I.  Mind. — Hamoor  morose,  sad,  with  despair  of  cure. — Involuntary 
tetts* — Anguish  and  anxiety  as  if  one  were  threatened  with  some  fatal 
accident,  or  had  committed  some  crime. — ^Time  passes  too  slowly ;  intolerable 
tmtnti;  an  hour  seems  half  a  day. — Seeing  blood  on  a  knife  she  has  horrid 
ideas  of  killing  herself,  though  she  abhors  the  idea.— Apprehensions. — Dis- 


70  ALUMINA 

position  to  be  frightened^Air  sorrowful  and  morose. — Ill-humour,  with 
unfitness  for  labour. — Disposition  to  be  angry. — Obstinate,  and  contradictory 
humour. — ^Taking  everything  in  bad  part. — Humour  changeable ;  at  one  time 
bold,  at  another  timid. — ^Weakness  of  memory. — Distraction,  inadvertence, 
and  incapability  of  following  up  an  idea. — ^Absence  of  ideas. — Blunders  in 
speaking. — Great  vivacity  of  apprehension,  alternately  with  inadvertence,  and 
deprivation  of  sight  and  hearing. — Sensation,  as  if  self-consciousness  were 
outside  the  body. 

2.  Head. — Dizziness,  whirling  sensation,  eversrthing  turns  in  a  circle, 
most  frequently  so  as  to  cause  falling ;  sometimes  with  nausea,  or  tension  in  the 
nape  of  the  neck  ;  <  before  breakfast ;  on  opening  eyes ;  when  closing  eyes. 
— Easily  made  drunk.— Vertigo,  with  white  stars  before  the  eyes. — State  of 
intoxication  after  smoking  tobacco,  or  after  having  taken  the  weakest  spirituous 
drink,  and  principally  in  the  morning. — Headache,  as  if  one  were  dragged  by 
the  hair ;  or  smart  shootings  in  the  brain,  with  inclination  to  vomit. — Stitches 
in  the  brain  with  nausea. — Heaviness  of  the  head,  witli  paleness  of  face,  and 
fatigue. — Compressive  cephalalgia. — Headache  with  constipation. — Headache 
from  chronic  catarrhs  in  the  head. — Beatings  and  pulsations  in  the  head. — 
Congestion  of  blood  towards  the  eyes  and  nose,  with  pressure  in  the  forehead 
and  epistaxis,  with  a  chill  when  walking  in  the  open  air ;  better  after  Ijring  or 
eating. — Headache  <  while  walking  in  the  open  air ;  >  l3dng  down,  the  head 
being  softly  supported. — Itching  in  the  forehead. — Pain,  as  from  excoriation, 
in  the  scalp.— (Moist  crusts  on  the  temples.)— Dryness  of  the  hair. — Itching  in 
the  scalp,  with  profuse  desquamation. 

3.  Eyes. — Pressure  on  the  eyes,  which  renders  it  impossible  to  open 
them. — Pressure,  as  from  a  grain  of  sand,  in  the  corner  of  the  eye,  in  the 
evening. — Sensation  of  burning,  in  the  eyes,  with  nocturnal  agglutination  of 
the  lids,  and  diurnal  lachrymation. — Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  eyes  and 
eyelids  on  walking  in  open  air. — Swelling  of  the  eyelids. — Paralysis  of  the 
upper  lid. — Hordeolum. — Eyelashes  fall  out. — Inclination  to  stare. — Spasmodic 
drawing  of  the  lids  at  night,  with  pain  in  the  eyes  on  opening  them. — Stitches 
in  the  eyes. — Photophobia. — Confusion  of  sight,  as  from  a  mist,  and  sparkling 
before  the  eyes. — Yellow  aspect  of  all  objects. — Coloured  reflection  round  the 
candle  in  the  evening. — Strabismus  of  both  eyes;  esp.  loss  of  power  of 
internal  rectus. — Glittering  before  the  eyes  on  shutting  them. — Far  sight. 

4.  Ears. — Shooting  pains  in  the  ears,  principally  in  the  evening,  or  at 
night. — Stitches  in  the  (1.)  ear  (evening). — Itching  and  sensation  of  burning  in 
the  ears. — Frequently,  in  the  evening,  heat  and  redness  of  one  ear. — Purulent 
discharge  from  the  ears. — Crackling  noise  and  buzzing  in  the  ears,  chiefly 
when  chewing,  but  also  on  swallowing. 

5.  Nose. — Pain  in  the  root  of  the  nose  and  in  the  forehead. — Pain,  swell- 
ing, and  redness  of  the  nose. — Soreness  and  scabs  in  the  nose,  with  discharge 
of  thick  yellow  mucus. — Discharge  of  solid,  yellow,  greenish  substances  from 
the  nose. — ^Accumulation  and  flow  of  a  thick  and  yellowish  matter  from  the 
nose. — Nostrils  ulcerated. — Furunculus  in  the  nose. — Ozsena. — Blood  from 
the  nose  when  blown. — Epistaxis. — Sour  smell  in  the  nose. — Smell  either 
exceedingly  delicate  or  weak. — Coryza,  with  defluxion  from  one  nostril,  with 
stoppage  of  the  other. — Coryza,  alternately  dry  and  flowing. — Stoppage  of  the 
nose. 


ALUMINA  71 

fi-  Pace. — ^Aspect  ^oomy,  morose. — Rapid  alternation  of  redness  and 
paleness  oi  countenance. — Copper-like  redness  of  the  cheeks,  as  in  drunkards. 
—Tinging  on  the  face,  and  tension  of  the  skin,  as  if  it  were  covered  with 
white  of  ^g  dried. — Sensation  of  swelling,  and  of  heaviness  of  countenance. 
— Bulhons  swellings  and  blood-boils  on  the  face  and  nose. — Red  painful  spot 
OD  the  cheek. — Roughness  of  the  skin  of  the  face,  esp,  over  the  forehead. — 
Heat  and  redness. — ^Itching  and  eruption  of  small  pimples  over  the  face. — 
Moist  scabs  on  the  temples. — Shooting  and  drawing  sensation  in  the  cheek- 
bones.— ^Transient  heat  of  face. — Furunculus  in  the  cheeks. — Leprous  tubercles 
in  the  face. — Lips  dry,  and  cracked,  with  exfoliation  of  the  skin. — Swelling  of 
the  lips. — Pimples  and  scabby  eruptions  on  the  lips. — Swelling  of  the  jaws, 
with  ten^ve  pain  on  opening  the  mouth,  and  on  chewing. — Shortening  of  the 
tower  jaw. — ^Involuntary  spasmodic  twitching  of  lower  jaw. — ^Trismus. 

7-  Teeth. — Pains  in  the  teeth  on  chewing,  or  in  the  evening,  in  bed. — 
Tearing  in  the  teeth,  extending  to  other  parts,  as  far  as  the  zygomatic  bone, 
and  in  the  forehead  and  temples. — Piercing  pain  in  the  carious  teeth. — 
Ulceration  of  the  roots  of  the  teeth. — Ulcer  on  the  gums. — Swelling  of  the 
gums,  which  have  a  tendency  to  bleed. — Sensation  as  though  the  teeth  were 
elongated. — Odontalgia,  with  nervous  irritation,  as  after  a  chill,  or  after  the 
use  of  Ckamomilla, 

S.  Mouth. — Pain  as  of  excoriation  in  the  mouth,  palate,  tongue,  and 
goms^  which  almost  prevents  eating. — Small  ulcers  in  the  mouth. — Dryness  of 
the  month,  chiefly  on  waking. — ^Accumulation  of  a  sweetish  or  sour  saliva  in 
the  mouth,  like  actual  salivation. — Musty  or  putrid  smell  from  the  mouth. — 
Tongue  loaded  with  a  black  or  yellowish  coating. — Expectoration  of  bloody 
mucns. 

9.  Throat. — Sore  throat,  which  is  aggravated  in  the  evening  and  at 
mgjit,  but  which  is  ameliorated  on  taking  anything  warm,  and  which  is  less 
painful  in  the  morning. — Contractive,  or  shooting  pains  in  the  throat,  chiefly 
on  swallowing. — Difficult  deglutition,  as  if  the  gullet  were  contracted. — 
Cramp-like  pressture  and  squeezing  in  the  oesophagus. — Sensation,  as  if  the 
oesophagus  were  contracted  when  swallowing  a  small  morsel  of  food ;  it  is 
feit  until  it  enters  into  the  stomach.—  Pains  in  throat  <  evening  and  night. — 
Swelling  of  the  tonsils. — Great  dryness  in  the  throat. — ^Accumulation  of  a 
thick  and  viscous  mucus  in  the  throat,  with  difficult  expectoration. — Painful 
ulcers  in  the  fauces,  secreting  a  brown,  badly-smelling  pus. — Sensation  of  a 
splinter  in  the  throat 

10.  Appetite. — Sweetish  taste,  or  a  taste  of  blood  in  the  mouth. — Rough 
taste,  astringent,  or  bitter  and  insipid. — Bulimy. — Irregular  appetite ;  at  one 
time  too  strong,  at  another  too  weak. — Food  appears  insipid,  esp.  in  the 
evening,  and  principally  bread  and  meat. — Distaste  for  animal  f ood.~-Craving, 
with  want  of  appetite. — ^Appetite  for  dry  foods ;  for  starch ;  chalk ;  clean 
white  rags;  charcoal;  cloves;  acids;  coffee  or  tea  grounds;  dry  rice. — 
Desire  for  hot  drinks. — Desire  for  vegetables,  for  fruits,  and  spoon  meats. — 
After  having  eaten,  and  chiefly  in  the  evening,  hiccough,  pressure  in  the 
stomach  and  abdomen,  distaste,  nausea,  and  lassitude. — Potatoes  excite 
nausea  and  bitter  eructations.— All  irritating  things  immediately  start  cough. 

n.  Stomach* — Eructations,  sour  and  acrid,  and  pyrosis. — Chronic 
tendency  to  eructation. — Frequent   eructations. — Nausea,  with  faintness, — 


74  AMBRA  GRISEA 

down,  which,  however,  increases  the  fatigue. — Great  general  fatigue,  even 
after  a  short  walk,  but  principally  after  speaking. — Frequent  stretching  while 
sitting.— Want  of  vital  heat. 

25.  Skin. — Miliary  eruption  in  the  arms  and  legs,  with  much  itching  and 
serous  bleeding  after  having  scratched. — Chapped  skin  and  bulbous  eruptions. 
— Boils  or  itching  exanthemata  on  perinasum. — ^The  slightest  injuries  of  the  skin 
smart,  and  become  inflamed. — Leprous  pimples. — Scurf  and  tetters,  "which 
itch  or  become  moist  chiefly  in  the  evening. — Renewal  of  cutaneous  symptoms 
at  every  new  or  full  moon. — Rhagades. — Brittle  nails. 

86.  Sleep. — Sleep  tardy,  and  wakefulness  before  midnight. — Restless 
sleep,  always  awakening  with  palpitation  of  the  heart. — Nocturnal  sleep  too 
light,  agitated,  with  frequent  starts. — Deep  sleep,  not  refreshing,  with  a  desire 
in  the  morning  to  sleep  more. — Frequent  vt^king  in  the  night. — Dreams 
frequent,  anxious,  with  talking,  laughter,  tears,  lamentations,  groans,  and 
somnambulism. — Dreams  of  horses,  of  quarrels,  and  of  vexations,  of  fire,  of 
marriages,  of  spectres,  of  death,  of  robbers. — Dreams,  with  fear  of  death  after 
waking. — Nightmare. — During  the  night,  anxiety,  agitation,  and  tossing 
about ;  or  heat,  toothache,  headache,  spasms,  and  oppression  of  the  chest,  or 
diarrhoea,  with  pains  in  the  stomach,  and  shiverings. — ^After  sleep,  on  waking 
in  the  morning,  mind  weighed  down  by  vexatious  ideas,  or  nausea,  with 
insipidity  in  the  stomach,  and  feverish  movements. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse  full  and  accelerated. — Shivering,  even  when  near  a 
fire,  and  at  night,  in  bed,  not  able  to  warm  oneself. — Fever  towards  the 
evening,  with  predominant  chilliness. — Sensation  of  cold  immediately  after 
taking  soup  at  midday. — During  the  day  chill;  during  the  night,  fever. — 
Heat  in  the  evening  which  spreads  from  the  face ;  at  times  only  over  the  r. 
side  of  the  body. — Perspiration  at  night,  or  more  towards  morning,  in  bed  ; 
mostly  in  the  face,  or  on  one  side  of  the  face. — Inability  to  perspire. 


Ambra  Grisea. 

Ambergris.  Most  probably  a  morbid  product  found  in  the  Sperm 
Whale  or  floating  in  the  sea.  (Not  to  be  confounded  with 
Amber — Succinum.)    Trituration  and  tincture. 

Olinical. — AnuSf  irritation  of.  Asthma.  Bashfulness.  Brain,  softening  of. 
Cardiac  asthma.  Convulsions.  Cough.  Deafness.  Emaciation.  Epistaxis.  Face, 
pimples  on.  Hysteria.  Jaundice.  Menstrual  irregularity.  Music,  intolerance  of. 
Nervousness.  Nymphomania.  Pruritus  vulvae.  Puerperal  convulsions.  Ranula. 
Reaction  defective.    Spleen,  pain  in.    Tympanites. 

CharaoteristicB. — Ambra  produces  faintness  (Mosckus),  nervous- 
ness, jerks,  and  twitches.  Reflex  action  is  increased.  The  patient 
has  an  embarrassed  air ;  the  bashful  state  is  very  characteristic  in 
certain  connections.  Embarrassed  in  company.  Cough  worse  when 
many  people  are  present.  As  if  in  a  dream.  Forgetful.  There  is 
defective  reaction  in  nervous  patients.    Sensation  of  icy  coldness  in 


AMBRA  GRISEA  75 

abdomen.  The  pelvic  organs  are  painfully  influenced.  There  is 
voluptuous  itching  on  the  scrotum  and  some  rawness  below  the 
thighs  in  the  male.  In  the  female  there  is  discharge  of  blood 
between  the  periods  at  every  httle  accident,  as  straining  at  stool  or 
extra  work.  Severe  itching  on  pudenda.  During  urination,  itching, 
tickling,  burning  of  vulva  and  urethra.  Nymphomania,  with  dis- 
charge of  bluish  white  mucus.  In  childbed,  obstinate  constipation 
and  tenesmus  with  bashfulness ;  cannot  make  the  attempt  to  stool 
if  any  one  is  present,  even  the  nurse.  There  is  a  tickling,  spasmodic 
cough.  Cough  excited  by  speaking.  Night  cough.  Cough  followed 
by  copious  belching.  Itching  in  chest.  The  hmbs  go  to  sleep  easily. 
Finger  nails  are  brittle.  Sweat  on  slightest  exertion.  Sleepless  from 
worry  ;  retires  tired,  wakeful  as  soon  as  touches  pillows.  <  Warmth  ; 
>  cold ;  <  from  overlifting.  Suited  to  excitable,  nervous  children. 
Nervous  persons.  Lean  persons.  Old  persons.  Nervous  bilious  tem- 
perament. "  Dried-up  "  nervous  persons.  '*  Thin,  scrawny  women." 
Relations. — Compare:  Moschus  (faintness ;  hysteric  asthma); 
Castor.,  Asaf.,  Pso.  and  Valer.  (defective  reaction) ;  Coca  (bashfulness) ; 
Kali  bro.,  Nux  v.  (increased  reflexes) ;  Calc,  Nat.  c.  (coldness  in 
abdomen) ;  Act.  r.  (night  cough) ;  Nux  v.  (thin,  nervous  persons) ; 
Ars.  (Asthma) ;  Phos.  (asthma,  nervous  excitability  ;  "irritable  weak- 
ness " ;  slender  build) ;  Bov.  (flow  of  blood  between  the  periods) ; 
Lach.  and  Sep.  (<  from  overlifting) ;  CofiF.,  Chi.,  Ign.,  SuL,  Puis., 
Staph. ;  Sec.  (scrawny  women).  Antidoted  by :  Camph.,  CofiF.,  Nux  v., 
Puis.,  Staph.  Antidote  to :  Staph,  (especially  the  voluptuous  itching 
of  scrotum)  ;  Nux  v. 

STHPTOHS. 

I.  Mind. — Great  restlessness. — Hastiness  and  nervous  excitement  when 
talking. — Memory  impaired. — Slow  of  comprehension,  has  to  read  a  sentence 
over  and  over  again,  and  then  does  not  understand;  thinking  powers  are 
quite  impaired. — Melancholy. — Inconsolable  sadness. — ^Anxiety,  esp.  in  the 
evening. — ^Timidity. — Despair,  and  disgust  of  life. — Repugnance  to  laughter 
and  conversation. — Excitement,  agitation,  and  precipitation,  chiefly  during 
intellectual  labours. — Imagination  occupied  with  grinning  faces  and  wanton 
images. — ^Absence  of  ideas. — Difficult  conception.— £mt)arrassed  manner  in 
society;  bashful. 

3.  Head. — ^Attack  of  dizziness,  esp.  on  walking  in  the  open  air. — 
Vertigo,  which  compels  the  patient  to  lie  down,  with  a  sensation  of  weakness 
in  the  stomach. — In  the  morning,  headache  as  after  a  nocturnal  debauch. — 
Sensation  of  weakness  in  the  head,  with  external  shivering. — Pressive  pain  in 
the  head,  every  two  days,  with  heat  in  the  head,  burning  in  the  eyes,  and 
paleness  in  the  face. — Pressure  in  the  forehead,  with  fear  of  losing  one's 
reason. — Pressing  pain  in  the  forehead  and  vertex,  with  heat  in  the  head,  with 
pale  face  on  alternate  days,  with  fear  of  losing  his  senses. — Pressive  squeezing, 
with  perplexity,  principaUy  in  the  forehead  and  occiput. — Congestion  of  blood 
in  the  head,  esp.  on  hearing  music. — ^Acute  sensation  of  drawing  in  the  head, 
with  ulcers  on  the  scalp. — Dartings  in  the  head. — Pain  in  the  head,  as  if 
caused  by  a  strain  from  lifting  a  weight. — Pain  in  the  scalp  on  its  being 


76  AMBRA  GRISEA 

touched,  \nth  falling  off  of  the  hatr. — ^The  scalp  feels  sore  in  the  morning, 
when  awaking :  this  is  followed  by  a  sensation  of  nnmbness,  extending  over 
the  whole  body. 

3.  Eyes. — Pressure  on  the  eyes,  with  heaviness,  and  a  sensation  as  if  the 
eyes  were  too  deep  in  the  head,  with  a  difficulty  of  opening  them  in  the 
morning. — Insufferable  tickling  round  the  eyes.— Itching  in  the  eyelid,  as  if 
a  sty  were  being  formed. — Inflammatory  redness  of  the  sclerotica,  with 
injection  of  the  vessels. — Confusion  of  sight,  like  a  mist,  and  obscurity  before 
the  eyes. 

4*  Ears. — ^Acute  sensation  of  drawing  in  the  ears. — ^Tension  in  the  ears. 
— Crawling  and  tickling  in  the  interior  of  the  ears. — ^Tinkling  and  buzzing 
before  the  ears. — ^Increasing  deafness ;  deaf  in  one  ear,  roaring  and  whistling 
in  the  ear. 

5.  Nose. — Spasms  in  the  alae  nasi. — Nasal  haemorrhage,  principally  in 
the  morning. — Clots  of  dry  blood  in  the  nose. — Frequent  sneezing. — Dryness 
and  stoppage  of  the  nose,  with  pain,  as  of  excoriation. — Dry  coryza. — Chronic 
suppression  of  the  nasal  mucus. 

6.  Face. — Redness  and  heat,  sometimes  transient,  of  the  face. — ^Jaundiced 
face. — Convulsive  movements  in  the  muscles  of  the  face. — ^Tickling  and  itching 
titiUation  in  the  face,  with  eruption  of  pimples  ;  the  same  in  the  forehead, 
and  in  the  region  of  the  whiskers. — Red  spot  on  the  cheeks,  cramps  in  the 
lips. — Cramp  of  the  lower  lip. — Hot  lips. 

7.  Teeth. — Drawing,  shooting  pains,  chiefly  in  the  teeth  that  are  carious, 
and  esp.  in  the  open  air ;  increased  by  taking  anything  hot. — Drawing  tooth- 
ache, sometimes  on  one  side  and  then  on  the  other. — Bleeding  of  the  gums. 
— Painful  swelling  of  the  gums. 

8.  Mouth. — In  the  morning,  on  waking,  dryness  and  sensation  of  numb- 
ness in  the  mouth,  in  the  tongue,  and  in  the  lips. — Itching  and  smarting  in 
the  mouth. — ^Vesicles  in  the  mouth,  with  burning  pain. — Nodosities,  with  pain, 
like  excoriation,  below  the  tongue. — ^Tongue  coated  white,  or  greyish  yellow. 
— Offensive  smell  in  the  mouth  (in  the  morning). — Ranula. 

9.  Throat. — Sensation  as  of  a  plug  in  the  throat,  with  difficulty  of 
swallowing. — Strangling  in  the  pharynx  on  swallowing  food. — Gnawing  and 
scratching  in  the  throat. — ^Accumulation  of  greyish  mucus  in  the  throat,  with 
inclination  to  vomit,  and  vomiting  when  hawking. — In  the  morning,  hawking 
up  of  mucus. — ^Asthma  in  lean  and  delicate  old  people. 

ID.  Appetite. — Insipid  or  rancid  taste. — ^Want  of  appetite. — Sourness  in 
the  mouth  after  taking  milk. — ^Af ter  eating,  pressure  at  the  pit  of  the  throat, 
as  if  a  piece  had  stopped  there. — ^After  eating,  cough  and  gaping,  and  a  feeling 
as  if  food  did  not  go  down  into  the  stomach.— Entire  thirstlessness. 

II.  Stomach. — Imperfect  eructations. — Frequent  eructations,  often  sour, 
or  with  the  taste  of  the'  food  which  may  have  been  taken. — Hiccough  after 
having  smoked  tobacco. — Pyrosis  principally  in  the  evening,  or  on  walking  in 
the  open  air. — Nausea  and  vomiting. — Pressure  and  cramp-like  pain  in  the 
stomach. — Sensation  of  burning  in  the  stomach  and  in  the  precordial  region. 
— Heartburn  from  drinking  milk. 

IS.  Atxlomen. — Hepatic  pains,  most  frequently  press! ve. — Pressive  pain 
in  the  epigastrium  and  in  the  abdomen. — Heaviness  in  the  belly. — ^Tension 
and  inflation  of  the  belly,  principally  after  eating  and  drinking. — Compression 


AMBRA  GRISEA  77 

in  the  belly,  sometimes  in  the  morning. — Cutting  pains  in  the  evening,  after 
midnight,  and  in  bed  in  the  morning  with  diarrhoea. — Pain,  as  from  a  wound 
in  the  abdominal  muscles,  on  coughing  and  on  turning  the  body. — Pain  in  the 
spleen,  as  if  something  were  torn  o£E. — Sensation  of  coldness  in  abdomen, 
sometimes  on  one  side  only. — In  the  evening  sensation  of  drawing  in  the 
abdominal  muscles. — Incarcerated  flatus. — Flatulent  colic  in  the  night 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation  and  tardy  stools. — Fruitless  desire 
to  go  to  stool,  with  anxiety,  and  incapability  of  enduring  the  approach  of  any 
person. — Irregular  intermittent  stools,  often  only  every  two  days.— Soft,  loose, 
clear-brown  stools. — ^After  the  stool,  pressure  in  the  abdomen. — Flowing  of 
blood  with  the  stool. — Haemorrhoidal  excrescences  in  the  anus. — Itching  and 
tingling  in  the  anus  and  in  the  rectum. — Itching,  smarting,  and  stinging  at 
the  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — In  the  morning,  after  getting  up,  an  urgent 
desire  to  make  water. — Increased  secretion  of  urine,  chiefly  at  night  and  in 
the  morning. — Increased  secretion  of  urine,  much  more  than  the  amount  of 
the  fluid  drunk. — Urine  of  a  yellowish-brown,  and  turbid,  with  brown  sediment. 
— Reddish  cloud  in  the  urine. — Urine  tinged  with  blood. — ^Acid  smell  from  the 
urine. — Burning  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Voluptuous  excitement  of,  and  itching  in, 
the  genital  parts,  without  external  cause. — Burning  in  the  region  of  the  sper- 
matic vesicles. — Erections  in  the  morning,  with  numbness  of  the  genital  parts. 
— Sore  rawness  between  thighs. — Violent  erections  in  the  morning,  without 
sexual  desire,  with  numbness  of  the  parts. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  too  early  ;  and  too  profuse. — 
Discharge  of  blood  between  the  periods. — During  menstruation,  increased 
swelling  of  varicose  veins,  with  pressure  in  the  legs. — Leucorrhoea  thick,  slimy, 
preceded  by  shooting  pains  in  the  vagina. — Running  of  wjiite-bluish  matter 
from  the  vagina. — The  leucorrhoea  more  abundant  at  night. — Burning,  pain  of 
excoriation,  and  itching,  in  the  sexual  parts. — Violent  itching,  with  swelling  of 
the  external  parts. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Cough,  with  coryza,  and  expectoration  of  a 
whitish  and  salt  mucus. — Nocturnal  cough,  excited  by  excessive  tickling  in 
the  gullet,  cough  in  the  evening,  with  pain  in  the  1.  side,  as  if  something  were 
torn  away. — Spasmodic  cough  from  tickling  in  the  throat  with  expectoration 
of  yellowish,  or  greyish-white  mucus,  tasting  salt  or  sour,  in  the  morning ; 
with  expectoration  in  the  evening. — Convulsive  cough,  with  eructations  and 
hoarseness. — On  coughing,  pressive  headache  in  the  temples. — ^Voice  hoarse, 
harsh,  with  an  accumulation  of  thick  mucus  in  the  air  ducts. — Hoarseness  and 
roughness  of  the  voice,  with  accumulation  of  thick,  tough  mucus,  easily 
thrown  off  by  coughing. — Cough  <  by  music. 

id.  Chest. — Breathing  short.— Oppression  in  breathing. — Oppression 
felt  in  the  chest,  and  between  the  scapulae. — Breath  fetid  in  the  morning 
after  waking. — ^Wheezing  in  the  chest. — Painful  oppression  in  the  chest  and 
in  the  back. — Pressure  in  the  chest,  chiefly  in  the  region  of  the  heart. — 
Sensation  of  rawness  in  the  chest — Itching  in  the  chest,  and  in  the  thyroid 
gland.— Asthma  of  old  people,  and  of  children.— At  night,  trembling  in  the 
breast. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  frequently  when  walking  in  the  open  air, 
with  paleness  of  face,  and  pressure  in  the  chest  as  if  a  lump  were  lodged 


78  AMBRA  GRISEA 

there  or  as  if  the  chest  were  obstructed. — Rheumatic  pain,  as  from  a  bruise 
in  the  chest. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Pressive  drawing  pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck, 
and  in  the  back. — Shooting  pain  in  the  loins.-— Sti£Fness  in  the  loins  after 
sitting  long. — Heaviness  in  the  back,  with  pain  in  the  belly,  as  if  the  intes- 
tines were  compressed. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — ^The  arms  become  easily  numbed,  whether  they  are 
leant  upon  or  used  to  carry  something,  or  even  in  the  night,  with  sensation  of 
torpor. — Paral3rtic  drawing,  as  from  dislocation,  in  the  shoulder-joints,  in  the 
elbows,  in  the  fore  part  of  the  arms,  and  in  the  hands. — ^Trembling  of  the 
arms. — Pain  in  the  bone  of  the  elbow  when  touched. — Cramp  in  the  hands  on 
taking  hold  of  anything. — Prolonged  coldness  of  the  hands. — Contraction  of 
the  fingers. — In  the  evening,  attack  of  trembling  in  the  thumb. — In  the  morn- 
ing, the  skin  at  the  extremity  of  the  fingers  is  wrinkled. — Nocturnal  weakness 
of  the  fingers. — Itchy  tetter  between  the  fingers. — Itching  in  the  palms  of 
the  hands. 

23.  Lovrer  Limbs. — Sensation  of  torpor  in  the  legs,  with  an  unsteady 
walk. — Sensation  of  contraction  in  the  (r)  thigh,  the  limb  seems  to  be 
shortened. — Nervousness  of  the  legs. — Heaviness,  stiffness,  and  weakness  of 
the  legs. — Cramps  in  the  legs,  and  at  night  in  the  calves  of  the  legs. — ^Acute 
drawing  pain  in  the  legs,  from  the  os  sacrum  to  the  feet,  with  incapability  of 
supporting  the  foot  on  the  ground :  the  affected  leg  seems  shorter  than  the 
other. — Excoriation  in  the  hams,  with  pain,  principally  in  the  evening. — ^Ting- 
ling in  the  calves  of  the  legs  and  in  the  feet. — Arthritic  pains  in  the  joints  of 
the  feet  and  in  the  great  toes. — ^Tightness  in  the  joints  of  the  feet. — Piin,  as  of 
ulceration,  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  when  walking. — Burning  in  the  soles  of  the 
feet. — Itching  of  the  inside  of  the  soles  of  the  feet. — Swelling  of  the  feet — 
Shooting  pains  in  chilblains  on  the  toes. — Pain,  as  of  excoriation,  in  the  corns. 

24.  Generalities. — Infantile  or  other  spasms. — Cramps  and  sensation 
of  drawing  in  the  muscles. — ^Tearing  pains,  chiefly  in  the  joints,  and  often  on 
one  side  only  (from  the  small  of  the  back  through  the  r.  leg). — Spasms  and 
twitches  in  the  muscular  parts. — Susceptibility  to  numbness  in  various  parts. 
— Many  of  the  symptoms  appear  during  sleep,  and  diminish  after  rising. — 
Many  of  the  pains  are  mitigated  by  walking  in  the  open  air,  or  when  lying  on 
the  part  affected. — In  the  evening,  and  in  a  warm  temperature,  many  of  the 
S3rmptoms  are  aggravated. — Sensation  of  drawing  throughout  the  body. — 
Incisive  pain  in  the  hands  and  feet. — Inflation  and  pulsation  over  the  whole 
body,  with  great  weakness  after  walking  in  the  open  air. — Ebullitions  and 
pulsations  in  the  whole  body,  esp.  after  walking  in  the  open  air.^  After 
having  talked  much,  agitation  and  trembling  all  over  the  body,  with  restless- 
ness.— Fatigue,  esp.  in  the  morning,  in  bed,  and  at  night  on  waking. — Sensa- 
tion of  numbness  and  of  torpor  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  body,  chiefly 
in  the  morning. 

25.  Skin. — Dry,  itching  burning. — Burning  herpes. — Suppressed  erup- 
tions.— Itching,  and  sensation  of  burning  in  several  parts  of  the  skin,  as  from 
the  itch. — ^Tetters  and  itchy  eruptions  appear  during  the  use  of  this  medicine. 
— Dryness  of  the  skin. — Burning  tetters. 

26.  Sleep. — Inclination  to  sleep  during  the  day. — Restlessness  at  night. 
— ^Worriment  from  business  embarrassments. — ^Agitated  sleep,  in  consequence 


AMMONIACUM  79 

of  cokl  in  the  body,  and  a  sensation  of  drawing  in  the  limbs. — Sleep,  with 
anzioos  dreams  and  reveries. — On  sleeping,  startings  with  fright. 

«?.  Fever. — ^Pulse  accelerated  with  ebullitions. — ChiD  in  the  forenoon, 
with  weakness  and  sleepiness,  better  after  eating. — Flushes  of  heat,  return- 
ing every  fifteen  minutes,  worse  towards  evening. — Feverish  shivering  in 
different  parts,  followed  by  heat  in  the  face. — ^Transient  heat,  sometimes 
with  anxiety  at  the  heart. — Perspiration  from  slight  exertion,  esp.  on  the 
abdomen  and  on  the  thighs. — Nocturnal  sweat,  particularly  on  the  diseased 
side,  after  midnight 


Ambrosia   ArtemisisBfolia. 

Ragweed.      Roman    Wormwood.      Hogweed.      (America.)     N.  0. 
Compositae.    Tinctm-e  of  fresh  flower  heads  and  young  shoots. 

GHaieaL— Coryza.    Hay-fever. 

duffaoteristioa. — Dr.  £.  T.  Marsh  and  another  experimenter 
soffered  severely  from  symptoms  of  coryza  and  hay-fever  whilst 
observing  the  pollen  of  this  plant.  It  should  therefore  be  of 
service  in  similar  affections. 


Ammoniacnm. 

Gnm-ammoniac,  obtained  from  Dorema  ammoniacum.    N,  0.  Um- 
belliferse.    Trituration  of  the  gum. 

QbdeaL— Appendicitis.   Asthenopia.   Asthma.  Bronchitis.    Eyes,  affections  of . 
Gbads,  affections  of.    Heart,  affections  of.    Hydrocele.    Panaritium. 

Ghanetoristios. — Ill-humour  is  the  prevailing  mental  feature  of 
Ammoniac,  It  acts  prominently  on  mucous  membranes,  causing  first 
diminished  and  then  increased  secretion.  There  are  stars  and  fiery 
points  bciore  the  sight  Sees  smoke  in  circles.  Dim  sight  from  a 
Mow  on  the  head.  Dim  sight  from  reading.  Hydrocele.  Heart 
beat  too  strong,  <  lying  on  left  side.  Great  accumulations  of  mucus. 
Stitches  are  prominent  in  the  provings.  Stitches  in  the  caecum  at 
7  pjD.,  alternating  with  pains  elsewhere.  This  should  make  it  appro- 
pnate  in  some  cases  ox  appendicitis.  There  are  many  rheumatic 
pains  in  the  limbs  and  loins.  There  is  marked  sensitiveness  to  cold 
and  <  in  cold  weather.  It  is  suited  to  bronchial  affections  in  old 
people  brought  on  by  cold  weather. 

Balations.'— Com^ar^ :  Asai,,  Coni.,  Cicut.  (botanical  relations) ; 
Ambra,  Aur.;  Am.  (effects  of  blow) ;  Puis.  «  lying  on  left  side) ;  BeU. 
and  Rata  (eyes).    AnUdoted  by :  Am.,  Bry. 


8o  AMMONIACUM 

BTMPTOM& 

I.  Mind.-*Temper  sombre  and  taciturn  ;  repugnance  to  everything ; 
ill-humour,  which  induces  discontent  with  everything  that  is  done ;  incapacity 
lor  mental  application. 

8.  Head. — Head  confused,  with  inc24)ability  of  mental  labour  ;  heavi- 
ness in  the  head. — Violent  pains  in  the  head. — ^A  semi-lateral  pressure  in  the 
forehead  ;  pressure  over  the  eyebrows. — ^A  sense  of  confusion  in  the  forehead, 
with  dimness  of  sight ;  tearing  sensation  in  the  right  side. — Pressure  in  the 
occipital  region. — Pricking  in  the  scalp. — Sensation  of  swelling  at  the  occiput 
— Itching,  enforcing  scratching  of  the  parts  affected,  and  tingling ;  pimples  at 
the  roots  of  the  hair. 

3.  Eyes. — ^A  sense  of  pressure,  with  tickling  at  the  upper  part  of  the 
globe  of  the  eye  ;  throbbing  and  tingling  at  the  upper  part  of  1.  eye,  followed 
by  a  sense  of  pressure. — Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  eyes,  and  as  of  some  foreign 
body  under  the  upper  lid  of  the  1.  eye. — Stars  and  fiery  points  floating 
before  sight. — Sees  smoke  before  him  (amblyopia  from  a  blow). — Dimness  of 
sight  at  night,  and  chiefly  in  the  morning,  immediately  on  rising,  with  burning 
heat  in  the  eyes. — Reading  impracticable,  at  least  without  considerable  effort. 
— Photophobia,  although  the  weather  may  be  cloudy. 

4.  Bars. — ^Tearing  sensation  at  the  exterior  of  r.  auditory  passage. — 
Gurgling  in  1.  ear,  on  scratching  the  occiput  Roaring  in  the  ears,  with 
difficulty  in  hearing. 

5.  Nose.^Painful  dryness  in  the  nose  on  rising  in  the  morning. — 
Increase  of  nasal  mucus. — Sneezing,  followed  by  an  abundant  flow  of  mucus 
from  the  nose. — Constant  motion  of  alae  nasi. 

6.  Face. — Paleness  of  the  face,  with  a  sensation  of  uneasiness,  preceded 
by  frequent  change  of  colour. — Drawing  sensation  in  1.  cheek-bone,  towards 
the  temple. — Throbbing  in  the  inferior  maxillary  region,  extending  into  the 
mouth. 

8y  g.  Mouth  and  Throat. — Dryness  of  the  mouth  and  throat  in 
the  morning,  on  awaking. — Sensation  of  fulness  in  the  back  of  the  throat  and 
gullet,  accompanied  by  nausea. — Sensation,  as  of  a  foreign  body  in  the  throat, 
which  incites  efforts  to  swallow  it — Scraping  and  burning  in  the  gullet  and 
cesophagus. 

zz.  Stomach. — Frequent  risings. — Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit. 
—Taste  clammy,  insipid,  or  sweetish  in  the  morning,  bitter  in  the  gullet,  with 
loss  of  taste  at  end  of  tongue. 

Z2.  Abdomen.— Borborygmi,  with  sensation  of  confusion  in  the  fore- 
head.— Pinching  pains, — ^Violent  abdominal  pains. — Painful  pressure  in  the 
region  of  the  pubis. 

Z3.  Stool  and  Anus. — Stools  scanty ;  none  until  evening,  or  during  two 
or  three  days. — Stool  relaxed,  of  the  consistence  of  pap  ;  like  pap  after  a  meal. 
— Soft,  with  much  wind,  and  preceded  by  borborygmi  in  the  belly. — Mucous 
stools,  sometimes  preceded  by  shivering,  and  colicky  pains  which  occasion 
writhing. — Liquid  stools. — Diarrhoea,  with  mucous  evacuations. — Pressure  on 
the  rectum. 

Z4.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  profuse,  containing  much  lactate  of  urea. 
— Burning  in  the  urethra. — Passing  drops  of  urine,  after  having  micturated. 


AMMONIUM   ACETICUM  8i 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Shooting  pains  in  the  right  spermatic 
cord,  and  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood. — Drawings  internally. — Shooting 
pains  at  the  root  of  the  penis. — Itching  in  the  pubic  region. — Hydrocele. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Roughness  of  the  orifice  of  the  throat. — 
Constant  tickling,  without  inclination  to  cough. — Bronchial  a£Eections  of  old 
people  in  cold  weather. 

18.  Chest. — Respiration  short,  with  heaving  of  the  chest,  and  anxiety ; 
quickened. — During  inspiration,  a  sense  of  oppression,  with  lancinating  pains 
in  the  1.  side  of  the  chest — Pressure  in  the  side. — Great  uneasiness  at  the 
bottom  of  the  chest,  towards  the  back,  on  r.  side,  followed  by  pressure  in  the 
deepest  part  of  the  chest. 

20.  Back. — ^Weight  and  pressure  in  the  lumbar  vertebrae. — Darting  pains 
in  the  loins,  chiefly  during  inspiration. — Rheumatic  pains  at  the  1.  of  the  pelvis. 

23.  Upper  Umbs. — Shooting  and  tearing  pains  in  the  shoulder- 
joint. — Sense  of  weakness  in  1.  arm. — Rheumatic  pain. — ^A  sensation  of  break- 
ing, chiefly  in  the  elbow  and  1.  wrist ;  sometimes  with  a  tearing  pain  in  r. 
hand. — Swelling  of  the  fingers. — Dragging  sensation  in  the  middle  finger  of 
r.  hand. — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  forefinger  of  the  r.  hand. — Panaritium. 

23.  Loiter  Limbs. — Darting  pains  about  the  hips  while  walking,  which 
induce  limping ;  also  in  r.  hip  joint,  on  being  seated. — Weakness  in  the  legs. 
— Jerking  pain  in  1.  thigh,  along  the  crural  nerve. — ^Violent  pain  above  the 
knee  while  walking. — Sensation  of  swelling  in  the  knee,  at  night,  on  being 
seated,  with  pinching  pains  in  the  popliteal  space. — Shooting  pains  in  r.  knee. 
— Stiffness  of  the  joint  while  walking. — Darting  and  pressive  pains  in  the  1. 
tibia. — ^Tearing  pains  in  the  joints  of  the  foot. — Sense  of  pressure  above  r. 
ankle. — Cracking  of  the  joints  on  moving. — ^Tearing,  burning  pains,  in  the 
metatarsal  bones. — Heaviness  in  r.  foot. — ^A  tendency  to  stumble  on  going  up 
stairs. — Pinching  burning,  tearing  and  drawing  in  1.  foot. — Tingling  in  r. 
foot — Swelling  of  the  toes. — Burning  and  shooting  pains  in  the  great  toe. 
— ^Drawing  in  the  middle  toe. 

24.  Generalities. — Swelling  of  the  joints  of  the  upper  and  lower 
extremities. — Neuralgia. — Lassitude  after  the  least  exertion. — Physical  dulness 
and  lassitude,  with  mental  depression. — Inclination  to  sleep  during  the  day, 
sometimes  even  on  rising  in  the  morning,  with  listlessness ;  yawning  from 
emptiness  of  stomach,  sometimes  attended  by  weeping ;  sleep  unquiet  during 
the  night,  disturbed  by  dreams,  unrefreshing  ;  sleep  delayed ;  numerous  and 
sometimes  painful  dreams. — Coldness  and  shivering,  tendency  to  perspire. — 
Pulse  small,  wiry,  rapid,  and  hard. 


Ammoninm  Aceticum. 

Ammonia  acetate.    Spiritus  Mindereri.    C3  H3  O3  NH4.    Aqueous 

solution. 

CPw*iy^^- — Diabetes.    Fever.    Sweat. 

Chanoteritrtlos. — ^This  is  a  very  old  medicine  in  great  use  in 
old-school  practice  for  "  fever  mixtures.*'    It  has  been  experimented 
VOL.  I.  7 


82  AMMONIUM   BROMATUM 

with  by  Wibmer,  who  experienced  the  following  symptoms :  "  Scrapiag 
in  throat.  Increased  warmth  in  abdomen  ;  in  the  skin,  especially  of 
face.  Heaviness  in  the  head."  It  causes  profuse  flow  of  urine,  said 
to  contain  sugar.    <'  Bathed  in  sweat "  is  a  leading  indication. 


Ammonium  Benzoicnm. 

Benzoate  of  Ammonia.    NH^  C,  H5  O..    Solution  in  distilled  water. 
OUnloaL — ^Albuminuria.    Dropsy.    Gout    Indigestion.    Ranula.    Rheumatisixi. 

Charaoteristios. — ^The  chief  symptoms  of  this  salt  (which  has 
been  proved)  are  :  Head  heavy,  stupid.  Urine  scanty  ;  smoky. 
Right  kidney  sensitive  to  pressure.  Gout  with  fluid  in  great  toe-joint 
or  with  lithates.    The  right  side  is  most  affected. 

Relations. — It  is  similar  in  its  action  to  the  Ammonias  and  to 
Benzoic  acid.  Also  to  Gnaphal.  (gouty  concretions),  Caustic,  Tereb., 
Urtica. 

SYMPTOMS. 

3.    Eyes. — Feeling  of  swelling  and  soreness,  apparently  in  the  puncta 
and  saccus  lachrymalis. — Lids  swollen. 

8.    Tongue. — Swelling  under  tongue,  r.  side,  like  ranula. 

zx.    Stomach.— Eructation  of  food  without  acidity,  with  apparent  weak- 
ness of  digestion,  or  acid  eructations. — Increased  warmth  in  stomach. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Sensation  of  internal  soreness  on  pressure  in 
leaning  the  back  against  the  cushioned  back  of  a  carriage  in  region  of  r. 
kidney. — Bloated  face,  eyelids  swollen,  head  heavy,  stupid;  urine  scanty 
smoky. — (Albuminuria.) — Urine  smoky-looking,  scanty,  strong-smelling. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Increased  mucus  in  larynx  causes  frequent 
hawking  and  spitting. 

20.    Back. — Pains  across  sacrum,  with  urgency  to  stool. 


Ammonium  Bromatom. 

Bromide  of  Ammonium.    (NH4  Br.)    Solution  in  distilled  water. 

OUnioaL^^iliary  neuralgia.  Corpulency.  Coryza.  Cough.  Epilepsy.  Kid- 
ney, pain  in.  Larynx,  catarrh  of.  Nails,  biting.  Ophthalmia,  scrofulous.  Ovaries, 
affections  of.    Pharyngitis.    Pterygium.    Whooping-cough. 

Charaoteristtos. — ^This  salt  has  been  well  proved  by  A.  M.  Gush- 
ing. The  eyes  and  ovaries  are  markedly  aflfected.  In  the  morning 
the  eyes  are  red  and  sore,  with  mucus  in  corners  «  left  eye).  There 
is  pain  in  left  ovary,  dull,  with  hard  swelling.  Chronic  laryngeal 
catarrh  of  speakers.    A  sudden  desire  to  cough— so  sudden  it  causes 


AMMONIUM    BROMATUM  83 

strangling.  Sudden  short  cough  when  rising  in  morning,  from  accu- 
mulation of  mucus  in  throat.  Cough  at  3  a.m.  The  mucus  of  Am. 
bro.is  ^t  to  be  stringy.  It  is  incUcated  in  epilepsy  when  the  aura 
begins  with  a  fainting  or  sufiFocating  sensation  at  epigastrium,  rising 
up  both  sides  of  sternum  to  throat  There  is  an  irritable  feeling 
under  finger  nails,  >  only  by  biting  them.  The  known  conditions 
arc :  >  warmth,  vrarm  drinks ;  <  in  open  air,  cold  air.  Many 
symptoms  occur  on  waking,  3  a.m.  Must  walk  about  for  fear  of 
sofibcation. 

Bdadons. — Compare:  Kah  bro.,  Arg.  n.,  Caust,  Bufo,  Cepa 
(coryza  <  in  warm  room);  Lach.  «  after  sleep).  Cough  from 
accumulation  of  mucus  in  throat,  JEsc.  h.,  Atrop.,  Grat.,  Kre,,  Seneg. 


BTKPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Feared  he  might  die  (with  stomach  symptoms). — ^Timid, 
<fiscoQraged;  lack  of  self-confidence. — ^While  writing  mis-spelled  words  or 
numbers. 

S.  Head. — Sensation  of  band  round  head  pressing  hardest  just  above 
ears.— Pain  in  side  of  head  (1.)  near  eye;  as  if  a  nail  driven  in.— R.-8ided 
headache  <  by  coughing. 

3.  Eyes.—  In  evening  eyes  (esp.  r.)  feel  large,  with  constant  blur  before 
them. — Eyes  as  if  sand  in  them. — R  eye  feels  as  if  bathed  in  hot  water; 
stringy  mucus  in  it — Pterygium. — Eyes  red  and  sore  in  morning,  with  white 
nracQs  in  comers. — Lids  swollen;  droop,  difficult  and  painful  to  raise; 
adhere. — ^Pains  round  eyes   into   head. — In   evening,   difficult   vision   and 


S-  Nose. — Sneezing  on  moving  about  in  cold  room,  or  on  raising  arms ; 
Hun  discharge  from  r.  nostril  (next  day  thicker). — Sneezing  on  going  into 
warm  room ;  stoppage  of  nose  in  warm  room. 

8.  Mouth. — Mouth  and  tongue  smart  severely  as  if  just  burned ; 
mormng.— Must  hold  mouth  open  when  walking  on  account  of  heat  in  throat 
and  lungs.— Stringy,  tasteless  mucus  in  mouth. — ^Tastes  food  eaten  several 
boors  before. 

9.  Throat. — During  day  filled  with  white  sticky  mucus,  streaked  with 
Uood.— Throat  sore,  mottled  look. — Preparing  to  swallow  is  painful,  the  act 
is  not— Sensation  of  hot  air  passing  up  throat,  r.  side,  though  stomach  feels 
cold.— Fauces  and  tongue  feel  scalded. — Stinging  and  irritation  in  fauces  with 
inclination  to  cough  >  by  sneezing. 

n.  Stomach. — Belching  >  faint  stomach. — Dyspncea,  with  distress  in 
Qpper  epigastrium. 

It.    Abdomen. — Sharp  twisting  pain  just  above  crest  of  r.  ilium. 

13.  Stool  and  Anu8.---Sudden  urgent  desire  with  loose  stool. — Transient 
Rtom  of  old  h^smorrhoid. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Feeling  over  r.  kidney  as  if  something  were 
pressed  hard  against  it ;  >  by  pressure,  but  leaving  a  pulling  sensation. 

ifi.   Female  Sexual  Organs. — Dull,  constant  pain  and  hard  swelling 
in  L  ovary. 
17.   Respiratory  Organs.— An  almost  continuous  cough  for  hours,  > 


86  AMMONIUM   CARBONICUM 

the  warm  room;  heaviness  and  beating  in  the  forehead  after  dinner. — 
Shootings  at  the  base  of  the  brain. — Headache,  as  if  from  carbonic  acid  gas. 
— Sensation  as  if  the  brain  moved  loosely  in  the  skull. — Soreness  of  the  scalp 
smd  of  the  hair. — Itching  in  the  head. — Falling  oflF  of  the  hair. 

3.  Byes. — Burning  in  the  eyes,  principally  in  the  evening,  or  in  the 
morning,  with  photophobia. — Sensation  of  cold  in  the  eyes. — Hordeolum. — 
Nocturnal  agglutination  of  the  eyelids. — Dry  excretion  in  the  eyelids. — AfEec- 
tions  from  over>straining  the  eyes. — Muscae  volitantes. — Eyes  weak  and  watery 
after  reading  or  using  them  at  fine  work. — ^Yellow  spots  before  the  eyes  on 
looking  at  white  objects. — Inability  to  move  the  eyes. — Confused  sight,  ^rith 
sparks  before  the  eyes. — Double  vision. — Myopia. — Cataract — Black  spots 
and  bright  bands  before  the  eyes. — ^Weeping. 

4.  Ears. — Buzzing  in  the  ears,  particularly  at  night. — Roaring  and 
tingling  in  the^ears. — Hardness  of  hearing,  with  suppuration  and  itching  of 
the  ears. — Hard  swelling  of  the>glands  of  the  neck,  and  of  the  parotid  glands. 

5.  Nose. — Heaviness  in  the  extremity  of  the  nose  on  stooping,  as  if 
from  congestion  of  blood. — Itching  and  purulent  pimples  in  the  nose. — 
Furunculus  at  the  extremity  of  the  nose. — Swelling,  sensation  of  excoriation 
and  painful  sensibility  of  the  nostrils. — Discharge  of  sharp,  burning  water 
from  the  nose. — Discharge  of  pus  from  the  nose. — Excretion  of  sanguineous 
mucus. — Bleeding  of  the  nose,  particularly  in  the  morning  on  washing,  or 
after  a  meal. — Obstinate  dryness  of  the  nose. — Obstinate  coryza. — Dry  coryza 
and  stoppage  of  the  nose,  chiefly  at  night,  with  danger  of  suffocation. — V/ith 
long-continued  coryza,  he  can  only  breathe  through  the  mouth. 

6.  Face. — Face  pale  and  bloated,  with  nausea  and  fatigue  of  body  and 
mind. — Sickly  complexion. — Heat  in  the  face  during  intellectual  labour. — 
Tension  and  acute  dragging  pains,  with  shootings  in  the  right  side  of  the  face. 
— ^Tightness  in  the  skin  of  the  face,  as  if  the  face  were  swollen. — Hard  swell- 
ing of  the  (r.)  parotid  gland. — Distortion  of  the  features. — Eruptions  on  the  face, 
with  itching. — Furunculi  on  the  cheeks. — Ephelides. — ^Tetter-like  eruptions, 
with  desquamation  of  the  skin,  on  the  cheeks,  round  the  mouth,  and  on  the 
chin, — Lips  dry,  cracked,  burning,  and  bleeding. — ^The  corners  of  the  mouth 
and  lips  are  sore,  cracked,  and  burn. — Painful  swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary 
glands. — Itching  eruptions,  with  soreness  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Toothache  on  compressing  the  teeth,  or  after  lying  down  in 
the  evening,  or  when  the  air  has  penetrated  to  them,  or  during  catamenia ; 
the  pains  are,  for  the  most  part,  drawing  or  starting,  or  shooting,  or  like  those 
of  ulceration,  and  they  frequently  extend  into  the  cheeks  and  ears. — ^Aggrava- 
tion from  warm  fluids,  during  the  menses. — Pricking  pain,  esp.  in  the 
molar  teeth  ;  worse  when  masticating  or  touching  the  decayed  tooth  with  the 
tongue. — Obstinate  shooting  pain  in  the  teeth. — Caries,  elongation,  and  chronic 
looseness  of  the  teeth ;  rapid  decay  of  the  teeth. — The  edges  of  the  teeth  feel 
dull. — Inflammatory  swelling,  suppuration,  and  easy  bleeding  of  the  gums. 

8.  Mouth. — Redness,  inflammation,  pain  as  from  excoriation,  and 
sensation  of  swelling  in  the  interior  of  the  mouth ;  esp.  the  inside  of  the 
cheeks. — Eruption  of  vesicles  in  the  mouth  and  on  the  tongue. — ^Vesicles  on 
the  tongue,  at  the  tip,  on  the  borders,  burning,  hindering  eating  and  speaking. 
— Difficulty  of  speech,  as  if  from  weakness  of  the  organs. — Great  dryness  of 
the  mouth  and  throat,  chiefly  at  night. — ^Accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth, 


AMMONIUM   CARBONICUM  87 

and  Goostant  spitting. — Q£Fensive  smell  from  the  mouth,  perceptible  to  the 
patient 

9.  Throat. — ^When  swallowing,  sensation  as  of  a  foreign  body  in  the 
thnat— Sore  throat,  as  if  something  were  sticking  in  it,  principally  in  the 
moming  and  evening. — Pain,  as  from  excoriation  and  scraping  in  the  throat, 
dwelling  of  the  tonsils,  with  difficulty  in  swallowing  (tonsils  bluish,  much 
offensive  mucus  there). — Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  anterior  muscles  of  the 
neck  after  drinking. — Putrid  sore  throat. 

10.  Appetitc^Taste  of  blood  in  the  mouth.— Bitter  taste,  chiefly  after 
eating,  or  after  waking  in  the  morning. — ^Acid  taste  of  food  and  after  having 
taken  milk.— Metallic  taste  of  food?— Much  thirst— Constant  thirst.— Inability 
to  eat  without  drinking. — Great  craving  and  appetite. — ^Want  of  appetite  in 
the  morning. — ^Wben  eating  one  is  soon  satiated. — Repugnance  to  milk. — 
Excessive  desire  for  sugar. — Dizzy  vertigo,  and  heat  in  the  face  when  eating. 
—After  a  meal,  pyrosis,  with  scraping  in  the  throat,  and  drowsiness. 

11.  Stomach. — Sour,  or  empty,  or  abortive  risings. — Risings,  with  taste 
of  food  taken. — Pyrosis. — Risings,  and  vomiting. — Pain  as  from  constriction  in 
the-jstomach,  with  nausea,  water-brash  and  chilliness  (>  by  pressure  and  by 
lying  down). — ^Nausea  and  vomiting  after  eating  vdth  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the 
stomach.— Sensitive  painf  ulness  of  the  stomach,  even  to  the  clothing. — ^Violent 
sanguineous  vomiting. — Fulness  in  the  stomach,  chiefly  after  a  meal,  with 
nansea,  and  great  tenderness  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Gastralgia. — Con- 
tractive pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  when  stretching. — Heat  and  sensation 
of  burning  in  the  stomach. — Heartburn  after  eating. 

IS.  AtMlomen. — Pressure,  pain  as  from  excoriation  and  burning  in  the 
bepatic  region. — Piercing  shootings  in  the  liver,  when  seated  in  the  evening. 
— Piin  in  the  abdomen,  with  diarrhoea. — Contractive  spasmodic  colics,  with 
nausea,  and  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth. — Pain,  as  from  commotion 
in  the  abdomen,  when  walking. — Noise  in  the  abdomen. — Elastic  swelling  in 
the  ffmn^  like  flatulent  hernia. — Flatulent,  painful  colic. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation. — Difficult  evacuations.— Slow,  hard 
efaoations,  in  small  pieces. — Stool  difficult,  hard,  knotty. — Soft  or  loose 
slimy  evacuations,  followed  or  preceded  by  cutting  pains. — ^Af ter  and  during 
an  evacuation,  discharge  of  blood  from  the  anus.  Haemorrhoids  in  the  anus, 
sometimes  bleeding,  with  smarting  pains. — Protrusion  of  haemorrhoids  from 
the  rectum  during  the  evacuation,  with  much  pain  afterwards. — Haemor- 
iboidaJ  tumours  protruding  before,  during,  and  after  stool. — Nocturnal  burn- 
ing and  itching  in  the  anus. — Excoriation  between  the  legs  and  at  the  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Constant  inclination  to  make  water,  even  at 
niglit,  with  scanty  emission. — Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  continued 
pressure  on  the  bladder. — Frequent  and  copious  micturition,  esp.  in  the 
evening. — Passing  water  at  night,  during  sleep  (morning). — ^Wetting  the  bed. 
—White,  sandy  urine. — Reddish  urine,  like  v^^ter  mixed  with  blood. — Emis- 
sion of  blood  from  the  urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Excessive  sexual  desire,  without  lascivious 
ideas  or  erections;  or  want  of  sexual  desire  and  repugnance  to  the  other  sex. 
—Frequent  pollutions,  and  a  sense  of  contracting,  dragging  and  heaviness  in 
the  testes.— Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid,  after  a  difficult  evacuation. 

tA   Female  Sexual  Organs. — Swelling,  itching,  and  burning  in  the 


88  AMMONIUM   CARBONICUM 

(external)  genital  parts  of  the  female. — Excoriation  of  the  skin  in  the  parts,  and 
in  the  anus. — Premature  and  too  copious  menses,  with  emission  of  black  and 
acrid  blood. — Before  and  during  the  catamenia,  colic  and  pains  in  the  loins. — 
During  the  catamenia,  toothache,  pressure  on  the  matrix,  cuttings,  acnte 
drawings  in  the  back  and  in  the  genital  parts,  desire  to  lie  down,  paleness  of 
the  face,  shivering,  corjrza,  and  sadness. — Discharge  of  serum  from  the  matrix. 
— Great  weakness  during  the  menstrual  flow ;  haemorrhoids  <  during. — ^Acrid, 
corrosive,  or  burning  leucorrhcea,  or  watery. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Roughness  and  hoarseness,  with  difficulty 
of  speech. — Inability  to  speak  a  loud  word. — Catarrh,  with  hardness  of  hear- 
ing, and  burning  in  the  stomach. — Cough,  with  hoarseness. — Dry  cough,  as  if 
from  a  feather  in  the  throat. — Cough,  with  asthmatic  oppression,  particularly 
when  in  bed  in  the  evening. — ^Tickling  cough,  with  expectoration. — Cough 
only  at  night,  or  only  by  day,  or  in  the  evening,  before  going  to  sleep,  or  in 
the  morning  towards  three  or  four  o'clock ;  dry  from  tickling  in  the  throat,  as 
of  dust. — Cough,  with  spitting  of  blood,  with  previous  sweet  taste  and  with 
great  dyspnoea. — Cough,  with  stitches  in  the  small  of  the  back. — ^When 
coughing,  shootings  in  the  loins,  in  the  sternum,  or  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. 
— Cough,  with  mucous  and  sanguineous  expectoration,  shortness  of  breath, 
and  sensation  of  a  weight  in  the  chest. — Expectoration  of  pure  blood,  pro- 
duced by  coughing. 

18.  Chest. — Short  breath,  with  choking,  principally  on  going  upstairs. — 
Asthmatic  respiration,  and  dyspnoea,  chiefly  in  the  heat  of  a  room,  as  well  as 
after  any  exertion,  sometimes  with  palpitation  of  the  heart. — Nocturnal 
dyspnoea. — Painful  sensation  of  spasmodic  asthma,  with  short  and  dull  cough. 
--Shootings  in  the  chest  and  in  the  sides,  particularly  when  breathing,  sing- 
ing, stooping,  walking,  or  at  night,  with  inability  to  lie  for  any  time  on  the 
side  affected. — Feeling  of  fatigue  in  the  chest. — Congestion  towards  the  chest 
— Heaviness  in  the  chest,  as  from  congestion  of  blood  to  the  chest. — Burning 
in  the  chest. — Stitch  in  the  heart,  frequently. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  chiefly 
after  exertion,  and  sometimes  with  retraction  of  the  epigastrium,  and  weakness 
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Shootings  in  the  integuments  of  the  chest. — Purple 
miliary  eruptions  and  f urunculi  on  the  chest. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Pains  in  the  lumbar  region,  and  pains  in  the  nape 
of  the  neck,  mostly  of  a  dragging  nature. — ^Acute  draggings  from  the  side  to 
the  scapulary  joint. — Painful  swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  neck  and  of  the 
axillary  glands. — Goitre. — Drawing  tension  in  the  back  and  in  the  loins. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Arms  and  fingers  dead  and  sti£F  at  night,  as  well  as 
in  the  morning,  and  when  grasping  anything. — Heaviness  and  paralytic 
weakness  of  the  arms. — Acute  pulling  in  the  joints  of  the  arms,  of  the  hands, 
and  of  the  fingers,  >  by  the  heat  of  the  bed. — Pain,  as  from  a  sprain  in 
the  wrist. — ^Attack  of  trembling  in  the  hands. — Swollen  veins  and  bluish 
colour  of  the  hands,  after  having  washed  them  in  cold  water. — Exfoliation  of 
the  skin  of  the  hands. — ^The  skin  of  the  hands  becomes  hard  and  cracked. — 
Cramps  in  the  fingers. — Numbness  of  the  fingers. — Swelling  of  the  hands 
when  the  arms  are  suffered  to  fall  down. — Swelling  of  the  joints  of  the 
fingers. 

23.  Lower  Limbs.— Tightness  in  the  legs,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too 
short.-— Jerking  and  contracting  of  the  legs. — Great  fatigue  in  the  legs. — ^Pain, 


AMMONIUM   CARBONICUM  89 

as  from  fatigue,  in  the  coxo-femoral  joint,  and  the  thighs,  particularly  in 
bed  in  the  morning;  >  by  walking. — Pain,  as  if  bruised  in  the  thighs. — 
Qramps  in  the  feet,  in  the  calves  of  the  legs,  and  in  the  tibiae. — ^Jerking  of  the 
knees  and  legs. — Drawing  pain  in  the  legs,  when  seated. — ^Acute  dragging  in 
the  joints  of  the  feet,  >  by  the  heat  of  the  bed. — Pain,  as  of  ulceration, 
and  shootings  in  the  heels. — Sensation  of  burning  in  the  feet. — Swelling  of 
the  feet — Sweating  of  the  feet. — Cold  and  shivering  in  the  feet,  chiefly  on 
going  to  bed  in  the  evening. — Pain  (as  from  dislocation)  in  the  great  toe, 
principally  in  bed  at  night,  on  moving  it. — Redness,  heat,  and  swelling  of  the 
great  toe,  in  the  evening,  as  if  from  chilblains. 

24.  Generalities. — Pain,  as  from  subcutaneous  ulceration. — Pains,  as  of 
ulceration  in  different  parts,  or  shootings  and  acute  dragging,  mitigated  by 
the  heat  of  the  bed. — ^Pains,  as  of  dislocation,  drawing  and  tension  of  the 
joints,  as  if  from  contraction  of  the  tendons. — ^The  right  side  of  the  body 
appears  to  be  more  affected  than  the  left  side. — The  pains  for  the  most  part 
^ypear  either  in  the  evening  or  at  night,  or  in  the  morning. — General  restless- 
ness in  the  Ixxiy  in  the  evening. — Inclination  to  stretch  out  the  arms  and  the 
legs.— <jreat  fatigue  felt  from  speaking  much  and  from  listening  to  another. — 
Weariness,  bmise-like  pain  and  great  weakness  in  the  limbs,  chiefly  when 
walking  in  the  open  air,  or  in  the  evening,  sometimes  with  an  inclination  to 
lie  down. — Repugnance  to  exercise. — Convulsions. — Local  inflammations. — 
Tetanus.— Scorbutic  dyscrasia. — Tendency  of  the  blood  to  decomposition. — 
Emaciation. — Great  sensibility  to  cold. 

95.  Skin. — Violent  itching  here  and  there,  with  burning  vesicles  and 
pimples  after  scratching. — ^Miliary,  chronic  eruptions. — Redness  like  scaxiatina 
on  all  the  npper  part  of  the  body. — Scarlatina  (malignant),  dark  red,  sore 
tfaroat,  parotids  and  cervical  glands  much  swollen,  stertorous  breathing, 
involuntary  stools,  vomiting. — Freckles. — Burning,  acute  shootings  and  draw- 
ings in  the  corns. — Excoriation  of  the  skin  (between  the  legs,  and  in  the  anus, 
and  in  the  genital  parts). — Desquamation  of  the  skin  (palms  of  the  hands). — 
(Ganglia.)-— Swelling  of  the  glands. — Rachitis. 

96.  Sleep. — Sleepiness  in  the  daytime. — Sleeplessness,  and  sleep  delayed, 

esp.  after  going  late  to  bed.— Sleeplessness  till  4  a.m.,  and  when  falling  asleep, 

perspiration. — Nightmare  when  fsdling  asleep. — Frequent  waking,  with  fright 

(9%at  fear  afterwards),  and  difficulty  in  going  to  sleep  again. — Sleep  full  of 

dreams,  both  anxious  and  romantic,  historical  and  lascivious. — Dreams  of 

speches^  of  death,  of  vermin,  and  of  quarrels. — Disturbed  and  unrefreshing 

sleep.— At  night,  attacks  of  anguish,  vertigo,  congestion  of  blood  in  the  head, 

cephalalgia,  toothache,  nausea,  gastralgia,  colic,  inclination  to  make  water, 

spitting  of  slimy  matter,  pains  in  the  great  toes  and  in  the  ganglia,  shocks  in 

the  body,  pains  in  the  limbs,  itching  and  pricking  in  the  skin,  restiessness, 

ebnOitkm  of  the  blood,  dry  heat,  sweat,  esp.  in  the  legs,  shivering  and 

cdd. 

ty.  Ferer. — Pulse  hard,  tense,  and  frequent— Attacks  of  shivering  in 
tte  evening. — ^Violent  shivering  with  trembling,  before  going  to  sleep. — 
Feverish  heat  in  the  head,  with  cold  in  the  feet. — Sweats,  every  night  and 
towards  the  morning. — Perspiration  in  the  morning  and  during  the  day, 
fflostfjr  on  the  joints. 


90  AMMONIUM   CAUSTICUM 

Ammonium  Gaasticnm. 

Ammonia.    Spirits  of  Hartshorn.    NH^  OH.    Solution  in  water. 

Clinioal. — ^Aphonia.      Nephritis.      CBsophagitis.      Rheumatism.      Sloughing. 
Thirst    Timidity.    Ulcerations.    Vomiting. 

Charaoteristtos. — ^The  symptoms  of  caustic  ammonia  closely 
resemble  those  of  the  carbonate.  The  caustic  nature  of  the  drug 
is  exemplified  in  the  burning  sensations  experienced,  especially  in 
throat,  gullet,  and  rectum.  White  patches  on  tongue  and  inner  side  of 
cheeks.  There  is  intense  thirst,  and  excessively  violent  ejection 
of  stomach  contents.  Voice  low,  weak.  Speech  broken.  Aphonia, 
with  debiUty ;  or  with  burning  rawness  in  throat.  (A  good  all- 
round  remedy  in  aphonia.)  Great  oppression  of  breathing ;  the 
patient  gasps  for  breath.  As  with  the  carbonate  there  is  timidity — 
great  tendency  to  take  fright.  Shiverings.  In  a  case  of  poisoning  in 
a  man  who  took  a  mouthful  of  a  strong  solution  of  ''household 
ammonia  "  by  mistake  there  was  great  swelling  of  mucous  membrane 
of  mouth  and  throat,  stertorous  breathing,  voice  muffled  and  husky  ; 
later,  cough  with  blood-stained  expectoration.  One  night  there  was 
headache  and  deUrium,  and  at  the  same  time  the  urine  contained 
albumen  and  hyaline  casts.  It  has  been  used  in  muscular  rheu- 
matism of  the  shoulders  and  thighs.  Haemorrhages  occur  from 
mucous  surfaces.  Great  excitement  in  evening. — <  After  eating  or 
drinking. 

ReuLtions. — Compare:  the  Ammonias,  especially  Amm.  carb. 
AntidoUd  by:  Vinegar  and  vegetable  acids. 

SYMPTOMS. 

z.    Mind.— Timidity. 

3.  Head. — Sensation  as  if  brain  protruded  at  centre,  forward,  and  on 
both  sides,  and  the  skull  was  quartered,  but  without  pain  and  without  con- 
fusion of  the  head. 

5.  Nose. — Peculiar  redness  of  skin  over  nose  and  frontal  sinuses. — Nose 
stopped. — ^Watery  coryza. 

6.  Face. — Extremely  pale  face,  expressive  of  the  greatest  suffering. — 
Lower  lip  swollen  three  times  its  size;  black  coating  in  centre. — Mucous 
membrane  of  lips  and  nose  destroyed. — ^Glands  under  angle  of  jaw,  each  side, 
swollen. 

8.  Mouth. — Profuse  bloody  salivation. — Burning  and  scraping  at  root 
of  tongue  and  back  of  gullet. — Lips,  gums,  and  tongue  swollen. 

9.  Throat. — Burning  and  dryness  of  oesophagus;  great  difficulty  in 
swallowing. — Uvula  retracted,  covered  with  white  membrane.— Tonsils 
swollen,  uvula  elongated  and  swollen. 

iz.  Stomach. — Intense  thirst. —Vomiting  of  mucus  and  blood  and 
great  tenderness  over  epigastric  region. — ^Violent  ejection  of  stomach  contents 
by  nose  and  mouth. — Burning  in  track  of  oesophagus,  none  in  stomach* 


AMMONIUM    MURIATICUM  91 

15.  AtMlomen. — Pains,  tenderness,  distension. — Borborygmi. 

13.  Stool  and  Rectum. — ^Copious  bloody  stools.— Tenesmus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  red,  alkaline. — ^Albuminuria,  h3raline 
casts. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Menses  fifteen  days  too  early  and  very 
profuse. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Bronchitis,  with  profuse  expectoration ; 
blood-stained. — ^Voice  deep,  weak,  or  absent— Great  difficulty  in  breathing.— 
Gasping  for  breath. 

s.  Upper  Limbs.— Convulsive  twitches  of  r.  arm. — Muscular  rheu- 
matism of  shoulders. 

H-  Generalities. — Bleedings  from  all  orifices,  which  cause  faintness.— 
Mection  of  the  mucous  membranes  and  organs  of  the  chest ;  contraction  of 
the  flexor  muscles ;  contraction  of  the  oesophagus  and  of  the  colon. — Great 
exhaustion  and  muscular  weakness;  weakness  which  hardly  admits  of  an 
aprig^t  posture ;  great  trembling  on  making  the  slightest  exertion. — Skin  hot 
and  dry,  afterwards  moist,  perspiration  supervening. — Disturbed  sleep. — 
Sluvcrings;  fever  towards  evening;  pulse,  at  first  feeble  and  rather  ac- 
celerated, afterwards  quicker  from  hour  to  hour. — Great  tendency  to  take 
fright 


Ammomnm  Mariaticnm. 

Sal  ammoniac.    Ammonium  chloride.    NH^  CI. 

QWiaiJ. — Anosmia.  Bronchitis.  Constipation.  Coryza.  Cough.  Diarrhcea. 
Eyes,  inflammation  of.  Feet,  pains  in.  Glands,  enlarged.  Hatmorrhoids.  Liver, 
ofedionsof.  Melancholia.  Menstruation,  disorders  during.  Pneumonia.  Sciatica. 
Scurvy.  Spleen,  pains  in.  Sprains.  Stumps,  neuralgia  in.  Tonsils,  swelling  of. 
Uken. 

Ghanusteristtos.— i4m.  mur.  is  less  prominently  a  right-side 
medicine  than  Am.  c. ;  Guernsey  regards  it  as  rather  left-sided.  It 
ads  specially  also  on  the  forehead.  It  causes  ulceration  and  ulcera- 
tive pains  ;  also  dislocation-like  pains  and  tension  as  if  tendons  were 
contracted.  Both  cause  paralytic  weakness ;  both  are  <  in  open 
air.  Am,  mur  has  >  from  warm  bath.  Am.  carh,  has  greater 
sensitnlity  to  cold  and  to  damp  weather  than  the  muriate.  Both 
have  itching  eruptions  of  all  kinds  ;  drowsiness  by  day  with  indolence  ; 
shivering  in  the  evening.  The  mental  state  is  very  similar  in  the  two. 
The  muriate  has  perhaps  more  melancholy  and  disposition  to  tears 
than  the  other ;  and  it  has  pecuUar  to  itself  '^  antipathy  to  certain 
persons."  Am,  mur.  has  fear  of  darkness,  like  Siram,^  which  is  not 
noted  under  Am.  carb.  The  muriate  has  fulness  in  head  ;  weight  in 
forehead.  Burning  in  eyes  in  twilight  or  in  morning  with  photo- 
phobia. Keratitis.  Ulceration  in  comers  of  mouth.  Sensation  in 
stomach  as  if  fasting,  which  nevertheless  feels  full ;  <  after  breakfast. 
Intermittent  pains  in  both  hypochondria.  Stitches  and  burning  in 
liver  region,  stitches  in  spleen  <  sitting.    Tension  in  either  groin. 


92  AMMONIUM   MURIATICUM 

Shootings  in  scapula  and  ice-cold  sensation  between  scapulae,  un- 
relieved by  external  wraps.  In  the  fever  chilliness  predominates. 
Choudhuiy  cured  with  it  a  case  of  intermittent  characterised  by 
absence  of  thirst  in  all  stages.  Constipation  and  piles  with  bleeding  at 
stooL  Sore,  smarting  haemorrhoids.  Hard  stool  covered  with  mucus  ; 
mucous  secretions  generally  increased.  Menses  too  early  and  too 
copious  (Am.  c),  with  pains  in  loins.  Vomiting,  diarrhoea,  and 
neuralgic  pains  in  feet  during  period.  Coryza,  acrid,  watery  ;  scalding 
hot ;  with  cold  feeling  between  shoulders.  Loss  of  smell.  Cough 
and  asthmatic  symptom  <  evening  and  at  night  and  <  in  open  air. 
Pain  as  from  ulceration  at  tips  of  fingers.  Neuralgic  pains  in  stamps 
of  amputated  limbs  (AL  cep,).  Ulcerative  pains  in  heels  (ulcers  from 
friction  Al,  cep.),  (Panaris.)  Sciatic  pain  as  if  tendons  were  too  short. 
<  Sitting  or  walking.  Tension  in  legs  on  lying.  Large  buttocks. 
Fatty  tumours.  Obesity.  Body  fat ;  le^  thin  {Am.  c,  fat  all  over). 
There  is  >  walking  crooked,  <  on  walking  erect.  Most  symptoms 
are  <  at  night  and  from  two  to  four  a.m. 

Relatioiis. — Compare :  Mag.  mur.,  Nat.  mur. ;  Val.  and  Ac.  mur. 
(pains  in  feet  and  heels) ;  Rhus  (sprains ;  <  sitting) ;  Seneg.  (fat 
people);  Sep.,  Sul.  In  "aversion  to  darkness"  compare:  Csdc, 
Carb.  an.,  Stron.,  Val.,  and  Stram.  A  hot  bath  relieves  aggravation 
caused  by  Am.  m.  Antidotes  to  Am.  m. :  Bitter  almonds  ;  CofiFea ; 
Nux  V. 

SYMPTOMS. 

z.  Mind. — Great  anguish,  and  melancholy  state  as  from  vexation  or 
cares,  with  inclination  to  shed  tears. — Full  of  grief,  but  can't  weep. — Morose, 
apathetic  humour,  with  repugnance  to  conversation. — Irritability  and  dis- 
position to  be  angry. — ^Antipathy  to  certain  persons. 

2.  Head. — Dizziness  and  vertigo  (flushed  face  and  enlarged  veins), 
which  mostly  disappear  in  the  open  air.— iSensation  of  fulness  in  the  head  and 
weight  over  the  forehead,  chiefly  in  the  morning  on  rising. — Pressure  in  the 
forehead  towards  the  root  of  the  nose,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  brain  were 
bruised. — ^Acute  semi-lateral  sensation  of  pulling  in  the  head  and  in  the  face. 
— Congestion  of  blood  in  the  head,  with  internal  heat. — Itching  in  the  scalp, 
which  forces  to  scratch  constantly. — The  hair  falls  out ;  often  with  dandrifiF. 

3.  Eyes. — Burning  in  the  eyes,  and  in  the  corners  of  the  eyes,  in  the 
evening,  in  the  twilight,  or  in  the  morning,  with  photophobia. — Palpitation  in 
the  eyelids. — Confused  sight,  as  from  a  mist. — Fluttering  spots  and  points 
before  the  eyes,  in  the  day,  and  in  the  evening  by  candle-light. — Yellow  spots 
before  the  eyes  on  looking  steadfastly  at  any  object ;  while  sewing. 

4*  Ears. — Shooting  in  the  ears  from  the  inside  outwards,  esp.  in  the 
open  air. — Drawing  and  piercing  sensation  in  the  ears. — Eruption  in  the  ears. 
— Running  from  the  ears. — Hardness  of  hearing.— Tingling  and  buzzing 
before  the  ears. — Affection  of  the  r.  ear  commencing  in  the  throat,  as  if  the 
throat  and  the  ear  were  connected. 

5.  Nose. — Swelling  of  the  nose,  and  painful  sensibility  to  the  touch, 
with  pain  of  ulceration  and  bloody  crusts  in  the  nostrils. — Sneezing,  with 
shooting  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  as  far  as  the  shoulders,  and  crawling  in 


AMMONIUM   MURIATICUM  93 

the  tbroat — Coryza,  with  stoppage  of  the  nose  (and  tenderness  of  the  nose) 
and  loss  of  smell. — Flow  of  clear  corrosive  water  durmg  the  coryiA,  corroding 
tiielips. 

6.  Face. — ^Acute  sensation  pf  tearing,  violent  in  the  zygomatic  bones. — 
Burning  heat  in  the  face  in  the  room. — Eruptions  in  the  face. — Ulcerations 
in  the  comers  of  the  mouth,  and  in  the  upper  lip. — Lips  shining,  as  from 
^ease.-— Lips  dry,  wrinkled,  chapped,  and  excoriated  with  burning  heat,  with 
blotdies  of  the  skin,  peeling  <^ ;  the  face  bums  with  an  eruption  which 
requires  cold  applications  for  relief  .—Tensive  pain  in  the  articulation  of  the 
lower  jaw  on  chewing,  and  on  opening  the  mouth. — Swelling  of  the  sub- 
maxiUary  ^ands,  with  throbbing  pain. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Acute  sensation  of  tearing  in  the  teeth. — Swelling  of  the 
gnms^with  shooting  pain. 

8.  Mottth. — Burning  blisters  on  the  point  of  the  tongue. — Shooting 
pain  in  the  throat  on  swallowing. — ^Tenacious  mucus  in  the  throat,  chiefly 
in  the  morning. — Swelling  of  tonsils  so  he  can  scarcely  swallow  after  taking 
cokL 

m.  Appetite. — Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  chiefly  in  the  moming,  with 
bitter  eructations  and  anxiety. — ^Absence  of  hunger  and  of  appetite. — Much 
thirst,  chiefly  in  the  evening. — ^Af ter  every  meal,  nausea,  flow  of  water  from 
the  mouth,  with  shuddering,  diarrhoea  witii  colic  and  pains  in  the  limbs,  and 
sometimes  with  throbbing  in  the  chest,  heat  in  the  face,  and  resUessness. 

II.  Stomach.'— Emctations,  mostiy  bitter  or  imperfect. — Regurgitation 
of  what  has  been  taken,  or  of  a  bitter  and  acid  water. — Frequent  violent 
hiooough,  often  with  shootings  in  the  chest. — ^Water-brash. — Drawing  or 
gnawing  pains  in  the  stomach,  as  if  from  worms. — Sensation  of  burning  in 
the  stomach  and  in  the  precordial  region. 

13.  Abdomen. — Shooting  pains  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,  chiefly  in 
the  moming  on  waking,  with  dyspnoea,  which  causes  the  assumption  of  an 
erect  position. — Inflation  of  the  abdomen. — Pinching  in  the  abdomen. — 
Tension  and  swelling  in  the  groins. — Sensation  of  swelling  and  pain,  as  of 
ulceration  in  the  groins,  on  their  being  touched. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Constipation. — Hard  stools,  or  frequent  and  soft. 
^Hard,  crumbly  stool,  or  covered  with  glairy  mucus. — Diarrhoea  with  pain, 
as  if  caused  by  excoriation,  or  by  a  bruise  in  the  belly. — Loose,  slimy,  greenish 
stools. — Before  the  stool,  pain  in  the  belly  round  the  navel. — Discharge  of 
blood  with  the  stool. — During  stool,  stitches  in  anus. — Pustules  form  beside 
the  anus,  with  itching  and  soreness. — Stool  often  varies  in  colour  at  every 
evacuation,  no  two  being  alike. — Pain,  as  from  excoriation  in  the  rectum 
when  sitting ;  during  and  after  the  expulsion  of  stool,  severe  burning  and 
smarting. — Pain  in  the  perinaenm  when  walking. — Haemorrhoids :  bu-ning, 
stinging,  smarting,  soreness. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Evacuation  of  urine  increased,  principally  in 
the  night. — Reddish,  clear  urine,  without  sediment. — Diminished  secretion 
of  urine. — Slow  flow  of  urine ;  more  abundant  during  stool. — Frequent 
urination,  esp.  towards  moming. — Sediment,  like  clay. — Urine  smells  strongly 
of  ammonia ;  sometimes  musty  odour. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Shootings  and  throbbings  in  the  spermatic 
cord.— Frequent  erections. 


94  AMMONIUM   MURIATICUM 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organ8.^M enses  too  early  and  too  copious,  with 
pain  in  the  abdomen,  loins,  and  pains,  compressive  or  drawing,  in  the  back  ; 
continuing  during  the  night,  when  the  menstrual  discharge  is  more  profuse. — 
During  the  menses,  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  drawing  in  the  feet,  or  discharge 
of  blood  on  going  to  stool. — Leuoorrhoea,  with  inflation  of  the  belly ;  or  like 
the  white  of  an  egg,  preceded  by  pinchings  round  the  navel ;  or  slimy  and 
brown,  discharged  after  making  water. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness,  with  sensation  of  burning  in 
the  larynx. — ^Violent  cough,  chiefly  in  the  evening  and  at  night,  when  Isring 
on  the  t)ack. — Frequent  hawking,  with  expectoration  of  mucus. — Dry  cough 
in  the  morning  (with  tickling  of  the  throat),  with  expectoration  of  whitish  and 
thick  matter. — ^The  cough  is  aggravated  after  a  meal,  as  well  as  after  a  cold 
drink,  and  when  lying  with  the  head  low. — Cough  on  breathing  deeply,  esp. 
when  lying  on  the  r.  side. — ^When  coughing,  shootings  in  the  chest  and  in  the 
hypochondria. — Spitting  of  blood,  preceded  by  tickling  in  the  throat. — ^When 
breathing,  stitches  in  the  shoulder-blades. 

18.  Chest. — Asthmatic  state  on  moving  the  arms  up  and  down. — Weight 
and  oppression  of  the  chest,  with  difficulty  of  breathing,  chiefly  in  the  open 
air,  or  at  night — Pressure  and  shootings  in  the  chest. — Pressure,  heaviness, 
and  stitches  in  the  chest,  sensation  as  if  a  swallowed  morsel  had  lodged  in 
the  chest. — ^Throbbing  in  the  chest  when  standing. — Burning  in  small  spots 
in  the  chest,  lungs  feel  sore  and  as  if  paralysed. — ^Tension  and  pain,  as  from 
fatigue,  in  the  exterior  of  the  chest.— Eruption  and  red  spots,  burning  and 
itching  on  the  chest. 

ao.  Neck  and  Back. — Acute  drawings  in  the  sides  of  the  neck  and  in 
the  collar-bone. — A  fatty  swelling  on  nape  of  neck,  extending  from  ear  to  ear. 
— Stiffness  of  the  neck,  with  pain  on  moving  it,  from  the  nape  of  the  neck  to 
the  shoulders. — Coldness  in  the  back,  esp.  between  the  shoulders  (which 
nothing  warms). — Pain  in  small  of  back  as  if  beaten  and  shattered. — Pain  in 
coccyx,  when  sitting,  <  when  sleeping. — Pains,  as  from  fatigue  in  the  loins, 
principally  at  night,  when  lying  down,  when  v^aiking,  or  after  stooping. — 
Painful  stiffness  in  the  loins,  which  forces  one  to  stoop  in  walking. — Shootings 
in  the  shoulder-blades,  esp.  on  breathing. 

28.  Upper  Limbs. — Heavy  and  stiff,  as  if  paralysed. — ^Tearing  in  bone 
of  1.  upper  arm,  and  afterwards  in  r.  thigh  from  above  downwards. — During 
the  night,  acute  tearing  in  the  arms,  as  if  it  were  in  the  bones. — Swelling  and 
hardness  of  the  axillary  glands. — ^The  r.  arm  is  heavy  and  stiff. — ^Tearing  in 
the  shoulders. — Swelling  of  the  wrists  with  tearing  pain. — Blisters  on  the 
wrists,  which  form  crusts. — Pain,  as  from  dislocation,  in  the  wrist.— Sudden 
jerks,  tearings,  or  shootings,  throbbing,  tingling  and  pain  as  from  ulceration 
at  the  tips  of  the  fingers.— Exfoliation  of  the  skin  between  the  fingers  (and 
on  wrists). 

23.  Loiter  Limbs. — Tension  in  the  hips  and  the  hams. — Shootings, 
pain  of  dislocation  (1.  hip  is  painful,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short,  causing 
limping),  and  pulling  in  the  hip. — ^When  sitting,  gnawing  pain  in  the  bone. — 
Contraction  of  the  tendons  of  the  hams  (the  muscles  under  the  knee  feel 
too  short  when  walking),  and  stiffness  in  the  joint  of  the  knee. — At  night, 
acute  pulling  in  the  legs,  as  if  in  the  bone. — Shooting  pain  in  the  calves  of  the 
legs,  after  having  walked  long. — Legs  dead  and  insensible. — Pain  of  ulceration 


AMMONIUM   PHOSPHORICUM  95 

and  polling  in  the  heels. — Cold  feet,  esp.  in  evening,  in  bed. — Fetid  sweat  in 
the  feet — Sudden  jerks,  pollings,  or  shootings,  throbbing  and  tingling  in  the 
extremity  of  the  toes. — Ebullitions,  with  anxiety  and  weakness,  as  if  paralysed. 
— Tension  in  the  joints,  as  from  shortening  of  the  muscles. — Burning,  stinging. 
throbbing,  as  from  a  boil. — Sensation  of  soreness  in  different  parts  of  the 
body.— Very  severe  ulcerative  pain  in  the  heel,  >  by  rubbing.— The  feet  get 
very  cok)  in  the  evening  in  bed. 

S4.  Generalities. — Pains,  as  from  ulceration  in  different  parts  of  the 
body.— Tension  in  the  joints,  as  by  contraction  of  the  tendons. — ^The  r.  side 
of  the  body  appears  to  be  more  affected  than  the  1. — Pains  in  the  head  and 
chest, which  increase  principally  towards  morning;  gastric  and  abdominal 
pains  after  dinner,  and  pains  in  the  limbs ;  cutaneous  affections  ;  also  febrile 
symptoms,  which  present  themselves  in  the  evening  and  at  night. — Ebullition 
of  the  blood  with  anxiety. — Paralytic  weakness  and  fatigue,  chiefly  of  the 
lower  extremities,  sometimes  with  giddiness,  or  with  tension  and  dragging  of 
the  legs. — Scorbutic  cachexia. — ^Tendency  of  the  blood  to  decomposition. — 
Acute  dragging  pains  in  the  bones,  nightly. 

25.  Skin. — Itching  and  titillation,  giving  an  impulse  to  scratch,  followed 
by  eruption  of  pimples. — Miliary  eruption. — ^Vesicular  eruptions  which  form 
scurf. — Exfoliation  of  the  skin  in  several  places. 

26l  Sleep. — Diurnal  drowsiness,  with  indolence  and  dread  of  exertion. — 
Early  in  the  evening,  inclination  to  sleep. — Restlessness  before  midnight. — 
Sleeplessness  after  midnight,  from  cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen,  at  two  a.m. ; 
or  from  sneezing ;  pain  in  small  of  back. — Waking  too  early. — Many  dreams, 
anxioas>  terrific,  or  lascivious. — ^At  night,  colicky  pains,  frequent  sneezing, 
crawling  in  the  throat,  weight  and  pressure  on  the  chest  (nightmare  ?),  violent 
suffering  in  the  veins,  and  pains  in  the  trunk  and  in  the  limbs,  cold  feet,  heat 
in  the  head,  shivering,  and  itching  in  the  skin. 

87.  Fever. — Cold  shivering,  most  frequently  in  the  evening,  abdut  six 
o'clock ;  without  thirst. — All  stages  of  fever  without  thirst. — Shivering  after 
lying  down  in  bed,  evening,  and  as  often  as  she  wakes. — Cold  feeling  between 
Moulders. — Heat  with  thirst,  and  face  bloated. — Nocturnal  sweat,  after  mid- 
ni^t— Sweat  increased  by  every  motion. 


Ammoninm  Phosphoricum. 

Ammoniae  phosphas.    Hydro-diammonic  phosphate    (N  114)3   HPO4 

Solution. 

cn«i^. — ^Facial  paralysis.    Gout    Joints,  concretions  on. 

CBiaraoteristios. — ^This  salt  has  been  used  in  cases  of  chronic 
gput  with  nodes  of  urate  of  soda  on  the  joints.  C.  Voigt  took  three 
grains  of  Am,  phos.j  with  this  result :  In  about  an  hour,  attacked  by 
a  sense  of  ti^tness  in  the  precordia  and  around  the  chest ;  nausea  ; 
thirst ;  a  hard,  small,  frequent  pulse ;  and  a  collapsed  state  of  the 


96  AMPELOPSIS 

circulation.  Afterwards,  fulness  and  tension  in  head  ;  heaviness 
in  limbs ;  unsteady,  tottering  gait.  Allen  says  it  has  been  used 
with  success  in  some  cases  of  facial  paralysis. 

Ammonium  Picricom. 

Picrate  of  Ammonia.    C^  H,  (NO,),  ONH3. 
OlinieaL— Headache.    Neuralgia.    Whooping-cough. 

OhaFaoteriBtics. — Picric  add  and  its  combinations  are  very  power- 
ful medicinal  substances  of  the  nitric  acid  group.     Allen  gives  this 
indication  for  Amm.  pic.  (which  has  had  only  a  fragmentary  proving) : 
Periodical  neuralgia  in  right  side  of  occiput,  boring  extending  to  the 
ear,  orbit  and  jaw  ;  vertigo  on  rising,  especially  in  irregular  menstrua- 
tion.    Hale,  who  introduced  the  remedy  to  homoeopathy,  commends 
it  in  congestion  of  brain  and  spinal  cord.     Heavy,  pressive  pains  in 
occiput  and  mastoid  region  ;  on  sides  of  head  to  temples  and  eyes. 
Face  darkly  flushed.    Mind  obtuse,  disinclined  to  labour.     Periodic 
bilious  headache  like  that  of  Sang,,  and  Act,  r.    One  case  he  cured 
had  these  symptoms  :  Middle-aged  woman,  short,  stout,  florid,  every 
six  or  eight  days  would  wake  in  morning  with  violent  pain   in 
occipital  region,  heaviness  of  head,  vertigo  on  rising.     Pain  <  on 
getting  up ;  extended  over  sides  of  head  to  temples  and  eyes.     In 
afternoon  nausea  and  vomiting  of  sour  bilious  matter.    Another  case 
was  that  of  a  doctor  who  had  been  thrown  from  his  carriage  and 
injured  about  the  back  of  his  head.     He  seemed  more  frightened 
than  hurt,  but  in  a  few  days  he  noticed  that  on  turning  in  bed,  or 
stooping,  or  on  any  sudden  motion,  he  would  be  seized  with  a  "  wild 
feeling  "  in  the  occiput,  trembling  beating  of  heart  with  intermission, 
and  great  alarm.     Am.  pic.  completely  relieved  him   after  other 
medicines  had  been  given  in  vain.    Am.  pic  is  intensely  bitter,  and 
like  Pic.  ac.  and  other  picrates  has  a  strong  action  on  the  liver. 
Pic.  ac.f  like  Am.  pic,  has  occipital  headache,  proceeding  down  the 
spine  ;  and  also  a  pain  travelling  the  reverse  way.     I  gave  great  relief 
with  Pic.  ac.  in  a  case  of  spinal  paresis  in  which  a  pain  rising  up  the 
spine  into  the  head  was  complained  of.     I  think  it  is  the  Pic.  ac. 
element  in  this  ammonia  salt  that  accounts  for  its  action  in  these 
cases  of  Hale's. 

RelationB. — Compare:   Calc.  pic,  Fer.  pic,  Pic   ac,  Act.  r., 
Sang. 


Ampelopsis. 


Ampelopsis  quinquefolia.     Virginia  Creeper.    American  Ivy.    N.  O. 
Vitaceae.    Tincture  of  plant.    Decoction  of  chopped  inner  bark. 

CliiiieaL-*ChoIera.    Dropsy.    Hoarseness.    Hydrocele. 

Charaoterifltios. — Our  pathogenetic  knowledge  of  Ampelopsis  is 
due  to  observations  on  two  children  poisoned  by  chewing  the  leaves 


AMPHISBiENA  97 

They  were  quickly  seized  with  violent  vomiting  and  purging,  with 
considerable  tenesmus ;  then  collapse,  sweating,  and  faint  pulse ; 
then  deep  sleep  for  two  hours,  from  which  they  were  aroused  by 
return  of  vomiting  and  purging.  There  was  dilatation  of  pupil  for 
hours  after  commencement  of  attack. 

Hansen  gives  as  an  indication  :  "  Chronic  hoarseness  in  patients 
who  were  scrofulous  in  their  youth."  S,  M.  Worthington  has  cured 
with  it  renal  dropsies  that  had  resisted  other  treatment  and  a  case  of 
hydrocele.     He  found  the  decoction  the  most  efficient  preparation. 

Relations. — Compare :  Vitex  agnus  castus  (botan.)  ;  i£thus.  cyn. 


AmphisbsBna. 


Amphisbasna  vermicularis.     N.  O.  Lacertilia.     The  jaw  containing 
the  poison  is  removed  and  triturated. 

Clfalol.— Constipation.    Cramps.   Headache.   Hernia.   Jaw,  pains  in.   Toothache. 

OharaoterlstioB. — Amphisbctna  is  a  snake-like  lizard,  without 
limbs,  and  progressing  (as  its  name  implies)  either  backwards  or 
forwards.  Mure  is  the  authority  for  its  effects.  It  is  prepared  from 
the  jaw  as  well  as  the  poison  of  the  animal,  and  has  symptoms  indi- 
cating action  on  bone  like  that  of  Sil,  It  acts  most  markedly  on  the 
jaws,  causing  swelling  and  pain,  especially  in  the  right  jaw,  <  by  air 
and  dampness.  Many  kinds  of  severe  headaches  are  complained  of, 
one  with  a  sensation  *'  as  if  the  feet  were  in  the  head."  Lancinating 
pains  are  frequent.  Eruptions  of  vesicles  and  pimples.  It  is  a  right- 
side  medicine.    There  is  generally  <  from  motion. 

Relations.— Com^ari?.*  Heloderma,  Silica. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Ennui. — Sadness  and  lassitude  in  the  morning. — Impatience. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo. — Tendency  to  fall  to  one  side  and  then  to  the  other  ; 
<  when  turning  round. — Horrible  headache,  with  sensation  as  if  the  feet  were 
in  the  brain.~Beating  as  if  from  hailstones  r.  side  of  forehead. — Lancination 
and  pain  all  through  r.  side  of  head. — Sweat  about  head. 

3.  Eyes. — Constriction  of  r.  eye,  as  if  strung  together  with  a  cord. — 
Constant  twitching  of  upper  eyelids,  esp.  1. 

4.  Ears. — Pain  in  meatus  auditorius,  as  if  air  were  rushing  in. 

6.  Face. — Painful  large  pimple  1.  side  of  upper  lip,  suppurating. — Pains 
in  r.  lower  jaw  with  swelling  <  by  air  and  dampness. 

8.  Mouth. — Teeth  feel  elongated  and  set  on  edge,  esp.  r.  lower  molars. 
— ^Toothache  <  afternoon  and  evening. — Chewing  is  painful,  but  not  contact 
with  liquids. 

11.  Stomach. — Chilliness  and  pains  at  epigastrium. 

12.  AtMlomen. — Protrusion  of  umbilical  hernia. — ^Tearing  pain  at  navel ; 
lancination  as  from  stiletto. — Suppuration  of  inguinal  hernia. — Hernia  is 
painful  and  air  is  felt  in  it. 

VOL.  I.  8 


98  AMYLENUM   NITROSUM 

13.    stool  and  Anus.— Constipation. 

90.  Neck  and  Back.— Violent  pain  in  whole  of  vertebral  column, 
<  walking,  moving  arms,  or  stooping. 

28.  Upper  Limb8.^Breaking  out  of  little  pimples,  esp.  on  forearm.— 
Painful  swelling  of  arm. 

93.  Lower  Limbs.— Painless  drawing  up  of  the  legs.— Cramp  in  L  leg ; 
it  remains  behind  in  walking,  as  if  paralysed. 

96.    Sleep.— Wakes  at  midnight  for  ten  consecutive  nights. 


AmygdalsB  AmarsB  Aqua. 

Amygdalus  communis.  Bitter  Almond.  N.  O.  Rosaceae.  An 
ounce  of  alcohol  is  added  to  a  pound  of  bitter  almonds  ;  then 
add  six  pounds  of  water  and  distil  down  to  three  pounds. 
(Hydrocyanic  acid  is  formed  by  the  action  of  water  on  the 
amygdaloids.) 

Cllnieal.— Asthma.     Coma.     Diphtheria.     Epilepsy.     Headache.     Syncope. 
Tetanus.    Urticaria. 

ChaFaoteristicfl. — ^The  symptoms  of  Amygdala  are  not  very  dis- 
tinguishable from  those  of  Hydrocyanic  acid,  but  these  may  be  taken 
as  indicating  its  use  :  An  excessively  brilliant  appearance  of  the  eyes 
without  corresponding  mental  expression.  Heaviness  in  forehead 
(also  Lauro,),  Dulness  of  1.  half  of  the  head  {Hydro,  ac,  right).  Head 
drawn  backward.  Eyes  drawn  to  left  side.  Burning  heat  in  laringo- 
pharyngeal  region.  Lancinating  pains  through  tonsils  (Farrington). 
Palate  and  fauces  dark  red.  Swallowing  impossible.  Vomiting  of 
undigested  food  and  bile.  Convulsive  and  at  intervals  very  short 
respiration,  with  fear  of  suffocation. — ^Terking,  hesitating  speech : 
''What's — the  mat — matter  with  me?"  Cough  with  soreness  of 
chest  extending  down  to  stomach.  Stitches  under  left  nipple,  going 
deep  in,  making  exhalations  more  difficult.  Opisthotonos.  Snoring. 
Surface  cold,  cUmmy,  pallid  or  blue.     Urticaria. 

Relations. — Compare :  The  Prunas  and  Pomae  of  the  Rosaceae ; 
Laurocerasus,  Ac.  hydrocy.,  Opi.  (spasms,  stertor,  slow  pulse,  stupor), 
Stram.,  Tabac,  Ant.  t,  Lach.,  Naja  (heart).  Antidoted  by :  Opi.  (con- 
vulsions) ;  strong  coffee  ;  cold  water  poured  over  head. 


Amylenum  Nitrosum. 

Nitrite  of  Amyl.    C5  H„  NO3.     Dilution  with  alcohol. 

Qlbdeal.^Angina  pectoris.  Blushing.  Chorea.  Climacteric  flushing.  Epilepsy. 
Exophthalmos.  Flushings.  Headache.  Heart,  affections  of.  Hysteria.  Seasick- 
ness.    Sunstroke. 

OhaPaAteristios.— The   Nitrite   of  Amyl   was    introduced    into 
medicine  by  the  old  school  as  a  remedy  for  angina  pectoris,  and  was 


AMYLENUM   NITROSUM  99 

supposed  to  act  by  lessening  arterial  tension.  Dn  G.  W.  Balfour  has, 
however,  shown  that  this  cannot  always  be  the  case,  since  samples 
which  have  been  kept  for  a  time  in  imperfectly  sealed  bottles,  whilst 
retaining  their  power  to  relax  tension,  have  none  over  the  pain. 
Homoeopathic  provings  have  shown  that  in  some  cases  at  any  rate 
Amy  I  nit.  has  a  specific  action.  The  most  striking  action  of  the 
drug  is  the  deep  facial  flushing  it  causes  and  the  pulsation  all  over 
the  body.  The  specific  heart  symptoms  are :  Sensation  of  swelling 
of  front  of  chest  as  if  convex,  with  a  f eeUng  as  if  the  lower  end  of  the 
sternum  made  a  deep  depression  bent  in  towards  the  spine.  Precor- 
dial anxiety.  Accelerated,  intensified  beating  at  the  heart.  Oppression 
and  tumultuous  action.  Constriction  (relieved  by  Cactus)  and  aching 
pain.  Strong,  full  pulse.  Other  prominent  symptoms  are :  Anxiety 
as  if  something  might  happen ;  must  have  fresh  air.  Throbbing  in 
head.  Bursting-out  feeling  in  ears.  Smacking  of  lips  as  if  in  act  of 
tasting.  Munching  movement  of  lower  jaw  as  if  chewing.  Constric- 
tion of  throat  and  heart ;  from  actual  fright  ran  to  window  for  air. 
Intense  fulness  in  head ;  sensation  of  rushing  to  vertex.  Eyes  pro- 
truding, staring.  Exophthalmic  goitre  from  gnef.  Flushing  of  face. 
Flushing  on  least  emotion.  Nash  has  cured  with  it  "  chronic  blushing 
on  least  excitement  mental  or  physical."  Heat,  redness,  turgidity. 
Choking  feeUng  ;  collar  feels  tight.  Tremor  and  weakness  of  hmbs. 
>  Open-air  exercise ;  cold  water  and  cold  air.    <  In  warm  room. 

Belfttlon8« — Compare :  Glon.,  Aco.,  Ether.,  Cact.,  Nit  dulc.  spir., 
Laches.,  Coca  (flushing  when  excited,  as  in  company) ;  Bell.  // 
antidotes :  Chloroform  (failure  of  respirations) ;  Strychnine  (convul- 
sions).   Antidoted  by ;  Cactus  (cardiac  constriction). 

BTHPTOMB. 

I.  Mind. — Anxiety,  as  if  something  might  happen ;  cannot  sit  still ; 
must  have  fresh  air. — Mental  confusion,  and  a  trance-like  state. 

9.  Head. — Great  confusion  of  the  head,  with  vertigo  and  drowsiness. — 
Convulsions  with  piercing  shrieks. — Heat  and  throbbing  in  the  head,  with 
feeling  of  intense  fulness  to  bursting. — Beating,  throbbing,  bursting  sensation 
in  the  head  and  ears,  with  constriction  of  the  throat  and  heart. — ^Visible 
pulsating  throbbing  in  the  temples,  with  sense  of  tension  in  the  temples. — 
Sensation  of  something  rushing  upward,  and  throbbing  in  the  vertex. — Sick- 
headache  ;  <  1.  side. — Crushing  on  head,  threatening  to  cause  unconsciousness. 

3.  Byes. — Objects  appear  pea-green  or  yellow. — Protruding,  staring 
eyes;  conjunctiva  injected.— Ciliary  neuralgia;  eye  injected;  face  or  cheek 
suffused. — Sight  blurred,  wavering. — Arteries  of  optic  disc  small,  but  the  veins 
enlarged  and  tortuous.— Aching  eyes  in  sunlight,  trembling  and  wavering  of 
objects,  lachrymation  and  sneezing. 

4.  Ears.^Throbbing  in  the  ears ;  bursting ;  burning. 

6.  Face. — Flushing  of  the  face;  face  scarlet,  afterward  paler  than 
usual. — Neuralgia  of  fifth  pair  of  nerves. — Flushing  of  the  face,  followed  by 
turgidity  of  the  facial  veins. — Surging  of  blood  to  face  and  head ;  heat  and 
redness  of  the  face ;  feels  as  if  the  blood  would  start  through  the  skin,  with 


loo  AMYLENUM   NITROSUM 

lachrymation.--Smacking  of  lips  as  if  tasting.— Munching,  chewing  movement 
of  lower  jaw. 

9.  Throat.— Choking  feeling  in  throat  on  each  side  of  the  trachea, 
along  the  carotids ;  feeling  of  constriction.— The  collar  seems  too  tight ;  desires 
to  loosen  it. 

11.  Stomach. — Hiccough. — Nausea;  with  dr3mess  of  throat— Crampy 
pains  in  epigastrium. — Fulness  and  pressure  with  belching.— Cadialgia. — Hot, 
burning  sensation  in  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen.— Oppression  near  liver.— Crampy,  colicy  pains ;  rumbling. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Contraction  of  muscles  of  lower 
abdomen  over  uterus. — During  menses,  violent  l.-side  headache,  beginning 
morning ;  most  violent  at  noon ;  lasting  till  evening  with  frequent  vomiting- 
— Neuralgia  during  menses.— Climacteric  blushing.— Convulsions  inmiediately 
after  delivery. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— The  feeling  of  constriction  in  throat 
extended  to  the  chest,  and  produced  dyspnoea  and  asthmatic  feeling  in  lar3mx 
and  trachea,  with  desire  to  eructate. — Asthma. — Hastens  and  deepens  breath- 
ing.— Su£Eocation  and  cough  in  paroxysms  of  several  minutes. 

i8.  Chest. — Feeling  as  if  a  weight  on  sternum. — Sensation  of  swelling 
of  front  of  chest,  with  a  feeling  as  if  lower  end  of  sternum  made  a  deep 
depression. 

19.  Heart  and  Pulse.— Precordial  anxiety.— Violent  beating  of  the 
heart  and  carotids  (is  felt  up  into  the  ears);  with  sense  of  constriction. — 
Accelerated  heart  action. — Fluttering  of  heart  on  least  excitement— Cardiac 
oppression  and  tumultuous  heart  action. — ^The  heart  has  an  irregular,  rumbling 
sort  of  sound.— Aching  pain  and  constriction  around  the  heart — Pulse  accele- 
rated, full,  hard ;  quickened  in  a  very  variable  degree ;  irregular,  jerking. — 
Angina  pectoris,  with  great  agony. — Precordial  pain  extending  to  r.  arm. 

21.  Limbs. — Tired  feeling  of  limbs.— Veins  dilate. 

22.  Upper  Limbs.— The  right  shoulder,  scapula,  and  arm  seem  to 
sympathise  with  the  region  of  the  heart  very  much. — The  hands  of  children 
in  convulsions  tremble  and  grasp  at  imaginary  objects ;  much  trembling  and 
sense  of  numbness  in  the  hands. 

24.  Generalities. — General  relaxed,  weak  feeling  over  the  whole  body. — 
In  chorea  every  muscle  in  the  body  seems  in  motion. — Succession  of  spasms, 
coming  more  and  more  rapidly,  till,  finally,  no  sooner  does  one  end  than 
another  begins. — ^Af ter  an  extensive  burn,  trismus,  with  horrid  tetanic  grin, 
marked  opisthotonos  and  interrupted  deglutition,  was  cured  by  inhalation. — 
Can't  endure  warmth,  must  throw  off  all  covering,  and  open  the  doors  and 
windows,  even  in  cold  weather. — In  convulsions,  muscles  become  rigid. — 
Cures  some  forms  of  sea-sickness. 

26.  Sleep. — In  coma,  diu-ing  an  unconscious  state,  profound,  and  repeated 
yawning. — Waking  with  frequent  starts,  and  feels  unrefreshed  in  the  morning. 

27.  Fever. — Chilliness  and  crawlings  repeatedly,  face  pale  all  day.— 
Much  flushing  of  heat,  whilst  some  parts  of  the  body  feel  biu-ning  hot. — 
Sometimes  after  the  flushings  the  skin  becomes  cold  and  clammy. — Heats  are 
often  followed  by  profuse  sweatings.— Throbbing  throughout  the  whole  body 
often  attends  these  heats,  which  are  followed  by  much  prostration. 


ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE  loi 

Anacardinm  Occidentale. 

Cashew  Nut.  (West  Indies.)  N.  0,  Anacardiaceae.  Tincture  of  the 
black  juice  between  outer  and  inner  shell.  (This  nut  is  kidney- 
shaped,  that  of  Anac,  orient,  is  heart-shaped.) 

QUoaL --Corns.   Erysipelas.    Imbecility.    Itching.    Paralysis.    Rhus  poison- 
ing.  Ringwomi.    Small-pox.    Warts. 

Chanoteristtcs. — ^The  effects  of  the  Cashew  nut  are  known 
through  instances  of  poisoning.  It  acts  powerfully  on  the  skin, 
cai^Qg  erysipelas,  bUsters,  and  swelling,  and  has  been  used  as  an 
antidote  to  Rhus  poisoning.  The  juice  has  been  used  locally  as  an 
applications  to  corns,  warts,  hard  excrescences,  ringworms,  and 
obstinate  ulcers.  It  causes  weakness  of  memory  and  mind  like 
A,  oricnL  General  paralytic  state.  Tongue  painfully  swollen. 
Vesicular  eruption,  on  face  especially.  Itching  almost  intolerable  ; 
umbilicated  vesicles  as  in  small-pox.  The  erysipelas  spreads  from 
left  to  right,  and  it  cures  erysipelas  spreading  from  right  to  left ; 
Rhus  L  cures  cases  spreading  left  to  right. 

Balatioiifl. — Compare :  Anac.  orient,  Rhus,  Canth.,  Mez.,  Crot.  t. 
AvHdoted  by:  Rhus,  Iodine  locally. 


Anaoardium  Orientale. 

Semecarpus  anacardium.  Marking  Nut.  N,  0,  Anacardiaceae.  (East 
Indies.)  Preparation  :  layer  of  nut  between  shell  and  kernel 
triturated. 

CHlieiiU — ^Alcoholism.  Apoplexy.  Brain-fag,  Constipation.  Cough.  De- 
hUity.  Dysmenoirhcea.  Dyspepsia.  Eczema.  Elephantiasis,  Examination  funk. 
Haemorrhoicls.  Headache.  Heart,  affections  of.  Hypochondriasis.  Hysteria. 
Insanity.  Memory,  loss  of.  Mental  weakness.  Nervous  ailments.  Palpitation. 
P»alysis.  Pemphigus.  Rheumatism.  Self-abuse.  Skin,  diseases  of.  Smell, 
illQsioiis  of.  Spine,  affections  of.  Stiff-neck.  Vomiting  of  pregnancy.  Whoop- 
ing-cough.   Warts.    Writer's  cramp. 

Gharafitevistios. — Anacardium  has  many  features  in  common 
with  its  botanical  relatives,  the  different  species  of  Rhus,  especially  in 
its  action  on  the  skin,  muscles,  and  joints,  but  it  has  also  very  distinct 
features  of  its  own.  A  very  characteristic  sensation  is  a  pressing  or 
penetrating  pain  as  from  a  plug^  which  may  occur  in  any  locality  in 
connection  with  neuralgias  and  ear  affection,  piles,  &c.,  and  whenever 
present  Anacardium  will  probably  be  the  remedy.  Sensation  of  a 
hoop  or  band  around  the  body  or  about  any  part  is  a  leading 
symptom.  It  has  been  used  with  success  in  diseases  of  the  spinal 
cord  with  this  sensation  and  the  feeling  of  a  plug  in  the  spine,  <  by 
any  motion  which  causes  a  pain  as  ^  the  plug  were  sticking  still 


102  ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE 

further  in.    Paralysed  feeling  in  knees.    Sensation  as  if  knees  -were 
bandaged. 

The  nut  is  heart-shaped  (hence  its  name),  and  perhaps  this  may 
be  taken  as  the  '*  sign  "  of  its  courage-imparting  properties.     It  has 
at  any  rate  won  for  itself  a  reputation  in  "  examination  funk  "  and 
allied  conditions.     Brain-fag.      Loss  of  memory  is  very  marked. 
Deafness  with  loss  of  memory.    Headache  <  by  mental  exertion  ; 
>  by  eating.    The  Anacard.  patient  has  many  mental  aberrations  ; 
is  clairaudient,  hearing  voices  of  persons  far  away,  or  dead  ;  voices 
behind  her.     Seems  to  have  two  wills.    Is  as  if  in  a  dream.     A 
curious  symptom  is  a  great  propensity  to  swear  and  blaspheme  in 
persons  not  usually  adScted  thereto.    Irritability.    There  is  also  a 
tendency  to  suicide  by  shooting  (Ant.  crud,).    Fixed  ideas  of  various 
kinds  :  that  mind  and  body  are  separated  ;  that  he  is  double ;  that  a 
demon  sits  on  his  neck  telling  him  most  offensive  things ;  that  he 
sees  everybody's  face  in  a  glass  except  his  own.    The  senses  are 
either  too  weak  or  too  acute,  and  there  are  sense  illusions  :  a  light 
has  a  halo  ;  optical  illusions  in  dark  colours  ;  illusions  of  hearing  ; 
illusions  of  smell :  burning  tinder,  pigeon's  dung.     I  cured  with  it  a 
man  who  had  a  smell  of  burning  wood  in  his  nose,  remaining  after 
influenza.    There  is  a  headache  proceeding  from  before  backward. 
Stiffness   in    nape   of    neck.      Stiff-neck   <    beginning    to    move. 
Whooping-cough  with    gaping    and  drowsiness    after    the  cough. 
Morning  sickness  of  pregnancy  >  by  eating,  but  returns  soon  after. 
The  Anacard,  indigestion  contrasts  with  that  of  Nux  in  a  striking 
way.    With  Nux  the  pain  is  worst  for  two  or  three  hours  after  a 
meal,  during  stomach-digestion,  and  is  >  when  that  is  over  ;  whereas 
with  Anac,  it  is  just  then  (when  digestion  is  complete)  that  the 
pain  is  worst,  and  it  lasts  until  the  next  meal,  which  again  >  for  a 
time. 

E.  S.  Breyfogle  narrates  a  striking  case  (an  involuntary  proving) 
illustrating  the  nerve  and  skin  effects  of  the  remedy.  Acting  on 
Bayes'  indications,  "funk  before  examination,"  "nerve-exhaustion 
from  over-study,"  "  nervous  prostration  from  seminal  emissions,"  or 
sexual  excess,  Breyfogle  had  used  the  remedy  with  much  success. 
To  a  patient,  for  excessive  nervousness,  he  gave  the  ist  dilution  in 
discs.  He  took  two  discs  every  four  hours  till  eight  were  taken. 
Then  a  sore  mouth  suddenly  developed,  mucous  membrane  inflamed, 
burning,  and  acutely  sensitive.  Vesicles  appeared  on  roof  of  mouth, 
and  a  dirty  membrane  peeled  oflF  easily.  Gums  were  next  affected. 
Mouth  dry,  taste  offensive  :  at  the  same  time  a  papular  eruption  on 
wrists  and  ankles,  later  on  inside  arms  and  legs,  chest,  neck,  back, 
especially  defined  in  bends  of  knees  and  elbows,  and  worst  of  all 
about  anus.  Scratching  <,  but  was  compelled  to  scratch  all  the 
same.  Water  as  hot  as  could  be  borne  >  instantly.  Simultaneously 
the  nervousness  disappeared.  "  I  haven't  had  a  nerve  since.  It  has 
made  a  profoimd  impression  on  my  nervous  system."  Later  came 
a  sudden  sense  of  complete  prostration :  knees  gave  way ;  had  to 
keep  a  flask  of  whisky  by  him  to  relieve  it.  Later :  cold  chills  ran 
over  body  at  least  exposure,  even  putting  arms  out  of  bed ;  feared 


ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE  103 

he  was  going  to  be  ill,  slept  with  hot  bottles  on  chest  all  night.  As 
eruption  in  mouth  disappeared  salivary  flow  increased  ;  it  ran  from 
his  mouth  on  pillow  during  sleep.  '^  Feels  as  if  a  particle  of  food 
were  in  oesophagus  ;  swallows  constantly  to  get  rid  of  it." 

There  is  not  the  same  <  by  rest  and  >  by  motion  as  with  Rhus, 
but  many  symptoms  are  <  by  commencing  motion  (stifiF-neck). 
Headache  is  >  lying  down.  Piano-playing  caused  heaviness  and 
fulness  of  the  whole  body.  Like  RhuSy  Anac.  has  chilliness,  liability 
to  take  cold,  sensitiveness  to  draughts,  and  >  from  warmth.  The 
symptoms  are  <  morning,  and  again  evening  to  midnight.  4  p.m. : 
heat  daily.  The  cough  of  Anac,  is  >  by  eating.  Symptoms  gene- 
rally >  by  eating  ;  recur  two  hours  after. 

There  is  intermittence  in  the  symptoms  of  Anac.  ^'  The  attacks 
ceased  for  one  or  two  days,  and  then  continued  again  for  a  couple  of 
days."  Guided  by  this  indication  alone,  Custis  cured  with  Anac,  200 
a  case  of  sleeplessness  in  a  pregnant  woman  :  <'  Spells  of  sleeplessness 
lasting  for  several  nights."  Anac.  is  suited  to  affections  of  the  palms 
of  the  hands.    There  are  warts  even  on  the  palms. 

Bftlationa. — Compare :  ComocL,  Rhus  t,  Rhus  ven.  (botan.) ;  Ant. 
t,  Apis,  Coriar.  ruse,  Fer.,  lod..  Jug.  c,  Lye,  Nit.  ac.,  Nux  v.,  Phos.  ac., 
Fbt,  Urt  ur.,  Puis.,  Nat  m.,  Caust.,  Thuj.  (fixed  ideas).  It  is  an 
MHdaic  to  Rhus  if  there  are  gastric  symptoms,  or  symptoms  going 
from  r.  to  1.  AntidoUd  by :  Coffea,  Juglans  cin.  Follows  well :  Lye, 
Puis.,  PlaL    Followed  well  by  :  Lye,  Puis.,  Plat. 

Oaninitlon> — Checked  eruptions.    Examinations. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Hypochondriacal  sadness^  and  melancholy  ideas. — ^Anthro- 
pophobia. — Anxiety,  apprehension,  and  fear  of  approaching  death. — Fear  and 
mistrust  of  the  future,  with  discouragement  and  despair. — Disposition  to  take 
everything  amiss,  to  contradict,  and  to  fly  into  a  rage. — Frequently  screams 
loudly,  as  if  to  call  some  one;  so  furious  has  to  be  restrained. — Manners 
awkward,  silly. — Disposition  to  laugh  at  serious  things,  and  to  maintain  a 
serious  demeanour  when  anything  laughable  occurs. — State  as  if  there  were 
two  wills,  one  of  which  rejects  what  the  other  requires. — Fixed  ideas :  that 
be  b  doable ;  that  there  is  no  reality  in  an3rthing,  all  appears  like  a  dream ; 
that  a  stranger  is  constantly  by  his  side,  one  to  the  r.,  the  other  to  the  1. ;  her 
husband  is  not  her  husband,  her  child  is  not  hers ;  fondles,  then  pushes  them 
»way.— Want  of  moral  sentiment  (wickedness,  impiety,  hardness  of  heart, 
oroelty). — ^Irresistible  desire  to  blaspheme,  and  to  swear. — Sensation  as  if  the 
inind  were  separated  from  the  body. — ^Weakness  of  mind  and  of  memory. — 
Loss  of  memory. — Soon  forgets  everything ;  consciousness  of  f orgetf ulness 
takes  away  appetite.— Weakness  of  all  the  senses. — Absence  of  ideas. 

1.  Head. — Head  confused. — Fits  of  giddiness.— Vertigo  on  walking,  as 
tf  all  objects  were  too  distant,  or  undulating. — ^Whiriing  dizziness,  with 
obscuration  of  the  eyes  on  stooping. — Headache  from  noise,  and  at  every 
(false)  step. — Headache  with  giddiness  and  vertigo,  aggravated  by  movement. 
—Digging  and  throbbing  r.  side  of  head,  and<  along  border  of  orbit ;  > 
entirely  when  eating,  and  when  lying  down  in  bed  at  night  and  when  about 


I04  ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE 

falling  asleep  ;  <  during  motion  and  work. — Headache  in  consequence  of 
intellectual  labour^  with  pain  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  brain,  or  tractive  pressure 
in  the  forehead.— -Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  pain  in  the  cere- 
bellimi. — Pressive  pains,  principally  in  the  temples. — Pressive  padn  in  the 
temple,  as  from  a  nail ;  <  after  eating,  in  the  cold  air,  and  from  exertions  of 
the  mind. — Constrictive  pains  in  the  head. — Sensation  of  tearing  in  the  head, 
chiefly  on  the  right  side,  and  often  as  far  as  the  face  and  neck,  followed  by 
buzzing  in  the  ears. — In  the  evening,  sensation  of  digging  in  the  head,  disap- 
pearing with  sleep. — Stitches  in  the  head. — Itching  in  the  scalp. 

3.  Eyes. — Painful  pressure  on  the  eyes. — Pressure  in  the  eyes  as  from 
a  plug. — Objects  appear  too  far  off.— Photophobia. — Contraction  of  the 
pupils. — ^Wesikness  and  confusion  of  sight. — Myopia. — Threads  and  black 
spots  appear  before  the  eyes. — A  nimbus  round  the  candle  in  the  evening. 

4.  Ears. — Shooting  and  tearing  otalgia. — Painful  pressure  in  the  ears. — 
Pain,  as  of  ulceration,  in  the  ears,  principally  on  pressing  the  teeth  close,  and 
on  swallowing. — Imagines  whispers  of  blasphemy  in  his  ears. — Discharge  (of 
a  browish  colour)  from  the  ears. — Itching  in  the  ears. — ^Tingling  in  r.  ear. — 
Hardness  of  hearing.— Buzzing  and  roaring  in  the  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis. — Diminution  of  the  sense  of  smell. — ^Anosmia. — 
The  sense  of  smell  is  too  acute  or  illusory. — Constant  smell  before  the  nose, 
as  of  pigeon's  dung  or  burning  tinder. — Stoppage  of  the  nose,  with  sensation 
of  dryness  in  the  nostrils. — Coryza  (sneezing  and  lachr3miation),  and  discharge 
of  mucus  from  the  nose,  both  chronic— Violent  coryza,  with  catarrhal  fever, 
tension  in  the  calves  of  the  legs  and  in  the  legs,  and  palpitation  of  the  heart 

6.  Face. — Look  wild,  childish,  expressionless ;  may  be  red  or  pale. — 
Pale,  sickly  face,  with  hollow  eyes,  sunk,  and  encircled  by  dark  rings ;  by 
blue  ridges. — Pressure  on  the  eyeballs. — Rough  spots,  scurfy  and  mealy, 
round  the  mouth  and  on  the  cheeks,  with  crawling-like  itching. — Burning 
sensation  round  the  chin. — Eczema  of  face  and  neck,  with  eruption  of  small 
blisters,  intensely  itching. 

7.  Teeth.— Tearing,  jerking  odontalgia,  principally  on  taking  anything 
very  warm  into  the  mouth. — ^Tensive,  cramp-like  pains  in  the  teeth,  as  far  as 
the  ears,  most  frequently  in  the  evening  towards  ten  o'clock. — Swelling  of  the 
gums,  which  bleed  easily. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Offensive  taste  in  the  mouth  and  also  of  the  food. — Painful 
vesicles  in  the  mouth ;  speaks  with  much  difficulty. — Offensive  smell  from 
the  mouth,  not  observed  by  the  patient.— Heaviness  and  swelling  of  the 
tongue,  with  difficulty  of  speech. — ^Tongue  white  and  rough. — Accumulation 
of  water  in  the  mouth;  sometimes  it  provokes  vomiting. — Dryness  in  the 
mouth  and  in  the  throat. — Taste  lost. 

10.  Appetite. — All  kinds  of  food  appear  insipid. — Bitter  taste  with 
dryness  of  the  mouth  and  throat. — Fetid  taste  in  the  mouth.— Violent  and 
constant  thirst,  with  sensation  as  of  suffocation  when  drinking. — ^Want  of 
appetite. — Weakness  of  digestion. — ^After  a  meal,  hypochondriacal  humour, 
heat  of  face,  pressure  and  tension  in  the  precordial  region,  in  the  stomach, 
and  in  the  belly,  inclination  to  vomit  or  to  go  to  stool,  repugnance  to  exertion, 
great  fatigue  and  desire  to  sleep. — Symptoms  disappear  after  dinner;  but 
begin  again  in  two  hours. 

XX.    Stomach. — In  the  evening,  water-brash  and  vomiting,  followed  by 


ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE  105 

ackSty  in  the  mouth. — ^Morning  sickness. — Pressure  in  the  stomach,  chiefly 
siiter  a  meal,  as  well  as  when  engaged  in  thought  and  mental  exertion. — In 
the  momin^  on  waking,  pressure  in  the  precordial  region. — Shootings  in  the 
pit  of  the  stomach,  chiefly  on  breathing. — Great  thirst,  with  arrest  of  breathing 
while  drinking.— Vomiting  of  the  ingesta,  which  gives  relief. — Clucking  noise 
and  fermentation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — ^Af ter  a  meal,  conunotion  in  the 
precordial  region  at  every  step. — Painful  sensation  in  cardiac  end  of  stomach 
on  walking  fast 

n.  Atxiomen. — Weak  digestion,  with  fulness  and  distension  of  the 
abdomen  and  hypochondriacal  humour. — Pressure  in  the  liver. — Colic  in  the 
ambQical  region,  mostly  pressive,  or  dull  and  shooting,  aggravated  by  respira- 
tioQ;  cough  and  external  pressure. — Pain,  as  if  a  blunt  plug  were  pressed 
into  the  intestines. — Hardness  of  the  abdomen. — Flatulent  colic  with  pinching, 
and  borborygmi  in  the  abdomen,  and  an  inclination  to  go  to  stool. 

13.  Stool  and  Anns. — Fruitless  inclination  to  go  to  stool.— Urgent 
desire  which  passes  away  with  effort  to  expel. — Difficult  evacuation  even  of 
soft  stools,  from  inactivity  of  the  rectum. — Stools  of  a  pale  colour. — Evacuation 
of  Uood  with  the  stools. — Painful  piles  (both  blind  and  bleeding)  in  the  anus. 
—Itching  in  the  anus. — Oozing  of  moisture  from  the  rectum.-  Fissures  of  the 
rectum. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  discharge  of  clear,  watery  urine. — 
Making  water  at  night. — Sensation  of  burning  in  the  glans,  during  the  evacu- 
ation of  urine  and  afterwards. — ^Turbid,  clay-coloured  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Erections  without  excitation  during  the  day. 
--Pollutions. — ^Voluptuous  itching  in  the  scrotum. — Increased  or  inexcitable 
senal  desire. — Want  of  enjoyment  during  coition. — Flowing  of  prostate  fluid 
while  at  stool  and  after  having  made  water. — Semen  passes  during  a  hard 
stooL 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Leucorrhcea,  with  itching  and  excori- 
ation in  the  parts. — Frequent  but  scanty  menses,  sometimes  with  spasmodic 
pains  in  abdomen. — ^Nausea  during  pregnancy,  >  whilst  eating. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness  and  sensation  of  excoriation  in 
the  tiiroat,  principally  after  a  meal. — Cough,  with  tickling  in  the  throat  and 
dioking.--Cough  after  meals  (with  loss  of  smell  and  taste)  with  vomiting  of 
what  has  been  taken,  or  in  the  evening,  in  bed,  with  congestion  of  blood  to 
the  head. — Shaking  cough,  like  whooping-cough,  chiefly  at  night,  or  after 
mnch  speaking. — ^Violent  convulsive  cough  (whooping-cough),  caused  by 
tickling  in  the  pharynx ;  worse  at  night,  and  after  eating ;  after  the  attacks, 
yawning  and  sleepiness. — Cough  (short)  with  purulent  expectoration. — Expec- 
toration of  blood  with  the  cough.— On  coughing,  pain  in  the  head. — ^Yawning 
after  a  violent  fit  of  coughing. 

iS.  Chest. — Breath  short,  and  respiration  asthmatic. — Oppression  of  the 
chest,  with  internal  heat  and  anguish,  which  causes  the  patient  to  seek  the 
open  air. — Pressure  and  sensation  of  excoriation  in  the  chest. — Pressure  in 
the  chest  (r.  side)  as  from  a  dull  plug. — Prickings  in  the  region  of  the  heart. — 
Rattling  in  the  trachaea  when  lying  on  the  1.  side. 

IQ.  Heart. — Uneasiness  in  the  heart. — Piercing  pains  (stitches)  through 
thermion  of  the  heart,  quickly  succeeding  each  other,  sometimes  they  extend 
to  the  small  of  the  back. 


io8  ANAGALLIS  ARVENSIS 

— Occiput :  dull  or  tearing  pains  and  inclination  to  vomit ;  violent  headache, 
with  hard,  knotty  stools ;  knocking  pain  in  1.  side ;  dull  pain  all  night — Head- 
ache >  by  coffee. — Skin  of  forehead  feels  too  tight. 

3.  Eyes.^Things  seem  to  float  to  and  fro,  he  cannot  write. — Glittering 
before  1.  eye, — Pressing  in  eyes  after  headache. — Stitches  in  temples  extend- 
ing into  eyes. — Pain  in  r.  eyeball  <  on  touching  lids. — Itching  of  lids. 

4.  Ears. — Obstruction  and  pain  in  r.  ear  following  the  pressure  in  eyes. 
— Stitches  in  r.  ear. — ^Tickling  and  itching  in  1.  ear. 

5.  Nose. — Nose-bleed  (syphilis). — Unpleasant  tickling  on  top  of  nose, 
with  violent  sneezing. — Copious  secretion  of  yellow  mucus. 

6.  Face. — Neuralgic  pains  in  r.  cheek-bone,  extending  to  supra-orbital 
region  ;  during  the  night. — Pains  in  facial  muscles. — Bran-like,  ring-shaped 
tetters  on  face. — Itching  on  cheek-bones. — Itching  and  tickling  stitches  on  I. 
comer  of  mouth  and  lower  lip,  just  under  the  border. 

7.  Teeth. — Dull  pain  in  a  hollow  tooth  with  trembling  of  the  heart. — 
Dull  pain  in  upper  molars  and  tearing  pain  in  r.  cheek-bone. — ^Teeth  pain  as 
from  cold ;  <  from  touch ;  chilly  sensation  in  teeth. — Dull  pain  in  gums 
accompanied  by  very  hard  stools. 

8.  Mouth. — Sensation  on  tongue  as  if  something  cold  were  placed  upon 
it ;  also  near  fraenum. — ^Viscid  saliva  in  mouth,  raised  by  coughing. — Collec- 
tion of  water  in  mouth,  with  slight  tearing  in  molars. 

g.  Throat. — Sensation  of  dryness  in  throat  with  scraping. — Tickling 
at  soft  palate  at  night,  as  from  touch  of  something  cold. 

11.  Stomach. — Eructations,  nausea,  inclination  to  vomit,  and  rumbling 
in  bowels  with  headache. — ^Causes  inflammation  of  the  stomach  in  horses. 

12.  Abdomen. — Hepatitis  and  induration  of  liver. — ^Abdomen  distended 
with  wind. — Visceral  obstructions. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Inflammation  of  rectum  in  horses. — Itching 
in  rectum ;  pressure  in  sacrum  ;  piles. — Passes  offensive  flatus. — Stools  : 
watery ;  soft  and  pappy  ;  hard  like  stones ;  knotty. — Itching  at  anus  after  stool. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Burning  in  urethra  when  urinating,  mostly  in 
the  morning. — Orifice  agglutinated;  presses  to  urinate;  stream  divided. — 
Tickling  prickling  along  urethra  inclining  to  coitus. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — ^The  burning  in  urethra  before  and  during 
erection  ceases  during  coitus. — Drawing  pains  in  r.  testicle  and  cord. — ^Tear- 
ing pains  in  spermatic  cords. — ^Tickling  in  symphysis  pubis. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Scratching  and  scraping  in  throat,  esp. 
after  meals. — Hoarseness  proceeding  from  the  trachea. — Cough  dry,  with  a 
scratching  sensation  when  reading  aloud ;  with  yellow  phlegm  from  the  nose ; 
with  spitting  of  saliva. 

18.  Chest. — ^A  kind  of  restlessness  in  chest. — Soreness  on  the  chest  with 
fever. — Pressure  in  r.  lung  after  a  meal  or  when  walking  fast. — Suddenly  a 
feeling  internally  in  chest  as  if  struck  with  a  cushion  full  of  pins. — Itching  on 
1.  side  of  chest,  principally  on  nipple. — Eruption  on  chest. 

IQ.  Heart.^Violent  trembling  of  heart,  with  general  trembling  and 
weakness,  preceded  by  aching  in  a  carious  tooth  and  anadcty  in  chest  in 
evening  in  bed. — Palpitation. 

90*  Neck. — ^Tensive  drawing  from  1.  shoulder  up  to  neck  ;  returns  when 
lifting  or  stretching  the  arm. — ^Trembling  of  muscles  of  neck  (horses). 


ANANTHERUM  109 

ai.  npi>er  Limbs.— Pains  in  muscles  of  upper  arm,  outside,  near 
shoulder.  —  Pains  in  forearm;  in  carpal  and  metacarpal  bones.  —  Gouty 
swellings  on  joints  of  fingers.— ^kin  of  hands  and  fingers  very  dry,  sticky  and 
dirty-lookingr — ^Tetter  on  hands ;  moist  or  dry  and  hairUke. 

13.  Lower  Limbs.—- Pain  in  hip.— Tickling  pains  in  r.  leg  and  at  the 
OS  ilium.— Drawing  pains  in  muscles  of  1.  leg ;  tearing  during  night— Weak- 
ness and  lameness  in  r.  leg,  as  if  it  was  too  short. — Pains  in  bend  of  1.  knee  ; 
seosation  of  tightness  as  if  something  swollen  or  sore. — Pains  in  shin  bones  ; 
<  when  extending  the  leg.— Cramps.— Pains  in  metatarsus  and  sole  (1.),  in 
concave  part  of  1.  sole  and  near  toes. 

S4.    Generalities*- A  chilly  trembling.— Exhausted  and  drowsy. 

2^.  Skin. — Itches  all  over ;  rough,  dry.— Dry  bran-like  tetters  in  rings. 
—Ulcers  and  swellings  on  joints. — Ill-conditioned  ulcers. — Promotes  expulsion 
of  splinters. 

aS.  Sleep. — ^Falls  asleep  late;  sleep  restless;  awakens  early;  feeling 
uu^freshed. 


Anantherom. 

Ananthenun  muricatum.  Andropogon  muricatus.  Andropogon 
squarrosus.  Cuscus  grass.  Vetiver  or  Viti-vayr.  A  medicinal 
grass  cultivated  in  the  Markarentas  Islands  (E.  Ind.).  (Houat) 
N.  O.  Gramineas.    Tincture  of  root. 

Qtiitesl. — Abscesses.  Aphonia.  Boils.  Cancer.  Erysipelas.  Glandular 
inflammation.  Hydrophobia.  Sycosis.  Syphilis.  Tic  convulsif .  Tic  douleureux. 
Tumours.    Ulcers. 

Gliaraoteristios. — Anantherum  produces  a  state  of  drunkenness. 
Severe  neuralgic  headache  ;  as  if  bells  moved  about  in  head ;  as  of 
steel  arrows  from  forehead  to  nape.  Pains  in  facial  bones  as  if 
crushed  or  ulcerated.  Convulsive  tic.  Ulcers  at  labial  commissures 
(syphilis).  Swelling  of  tonsils,  constriction  of  throat,  inability  to 
swallow.  Plugged  sensation.  Burning  and  stitches.  Thirsty  but 
cannot  drink.  Burning  heat  alternating  with  icy  coldness  in  guUet : 
as  of  something  alive  in  gullet.  Involuntary  urination  when  walking 
and  during  sleep.  Venereal  appetite  increased  by  every  attempt  to 
satisfy  it  until  driven  to  onanism  and  madness.  Tumour  of  breast, 
ulcerated,  indurated.  Abscesses,  boils  ;  glandular  swellings  (especi- 
ally of  sub-maxillary  and  cervical  glands).  Herpes.  Herpes  and 
ofcers  or  scabs  on  scalp.  Tumours.  Wart-like  growths  on  eyebrows. 
Falling  off  of  eyebrows  and  beard.  Chancre-Tike  ulcers  on  penis. 
Ptetules  like  small-pox  on  vulva.  Abscesses,  ulcers,  and  fissures  on 
aims  and  bands.  Eruptions  like  itch  or  lichen.  '*  Erysipelas  with 
much  swelling  of  arms  and  legs,  dark  red  or  bluish  eruptions,  with 
tendency  to  suppurate  "  (Farrington).  Formication  as  of  ants.  Ulcers 
yellowish,  violet,  swollen,  everted,  syphilitic.  Discharges  from  ulcers 
are  foul ;  foul  breath  and  eructations.  Coffee  at  first  <,  later  > .  Wine 
and  coffee  <  toothache. 


112  ANGUSTURA  VERA 


Angustura  Vera. 


Bark  of  Galipea  cusparia.  Bonplandia  trifoliata.  (From  Angustura, 
South  America.)  N.  O.  Rutacese.  Trituration  and  tincture  of 
the  bark. 

Clinioal.— Bone-pains.     Caries.     Diarrhoea.     Injuries.     Intermittent   fevers. 
Myopia.    Spavin  in  horses.    Tetanus.    Toothache.    Whooping-cough. 

ChaFaoteristlOB.— The  effects  of  Angustura  are  closely  allied  to 
those  of  Nux,  Ruta,  and  Mercurius.  The  mental  condition  is  one  of 
over-sensitiveness  and  excitability  ;  the  slightest  offence,  a  mere  trifle, 
irritates  as  with  Nux,  On  the  other  hand  there  is  pusillanimity,  which 
corresponds  more  to  Ruta.  Among  the  prominent  features  are  : 
Drawing,  tension,  stiffness  of  muscles  and  joints ;  bruised,  sore  feeling 
as  after  a  blow.  Drawing  of  head  to  right  side,  later  to  left  Short- 
sighted. Heat  in  forehead  at  night  Exostosis  of  lower  jaw. 
Trismus  neonatorum  (where  much  Mercury  had  been  given).  Draw- 
ing in  upper  r.  molar  tooth  >  application  of  cold  finger.  Thirst, 
constant  desire  to  drink.  Irresistible  desire  to  drink  coffee.  Hiccough 
after  cough.  Belching  with  cough  (Amhra),  Every  evacuation  fol- 
lowed by  shivering,  crawling  sensation  over  face.  Tenesmus  with 
soft  stool.  Haemorrhoids  protrude  with  hard,  knotty  stool.  Seminal 
emissions.  Itching  of  tip  of  glans  penis  (when  walking  in  open  air). 
Violent  itching  on  scrotum.  Dry,  hacking  cough  from  scratching  in 
throat  or  irritation  behind  sternum.  Irritation  behind  sternum  through 
to  back.  Palpitation  <  sitting  bent  and  >  sitting  up.  Cutting  pain 
from  point  of  right  scapula  to  breast,  near  nipple  (CA^/.).  Pain  in  cer- 
vical vertebrae  <  moving  arms.  Tearing  as  if  in  the  bones,  <  at  rest ; 
>  cold  applications ;  >  extension ;  <  exertion  and  pressure.  Spinal 
cord  and  extensor  muscles  principally  affected  ;  cracking  in  all  joints. 
Caries  of  long  bones.  I  have  verified  the  power  of  AngusL  over  long 
bones  in  a  case  of  acute  periostitis  of  the  tibia  in  a  scrofulous  boy. 
The  sx  trit.  speedily  arrested  inflammation,  after  the  failure  of  Merc. 
viv.  Symptoms  <  from  exertion  ;  from  stooping ;  sitting  bent  over 
(palpitation) ;  moving  or  lifting  arms ;  drinking  warm  milk ;  3  p.m. 
(loose  cough  ;  >  application  of  cold  fingers  (toothache)  ;  cold  appli- 
cation ;  extension  ;  lying  on  left  side. 

Relations. — Ang.  is  like  Ruta  in  its  action  on  bones,  and  as  an  anti- 
dote to  Mercury ;  also  hke  False  Angustura  (Angustura  spuria,  Brucea 
antidyssenterica,  Nucis  vomicae  cortex — see  Brucea) ;  Bell.  «  3  p.m.  ; 
easily  startled  ;  heat  in  female  genitals ;  trismus),  Bry.,  Rhus  ;  Cep., 
Cham.,  Coff.  (toothache  >  by  cold) ;  Cicut.,  Ign.,  Nux  (tetanus) ; 
Merc,  Pho.,  Sil.  (caries  of  jaw) ;  vEsc,  Alo.  (piles  and  backache) ; 
Ant.  cr..  Ant.  t.,  Lil.,  Nat.  m.,  Puis.,  Sep.  (eruptions) ;  Hjrperic,  Led. 
(pimctured  wounds) ;  Ran.  bulb,  (pain  in  pectoral  muscles).  AnHdoUd 
by :  Coffea  (not  Camph.),  Bry.  (bellyache  after  milk) ;  Chel.  (sharp, 
cutting  pain  from  just  beneath  right  scapula  to  chest). 


ANGUSTURA  VERA  113 


SYMPTOMS. 

I,  Mind. — ^Umidity  of  character,  and  tendency  to  take  alarm.— Pusil- 
lanimity, and  want  of  self-confidence. — Ill-humour  and  discontent,  with  great 
readiness  to  take  offence. — Extreme  excitement  and  gaiety. — ^Absence  of  mind 
and  reveries. — Vivacity  of  mind,  chiefly  in  the  afternoon. 

a.  Head. — Head  bewildered,  with  stupidity,  as  if  after  intoxication. — 
Dizziness  in  the  open  air,  or  on  crossing  a  stream  of  water. — In  the  evening, 
pressive  headache,  with  heat  in  the  face. — One-sided  headache,  or  both  sides 
ache  as  if  about  to  faint.— Bonng  pains. — Pain,  like  that  of  a  bruise,  in  the 
brain.— Onamp-like  pains  in  the  head. — Piercing  in  the  temples. — ^The  head, 
aches  appear  mostly  at  sunset,  and  continue  until  the  patient  goes  to  sleep. — 
Sensation  of  torpor  in  the  temporal  muscles,  with  tension  on  opening  the 
month. 

3.  Byes. — ^Tension  and  pressure  in  the  eyes,  as  from  too  strong  a  liglit. 
—Sensation  of  dryness  and  pain,  as  of  excoriation,  in  the  eyelids. — Redness, 
heat,  and  burning  in  the  eyes,  with  nocturnal  agglutination  of  the  eyelids. — 
Spasmodic  stretching  open  of  the  lids. — Eyes  fixed,  prominent,  immovable. 
—Sight  confused,  as  if  by  a  mist,  or  as  if  the  cornea  were  obscured  (in  the 
morning). — Objects  too  far  distant,  must  bring  them  closer. 

4.  Bars. — Cramp-like  pain  in  the  ears. — ^Jerkings  and  tearing  before  and 
in  the  ears. — Sensation  as  if  something  were  placed  in  or  before  the  ears. — 
Heat  in  the  ears. — Diminution  of  hearing. 

Gk  Face. — Heat  and  bluish  redness  of  the  face. — ^Tension  of  the  facial 
mosdes. — Cramp-like  pains  in  the  cheek-bones  and  in  the  masseters  frequently 
dart  through  the  eyeballs  and  temples,  <  by  stooping,  walking,  or  mental 
excitement. — ^Trismus,  with  the  lips  strongly  separated,  displaying  the  teeth. 
—(After  the  spasms,  the  face  and  lips  still  remain  bluish  for  some  time.) — 
Exostosis  at  the  lower  jaw. 

7.    Teeth. — Drawing  odontalgia. — Throbbing  in  the  hollow  teeth. 

i.  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth  and  lips.— (In  the  evening),  viscid, 
insipid,  and  putrid  mucus  in  the  mouth,  with  constant  desire  to  drink. — 'Tongue 
white,  and,  as  it  were,  rough. — Sensation  of  burning  in  the  tongue. 

n.  Appetite. — Bitter  taste,  principally  after  dinner  and  after  smoking 
tobacco. — Thirst,  with  desire  for  cold  drinks,  or  sensation  of  thirst  without  a 
desire  for  drink. — Di^ust  for  food,  principally  solid  food  with  irresistible 
desire  to  take  co£Fee,  or  with  insatiable  hunger. — Disgust  for  pork. — Imperfect 
eroctnations  after  eating,  with  a  sensation  of  fulness  in  the  chest. 

u.  Stomach.— Bilious  eructations. — Nausea  while  dining,  or  walking  in 
the  open  air,  with  uneasy  sensation  of  faintness. — Pain,  as  of  incisive  excoria- 
tkm  in  the  stomach,  particularly  at  the  beginning  of  a  meal. — Cramp-like  pain 
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Acidity,  coated  tongue,  pappy,  unpleasant  taste 
and  ]oss  of  appetite. 

m  Abdomen. — Bruise-like  pain  in  the  abdomen. — Cramp-like  colic. — 
Severe  pain,  extending  in  a  line  from  navel  to  sternum. — Cutting  pains,  chiefly 
after  having  taken  milk  (hot). — Shooting  pain  in  the  abdomen.— Borborygmi 
and  fermentation  in  the  abdomen,  as  preceding  diarrhoea. 

13.    Stool   and    Anus. — Stools  frequent   and   copious. — Diarrhoea  of 

TOU  I.  9 


114  ANGUSTURA  VERA 

mucus,  with  colicky  pains.-— Diarrhoea  day  and  night,  each  evacuation  pre- 
ceded by  cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen,  usually  attended  with  nausea  in  the 
morning ;  stools  often  whitish,  thin  and  copious,  diarrhoea  becomes  chronic, 
with  loss  of  flesh  and  great  debility ;  constipation. — Pressive  and  contractive 
pain  in  the  anus,  with  swelling  of  the  haemorrhoids. — Burning  in  the  anus  while 
at  stool. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  want  to  make  water,  with  scanty 
evacuation,  or  frequent  and  abundant  evacuation  of  urine,  preceded  by 
pressure  on  the  bladder,  and  followed  by  tenesmus. — Urine  of  an  orange 
colour,  and  soon  becomes  turbid. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Much  itching  of  all  these  organs,  sometimes 
voluptuous. — Seminal  emissions. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Troubles  with  the  r.  ovary. — Sensation 
as  if  the  uterus  were  beating  against  the  r.  ovary  and  r.  hip. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness  from  mucus  in  the  aerial  pas- 
sages.— Intermitting  spasmodic  breathing. — ^Voice  weak  and  faint. — Dry  cough, 
with  rattling  and  scraping  of  mucus  in  the  chest. — Violent,  deep  cough,  with 
expectoration  of  yellowish  mucus. — ^A  sort  of  whooping-cough  with  hiccough 
and  belching  of  wind. — Cough  occurring  every  p.m.,  at  3  o'clock. 

18.  Chest. — Respiration  convulsive  (intermittent). — Constriction  in  upper 
part  of  lungs,  as  if  one  had  been  running. — Oppression  of  the  chest,  on  walking 
quickly,  and  during  an  ascent. — Cramp  in  the  chest,  with  painful  spasms  of 
the  muscles  of  the  chest. — Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  chest,  even  to  the 
slightest  touch. — Bruise-like  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  chest,  on  moving  the 
arms. 

19.  Heart. — Incisive  shocks,  or  shootings  in  the  chest,  and  in  the  region 
of  the  heart.— -Violent  throbbing  of  the  heart,  when  seated  and  leaning  forward, 
or  in  the  evening,  in  bed,  when  lying  on  the  left  side. — Palpitation  of  the  heart 
with  anguish. — Heart  feels  suddenly  swollen,  with  great  fear  of  dying,  >  by 
lying  on  1.  side. — Sensation  of  painful  contraction  of  the  heart. 

80.  Neclc  and  Back. — Painful  heaviness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and 
between  the  shoulder-blades,  in  bed,  in  the  morning. — Opisthotonos. — ^Violent 
itching  along  the  back. — Pain  in  the  loins,  as  if  bruised,  mostly  at  night,  and 
particularly  towards  four  o'clock  in  the  morning. 

28.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Arms  tired  and  heavy,  as  if  paralysed,  with  stiffness 
in  the  elbow. — Paralytic  weakness  of  the  elbows  and  of  the  hands. — Cramp- 
like drawings  in  the  forearm,  the  hands,  and  the  fingers. — Coldness  of  the 
fingers. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Pain,  as  of  dislocation,  or  of  cramp  in  the  coxo- 
femoral  joints ;  also  in  the  legs  and  in  the  feet. — Pain,  as  from  fatigue,  in  the 
thighs  and  in  the  legs,  when  walking,  as  if  they  were  going  to  break. — Pressive 
drawing  in  all  parts  of  the  lower  extremities. — Pain  in  the  joint  of  the  foot  on 
putting  it  down,  producing  lameness.-^Paralysis  of  the  legs,  imminent  with 
trembling  of  the  feet.— Paralysis  of  the  joints  of  the  feet. — Drawing  in  the 
limbs,  with  soreness. — Pain  in  the  inner  side  of  the  ankle,  when  walking, 
causing  limping. 

24.  Oeneralities. — Sensation  of  weakness  and  of  stiffness  in  the  whole 
body ;  as  if  the  marrow  of  the  bone  were  stiff. — ^The  spinal  marrow  and  the 
exterior  muscles  are  principally  affected. — Stiffness  and  extension  of  the  limbs 


ANHALONIUM   LEWINII  115 

— TensioQ  in  the  muscles  while  walking. — Paralysis  of  different  parts. — Great 
difficulty  in  walking,  with  threatened  paralysis  of  the  legs. — In  tetanus,  trau- 
matic, or  otherwise,  when  there  is  spasmodic  twitching  or  jerking  of  the 
mnsdes. — Catalepsy,  with  the  body  bent  backward. — ^Wasting  of  soft  parts. — 
Convalsive  starts. — ^Attacks  of  tetanus,  excited  mostly  by  touch,  by  drinking, 
and  by  noise. — ^Tetanic  spasms  caused  (by  the  previously  named  causes)  and 
by  drinking  of  lukewarm  water ;  cheeks  and  lips  become  blue ;  the  breathing 
is  Jaboored  during  the  spasms,  groaning  and  closing  of  the  eyes,  lips  wide  open, 
drawn  up  and  down,  exposing  the  teeth. — Commotion  in  the  body  (trunk),  as 
from  an  electric  shock. — ^Twitching  and  jerking  along  the  back,  like  electric 
shocks.— Cracking  of  the  joints. — Caries,  and  painful  ulcers,  which  attack  the 
(loog)  bones  and  perforate  them,  even  to  the  marrow. 

A  Sleep. — In  the  evening,  great  drowsiness,  followed  by  sleeplessness 
before  midnight — Sleep  disturbed  by  frequent  dreams. 

87.  Fever. — ^Pulse  accelerated,  spasmodic,  irregular  at  times,  intermitting. 
— ChiU,  in  the  morning  and  forenoon,  preceded  by  thirst. — ^Violent  chill  every 
afternoon  at  3  o'clock. — Heat  in  the  evening  after  entering  a  room,  after 
supper,  mostly  in  the  face;  at  3  ajn.,  disturbing  sleep,  followed  by  chilli- 
oess.— iShuddering  in  the  part  affected. — Heat,  with  confusion  and  pain  in  the 
head,  in  the  evening  and  at  night — ^Thirst  and  vomiting  of  bile  begin  with  hot 


Angastnra  Spuria,   see  Brucea  Anti- 
dyssenterica. 

Anhalonium  Lewinii. 

Mescal  battons.  N.  0.  Cactaceas.  Tincture,  extract,  or  infusion. 
Havelock  Ellis  says :  '^  I  first  cut  up  the  buttons  into  small 
fragments  and  poured  on  boiling  water  twice ;  a  single  infusion 
is  inactive." 

CUiisaL— Brain-fag.  Delirium.  Headache.  Hallucinations.  Megrim.  Mental 
weaknctt.  Neurasthenia.  Paraplegia.  Senses,  disordered.  Visions,  disorders  of ; 
ookjored. 

GhanoteristioB. — ^The  plant  from  which  the  mescal  buttons  are 
obtabed  grows  in  barren  and  rocky  soil  in  the  valley  of  the  Rio 
Grande.  It  is  used  by  some  Indian  tribes  in  their  religious 
ceremonies.  It  has  been  recently  tested  scientifically,  a  notable 
proving  having  been  made  by  Dr.  Wier  Mitchell.  Dr.  E.  M.  Hale 
has  cdlected  me  facts  about  the  drug  in  an  article  published  in  the 
Haknammman  Monthly,  The  chief  feature  of  the  drug^s  action  is  the 
prodoction  of  coloured  visions  of  most  over-powering  brilliancy, 
associated  with  moving  shapes  of  fantastic  design,  the  motion  being 
regulated  somewhat  in  time  by  music.  In  the  Indian  ceremonies  the 
coQstaat  beating  of  tom-toms  is  an  essential  feature.  Other  symptoms 


ii6  ANHALONIUM   LEWINII 

are  loss  of  conception  of  time,  occipital  headache,  tired  feeling  in 
head,  nausea.  Tremor  of  muscles,  increased  knee-jerk,  and  loss  of 
power  of  co-ordination.  One  prover,  Havelock  Ellis,  noted  distinct 
slowing  of  the  pulse,  slight  faintness  and  shallow  breathing  ;  but  there 
were  none  of  the  terrible  heart  symptoms  of  the  other  Cacti.  The 
most  prominent  condition  is  <  on  closing  eyes.  The  nausea  and 
faintness  were  <  on  movement.  There  is  great  disinclination  to 
move.     >  Lying  down. 

Relations.— Com^ar^ :  Can.  ind.  (time  sense  disordered  ;  fantastic 
visions) ;  Gelsem.  (paralysis  of  accommodation) ;  Bell.,  Stram.,  Op., 
Pic.  ac.  Piper  methyst,  Coflea,  Coca  ;  Plat,  (objects  seem  small  and 
distant) ;  Pso.  (>  lying  down). 

8THPT0HS. 

z.  Mind. — Reverie. — ^Time  seems  long;  intervals  between  words  and 
sentences  seem  inordinately  long. — Cannot  find  the  right  word,  with  difficulty 
of  enunciation. — Seems  to  have  a  double  personality. — Distrust  and  resent- 
ment ;  thinks  companions  are  laughing  at  him  ;  wants  to  do  them  violence. — 
Consciousness  of  unusual  energy  and  intellectual  power  (which,  when  tested, 
was  found  not  to  actually  exist). — Sense  of  superiority  and  well-being. — Sense 
of  depression  and  inferiority. 

2.  Head. — Frontal  (1.)  headache  with  visual  zigzags. — Occipital  head- 
ache, with  disturbed  vision. — Persistent  ache  and  tired  feeling  in  occipital 
region  (lasting  several  days  and  making  work  impossible).— (It  rapidly 
removed  headache  in  one  prover.) 

3.  Eyes. — ^Visions  in  all  colours,  moving  fantastic,  of  surpassing 
brilliance,  in  designs  (sometimes  grotesque),  moving  scenes,  dances  ;  sifiFected 
by  beating  time  ;  dissipated  or  modified  by  opening  the  eyes ;  partly  under 
control  by  an  efEort  of  thought. — Natural  objects  seem  more  brilliant,  shadows 
deepened,  flickering  of  lights  greatly  exaggerated. — Pupils  dilated. — ^Accom- 
modation impaired. — Ptosis. 

4.  Ears. — Impressions  of  sound  and  visions  heightened  by  any  marked 
stimulation  of  skin. — Exaggerated  reverberation  of  ordinary  sounds. 

5.  Nose. — ^The  air  seemed  filled  with  vague  perfume. — Smell  blunted ; 
could  not  tell  whether  or  not  tincture  of  asafoetida  was  a  perfume. 

6.  Face.— Disinclined  to  make  the  slightest  movement ;  eyelids  droop ; 
they  scarcely  move  the  lips  and  jaws  in  articulating. 

8.  Mouth. — Great  difiiculty  in  talking  partly  from  paralysis  of  the 
tongue,  partly  from  slowness  of  thought. 

II.    Stomach. — Nausea ;  <  on  movement ;  entirely  >  on  lying  down. 
19.    Heart  and  Pulse. — Pulse  slowed. — Respiration  shallow. — Faintness. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — ^A  fine  tremor  in  lower  extremities. 

24.  Generalities.  —  Motor  inco-ordination.  —  Extreme  muscular  de- 
pression ;  don't  want  to  stir  ;  whole  body  feels  relaxed. — Lazy  contentment ; 
"a  land  where  it  is  always  afternoon." — Fine  tremor  in  lower  extremities 
preluding  the  visions ;  unable  to  walk  without  assistance  ;  can  with  difficulty 
sit  up. 

26.    Sleep. — Drowsiness ;  followed  by  consciousness  of  unusual  energy. 


ANTHEMIS  NOBILIS  117 

Anilinam. 

Amidobenzene.    C^  H5  NH,. 
> — ^Anaemia.    Cancer.    Cholera.    Eczema  rubnun. 

Gharaeteristias. — ^The  symptoms  of  Anilinum  have  been  observed 
on  workpeople  poisoned  by  inhalation  of  the  fumes,  and  on  persons 
who  have  worn  aniline-dyed  articles  next  the  skin.  The  symptoms 
are  in  many  respects  hke  those  of  Arsenic.  There  are  vomiting, 
parging,  bursting  headache,  epileptiform  attacks  ;  cyanosis  is  very 
marked ;  swelling  and  irritation  of  the  skin.  In  old-school  practice 
injections  of  aniline  blue  have  been  used  with  some  success  to  destroy 
cancerous  growths,  aniline  having  a  marked  affinity  for  cell  nuclei, 
hence  its  use  in  staining  microscopic  specimens.  In  poisoning  cases 
evacoants,  the  inhalation  of  oxygen,  the  free  use  of  'stimiidants — 
brandy,  ammonia,  chloric  ether — cold  a£Fusions  to  the  head,  and 
sinapisms  on  legs  and  thighs,  have  been  used  with  success. 

Belatioiia. — Compare:  Antipyrinum,  Antifibrinum,  Phenacetinum, 
Glon..,  Ars. 

STMPTOHS. 

X.    Mind.— Hebetude. 

8.    Head. — ^Vertigo. — Bursting  pains  in  head. 

y.    Eyes. — ^Eyes  irritated. — Burning,  injected. — Lower  lids  puffed. 

S.    If  OQtti.— Bitter  taste. 

u.  Stomach. — Intense  burning  in  stomach  and  head,  "  could  not  get 
her  breath "  ;  later,  vomiting,  purging ;  extremities  icy  cold ;  intense  pain 
over  stomach,  which  is  very  hard. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Pain  in  penis  and  scrotum,  later,  swelling, 
^Sl  later,  impotence. 

^,  Generalities. — Swelling  of  various  parts. — Irritation  of  tissues. — 
EpOeptic  attacks. — ^Tetanic  spasms. 

95.  Skin. — ^Vesicular  eruption  forming  a  bracelet  round  wrist. — Eczema- 
toos  emption  afiFecting  both  knees.— Swelling,  redness,  intolerable  itching  of 
skin ;  eczema  rubrum. 

A   Sleep. — Sonmolence. 

Anisnm  Stellatnm,  see    niioinm. 
Anthemis  Nobilis. 

Roman  Chamomile.    N.  0.  Composite.    Infusion  of  flowers, 
or  tincture  of  whole  plant  when  beginning  to  flower. 

OHiiMd. — ^Ascarides.    Colic.    Dyspepsia.    Headache.    Liver,  congestion  of. 

Qianeterfstios. — Anthetn.  nob.  is  the  common  chamomile  used 
domestically  in  the  form  of  a  tea  made  of  the  flowers.    It  is  not  to  be 


ii8  ANTHRACINUM 

confounded  with  Matricaria  chamomilla.  Burnett  has  recx>rded  a  case 
in  which  violent  gastric  disturbance  and  headache  were  caused  by  the 
"  tea "  ;  and  Berridge  has  proved  the  tincture.  In  Burnett's  case 
there  was  great  coldness  and  chilliness  inside  abdomen;  Ba*ridge 
had  feelings  of  coldness  generally,  and  sensitiveness  to  cold  air  and 
the  touch  of  cold  things ;  but  slight  exertion  caused  heat  and  per- 
spiration. 

BelationB. — Compare :  Cina,  &c.    China  is  "  useful  after  abuse 
of  chamomile  tea  when  haemorrhage  from  uterus  results  **  (Hering). 

8TMPT0HS. 

I.    Head. — Intense  vertical  headache,  pressure  from  within  out»  as  if 
top  of  head  were  blown  off. 

8.    Mouth. — ^Tongue  coated  white  with  islands  on  it. 

13,  Z3«  Abdomen  and  Stool. — Pain  in  region  of  transverse  colon 
from  r.  to  1. ;  then  bowels  relaxed,  stools  at  first  white  then  putty-like  ;  then 
severe  vomiting  and  griping  and  great  ine£Fectual  desire  for  stooL — Griping 
and  coldness  and  chilliness  in  abdomen,  passing  down  into  legs  as  far  as 
knees. — Itching  of  anus  as  from  ascarides. 

z6.    Female  Sexual  Organs.— Haemorrhage  from  uterus. 

25.    Skin. — Goose-flesh. 


Anthoxanthum. 

Anthoxanthum  odoratum.  Sweet  Vernal  Grass.  (Europe  and  America.) 
JV.  0.  Gramineae.    Tinctiure  of  fresh  flowering  herb. 

OllDieal*— Coryza.    Hay-fever. 

OharacteriBtios. — ^This  remedy  has  not  been  proved,  but  has 
been  used  with  success  on  the  clinical  indication  of  the  efiFects  produced 
by  the  pollen  grains  on  those  subject  to  hay-fever.  It  is  used  both 
locally  and  internally.  A  popular  remedy  for  hay-fever  is  "  hay  tea," 
a  decoction  made  of  hay  itself. 

Belatioiis. — Compare:  Cepa,  Arsen.,  Naphthal.,  Sabad.,  Psorin.; 
and  its  botanical  allies,  Ananth.,  Avena,  Arundo,  Lolium,  and  Sacch. 
off. 

AnthraGinum. 

An  alcoholic  extract  of  the  anthrax  poison  prepared  from  the  spleens 

of  affected  sheep. 

Clinioal. — ^Acne.  Boils.  Carbuncles.  Cynancbe  cellularis.  Erysipelas. 
Gangrene.  Malignant  pustule.  Parotitis  gangrenosa.  Phlegmonous  inflammation 
and  ulceration.    Small-pox.    Splenic  fever.    Ulcers.    Whitlow. 

OharaoterlBtiOB. — Anthradnum  is  indicated  in  all  conditions  of 
boils  and  boil-like  eruptions  (as  acne  in  some  f  orms,  and  in  carbuncles). 


ANTHROKOKALI  119 

It  was  introduced  into  homoeopathic  practice  by  Lux  the  veterinarian 
long  before  the  experiments  of  Pasteur.  The  keynote  for  its  employ- 
ment is  '* succession  of  boils"  or  carbuncles,  but  it  is  also  of  the 
greatest  use  in  other  cases.  "  Terrible  burning  "  with  carbuncle.  The 
potentised  virus  is  the  best  remedy  for  the  disease  from  which  it  is 
obtained — "Splenic  fever''  in  animalsi  and  ''Malignant  pustule"  in 
haman  beings.  Erysipelas  of  a  foul  kind,  and  gangrenous  erysipelas  ; 
cetlnlitis.  "  Hard,  stony"  swelling  in  region  of  right  lower  jaw  and 
submaxillary  gland.  Anthrax  -  quinsy.  Whitlow  and  sloughing. 
Glands  painfully  swollen*  Induration  of  cellular  tissue.  Black  or 
blue  blisters.  Horribly  offensive  gangrenous  ulcers.  A  number  of 
symptoms  have  been  recorded  from  human  patients  affected  with  the 
anthrax  disease. 

ltolati0Dg. — Compare :  Anthracinum  bovum,  Anthracinum  suum, 
Laches.,  Tarent.  c,  Arsen.,  Carb.  v.  It  follows  well :  Arsen.  (burning 
and  ulceration),  Phos.  ac.  Is  followed  well  by :  Aur.  mur.  nat.  (peri- 
osteal swelling  of  lower  jaw),  Siiic.  (cellulitis).  AniidoUd  by:  Camph., 
Ars.,  Rhus,  Silic.,  Laches.,  Carb.  v..  Puis.,  Kreos.,  Cart)ol.  ac.,  SahcyL 
ac,  Apis. 

STHPTOHS. 

a.  Head. — Headache,  as  if  a  smoke  with  a  heating  pain  was  passing 
fliroi]^  the  head.—Headache  with  chill.— Swelling  of  head. 

6.  Face. — Parotitis  gangrenosa. — Stony  swelling  around  lower  jaw. — 
Gland  onder  chin  painfully  swollen. 

It.  Abdomen. — Sensation  as  if  diaphragm  were  pushed  forward. — 
Eohrgement  <tf  spleen. — Bellyache  with  chill. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Vomiting  followed  by  a  painless,  often 
bkxxly  diarrhoea. — Diarrhoea  with  fever. — Cholera-like  collapse. 

v^  Heart  and  Circulation. — Heart -beats  frequent  but  weak. — 
C]faao6is. — ^Blood  does  not  coagulate. 

so,  SI.  Back  and  Limbs. — ^Axillary  glands  swollen. — Severe  pains  in 
fimbs  and  joints  with  the  fever. — CEdema;  ulcers;  gangrene;  sloughing 
whitlows. 

H,  Generalities. — Restlessness. — Clonic  and-  tetanic  spasms  (marked 
r^  mortis  after  death). — Exhaustion  and  collapse. — Terrible  burning  pains. 

15.  Skin. — Crusty  oozing  eruption. — Itching  with  dry  skin. — Black  or 
bine  blisters. — Carbuncles. — Boils. — Sloughing  ulcers. — Small-pox. 


Anthrokokall. 

Anthracite  coal  of  a  certain  kind  dissolved  in  boiling  caustic  potash. 

Trituration. 


Cracks.  Diabetes.  Diuresis.  Ecthyma.  Eczema  impetige- 
ooidet.  Gout  Heipes.  Impetigo.  Lichen.  Nostrils,  cracked.  Priapism.  Prurigo. 
Khmmatiam.    Scabies.    Scrofula.    Sycosis.    Urticaria. 

Camracteyigtios* — ''A  very  absurd  combination/'  says  Hering, 
"proved  on  many  people,  but  in  a  very  superficial  way."    It  has  been 


lao  ANTIFEBRINUM 

principally  used  in  skin  affections,  scabies,  prurigo,  chronic  herpes, 
and  chronic  cracks  and  ulcerations  of  nostrils.  Eruptions  decrease 
with  the  full  of  the  moon.  The  intense  thirst  and  diuresis  suggest  a 
place  for  the  remedy  in  diabetes. 

BbIMotlb.— Compare :  The    Carbons  ;  the  Antimonies  ;    Rhus, 
Dulc,  Ferrum  iod.  (eczema  impetigenoides). 

BYMPTOHB. 

5.    Nose.— Chronic  cracks  and  ulcerations  of  nostrils. 

8.  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth ;  foul  tongue. 

9.  Throat.— Dryness  of  the  throat;  internal  heat,  extending  to   the 
stomach;  deglutition  slightly  impeded. 

zz.  Stomach.— Want  of  appetite.— Surfeit.— Disagreeable  taste  in  the 
mouth ;  great  thirst ;  retching ;  vomiting  of  bile,  and  of  black  mucus ;  sensa- 
tion of  heat  in  the  stomach ;  pressure  within ;  cramps  of  the  stomach. 

Z2,  Z3.  Abdomen  and  Stool. — Inflation  of  the  abdomen,  as  in  tytn- 
panitis;  colic. — Blackish  stools  1  evacuations  like  pap,  with  colic  and  bor- 
borygmi;  diarrhoea,  which  continues  several  days. 

Z4.  Urinary  Organs. — Increase  in  the  secretion  of  urine;  abundant 
flow  of  pale  urine  without  sediment ;  burning  in  the  urethra  while  passing 
water ;  or  itching  at  the  orifice ;  retention  of  urine. 

Z5,  z6.  Male  and  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Frequent  o-ections. — 
Catamenia  beyond  the  usual  period. 

25.  Skin. — Increased  activity  of  the  skin ;  nettle-rash.— Chronic  erysi- 
pelas; purulent  pimples,  like  papulae,  with  considerable  itching,  appearing 
during  the  night  and  disappearing  in  the  da3rtime ;  dropsy. 

86.    Sleep. — Sleeplessness,  with  agitation  and  excited  pulse. 

27.  Fever. — Febrile  shivering,  alternating  with  heat,  followed  by  gentle 
perspiration,  and  quickness  of  the  pulse. — Redness  and  heat  of  the  skin,  dis- 
appearing on  the  supervention  of  sweat. — Perspiration  all  over  the  body,  with 
pain  in  the  head,  agitation,  and  bruise-like  sensation,  and  quickness  of  the 
pulse ;  nocturnal  sweat,  sometimes  general,  sometimes  limited  to  the  parts 
affected;  viscid  sweating  of  the  feet;  before  the  sweat,  oppression  of  the 
chest  and  violent  palpitations  of  the  heart ;  the  skin  continues  moist  for  a 
long  time  after  the  perspiration  has  ceased. 


Antifebrinnm. 

Acetanilid  (formed  from  aniline).  CH3  CO  NH  Q  H5.  Exalgine  is  a 
derivative  from  this,  Methylacetanilid,  and  has  almost  identical 
action.    Solution  and  trituration. 

CUnioal.— Asthma.    Cyanosis.    Fainting.    Head,  enlarged  sensation.    Palpita- 
tion.   Thrombosis. 

OharaoteristiOB. — Given  as  remedies  for  migraine  and  in  order 
to  reduce  fever,  Anti/eb.  and  Exalg.  have  produced  symptoms  of  col- 


ANTIMONIUM   CRUDUM  121 

lapse  and  cyanosis,  in  some  instances  fatal,  with  great  rapidity.  One 
patient  ezpNcrienced  from  Exalgine  a  sensation  that  his  head  was  so 
large  that  it  seemed  to  occupy  the  whole  room.  Respiration  was 
most  difficult  as  in  a  bad  attack  of  asthma,  he  seized  and  clenched 
the  hands  of  those  around  him.  He  was  not  an  asthmatic  subject. 
He  fdt  as  if  the  diaphragm  had  ceased  working  and  he  must  go  on 
breathing  on  his  own  account  at  any  cost.  Several  cases  of  thrombosis 
of  the  lower  extremities  from  heart  weakness  have  followed  its  use. 
Rdmtioiis. — Compare :  Antipyr.,  Anilinum,  Glon.,  &c. 


Antunoniam  Arsenicicum. 

Arseniate  of  Antimony.    (Sb,  O3)  As  O5  +  3  p.c.    Trituration. 

CMalcal. — Catarrhal  pneumonia.     Emphyswia.      Ophthalmia.      Pericarditis. 
Phthisis.    Pleurisy.    Pneumonia.    Sdatica. 

Charaoterirtios, — Antim.  ars.  is  said  to  afiFect  preferably  upper 
left  lung.  Emphysema  where  the  dyspnoea  is  excessive.  Haarer  is 
the  chief  authority  for  this  drug.  Mattes,  who  used  it  after  him,  says 
it  is  equally  efiEective  in  right-side  cases  in  old  pneumonias  and 
catarrhal  pneumonias  in  children  ;  in  old  pleuritic  effusions,  and  in 
pericardial  exudations.  The  cough  is  <  by  eating,  and  on  lying 
down.  Wandering  pains  in  sciatic  nerves.  It  has  caused  inflamma- 
tion of  the  eyes  and  oedema  of  the  face. 

RlllatioM, — Compare :  Other  antimony  salts,  Ars.,  Aur.,  Laches., 
Ptds.  (wandering  pains),  Sul. 


Antimoniam  Crudom. 

Native  Sulphide  of  Antimony.    Sb,  S3. 

QflUeaL— Jiiifs,  ifritation  of.  Callosities.  Catarrh,  Chorea.  Constipation. 
Coros.  Diarfhcea.  Dyspepsia,  Eczema,  Feety  sore  and  homy.  Fever.  Gum- 
nuL  Vaiis^  eUgeneraUon  of,  NettU'rash,  Piles.  Prolapsus  recti.  Red  gum, 
ttmiUaUfaier,  Stomachy  disordered,  Sonstroke.  Tendons  inflamed.  Torque  coated, 
ViBicCiloii.   Warts.    Whooping-cough. 

Charaetaristfos. — Antim.  crud.  corresponds  in  a  sense  to  the  race 
of  swine,  as  Arsenic  does  to  horses  and  Pulsatilla  to  sheep.  It  is  pre- 
eminently a  scrofulous  medicine,  corresponding  to  gross  constitutions 
with  tendency  to  rough  scaling  skin  with  homy  patches.  With  these 
bomy  patches  is  great  tenderness,  the  patient  can  hardly  bear  to  walk 
OQ  theuL  Analagous  to  these  horny  excrescences  are  warts,  and 
AnL  c.  has  cured  many  cases  of  these.  A  student,  17,  had  twenty- 
three  on  right  hand  and  thirty-four  on  left,  mainly  on  backs  and  Angers, 


124  ANTIMONIUM   CRUDUM 

7.  Teeth. — Pains  in  carious  teeth,  with  dull  pricking,  successive  pulling 
and  gnawing,  even  in  the  head,  renewed  after  every  meal,  increased  by  cold 
water,  and  mitigated  in  the  open  air. — ^Jerking  toothache  in  the  evening,  in 
bed,  and  after  a  meal. — Grinding  of  the  teeth  while  sleeping  in  a  sitting 
posture. — Stitches  in  and  about  the  teeth  when  inspiring  cold  air. — Bleeding  of 
the  teeth  and  of  the  gums,  which  become  detached. 

8.  Mouth. — Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth. — Ptyalism  (tasting  salty). — 
Dryness  of  the  mouth. — ^Accumulation  of  water  on  the  tongue  and  in  the 
mouth. — Salivation. — ^Tongue  loaded;  with  a  white  coating. — Pain,  as  of 
excoriation  at  the  edges  of  the  tongue. — Blisters  on  the  tongue. 

Q.  Throat. — Soreness  of  the  throat,  as  if  there  were  a  plug  in  it — 
Inability  to  swallow. — Dryness  and  scraping,  or  an  accumulation  of  viscid 
mucus  in  the  throat. 

10.  Appetite. — ^Aversion  to  all  food. — Longing  for  acids. — ^Thirst  chiefly 
in  the  night. — Loss  of  appetite. — Sensation  of  hunger  and  of  emptiness  in  the 
epigastrium,  in  the  morning  especially,  and  which  is  unappeased  by  eating. — 
After  a  meal,  dejection,  lassitude,  fulness  and  tension  in  the  abdomen. — 
Great  desire  to  take  food,  which  is  not  appropriated  to  strength. 

iz.  Stomach. — Eructations  with  taste  of  food,  or  very  add. — Re* 
gurgitation  of  a  watery  fluid. — Hiccough  on  smoking  tobacco. — Loathing  of 
food,  nausea,  and  inclination  to  vomit,  as  if  caused  by  indigestion. — Heartburn 
with  good  appetite. — Nausea  after  taking  wine. — Nausea  and  vomiturition, 
from  overloading  the  stomach,  or  after  drinking  (sour)  wine. — ^Vomiting  of 
mucus  and  of  bile,  sometimes  accompanied  by  diarrhoea,  great  anxiety,  and 
convulsions. — Pain,  burning,  and  cramp-like  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  some- 
times with  despair  and  inclination  to  drown  oneself. — ^Tension  and  pressure 
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Painful  sensation,  as  if  the  stomach  were  over- 
loaded with  food. — Pain  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  on  being  touched. — 
Gastric  catarrh  with  characteristic  white  tongue ;  even  if  caused  by  metastasis 
of  rheumatism  or  gout. 

18.  Abdomen. — Inflation  of  the  abdomen,  with  a  sensation  of  fulness, 
chiefly  after  a  meal. — ^Violent  cutting  pains,  sometimes  with  want  of  appetite ; 
urine  red  and  stools  hard. — Sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  as  after 
violent  diarrhoea. — Sensation  of  swelling  and  of  hardness  in  the  inguinal 
region,  on  its  being  pressed.*-Accumulation  of  flatus  in  the  abdomen,  with 
rumbling  and  borborygmi. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diflicult  evacuation  of  hard  stools. — Difficult 
evacuations ;  the  faeces  are  too  large  in  size. — Urgent  inclination  to  go  to 
stool.— Stool  of  the  consistence  of  pap. — Diarrhoea,  generally  watery,  with 
cutting  pains.— After  vinegar  or  acid  wine,  loose  stool. — ^Alternate  diarrhoea 
and  constipation,  esp.  in  aged  persons. — Constant  secretion  of  yellowish-white 
mucus  by  the  anus. — Flow  of  black  blood  from  the  anus. — Haemorrhoidal 
excrescences,  blind  and  running,  with  burning  and  tingling. — Burning 
itching  and  fissures  in  the  anus. — Eacpanstve  pressure  in  the  rectum  (during 
stool  as  if  an  ulcer  had  been  torn  open)  and  the  anus. — Burning  furunculns 
in  the  perineum. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  inclination  to  make  water,  with  scanty 
emission. — Frequent  and  abundant  emission  of  urine,  with  abundant  flow 
of  mucus,  and  burning  in  the  urethra,  accompanied  by  pains  in  the  ioins. — 


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM  125 

On  ooogfiing,  involuntary  emission  of  urine. — Urine  aqueous,  or  of  a  gold 
colour,  or  reddish  brown,  and  sometimes  mixed  with  small  red  corpuscles. — 
Incisive  pain  in  the  urethra,  on  making  water. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Excitement  of  sexual  desire,  and  great 
I^dviousness. — Pollutions. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Metrorrhagia. — Sharp  and  corrosive 
discharge  from  the  vagina. — Nymphomania  from  checked  catamenia. — 
Tenderness  over  ovaries  after  menses  checked  by  a  bath. — Gastro-intestinal 
disorders  of  pregnancy. — Pressure  in  the  uterus  as  if  something  would  come 
oat  of  it,  esp.  during  uterine  haemorrhage. — Toothache  before  the  menses, 
with  boring  in  the  temples. — Quite  solid  lumps  in  a  watery  leucorrhoea, 
which  sometimes  causes  a  smarting  down  the  thighs. — Nausea,  vomiting,  and 
diarrhcea  during  pregnancy. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Great  heat  in  the  throat  while  moving  in 
the  open  air« — Great  weakness,  or  entire  loss  of  voice,  chiefly  on  becoming 
warm. — ^Looking  into  the  fire  increases  cough. — Sensation  of  a  foreign 
substance  in  the  larynx,  with  inabihty  to  expectorate. — ^Violent  spasm  in  the 
hrynx,  with  sensation  of  excoriation. — Cough,  with  burning  in  the  chest. 
—Morning  cough,  dry  and  shaking. — ^Whooping-cough. — Cough  as  if  arising 
from  abdomen. 

18.  Chest. — Stifling  oppression  and  paralytic  orthopnoea. — Respiration 
deep,  with  sighing. — Shootings  in  the  chest,  when  drawing  breath  and  at 
other  times.—  Pain,  as  of  contusion,  in  the  pectoralis  major,  on  raising  the  arm, 
and  on  pressure.— Sharp  pain  under  1.  breast. 

S(k  Neck  and  Back. — Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck 
and  of  the  nape  oi  the  neck.— Rheumatic  pains  in  the  nape  of  the  neck. — 
Miliaiy  eruption  on  the  nape  of  the  neck,  in  the  shoulder-blades,  and  behind 
the  ears. 

82.  Upper  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  arms. — Red  vesicles  on  the 
arms,  with  itching. — Painful  inflammation  of  the  tendons  of  the  elbow,  with 
great  redness  and  curvature  of  the  arm. — Hot  and  red  swelling  of  the  forearm, 
with  shooting  tension. — Sensation  of  drawing  in  the  forearm,  the  fingers,  and 
the  joints  of  the  fingers. — ^Arthritic  pains  in  the  joints  of  the  fingers. — Painful 
sensibility  of  the  skin  under  the  nails,  and  slow  growth  of  the  nails  themselves. 
—A  homy  growth  under  the  nail.— Crushed  finger-nails  grow  in  splits,  with 
homy  spots. 

2^  Loiter  Umba — Sensation  of  drawing  in  the  lower  limbs,  esp.  in 
the  coxo-femoral  joint. — Lumps,  with  red  rings,  on  the  buttocks  and  legs. 
—Violent  pain  in  the  lower  extremities. — Numbness  of  the  legs  after  sitting 
for  some  time. — Shooting  pain  in  the  knee  and  in  the  tibia. — Drawing  pain  in 
knees,  lower  part  1.  tibia,  in  L  heel,  and  tearing  through  the  r.  great  toe.— 
Tumour  or  white  swelling  of  the  knee. — Painful  stiffness  in  the  knee,  preventing 
the  extension  of  the  leg. — ^Vesicles  on  the  knee  after  scratching  it.^-Sensibility 
of  the  soles  of  the  feet,  when  walking  on  the  pavement. — Red  swelling  of  the 
heel,  with  bnming  shootings,  which  are  aggravated  by  walking. — Corns  on 
the  soles  of  the  feet,  and  callous  excrescence  at  the  tips  of  the  toes. — Pressive 
pain  in  the  corns. — Burning  in  the  fleshy  part  of  the  great  toe. — Callous 
excrescence  under  the  nail  of  the  great  toe. 

24.    Generalities. — Rheumatic  pains  and  inflammation  of  the  tendons, 


128  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM 

o£Eensive  to  smell.— Pressure  in  throat  as  if  a  plug  stuck  in  it— Scratching, 
rough  feeling  in  throat  in  morning. 

zi,  12.  Stomach  and  Abdomen.— Pressure  and  fulness  in  stomach 
and  abdomen  ;  umbilical  region  sensitive. 

13.  Stool.— Passage  of  much  flatus  with  sudden  urging,  followed  by  a 
stool  solid  at  first  then  bright  yellow  and  pasty ;  afterwards  violent  colic  and 
rumbling  round  navel.— Constipation,  faeces  hard  and  passed  with  difl&culty. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Urine  increased,  dark  red. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Pustular  eruption  on  scrotum  with  much 
itching. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — ^Accumulation  of  tough  mucus  in  bronchi 
and  larynx.— Increased  mucous  secretion  with  fulness  in  bronchi  and  full,  hard 
breathing. — Respiration  difficult — Dry,  hard  cough,  no  expectoration. — 
Increased  mucous  sputum,  mixed  with  blood,  of  a  sweetish  taste. — Passive 
congestion  of  upper  lobe  1.  lung,  with  hard,  dry  cough. 

84.    Generalities. — Malaise,  fatigue,  lassitude,  with  nausea. 

25.    Skin.— Itching  on  hands  and  feet.- Pustular  acne. 

86.  Sleep. — Sleep  deep ;  dreamy  with  sudden  waking. — Sudden  waking 
after  midnight,  with  general  aggravation  of  symptoms,  heavy,  confused  head, 
slight  sweat 


Antimonium    Tartaricum. 

Tartar  Emetic.    Tartrate  of  Antimony  and  Potash  2[K  (Sb  O)  C4  H^ 
Oe]  HaO.    Trituration  and  solutions. 

CUniesL— il/co^/fsm.  Afhthof,  Asphyxia  neonatorium.  Asthma.  Bilious 
affections.  Bronchitis.  Catarrh.  Chicken-pox,  Cholera.  Cholera  morbus.  Coccy- 
eodynia.  Cough.  Croup,  Delirium-Tremens.  Dyspepsia.  Ecthyma.  Eyes,  inflamed. 
Impetigo.  Intermittent  fever.  Laryngitis.  Lumbago,  Lungs^  affections  of.  Uyalgta. 
Paralysis  agitans.  Plica-polonica.  Pneumonia.  Psoriasis.  Rheumatism.  Ring- 
worm. Screaming.  Small-fox.  Stiff-neck.  Sycosis.  Synovitis.  Taste^  altered. 
Thirst.    Tongue^  coated.    Tremors.    Varioloid.    Vomiting.    Whooping-cough. 

Oharaoteristios. — Antim.  tart,  resembles  closely  Antim,  crud. 
and  the  other  Antimonies  in  its  action,  though  the  modalities  differ. 
Antim.  tart,  was  the  favourite  emetic  of  olden  times,  and  con- 
sequently it  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  in  states  of  nausea.  The 
nausea  is  as  intense  as  that  of  Ipec.^  but  less  persistent,  and  is  >  by 
vomiting.  Nash  has  found  it  the  nearest  thing  to  a  specific  in  cholera 
morbus,  the  indications  being  '^  nausea,  vomiting,  loose  stools, 
prostration,  cold  sweat,  stupor,  or  drowsiness."  In  chest  affections 
of  all  kinds  it  is  indicated  where  there  is  great  accumulation  of  mucus 
with  coarse  rattling  and  inability  to  raise  it.  Drowsiness  and  even 
coma  may  accompany  cases  of  all  kinds  in  which  Ant,  t.  is  called 
for.  The  face  is  pale  or  cyanotic  and  the  breathing  stertorous. 
There  is  heat  about  heart  and  warmth  rising  up  from  it.  A  sensation 
of  coldness  in  the  blood-vessels.  A  correspondent  of  the  Chemist 
and  Druggist  (May  21,  1892)  related  the  case  of  an  apprentice  who 


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM  129 

had  been  employed  for  a  week  making  up  ''  cough-balls  '*  and  diuretic 
balls  for  horses,  both  containing  powdered  antimony.  He  had  been 
cautioned  not  to  inhale  the  powder,  but  his  employer  beUeves  he 
did.  At  the  end  of  the  week  he  was  seized  with  an  illness,  due,  his 
employer  thinks,  and  no  doubt  correctly,  to  the  antimony.  The 
symptoms  are  very  characteristic.  First,  there  was  nausea,  lassitude, 
and  a  desire  for  sleep.  He  was  sent  to  bed,  and  during  the  night  his 
fellow  apprentice  said  he  got  up  and  struggled  to  relieve  himself  of 
an  imaginary  load  on  the  chest.  On  being  put  to  bed  again,  a  pro- 
fuse perspiration  broke  out,  and  also  a  peculiar  rash  on  his  face  and 
chest ;  after  that  he  vomited  freely  and  felt  better.  Temperature 
104,  pulse  120.  A  fever-mixture  of  liq.  ammon.  acet.  and  Sp.  aether, 
nit.  was  given.  A  doctor  who  was  called  in  found  undoubted 
symptoms  of  pneumonia  of  left  lung,  but  confessed  he  had  never 
seen  the  rash  before  and  would  not  venture  an  opinion  regarding 
it  For  two  days  the  temperature  kept  at  104,  then  both  temperature 
and  the  pulse  became  normal,  the  rash  disappeared,  and  with  it  the 
pneumonic  cough  ;  in  six  days  the  boy  was  perfectly  well.  "  A 
child  coughs  when  angry ''  is  characteristic.  Heath  cured  a  case  of 
whooping-cough  in  a  child  who  was  very  fretful  before  the  cough. 
The  mother  said  that  if  the  child  got  angry  she  immediately  had  a  fit 
of  coughing.  **  Cough  at  4  a.m.''  is  another  indication  which  I  have 
found  true.  Further  leading  indications  for  this  remedy  are :  attacks  of 
fainting,  internal  trembling.  It  causes  relaxation  of  sphincters  and 
muscles,  with  nausea  or  without.  Os  uteri  dry,  tender,  undilatabie, 
with  distress,  moaning,  and  restlessness  with  every  pain  {Aco,)^  feeling 
of  sickness.  Convulsive  twitching.  Convulsions.  Great  heaviness  in 
all  the  limbs  and  great  debility.  Rheumatic  pains  (fever),  with  per- 
spiration, which  does  not  relieve.  Inflammation  of  internal  organs. 
Gastric  and  bilious  complaints.  Constant  nausea — nausea  felt  in 
chest  {Puis,).  Sensation  of  weight  or  heaviness  in  many  parts  ; 
head,  occiput,  coccyx,  limbs.  Pulsations  in  all  the  blood-vessels.  The 
child  wants  to  be  carried  and  cries  if  any  one  touches  it  Peevishness, 
whining,  and  crying.  Inquietude,  apprehension,  agitation.  Dulness 
and  bewilderment  of  head  as  if  benumbed.  Chronic  trembling  of  head ; 
of  head  and  hands  (as  in  paralysis  agitans).  The  tongue  has  a  thick, 
white,  pasty  coat  with  red  papillae  showing  through.  Intense  nausea 
and  vomiting  with  great  effort  ;  with  perspiration  on  forehead. 
Fulness  and  sensation  of  stones  in  abdomen,  especially  when  sitting 
bent  forward.  The  skin  is  notably  affected.  The  typical  exception 
is  like  that  of  smsdl-pox,  the  symptoms  of  which  disease  are  so 
closely  reproduced  in  the  proving  that  it  has  been  used  instead  of 
vaccine  for  inoculation  purposes,  and  prophylactic  power  has  been 
claimed  for  it  (Compare  Variolinum^  The  terrible  backache  of 
small-pox  is  paralleled  by  the  back-pains  of  AnL  /.,  which  I  have 
found  to  correspond  to  more  cases  of  lumbago  than  any  other  remedy. 
Ant.  t,  is  also  a  "  sycotic,"  and  I  have  veriiied  a  symptom  given  in 
Hering,  "  warts  at  the  back  of  the  glans  penis."  Antim.  tart,  has 
<  by  warmth,  but  not  the  excessive  sensitiveness  to  heat  and  sun 
of  Ant.  C.J  and  some  of  the  rheumatic  symptoms  are  >  by  warmth. 
Warm  drink  <  cough,  also  lying  in  bed,  especially  becoming 
vou  I.  10 


132  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM 

efforts,  pain  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,  trembling  of  the  body,  necessity  to 
bend  double,  shiverings,  and  strong  inclination  to  sleep. — ^Vomiting  of  mucus, 
with  mucous  diarrhoea.-— Acid  vomiting,  containing  food.— Vomiting  of  sour 
and  bitter  substances,  esp.  at  night — Excessive  sensibility  of  the  stomach ; 
the  smallest  mouthful  causes  a  painful  sensation. — Pain  in  the  stomach, 
as  if  it  were  overloaded. — Uneasiness  and  emptiness  in  the  stomach. 
—Pressure  in  the  stomach  and  scrobiculus,  esp.  after  a  meal. — ^Violent 
throbbings  and  pulsations  in  the  region  of  the  stomach. — Shootings  in  the  pit 
of  the  stomach. 

13.  At>doinen. — Pains  in  the  abdomen,  with  great  moral  and  physical 
agitation,  and  dislike  to  all  kinds  of  labour. — Uneasiness  in  the  epigastrium 
and  hypogastrium,  which  compels  the  patient  to  lie  down  and  to  stretch 
himself. — Fulness  and  pressure  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  it  contained  stones, 
esp.  on  stooping  forward,  while  in  a  sitting  posture. — Spasmodic  colic 
in  the  abdomen,  with  violent  contraction  of  the  eyelids,  and  irresistible 
inclination  to  sleep. — Incisive  pains  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the  intestines  were 
being  cut. — Pulsations  in  the  abdomen — ^Abundant  production  of  flatus,  with 
grumbling,  borborygmi,  and  pinchings  in  the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation,  alternating  with  diarrhoea. — 
Diarrhoea  in  pneumonia,  small-pox,  and  other  eruptive  diseases,  esp,  if  the 
eruption  has  been  suppressed. — Diarrhoea  and  vomiting. — Fasces  of  the  con- 
sistence of  pap. — Slimy  diarrhoea,  or  yellow,  bright  brown,  or  else  watery, 
often  preceded  by  gripings  and  movements  in  the  abdomen. — Sanguineous 
faeces. — Involuntary  evacuations. — During  the  evacuation,  palpitation  of  the 
heart. — ^Violent  burning  tickling,  extending  from  the  rectum  into  the  glans 
penis. — Lancinations  in  the  rectum. — ^Tenesmus  during  and  after  stool, 
frequent  burning  at  the  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Very  profuse  and  distressing  emission  of  urine, 
with  tension  in  the  perineum,  burning  sensation  in  the  urethra,  and  scanty 
stream,  which  is  sanguineous  towards  the  end  of  the  emission,  with  violent 
pains  in  the  bladder. — Nocturnal  calls  to  urinate,  with  burning  thirst  and 
scanty  emission. — Involuntary  emission  of  urine. — Red,  fiery  urine,  which 
forms  blood-red  filaments  after  standing. — Deep-brown,  acrid,  turbid  urine. — 
Pressure  and  tension  on  the  bladder. — Shootings  in  the  urethra  and  lower  part 
of  the  bladder. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Excitation  of  sexual  system.— Pain  in 
testicles  after  checked  gonorrhoea. — ^Warts  behind  glans  penis ;  with  ulcers 
elsewhere  (sycosis). — Pustules  on  genitals  and  thighs. — Syphilis. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs*— Catamenia  of  watery  blood.— Severe 
bearing-down  in  vagina. — Chronic  metritis  with  feeling  of  weight  tugging  at 
coccyx.— Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  genital  organs. — Itching  of  pudenda. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Catarrh,  with  irritation,  which  excites 
coughing,  copious  accumulation  of  mucus,  and  rattling  of  mucus  in  the  chest 
— Hoarseness. — Painful  tenderness  of  the  larynx  when  touched. — Cough, 
excited  by  violent  tickling  in  the  trachea. — ^A  child  coughs  when  angry. — 
Paroxysms  of  coughing,  with  sufiFocating  obstruction  of  respiration  (suffo- 
cating cough). — Dyspnoea,  compelling  one  to  sit  up. — Shortness  of  breathing 
from  suppressed  expectoration. — Suffocating  attacl^  with  sensation  of  heat  at 
the  heart. — ^Whooping-cough,  preceded  by  the  child  crying,  or  after  eating 


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM  133 

or  drinkiii^  or  when  getting  warm  in  bed ;  after  the  attack  somnolency. — 
Coii^,  widi  heat  and  moisture  of  the  hands,  and  perspiration  on  the  head, 
dnefly  on  the  forehead. — Cough,  with  vomiting  of  food,  after  a  meal.*- 
HoDow  cough,  with  rattling  of  mucus  in  the  chest.— Cough,  with  expectora- 
tioo  of  mucus,  sometimes  at  night  only,  chiefly  after  midnight. 

18.  Chest.— Velvety  feeling  in  the  chest.— Frequent  fits  of  obstructed 
respiration^  esp.  in  the  evening  or  in  the  morning,  in  bed,  almost  to  the 
extent  of  suffocation. — Shortness  of  breath. — Difficult  respiration. — Paralysis 
of  the  lungs. — ^Anxious  oppression  of  the  chest,  with  a  sensation  of  heat, 
which  ascends  to  the  heart. — Rattling  of  mucus  in  the  chest  when  breathing. — 
Fitful  pain,  as  from  excoriation  in  the  chest,  esp.  on  the  1.  side. — Rheumatic 
pain  in  the  1.  side  of  the  chest — Burning  sensation  in  the  chest  which 
ascends  to  the  throat. — Inflammation  of  the  lungs. — Miliary  eruption  on  the 
chest. 

xg.  Heart  and  Pulse. — Visible  and  anxious  palpitation  of  the  heart 
(also  without  anxiety),  sometimes  during  an  evacuation. — Palpitation  with 
loose  stools. — Heat  about  heart  and  warmth  rising  up  from  it. — ^Sensation  of 
coldness  in  the  blood-vessels. — Pulse :  hard,  quick,  and  small ;  or  weak, 
quick,  and  trembling ;  small,  threadlike ;  imperceptible. — ^Twisting,  digging, 
and  blows  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  at  night,  which  do  not  cease  till  perspiration 
breaks  out. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — ^Weakness  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  which 
prevents  the  head  from  being  held  up. — Miliary  eruption  on  the  nape  of  the 
neck. — Pain  in  the  back  and  loins  when  seated,  as  from  fatigue.— ^Violent  pain 
in  the  sacro-lumbar  region ;  slightest  effort  to  move  causes  retching  and 
cold,  clammy  sweat — Pain  in  sacrum  with  sensation  of  lameness. — Sensation 
as  if  a  heavy  load  was  hanging  on  end  of  coccyx,  dragging  downwards 
all  the  time. — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  back. 

21.  Li]nt>s. — Heaviness  in  limbs  followed  by  leprous  eruption. — Limbs 
over-fatigued,  a  sensation  coming  from  back. — ^Jerking  up  of  limbs  during 
sleep  with  loose  stools. — Small  ulcers  on  tips  of  fingers  and  toes,  spreading, 
livid  edges  (leprosy). 

82.  Upper  Limbs. — Cracking  in  the  joints  of  the  shoulder,  with  tearing 
in  the  arms,  extending  into  the  hands. — Excessive  heaviness  of  the  arms. — 
Jerinng  of  the  muscles  in  the  arms  and  hands. — Miliary  eruption  on  the  arms. 
—Itching  pimples  on  the  arms  and  wrists. — Red  spots  on  the  hands,  like  flea- 
bites.— -Trembling  of  the  hands. — Coldness  of  the  hands. — Icy  coldness  in  the 
tips  of  the  fingers,  as  if  dead. — Finger-ends  dead,  dry,  and  hard. — Spots  of  a 
deep  yellow  on  the  fingers. — Distortion  of  the  fingers. 

2^  Ix>iMrer  Limbs. — Heaviness  and  rheumatic  pains  in  the  hips  and 
legs.— Painful  weakness  in  the  knee-joint,  in  bed,  in  the  morning. — Dropsy 
of  the  L  knee-joint — Tension  of  the  tendons  of  the  ham,  and  of  the  instep, 
when  walking. — Cramp  in  the  calf  of  the  leg. — Coldness  of  the  feet. — Numb- 
ness of  the  feet,  on  sitting  down. 

Sf.  Generalities. — Rheumatic  pains  (fever)  with  perspiration,  which 
does  not  relieve. — Inflammation  of  internal  organs. — Gastric  and  bilious  com- 
plaints.— Arthritic  and  rheumatic  tearings  and  drawings  in  the  limbs,  with 
sensation  as  of  a  fracture.— Collection  of  synovial  fluid  in  joints. — Contraction 
of  the  limbs.— Jerking   of   the  muscles. — Convulsive  jerks  and  spasm.— 


132  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM 

efforts,  pain  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,  trembling  of  the  body,  necessity  to 
bend  double,  shiverings,  and  strong  inclination  to  sleep. — ^Vomiting  of  mucus, 
with  mucous  diarrhoea.-— Acid  vomiting,  containing  food.— Vomiting  of  sour 
and  bitter  substances,  esp.  at  night — Excessive  sensibility  of  the  stomach ; 
the  smallest  mouthful  causes  a  painful  sensation. — Pain  in  the  stomach, 
as  if  it  were  overloaded. — Uneasiness  and  emptiness  in  the  stomach. 
-^Pressure  in  the  stomach  and  scrobiculus,  esp.  after  a  meal. — ^Violent 
throbbings  and  pulsations  in  the  region  of  the  stomach. — Shootings  in  the  pit 
of  the  stomach. 

13.  Abdomen. — Pains  in  the  abdomen,  with  great  moral  and  physical 
agitation,  and  dislike  to  all  kinds  of  labour. — Uneasiness  in  the  epigastrium 
and  hypogastrium,  which  compels  the  patient  to  lie  down  and  to  stretch 
himself. — Fulness  and  pressure  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  it  contained  stones, 
esp.  on  stooping  forward,  while  in  a  sitting  posture. — Spasmodic  colic 
in  the  abdomen,  with  violent  contraction  of  the  eyelids,  and  irresistible 
inclination  to  sleep. — Incisive  pains  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the  intestines  were 
being  cut. — Pulsations  in  the  abdomen — Abundant  production  of  flatus,  with 
grumbling,  borborygmi,  and  pinchings  in  the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation,  alternating  with  diarrhoea. — 
Diarrhoea  in  pneimionia,  small-pox,  and  other  eruptive  diseases,  esp.  if  the 
eruption  has  been  suppressed. — Diarrhoea  and  vomiting. — Faeces  of  the  con- 
sistence of  pap. — Slimy  diarrhoea,  or  yellow,  bright  brown,  or  else  watery, 
often  preceded  by  gripings  and  movements  in  the  abdomen. — Sanguineous 
faeces. — Involuntary  evacuations. — During  the  evacuation,  palpitation  of  the 
heart— Violent  burning  tickling,  extending  from  the  rectum  into  the  gUins 
penis. — Lancinations  in  the  rectum. — ^Tenesmus  during  and  after  stool, 
frequent  burning  at  the  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Very  profuse  and  distressing  emission  of  urine, 
with  tension  in  the  perineum,  burning  sensation  in  the  urethra,  and  scanty 
stream,  which  is  sanguineous  towards  the  end  of  the  emission,  with  violent 
pains  in  the  bladder. — Nocturnal  calls  to  urinate,  with  burning  thirst  and 
scanty  emission. — Involuntary  emission  of  urine. — Red,  fiery  urine,  which 
forms  blood-red  filaments  after  standing. — Deep-brown,  acrid,  turbid  urine. — 
Pressure  and  tension  on  the  bladder. — Shootings  in  the  urethra  and  lower  part  I 
of  the  bladder.                                                                                                           I 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Excitation  of  sexual  system.— Pain  in  | 
testicles  after  checked  gonorrhoea. — Warts  behind  glans  penis ;  with  ulcers  1 
elsewhere  (sycosis). — Pustules  on  genitals  and  thighs. — Syphilis.                                 , 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs* — Catamenia  of  watery  blood.— Severe 
bearing-down  in  vagina. — Chronic  metritis  with  feeling  of  weight  tugging  at  j 
coccyx.— Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  genital  organs. — Itching  of  pudenda. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Catarrh,  with  irritation,  which  excites 
coughing,  copious  accumulation  of  mucus,  and  rattling  of  mucus  in  the  chest 
— Hoarseness. — Painful  tenderness  of  the  larynx  when  touched. — Cough, 
excited  by  violent  tickling  in  the  trachea. — ^A  child  coughs  when  angry. — 
Paroxysms  of  coughing,  with  sufiFocating  obstruction  of  respiration  (su£Fo- 
cating  cough). — Dyspnoea,  compelling  one  to  sit  up. — Shortness  of  breathing 
from  suppressed  expectoration. — SulGfocating  attacks  with  sensation  of  heat  at 
the  heart. — Whooping-cough,  preceded  by  the  child  crying,  or  after  eating 


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM  133 

or  drinkm^  or  when  getting  warm  in  bed ;  after  the  attack  somnolency.— 
Coo^  with  heat  and  moisture  of  the  hands,  and  perspiration  on  the  head, 
dueflj  on  the  forehead. — Cough,  with  vomiting  of  food,  after  a  meal.— 
Hollow  cough,  with  rattling  of  mucus  in  the  chest. — Cough,  with  expectora- 
tioa  of  mucus,  sometimes  at  night  only,  chiefly  after  midnight. 

x8w  Chest.— Velvety  feeling  in  the  chest— Frequent  fits  of  obstructed 
re^nration,  esp.  in  the  evening  or  in  the  morning,  in  bed,  almost  to  the 
extent  of  suffocation. — Shortness  of  breath. — Difficult  respiration. — Paralysis 
of  the  lungs. — Anxious  oppression  of  the  chest,  with  a  sensation  of  heat, 
winch  ascends  to  the  heart. — Rattling  of  mucus  in  the  chest  when  breathing. — 
Fitful  pain,  as  from  excoriation  in  the  chest,  esp.  on  the  1.  side. — Rheumatic 
pain  in  the  L  side  of  the  chest. — Burning  sensation  in  the  chest  which 
ascends  to  the  throat. — Inflammation  of  the  lungs. — Miliary  eruption  on  the 
chest. 

ig.  Heart  and  Pulse.—- Visible  and  anxious  palpitation  of  the  heart 
(also  without  anxiety),  sometimes  during  an  evacuation. — Palpitation  with 
Joose  stools. — Heat  about  heart  and  warmth  rising  up  from  it. — Sensation  of 
coldness  in  the  blood-vessels. — Pulse :  hard,  quick,  and  small ;  or  weak, 
quick,  and  trembling ;  small,  threadlike :  imperceptible. — ^INvisting,  digging, 
and  blows  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  at  night,  which  do  not  cease  till  perspiration 
breaks  out 

ao.  Neck  and  Back. — ^Weakness  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  which 
prevents  the  head  from  being  held  up. — Miliary  eruption  on  the  nape  of  the 
neck. — Pain  in  the  back  and  loins  when  seated,  as  from  fatigue. — ^Violent  pain 
in  the  sacro-lumbar  region ;  slightest  effort  to  move  causes  retching  and 
cold,  clammy  sweat — Pain  in  sacrum  with  sensation  of  lameness. — Sensation 
as  if  a  heavy  load  was  hanging  on  end  of  coccyx,  dragging  downwards 
all  the  time. — Rheumatic  pain  in  the  back. 

SI.  Limbs. — Heaviness  in  limbs  followed  by  leprous  eruption. — Limbs 
over-fatigued,  a  sensation  coming  from  back. — ^Jerking  up  of  limbs  during 
sk^  with  loose  stools. — Small  ulcers  on  tips  of  fingers  and  toes,  spreading, 
livid  edges  (leprosy). 

88.  Upper  Limt>s. — Cracking  in  the  joints  of  the  shoulder,  with  tearing 
in  the  arms,  extending  into  the  hands. — Excessive  heaviness  oif  the  arms.— 
Jerking  oi  the  muscles  in  the  arms  and  hands. — Miliary  eruption  on  the  arms. 
—Itching  pimples  on  the  arms  and  wrists.— Red  spots  on  the  hands,  like  flea- 
bites.— Trembling  of  the  hands. — Coldness  of  the  hands. — Icy  coldness  in  the 
tips  of  the  fingers,  as  if  dead. — Finger-ends  dead,  dxy,  and  hard. — Spots  of  a 
deep  yellow  on  the  fingers. — Distortion  of  the  fingers. 

Q.  Loixrer  Limbs. — Heaviness  and  rheumatic  pains  in  the  hips  and 
legs. — Painful  weakness  in  the  knee-joint,  in  bed,  in  the  morning. — Dropsy 
of  the  L  knee-joint. — ^Tension  of  the  tendons  of  the  ham,  and  of  the  instep, 
when  walking. — Cramp  in  the  calf  of  the  leg.— Coldness  of  the  feet. — Numb- 
ness of  the  feet,  on  sitting  down. 

84.  Generalities.^ — Rheumatic  pains  (fever)  with  perspu-ation,  which 
does  not  relieve. — Inflammation  of  internal  organs. — ^Gastric  and  bilious  com- 
plaints.—Arthritic  and  rheumatic  tearings  and  drawings  in  the  limbs,  with 
sensation  as  of  a  fracture. — Collection  of  synovial  fluid  in  joints.-— Contraction 
of  the  limbs.— Jerking   of   the  muscles. — Convulsive  jerks  and  spasm. — 


134  ANTIPYRINUM 

Epileptic  fits.— Trembling  of  the  limbs ;  long-continued  of  the  head  and 
hands  after  every  exertion  or  motion. — Internal  trembling.-^Shootings  in  the 
varices. — ^Aggravation  of  the  symptoms  when  sitting  down,  or  else  'when 
seated,  and  when  rising  from  the  seat. — In  some  forms  of  asthma  one  has  to 
sit  in  a  chair  and  lean  his  head  on  a  table. — In  some  forms  oi  pneumonia  so 
great  is  the  prostration  that  the  patient  is  constantly  slipping  down  in  bed. — 
Heaviness  in  all  the  limbs,  and  great  indolence.— Violent  pulsations  through- 
out the  body. — Great  debility,  weakness,  and  excessive  lassitude ;  feels  best 
when  sitting  still  doing  nothing. — ^A  child  continually  wishes  to  be  carried. — 
Syncope. — Excessive  tenderness  of  the  whole  body. — ^A  child,  when  touched, 
utters  piercing  cries. 

25.  Skin. — Itching  in  the  skin.— Itching  pimples,  and  miliary  eruption. — 
Eruptions  like  scabies. — Eruption  lof  pustules,  like  varioloids,  as  large  as 
peas,  filled  with  pus,  with  red  areola  (like  small-pox),  and  which  afterwards 
form  a  crust,  and  leave  a  scar. — Itching  round  inveterate  ulcers.— Pustular 
eruption  on  different  portions  of  the  body,  leaving  a  bluish-red  mark. 

96.  Sleep.— Urgent  inclination  to  sleep  during  the  day,  with  frequent 
stretching  and  yawning.— Invincible  drowsiness,  with  deep  and  stupefying 
sleep. — In  the  morning,  sensation  as  from  insufficient  sleep.— Retarded  sleep, 
and  nocturnal  sleeplessness. — Light  sleep,  with  many  fantastic  dreams. — 
Much  talking  during  sleep.— Cries  during  sleep,  with  fixed  eyes,  and  trembling 
limbs. — Shocks  and  blows  during  sleep,  which  occasion  jerking,  sometimes 
of  a  single  limb,  at  others  of  the  whole  body.— Lying  on  the  back  while 
sleeping,  with  the  left  hand  passed  under  the  head. 

27.  Fever. — Predominance  of  shivering  and  coldness. — Shiverings,  with 
excessive  paleness  of  the  face,  and  trembling  of  the  whole  body.— Violent  but 
not  long-continuing  heat,  preceded  by  a  long-lasting  chill ;  worse  from  every 
exertion  ;  or  long-continued  heat,  with  lethargy  and  perspiration  on  the  fore- 
head following  a  short-lasting  chill. — Burning  heat  of  the  whole  body,  ctuefiy 
in  the  head  and  face,  increased  by  the  least  movement. — Pulse  quick,  weak, 
or  full ;  hard  and  accelerated ;  at  times  trembling.— The  fever  ceasing,  the 
pulse  becomes  often  slow  and  imperceptible. — The  least  exertion  accelerates 
the  pulse. — Fever,  with  adipsia,  and  excessive  drowsiness. — Profuse,  frequent, 
and  sometimes  cold  perspiration. — Perspiration  on  the  parts  affected. — 
Profuse  nocturnal  perspiration. — Perspiration  on  the  whole  body. — Perspira- 
tion frequently  cold  and  clammy. — Intermittent  fevers,  with  lethargic 
condition. 


Antipyrinum. 


Phenazon  (Phenyl— dimethyl— pyrazolon).    Cxx  H„  N,0.    A  product 
of  coal  tar  through  toluin.    Solution  and  trituration. 

ClinloaL — Dysmenia.  Enuresis.  Epilepsy.  Epistaxis.  Erythema.  German 
measles.  Headache.  Heart,  paralysis  of.  Mind,  deranged.  Respiration,  Cheyne- 
Stokes.    Scarlatina.    Throat,  sore.    Toothache.    Urticaria. 

CharaoteristiOB. — Antipyrine  is  known  from  the  poisonous  effects 
it  has  produced  in  old-school  practice.    Many  fatal  cases  have  been 


ANTIPYRINUM  135 

recorded,  and  tbere  can  be  little  doubt  that  its  injudicious  use  has 
determined  a  fatal  issue  in  many  cases  that  have  remained  unrecorded. 
Its  action  is  very  like  that  of  Antifebrin  in  producing  collapse,  but  it 
has  more  e£Fect  on  the  skin,  causing  scarlet  rash  and  oedema.  A 
young  lady  patient  of  mine  who  took  AnUfyrin  on  her  own  account, 
whenever  she  thought  she  might  be  gomg  to  have  a  headache, 
devdoped  intense  dysmenorrhoea  (to  which  she  was  not  subject), 
\nth  depression.  This  was  only  removed  after  she  had  discontinued 
tiie  drug.  Lfater  on  she  took  Phenacetin,  with  the  result  that  an 
eruption  of  erythema  appeared  on  both  cheeks,  which  peeled  after  a 
few  days,  and  recurred  persistently.  It  would  seem  from  the  above 
that  the  drug  is  homceopathic  to  some  forms,  at  least,  of  neuralgia. 
One  patient  had  Cheyne-Stokes  respiration.  Erythema  appears  first 
on  face  and  arms,  last  on  legs.  Hansen  mentions  its  use  in  enuresis 
and  epistaxis.     >  Hot  drinks. 

lliilaHftM, — Compare  :  Anilinum  (skin).  Antefeb. ;  Ars.  ;  Chloral ; 
Aeon,  (numbness ;  rapidity  of  attack).  Aniidoied  by :  Bell.  The 
symptoms  are  much  intensified  in  persons  addicted  to  coffee  in 
excess. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Loss  of  consciousness. — Fear  of  impending  insanity  (mental 
balance  did  not  return  for  some  months). — Excitement. — Continual  crying. — 
NcrvoQS  anxiety. 

s.  Head. — Headache,  with  toothache  ;  pain  behind  both  ears  of  tearing 
cfaaiacter. — Snapping  sensation  in  head. 

3.  Byes. — Complete  loss  of  vision. — Eyelids  swollen  so  that  eyes  were 
almost  closed. — Coryza. 

4.  Bars. — Buzzing  in  ears. 

5.  Nose.^Tingling  burning  in  nose,  with  sneezing  and  running  from 
eye&  and  nose ;  nose  and  face  swollen. — Coppery  smell  which  comes  and 
goes. 

6.  Face. — (Edema;  dusky  red  face. 

7.  Teeth. — General  toothache,  together  with  headache ;  pain  behind 
both  ears  of  a  tearing  character. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tingling  burning  in  gums,  mouth,  and  throat. — Lump  in 
moiith  about  an  inch  thick ;  just  below  level  of  upper  teeth  (passed  away  in 
balf-honr). 

0.  Throat. — Dryness,  burning,  swelling,  1.  side  of  throat  with  aphonia ; 
L  tonal  white  and  swollen. — ^Tight,  constricted  feeling. 

ii«  Stomach.— Attacks  of  excitement  accompanied  by  vomiting  (in  a 
child). — Epigastric  pain,  causing  to  bend  double  and  cry  out. — Expanding 
sensation  rising  from  stomach. 

14.    Urinary  Organs. — Incontinence  of  urine. — ^Amount  diminished. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Cheyne-Stokes  breathing.  —  Hoarseness 
following  aphonia. 

x8.  Chest. — Sensation  as  though  contents  of  thorax  and  abdomen  were 
being  forcibly  drawn  up  towards  throat,  and  r.  testicle  to  abdomen. — 
Dy^moea ;  tightness  of  chest. — Sensation  of  tumour  over  notch  of  sternum. — 
Inability  to  lie  down. 


136  APHIS  CHENOPODII  GLAUCI 

IQ.    Heart.— Pulse  feeble  and  rapid.— Fainting  spells. 

ao.  Neck  and  Back«— Feeling  of  numberless  pins  pricking  him  down 
each  side  of  neck. 

31.    Limbs. — Pains  in  limbs. — Limbs  swollen. 

82.  Upper  Limbs. — Cramp  in  r.  arm. — Fingers  of  r.  hand  clenched  in 
the  form  of  a  claw. 

84.  Generalities. — Feeling  of  numberless  pins  pricking  him  down  each 
side  of  the  neck,  extending  down  r.  chest  and  abdomen,  particularly  severe  r. 
side  of  scrotum  and  r.  testicle,  also  in  legs  and  feet,  severely  r.,  slightly  1. — Sen- 
sation as  if  contents  of  chest  and  abdomen  drawn  upwards,  felt  he  was 
"  drawn  in  a  ruck,"  and,  being  unable  to  stand,  fell  on  the  floor. — Trembled 
violentiy  all  over,  had  cramp  in  r.  arm. — ^Epileptic  attacks,  with  partial 
unilateial  twitching ;  contraction  of  muscles ;  cluittering  of  teeth ;  jactita- 
tion. —Cyanosis.— Collapse.— Throbbing  all  over  body. — Sensation  as  if  inside 
of  body  were  filled  with  ice. 

25.  Skin. — Rash,  erythema  or  urticaria,  with  troublesome  itching; 
chiefly  between  fingers. — Irregular  rounded  pimples  l3ring  close  together, 
in  some  places  confluent,  forming  patches,  between  which  skin  was  normal, 
giving  a  marbled  appearance,  lasted  five  days,  turned  brownish  and  desqua- 
mated slightly. — Eruption  thickest  on  body  and  extremities,  extensor  more 
covered  than  flexor  surfaces. — Eruption  begins  on  face  and  arms,  last  on 
legs.-— Scarlet  macular  eruption. 

27.  Fever. — Excessive  perspiration.— Throbbing  all  over  body,  coldness 
of  hands  and  feet,  nervous  shuddering  without  chill.— Pulse  goes  up  and  down 
with  the  temperature. 


Aphis  Ghenopodii  Glauci. 

N.  0.  Insecta.    A  tincture  is  made  of  the  aphides  grown  on  the 
Chenopodium  glaucum. 

GliBlesL — Colic.      Coryza.      Cough.      Diarrhoea.      Headache.      Tenesmus. 
Toothache. 

CharaoteriBtics. — Some  of  the  most  notable  symptoms  of  Aphis 
are  :  Coryza  with  burning  and  biting  on  margins  of  nostrils,  especially 
of  septum.  Increase  of  most  violent  toothache  in  bed,  only  relieved 
if  after  awhile  a  general  warm  sweat  breaks  out.  Cutting  in  abdomen 
and  rumbling  01  flatus.  Ineffectual  urging  in  bladder  and  rectum. 
In  the  morning  urging  after  rising,  several  mush-like  stools  with 
pinching,  burning  in  anus  with  urging.  Flatus  accompanies  stool. 
Thin  stools  with  slime  and  spots  of  dark  blood.  The  insect  partakes 
of  the  properties  of  the  plant  it  lives  on,  Chenopodium  glaucum  being 
a  popular  colic  remedy,  and  allied  to  the  Polygonaceae  Rheum  and 
Rumex,  Aphis  is  peculiar  in  being  the  only  remedy  which  has  tooth- 
ache >  by  sweat ;  though  Cham,  has  general  >  by  sweat. 

Belauons. — Compare:  i£thus.  (stool  after  rising  ;  pinching,  cut- 
ting before,  urging  after) ;  Nat.  sul.  (stool  after  rising,  with  discharge 


APHIS  CHENOPODII  GLAUCI  137 

of  wind) ;  Nox  v.  (frequent  urging  in  rectum  and  bladder) ;  Gelsem. 
(chills  up  and  down  the  back). 

STHPTOHS. 

s.  Head. — Head  confused  in  the  evening,  as  with  coryza ;  with  tran- 
sient heat  in  the  face,  great  pressure  and  tightening  in  the  forehead  or 
occtpot,  increased  by  motion,  with  sensation  of  cerebral  oscillation  in  the 
head,  tearing  shooting  in  the  teguments  of  the  head. 

3.  Eyes. — Burning  heat  in  the  eyelids  during  several  evenings. 

4.  Ears.— Tearing  pains,  sometimes  in  one  ear,  and  sometimes  in  the 
other. 

5.  Nose. — Pain  of  excoriation  in  the  nostrils.— Violent  sneezing,  some- 
times attended  by  a  pain,  as  of  excoriation,  in  the  larynx. — Coryza,  sometimes 
with  burning  and  smarting  at  the  edges  of  the  nostrils,  and  esp.  at  the  septum. 
—Fluent  coryza,  with  secretion  of  serous  mucus,  sometimes  also  at  night, 
with  pulse  accelerated  to  eighty-five  pulsations,  with  coldness  in  the  feet 
extending  to  the  knees,  and  shuddering  ail  down  the  back. 

0.  Face. — Colour  pale,  yellowish ;  heat  in  the  face,  with  head  confused 
as  by  coryza,  at  night — Dry  lips,  sometimes  esp.  in  the  morning. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Toothache  with  tearing  shootings,  at  first  in  a  hollow  molar 
tooth,  afterwards  in  all  the  teeth  of  the  right  side ;  extending  from  the  right 
side  to  the  ear,  the  temple,  and  the  cheek-bone. — Aggravation  of  the  tooth- 
ache in  bed,  which  is  mitigated  only  after  a  hot  and  general  perspiration, 
which  supervenes  at  a  later  period. — Nocturnal  tearing  pains  in  the  teeth, 
with  tearing  shootings  above  the  face  towards  morning. 

8,  g.  Mouth  and  Throat.— Painful  vesicles  at  the  end  of  the  tongue. 
—Dryness  of  the  mouth  and  of  the  throat,  sometimes  with  increased  mucous 
secretion ;  increase  in  the  secretion  of  saliva. — Great  quantity  of  mucus  in 
the  mouth  and  throat,  sometimes  with  a  sickly  taste,  and  with  a  constant 
necessity  for  hawking  and  expectoration. — Secretion  of  frothy  mucus  in  the 
mouth  and  throat. — Scraping  sensation  in  the  palate ;  burning  smarting ; 
incisive  burning,  prindpaliy  when  inspiring ;  inflammatory  redness. — In  the 
throat,  scraping  and  burning,  as  from  acrid  substances,  sometimes  with  a 
sensation  of  dryness  and  increase  of  mucous  secretion. 

10.  Appetite. — Dislike  to  meat  and  bread ;  frequent  thirst,  sometimes 
increasing  at  night,  or  produced  by  a  sensation  of  dryness  in  the  throat. — 
Frequent  risings,  most  frequently  empty,  or  else  with  a  taste  of  the  food  which 
has  been  eaten. 

IS.  Abdon&en.— •Frequent  pinching  pains  in  the  abdomen,  sometimes 
throo^out  the  night,  or  else  during  the  day,  with  necessity  to  go  to  stool,  and 
frequent  urinations. — Emission  of  wind. — Cutting  and  pinching  pains,  with 
borboiygmi  and  emission  of  wind. — Congestion  of  blood  towards  the 
abdominal  viscera. — Rumblings  of  flatus  in  the  abdomen,  with  frequent 
emission  of  wind. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Abortive  inclination  to  go  to  stool,  with  pressure 
00  die  bladder  and  rectum. — Loose  evacuations  of  the  consistency  of  liquid 
pap,  usually  accompanied  by  burning  at  the  anus,  and  a  recurrence  of  the 
necessity  to  go  to  stool,  or  else  with  pinchings  in  the  abdomen,  occasioned  by 


138  APIS 

flatulency  before  and  after  a  stool. — Liquid,  mucus-like  stools  in  the  morning, 
with  spots  of  blood,  pinchings  in  the  abdomen,  pressure  on  the  rectum,  and 
pressive  headache. — ^At  a  later  stage  the  stools  have  more  consistence,  but 
they  press  painfully  on  the  rectum  and  the  bladder,  and  are  sometimes 
attended  by  a  flow  of  sanguineous  mucus. — ^Tearing  shooting  in  the  rectum. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.--Tearing  shooting  in  the  bladder ;  pressure  on 
the  bladder,  sometimes,  esp.  during  an  abortive  efiFort  to  go  to  stool. — 
Irritation  in  the  urethra,  as  from  acridities,  compelling  frequent  urination. — 
Voluptuous  excitation  of  the  glans  penis. — Frequent  and  copious  secretion  of 
a  frothy  urine,  deep  yellow,  sometimes  with  an  acrid  sensation  in  the  urethra. 
— In  the  evening,  urine  red,  brownish,  frothy,  depositing  during  the  night  a 
thick,  yellowish  sediment. — In  urinating,  burning  in  the  urethra,  esp.  at  the 
orifice. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Burning  scraping  in  the  larynx,  as  from 
acrid  substances.— Burning  tickling,  or  lancinations,  esp.  in  the  open  air,  in  a 
damp,  cold  atmosphere,  with  continual  irritation  in  the  larynx,  which  causes 
coughing,  followed  by  expectoration  of  mucus. — ^Voice  frequently  rough  and 
smothered,  which  symptoms  are  removed  by  hawking. — Frequent  irritation  in 
the  larynx,  which  compels  coughing. — Dry  cough,  provoked  by  irritation  in 
the  throat. 

90.    Neck  and  Back.— Pain  in  the  left  shoulder-blade. 

21.  Limbs. — Bruise-like  pain  of  the  limbs,  with  tearing  shootings  in  the 
shoulders  and  the  upper  part  of  the  arms  (rheumatic  pains),  or  else  from 
the  knees  to  the  feet,  and  esp.  on  the  tibia  and  at  the  soles  of  the  feet. 

23.  Lovrer  Limbs. — Pulling  and  tearing  above  the  knee  in  the  morning, 
following  nocturnal  toothache. — Sensation  of  weariness  in  the  legs. — Coldness 
of  the  feet,  extending  to  the  knees.— Burning  lancinations  in  corns. 

24.  Generalities. — Pain  (rheumatic)  as  from  weariness  in  the  limbs, 
with  tearing,  shootings,  chiefly  in  the  temples,  the  ears,  and  teeth,  which  are 
hollow ;  as  well  as  in  the  shoulders,  the  upper  part  of  the  arms,  the  tibia,  and 
the  soles  of  the  feet ;  sensation  of  weariness,  esp.  m  the  legs,  weariness  and 
weakness  at  night. — ^The  limbs  feel  bruised. 

26.  Sleep. — Sleeplessness  at  night,  without  much  pain ;  lascivious 
dreams  with  pollutions. 

27.  Fever. — Frequent  shiverings  of  the  whole  surface  of  the  body, 
chiefly  of  the  back,  burning  in  the  palms  of  the  hands,  and  tendency  in  them 
to  perspire  in  the  morning ;  with  acceleration  of  pulse,  sometimes  principally 
in  the  evening;  with  fluent  coryza,  or  accelerated  and  wiry  pulse  in  the 
morning ;  with  hot  breath  and  dry  lips ;  with  great  tendency  to  perspire  in 
the  face,  in  the  morning;  in  the  morning,  in  bed,  hot  sweat,  or  general 
perspiration.  t 


Apis. 


Apium  virus.  Honey-bee  poison.  N.  O,  Insecta.  Tinctures  are 
made  of  ttie  whole  bee ;  and  of  dilutions  of  the  poison  with 
alcohol. 

GliniesL — Abscess,    AnkUs^  swelling  oj.    Apoplexy.    Asthma.    Bladder,  affec- 
tions of.   Carbuncle.  Chancre.  Constipation  ;  of  sucklings.   DiarrhoMU   Diphtheria. 


APIS  139 

Disaedkm  wvxmda.     Dropsy.    Ear^  erysipelas  cf.    Erysifelas.    Erythema  nodosum. 
Eyes,  agections  of;  optic  neuritis.    Feet^  burning  of.    Gangrene.    Gout.    Hands, 
swdlmg  of.    Heart,  affections  of.    Heat-spots.    Housemaitts  knee.    Hydrocephalus. 
Hjrdrottorojr.      Injuries.       Intermittent  fever.     Irritation.      Jealousy,    effects   of. 
3foiiiis,  synaoiHs,    Kidn^^  Brighfs  disease  of.    Labia,  inflammation  of.    Laryngitis. 
LtdiM.    Ifentfigtiis.     Menstruation,  derangements  of.    NettU-rash.     Nose^  redness 
cf.   Operations,  effects  of.    Ovaries^  pain  in ;  inflammation  of;  tumours  of.    Panari- 
tium.   Pannns.    Peritonitis,    Phlebitis.    Pleurisy.    Prostatitis.    Punctured  wounds. 
Red-gtMN,    Rheumatism.    Scarlatina.    Self-abuse.    Suppressed  eruptions,  effects  of. 
Spoos.  Syphilis.   Throat,  sore.  Tongue,  oedema  of;  ulceration  of.  Trachea,  irritation 
Of.  Tumours.    Typhus.    Urethritis.    Urine,  abnormalities  of.    Vaccination.    Vari- 
cose Tctns.    Variola.    Wounds. 

OlftraoteristieB.— The  well-known  effects   of   a  bee's  sting- 
burning,  stinging,  lancinating   pain  with    excessive    swelling — ^give 
leading  keynotes  for  its  employment  in  a  great  variety  of  conditions. 
In  addition  to  these  there  is  great  sensitiveness  of  the  surface  to 
touch.    General  soreness  :  "  every  hair  is  painful  to  contact."    Great 
debility  as  if  he  had  worked  hard  ;  is  compelled  to  lie  down.    Tired 
and  bruised  feeling.    Great  restlessness  and  fidgetiness  (the  Arscn. 
restlessness  is  more  from  mental  anxiety).    Trembling,  jerking,  and 
twitching.    One   half   of   the   body  twitching,  the  other  lame  or 
paralysed.     Hemiplegia.    Apis  is  more  a  right-side  medicine ;  symp- 
toms proceed  from  right  to  left  {Rhus  left  to  right)  and  from  above 
downwards.     In  an  involuntary  proving  of  Apis  in  a  woman  (of  forty, 
strong,  florid,  of  full  habit)  who  kept  bees  and  was  frequently  stung 
without  constitutional   effect,  the  following   marked  and  peculiar 
symptoms  were  occasionally  noted  in  addition  to  the  better  known 
ones  {ffew.  Eng.  Med.  Gaz.^  Nov.,  1887)  :  Stiffness  of  lower  jaw,  soon 
amounting  to  a  sense  of  complete  fixation.    This  stiffness  extended 
to  tongue  and  throat,  rendering  speech  difficult  and  unintelligible, 
and  causing  a  condition  of  extreme  discomfort,  the  stiffness  being 
accompanied  by  a  feeling  of  constriction,  which  excited  a  single, 
spasmodic,   hacking  cough  at  short   intervals.    Some  difiBculty  in 
breathing,  especially  in  inspiration.    These  symptoms  were  accom- 
panied by  a  terrible  restlessness.    On  a  later  occasion  there  was 
dyspnoea,  face  purple,  head  thrown  back.    The  same  symptoms  as 
above  recurred,  but  the  throat  was  more  swollen  and  the  distress 
extended  below  the  larvnx  to  the  upper  part  of  the  lung,  which  soon 
became  very  sore  and  sensitive.    An  hour  after  the  sting  on  this 
occasion  a  violent  cough  came  on.    It  seemed  to  be  excited  by  the 
constrictive  feeling  in  the  throat,  but  it  reached  down  to  the  sore 
place  in  the  lungs,  causing  great  distress.    It  was  a  deep,  hard, 
ringiag  cough,  lasting  without  intermission  for  three  hours.    Traces 
of  the  cough  and  soreness  lasted  for  months.    Another  symptom  was 
an  ominous  twitching  of  muscles  of  extremities  controlled  by  hot  foot 
and  hand  baths.    Ledum  gave  almost  instantaneous  relief  to  the 
gniver  symptoms. 

The  burning  symptoms  of  Apis  are  distinguished  from  those  of 
AnoL  in  being  <  by  heat.  The  stinging  appears  in  many  diseases 
and  conditions,  causing  the  **  eric  cMbraU  "  in  acute  hydrocephalus 
and  meningitis.  Stinging  pains  in  haemorrhoids.  "  Redness  and 
swelling  with  stinging  and  burning  pain  in  eyes,  eyelids,  ears,  face. 


140  APIS 

lips,  tongue,  throat,  anus,  testicles."  CEdema  of  the  throat  may  be 
accompanied  with  stinging  pains,  but  if  the  case  is  more  advanced  it 
may  be  absolutely  painless,  and  then  it  is  more  dangerous.  {BapL  has 
painlessness  in  throat  affections  but  less  oedema. — Nash.) 

Afns  has  slow  action   and   must   not   be  changed   too  soon. 
Increased  flow  of  urine  shows  it  is  having  a  favourable  effect.    The 
dropsies  of  Apis  are  characterised  by  a  waxy  hue  of  skin,  whitish 
or  yellowish ;    transparent  swelling  of   eyelids ;    bag-like  swelling 
under  eyes ;  surface  of  body  sore,  bruised,  or  burning.    In  cardiac 
dropsy  the  feet  swell  after  walking,  and  are  intolerably  sore  and 
burning.    In  chest  affections  there  is  sensation  of  contraction  {Loch.) 
and  inability  to  lie  down.    Tension,  swelling,  and  stifiFness  of  limbs. 
This  tight  sensation  is  manifested  in  another  symptom :  sensation 
in  abdomen  as  if  something  tight  would  break  if  too  much  effort 
was  made  to  void  a  constipated  stool.    Aversion  to  tight  things 
like    Loch.      Prostration   even    to    faintness.      Paralytic   weakness. 
Paralysis  (after   diphtheria   and  other  severe   diseases).    Nervous, 
restless,  over-sensitive  ,*  or  hot  and  drowsy,  with  or  without  thirst. 
<   From  touch  or  pressiu-e  (though  the  head  is  >  by  pressure). 
In  this  Apis  resembles  the  Antimonies,  and  it  is  like  them  in  sensitive- 
ness to  heat,  especially  to  heated    rooms   {Puls.f  tod..  Kali   iod., 
Camph,,  SecaUf  Suiph.) ;  <  by  warmth  of  bed.    Cold  water  >.    Many 
symptoms  (eyes  and  chest)  are  <  in  the  night,  and  sleep  is  disturbed 
by  piercing  cries,  or  else  by  moaning  and  whining.     <  In  morning  : 
mucus  in  mouth,  resUessness,  diarrhoea.    <  In  evening :  erysipelas, 
giddiness,  headache,  chills,  fever.   Many  symptoms  are  <  lying  down, 
and  >  sitting. 

Belattons.— Com^ar^ ;  Vespa  and  serpent  poisons.  Acet  ac. 
(dropsy) ;  Aco. ;  Anac.  (urticaria) ;  Apoc.  can.  (dropsy) ;  Am. 
(bruised,  sore  conditions)  ;  Ars.  (typhoid,  gangrene,  dropsies,  scarla- 
tina, urticaria,  chills) ;  Bell,  (meningitis,  sore  throat,  erysipelas, 
scarlatina) ;  Brom.  (swelling  of  ovary  during  menses) ;  Bry.  (meningitis, 
rheumatism)  ;  Canth.  (bums,  erysipelas,  urinary  symptoms) ;  Chi.  ; 
Colch. ;  Crot.  t.  (urticaria) ;  Euphras.  (conjunctiva)  j  Fer. ;  Graph. ; 
Hep. ;  Hyo. ;  lod.  (synovitis) ;  Lach. ;  Lye. ;  Merc.  ;  Nat.  ars.  ; 
Nat.  mur.  (chills,  urticaria,  tension  in  ovarian  region)  ;  Puis. ;  Rhus 
(eyes ;  but  Apis  has  less  tendency  to  suppuration  ;  vesicular  erysipelas 
but  darker  than  Apis  and  spreading  left  to  right — Apis  right  to  left ; 
typhoid,  restlessness,  but  Apis  is  more  fidgetiness)  ;  Rumex  (painless, 
greenish-yellow  morning  diarrhoea)  ;  Sabi. ;  Sep.  ;  Sillc.  (ovarian  affec- 
tions with  inverted  nipples  ;  ulcer  on  tongue ;  vaccination  effects) ; 
Urt.  ur. ;  Zn.  Antidotes :  to  medium  doses  and  poisonings  ;  Nat.  mur. 
in  all  forms  ;  sweet  oil ;  onions  ;  Ammonia  ;  Ipec.,  low.  (also  powdered 
Ipec.  applied  locally) ;  Lach.  ;  Ledum.  It  antidotes :  Canth.,  lod., 
Chi.,  Dig.  It  follows  well :  Bry.  (when  cephalic  cry  appears)  ;  Helleb. 
(when  torpor  sets  in) ;  lod..  Hep.,  Merc,  Lye,  Sul.  Is  followed  well 
by :  Graph,  (tetter  on  ear  lobe) ;  Kali  bi.  (scrofulous  ophthalmia)  ; 
Arsen.  (hydro-thorax) ;  Phos.  (diphtheria) ;  Stram.  (mania) ;  Lye. 
(staphyloma)  ;  Sul.  (hydrothorax,  pleurisy,  hydrocephalus) ;  lod. 
(swollen  knee).  Complementary :  Nat.  mur.  (the  **  chronic  "  of  Apis). 
Inimical :  Rhus  in  eraptive  diseases. 


APIS  141 

Gansatton. — Grief.  Fright.  Rage.  Vexation.  Jealousy.  (The 
queen  bee  is  the  most  jealous  thing  in  nature.)  Hearing  bad  news, 
mental  shock.    Suppressed  eruptions. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind.— The  brain  feels  paraljrsed.— Tubercular  meningitis.— -Im- 
paired memory. — Absent-minded. — Cannot  concentrate  thought — IndifFerence. 
—Torpor  and  apathy — ^Awkward,  lets  things  fall  and  laughs  sillily  at  the 
mishap.— (The  mental  symptoms  are  rich  in  unconsciousness,  absent-minded- 
Dess»  impaired  memory,  and  slow  march  of  ideas.) — Loss  of  consciousness. — 
Great  tearfulness ;  cannot  Jielp  crying. — Children  constantly  whining. — 
Screaming,  sudden  outcry  during  sleep. — Busy,  restless,  continually  changing 
his  occupation. — Cannot  bear  to  be  left  alone. — Hysteria. — In  women  : 
jealousy ;  mania  from  sexual  irritation. — Depression,  feels  as  if  about  to  die 
(without  fear  of  death). — Delirium,  low  muttering. — Delirium,  after  suppressed 
scarlet  eruption. — Irritation. — Premonition  of  death,  thinks  it  is  about  to 
transpire.— Dread  of  death ;  sensation  as  if  he  could  not  breathe  again. — Fear 
of  being  poisoned. 

2.  Head. — Giddiness :  when  sitting  standing,  lying,  when  closing  the 
eyes ;  with  nausea  and  headache. — Congestion  to  the  head,  with  suppressed 
menstruation. — ^Pressing  pain  in  forehead  and  temples ;  <  rising ;  in  warm 
bed;  >  pressing  the  forehead  together. — ^The  brain  feels  tired — Sudden 
stabbing  and  stinging  pains. — Aching  in  1.  temple. — Hydrocephalus  in 
children,  and  apoplexy  in  old  persons. — Hydrocephalus ;  scalp  very  sensitive ; 
copious  sweat  of  head ;  child  lies  in  torpor,  delirium  interrupted  by  shrill 
cries,  boring  head  deep  in  pillow,  rolls  it  from  side  to  side. — Convulsed  on 
one  side  of  the  body,  paralysed  the  other  ;  squinting  grinding  of  teeth,  urine 
scanty  (milky). 

3.  Eyes. — Burning,  stinging  shooting,  piercing  pains  in  and  about  tlie 
eyes. — ^Aching  over  r.  eye  extending  to  r.  eyeball. — ^Twitching  of  eyeballs. — 
S^hyloma. — Cornea  thick,  having  dark,  smoky,  spots;  greyish,  smoky, 
opaque. — Keratitis. — Conjunctiva  reddened,  chemosed,  lids  everted. — Sensa- 
tion of  mucus  in  the  eyes. — Itching  in  eyes  and  lachr3nnation. — ^Weakness  of 
the  eyes,  with  pain,  photophobia,  and  increased  secretions. — ^Agglutination  of 
the  lids. — OBdematous  swelling  of  eyelids ;  bags  under  eyes  ;  upper  lids  hang 
over  like  sacs. — Styes  with  stinging  pains ;  smoky  darkness  before  the  eyes. 

4.  Ears. — Redness  and  swelling  of  both  ears. — Erysipelas  ;  otitis  after 
scarlatina ;  hardness  of  hearing. 

5.  Nose. — Swollen,  red,  oedematous. — Coryza,  worse  from  warmth; 
dironic  catarrh  with  crusty  nostrils ;  polypus. 

6.  Face. — (Edematous  swelling  of  the  face ;  red  and  hot,  swollen  so  as 
to  be  unrecognisable,  with  piercing  and  burning  pain  ;  waxy,  pale. — Happy 
expression  of  face ;  or  terror  ;  or  apathy. — Burning,  stinging  heat  in  the  face 
with  purple  colour.  —Erysipelas  of  the  face. — Erysipelas  of  the  face,  with 
fever,  coated  tongue. — Erysipelas  going  r.  to  1.  {Rhus  1.  to  r.) — ^Jaws  stiff,  with 
stiff  tongue  and  impossibility  of  intelligible  speech. 

7.  Teeth. — Grinding  of  the  teeth  ;  sudden  and  involuntary  biting  them 
togedier ;  covered  with  yellow  mucus  or  brown  sordes. 


142  APIS 

8.  Mouth. — Lips  oDdematous ;  upper  lip  swollen,  hot  and  red^-Mooth 
red,  burning,  stinging,  scalding. — Dryness  of  tongue,  mouth,  and  throat; 
fiery  redness  of  buccal  cavity,  with  painful  tenderness.— Dry,  swollen,  in- 
flamed tongue,  with  inability  to  swallow.-— White,  dry  tongue  (with  diarrhoea). 
— ^Tongue :  can  hardly  be  protruded  ;  hangs  from  the  mouth  ;  cancer  of. — 
Swollen  tongue ;  shining. — Borders  blistered ;  feel  as  if  scalded  and  quite 
raw.— Ulcer  in  L  border  (r.  Si/tc,  rAu/.)— Tongue  swollen,  dry,  cracked, 
sore,  ulcerated,  or  covered  with  vesicles.— Viscid,  tough,  frothy,  saliva. — 
Gums  sacculated  and  look  watery. — Fetor  of  breath,  with  headache. 

9.  Throat. — Throat  has  appearance  as  if  stung. — Dryness  in  the  throat 
with  heat,  without  thirst.— Burning,  stinging  in  throat. — Erysipelatous. — 
Glossy  red  varnish. — Inflammation  of  the  throat,  with  swelling,  redness,  and 
stinging  pains. — Ulcerated  sore  throat  (in  scarlet  fever,  when  the  eruption 
does  not  come  out). — Diphtheritic  sore  throat  gets  well  as  a  scarlatina 
rash  develops. — Throat  swollen  inside  and  outside ;  hoarse,  sense  of  con- 
striction ;  breathing  and  swallowing  diflicult — Ulcers  on  the  tonsils,  palate, 
&c. — Uvula  long  and  dropsical. — Sensation  of  foreign  body  Or  fishbone  in 
the  throat ;  of  constriction. — Paralysis. — Small,  clear,  watery  blisters  on  the 
back  part  of  the  throat. 

II.  Stomach.— No  thirst  with  the  heat.— Thirstlessness  (with  dropsy). — 
Vomiting  of  bile.— Vomiting,  with  inflammation  of  the  stomach. — ^Vomiting, 
with  diarrhoea. — Burning  heat  in  the  stomach. — Great  soreness  in  pit  of 
stomach  when  touched. — ^Violent  pain  and  sensitiveness  in  region  of  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Great  sensitiveness  of  the  abdomen  to  touch. — Soreness 
of  the  bowels  and  abdominal  walls ;  mornings  when  sneezing  or  pressing  upon 
them. — Sensitiveness  of  epigastrium  and  whole  abdomen  to  touch;  <rf  r. 
inguinal  region ;  across  hypogastrium  from  ilium  to  ilium. — Pain  in  abdomen 
on  pressure,  touch  and  horizontal  position,  with  sensitiveness. — Peritonitis. — 
Erysipelas  from  contusion. — Rumbling  and  meteoric  distension. — ^Ascites  and 
anasarca. — Hard  swelling  in  the  r.  groin,  oblong,  as  large  as  a  cucumber. — 
Long-standing  inguinal  hernia. — Collapse  of  abdominal  walls  in  meningitis 
infantum. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Sensation  of  rawness  in  the  anus,  with  diarrhoea. 
—Discharge  of  flatus  before  stool. — Diarrhoea  :  during  fevers ;  from  heat ;  in 
debilitated  children  ;  from  irritability  of  brain  (hydrocephaloid).— Diarrhoea, 
yellowish-green,  with  mucus,  esp.  in  the  morning. — Stool  thin,  watery, 
yellow,  <  in  morning ;  may  or  may  not  be  ofiFensive. — Stools  smelling  very 
ofEensively. — Diarrhoea  and  vomiting. — Diarrhoea  is  copious,  blackish-brown, 
green,  or  whitish ;  orange-coloured ;  greenish,  yellow  mucus  ;  yellow  watery  ; 
soft  and  pappy,  mixed  with  serum ;  thin  yellow. — At  every  motion  of 
body  bowels  act  as  though  he  had  no  power. — Uncertain  anus ;  constantly 
open  (during  urination),  oozing  of  liquid  {Phos,,  Phos,  oc.). — Swelling  of  anus. 
— Haemorrhoids,  with  stinging  pains. — Constipation,  with  feeling  as  if  some- 
thing would  break  if  he  continued  to  strain. — Stools  involuntary  and  painless, 
or  painful  and  urging,  olive-green,  profuse,  and  full  of  red  lumps,  like 
chopped  beets ;  bloody,  painless ;  smell  brassy  or  like  carrion ;  very  offensive. 
— Protruding  varices,  which  sting,  burn,  and  smart  intolerably. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Burning  soreness  when  urinating. — Strangury. 
— Pain  in  region  of  kidneys ;  soreness  on  pressure  or  when   stooping. — 


APIS  143 

Frequent  desire,  'with  passage  of  only  a  few  drops. — Urine  scanty  and  high- 
cokxred;  with  thirstlessness. — Incontinence  of  urine  from  coughing  and 
other  circiimstanoe& — Urine  suppressed. — ^Too  profuse  discharge  of  urine.— 
Freqaent  and  pro£usi&  urination. — ^Albuminuria  of  scarlatina. — (Increase  of 
urine  under  Apis  sho^xrs  that  the  medicine  is  acting  well.) — Burning  and 
sdnging  in  the  urethra. — Burning  and  smarting  in  the  urethra,  as  if  it  were 
scalded. — Bladder  very  painful,  often  tenesmus  after  urinating. — Urine  often 
bloody ;  milky  appearance ;  very  dark  and  frothy ;  very  fetid ;  sediment 
reddish-brown,  like  coffee  grounc^. 

15.  Male  Sexua.1  Organs. — Sexual  desire  increased. — Chancre  with 
stingHig  pains  like  bee*stings,  and  with  a  highly  inflamed  circumference. — 
Pains  and  swellings  of  testes  and  prostate. — Dropsy  of  the  scrotum  and 
prepuce ;  hydrocele. 

A    Female  Sexual  Organs.— Amenorrhcea  or  menorrhagia.— Inflam- 
mation, induration,  swelling,  and  dropsy  of  the  ovaries  (r.) — ^Weight  and  pain 
in  either  ovarian  region,  predominantly  r.  side. — The  ovaries  feel  better  by 
lying  on  r.  side. — Enlargement  of  the  r.  ovary  with  pain  in  the  1.  pectoral 
rc^on  and  cough. — ^Sbarp,  cutting,  stinging  pain  in  the  swollen  (r.)  ovary  ; 
worse  during  menstruation. — Ovarian  tumours,  with  stinging  pains  like  bee- 
stings^—Metritis,  peritonitis,  with  stinging,  thrusting  pains. — Pressing-down 
pain  in  the  oterus. — Bearing-down,  with  sensation  as  before  menses. — Dropsy 
of  the  ovaries  (r.)  ;  dropsy  of  the  uterus. — Strained  pain  1.  ovary. — Menstrua- 
tion suppressed  or  diminished,  with  congestion  to  the  head. — Labour-like, 
bearing-down    pains,   followed  by  dark,  bloody  mucus.— Threatened  mis- 
carnage  in  the  early  months,  with  heaviness  of  the  abdomen,  restlessness,  and 
3pwning. — ^Abortion. — ^Abortion  during    the   early  months. — Dropsy  in  the 
latter  part  of  pregnancy  attended  with  puerperal  convulsions. — Ulceration  and 
engorgement  of  os  uteri. — Large  and  painful  swelling  of  the  labia,  with  heat 
and  stinging  pains.— Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  the  breasts. — Swelling 
and  hardness  of  the  mammas  threatening  to  ulcerate. — Scirrhus  or  open  cancer 
of  the  manmiae,  with  stinging,  burning  pains. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs.— Irritation  to  cough  in  the  supra-sternal 
fossa. — Hoarseness. — Hoarseness  in  the  morning— Respiration  hurried  and 
difitodt  (with  fever  and  headache).— OBdema  glottidis. — ^Asthma ;  worse  in 
ookl  weather. — Croupy   cough. — Obstinate  night   cough  from  9  p.m.,  to 
4  ajn.-^Congh  which  loosens  with  difficulty,  rouses  from  sleep  before  mid- 
mi^  and  ceases  as  soon  as  least  particle  is  loosened,  which  is  swallowed. — 
Feeling  of  constriction  causing  a  single,  spasmodic,  hacking  cough  at  short 
intervals.— Violent  cough,  deep,  hard  ringing;  incessant  for  three  hours; 
eicited  by  constricted  feeling  in  throat,  but  reaching  down  to  lungs,  the 
upper  part  of  which  are  very  sore  and  sensitive. — Dyspnoea ;  esp.  difficult 
inspiration. 

tL  Chest. — Hydrothorax. — Sensation  of  soreness  in  the  chest,  as  from 
a  famise.— Oppression  of  the  chest,  shortness  of  breath,  esp.  when  ascend- 
ing ;  inability  to  remain  in  a  warm  room. — Dull,  aching  pain  in  the  1.  side 
of  the  chest,  near  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  with  sensation  of  fulness  in 
the  chest  and  short  breath.— Expectoration  of  copious,  transparent,  frothy, 
bloody  mucus.— Stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest  and  through  back. — Burning, 
stinging  pain  through  entire  front  of  chest. — Melting  heat  in  region  of 


144  APIS 

diaphragm,  as  from  rwming  violently. — Every  shock  from  coughing  gives 
pain  in  the  head  and  some  pain  through  the  chest,  as  from  the  clavicle ; 
>  after  loosening  a  small  portion  of  mucus,  or  a  large  quantity  of  transparent, 
frothy,  and  bloody  mucus  is  expectorated. 

19.  Heart.— Sudden  pain  just  below  the  heart,  soon  extending  toward  r. 
chest,  with  suffocation.— Very  feeble  action  of  the  heart;  violent  beats, 
shaking  the  whole  body;  intermittent  beats. — Region  of  heart  sensitive  to 
least  pressure ;  rasping  sounds  of  systole  and  diastole  unmistakably  audible. 
— Palpitation  of  heart  from  scanty  secretion  of  urine,  perfectly  cured  by 
establishing  the  natural  quantity. — Pulse :  almost  imperceptible  at  wrist ; 
accelerated  and  full ;  very  frequent  and  hard ;  wiry ;  irregular  and  slow  pulse ; 
intermittent. 

20.  Back. — Rheumatic  pain  in  back  and  limbs. — Cerebro-spinal  menin- 
gitis. 

aa.  Upper  Limbs.— Hands  bluish,  and  inclined  to  be  cold.— (Edema  of 
the  hands. — Sensation  of  numbness  in  fingers,  esp.  the  tips  about  the  roots 
of  nails. — Panaritium  with  burning,  stinging,  and  throbbing,  very  sensitive 
to  touch. 

23.  Lower  Limbs.— Cold  legs.— Sensation  in  the  toes  and  whole  foot, 
as  if  too  large ;  swollen  and  stiff. — Legs  (ankles)  and  feet  waxy,  pale,  and 
oedematous. — Burning  in  the  toes  with  redness;  feet  cold. — Suppressed 
perspiration  of  the  feet. — Numbness  and  coldness  of  feet,  even  paralysis. — 
Dropsy  of  limbs  in  diphtheritic  albuminuria. — Puffy  swelling  of  the  knees. 

24.  Generalities. — Great  debility,  as  if  he  had  worked  hard;  he  is 
obliged  to  lie  down. — Sudden  "puf&ng  up"  of  the  whole  body.— Tired,  as 
if  bruised  in  every  limb,  and  esp.  in  the  back,  as  after  exertion;  worse 
on  rising  after  sitting.^Oomplete  anasarca,  no  thirst,  pale,  waxy,  almost 
transparent. — Burning,  stinging  pains,  like  bee-stings,  occurring  occasionally. 
— Great  sensitiveness  to  touch  and  pressure  (abdomen). — Clonic  and  tonic 
spasms. — Sudden  weakness  with  coldness. — Tension  (over  the  eyes  in  the 
1.  side  of  head)  behind  the  ears,  in  the  neck. — Dark  haemorrhages. 

25.  Skin. — CEdematous  swellings. — Skin  usually  white,  almost  trans- 
parent (ovarian  dropsy). — Hives. — Urticaria  like  bee-stings,  or  stings  from 
other  insects,  with  intolerable  itching  at  night. — Carbuncles,  with  burning, 
stinging  pains. — Eruption  like  nettle-rash  over  the  whole  body.— Erysipelas ; 
with  gangrenous  spots.— Swelling  and  dry  erysipelatous  redness. — Scarlet 
eruptions. — Body  covered  with  large,  elevated,  white  wheals. — Panaritium 
(burning,  stinging). — Boils  and  swellingsof  all  descriptions  with  stinging  pains. 

26.  Sleep.— Much  yawning.— Great  desire  to  sleep ;  extreme  sleepiness. 
— Sleep  disturbed  by  many  dreams. — Dreams  full  of  care  and  toil ;  of  making 
long  journeys ;  of  flying  through  the  air ;  of  hot  stones ;  of  walking  over  hot 
floors ;  of  walking  a  long  way  over  wet  roads. — Sleep,  late  in  the  morning.— 
Awakens  from  sleep  with  a  shrill  shriek  (child  suffering  from  hydrocephalus). 

27.  Fever — Pulse  full  and  rapid;  small  and  trembling;  intermitting. 
—Chill,  mostly  towards  the  evening  (3-4  p.m.).— Chilliness  from  the  least 
movement,  with  heat  of  the  face  and  hands ;  runs  down  the  back  with  great 
prostration. — During  hot  stage  more  or  less  violent  headache ;  generally  a 
continuous  deep  sleep.— Heat  with  thirst,  wishes  to  uncover. — Dry  heat 
towards  evening  with  sleepiness.— Sweating  stage  either  absent  or  of  a  very 


APIUM   GRAVEOLENS  145 

hgfU  grade.— The  sensation  of  heat  is  more  felt  about  the  pit  of  the  stomach 
and  in  the  chest — Perspiration,  alternating  with  dryness  of  the  skin.— Much 
burning  of  the  skin  on  various  parts  of  the  body.— Thirst  wanting  during 
sweat ;  may  or  may  not  be  present  during  heat ;  always  thirst  during  chill. 
—Sweat  after  trembling  and  fainting,  then  nettlerash.— After  the  fever 
paroxysm,  sleep. — Apyrexia :  urine  scanty;  feet  swollen;  limbs  sore; 
restless;  urticaria. 


Apinm  Grayeolens. 

Celery.    N.  O.  UmbelliferaB.    Tincture  of  seeds.    Tincture  of  sticks. 

GUhImL— Fidgets.     Headache.     Heartburn.     Otorrhoea.    Post-nasal  catarrh. 
Rnmination,    Toothache.    Urine,  retention  of.    Urticaria. 

CStarMterifltios. — A  proving  of  tincture  of  seeds  produced  the 
following  symptoms  :  Unpleasant  feeling  at  stomach,  with  belchings 
tasting  of  celery.  Heartburn.  Spitting  up  of  food.  Gone  feeling  at 
pit  of  stomach  lasting  for  hours  and  paiiially  relieved  by  eating. — 
E£Fects  of  eating  the  root :  during  the  following  day  and  night,  most 
obstinate  retention  of  urine,  which  could  only  be  relieved  by  the 
catheter.  On  another  person  this  was  observed  :  Inability  to  sit  still 
or  lie  still  in  bed  from  feeling  of  ''  fidgets  "  ;  cannot  keep  mind  from 
thinking.  In  a  proving  under  the  direction  of  W.  P.  Wesselhoeft 
{Med.  Advance,  April,  1886)  a  remarkable  symptom  was  :  a  dull  ache 
in  sacrum  <  when  lying  down,  >  when  moving  about.  Another 
symptom  was  '^  sensation  as  if  both  eyes  were  sunken  back  into  their 
sockets."  Throbbing  headaches,  <  by  slightest  motion  ;  >  by  rest, 
mostly  left-sided.  Urticaria,  always  appearing  with  shuddering ;  in- 
tense stinging  itching  with  rapid  change  of  location.  Pressure  in 
stomach  preceding  urticaria,  and  relieved  when  it  appears.  Toothache 
in  leSt  molars  >  by  holding  cold  water  in  the  mouth.  Hering  cured 
with  Apium  g.  an  old  abscess  near  the  umbilicus.  Allen  mentions  : 
*' Profuse  discharge  from  granulating  ulcers,  intense  constriction 
over  sternum,  with  drawing  feeling  through  to  back  on  lying  down," 
as  having  been  cured  by  it 

STHPT0M8. 

r.    Mind. — Cannot  keep  mind  from  thinking. 

s.  Head. — Frontal  headache;  over  r.  eye  and  r.  temple;  <  during 
ni^t. — ^Doll  pain  r.  temple  with  nausea. — Pain  in  1.  temple  spreads  over  1. 
side  of  face  and  top  of  head. — Pain  as  from  a  jar  or  blow  deep  in  1.  temporal 
rcgioii,  a  throbbing  ache. — Painful  throbbing  <  by  expiring  through  nose.— 
Headaches :  >  while  eating;  in  open  air;  closing  eyes;  complete  rest 
drinking  cold  water ;  by  hot  compresses.  <  After  eating ;  by  light ;  by  read- 
ing or  studying ;  by  slightest  motion  or  nodding  head. 

3.    Eyes. — Eyeballs  feel  as  if  sunken  into  sockets. 

4*    Ears. — Partial  deafness  «  1.),  painless  pulsation. — Troublesome 
otorrhcea. 

VOL,  L  II 


146      APOCYNUM   ANDROSiEMIFOLIUM 

5.  Nose.— Tough  pearl-coloured  discharge  from  nostrils. — Sudden  drop- 
ping of  mucus  into  posterior  nares. — Tickling  in  nostrils  with  sneezing,  fore- 
noon.—Tickling  in  r.  nostril  with  watery  discharge  and  sneezing. — Nostrils 
stu£Fed,  with  pain  in  forehead. 

8.  Mouth.— Sore  spot  on  tip  of  tongue.— Dull,  sore  pain  on  upper  and 
lower  teeth. — ^Toothache  >  by  cold  water. 

g.  Throat. — Soft  palate  and  fauces  sore,  dark  red  and  swollen. — Air 
rushing  down  posteri<»'  nares  hurts  back  of  throat. 

II.  Stomach. — Unpleasant  feeling  at  stomach  with  belchings  tasting  of 
celery. — Heartburn. — Spitting  up  of  food. — Sore  feeling  at  pit  of  stomach 
lasting  for  hours  and  partially  relieved  by  eating. — Desire  for  oranges ;  for 
oatmeal. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Three  urgent  well-formed  stools  during  the  day. 
— Before  stool  sharp  pain  from  abdomen  directly  into  rectum,  with  feeling 
that  she  cannot  retain  stool  a  moment 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Obstinate  retention  of  urine,  could  only  be 
relieved  by  catheter. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — ^Tickling  in  top  of  windpipe  causing  dry 
cough.— Wheezing  breathing  during  the  night.— Can  count  heart-beats  by 
hearing  and  feeling  it  in  chest. 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — Muscles  of  back  of  neck  painful  on  motion,  sore 
to  pressure. — Dull  pain  in  sacrum  with  slight  bellyache. — Pain  in  sacrum 
more  to  1.  side  extending  to  lumbar  region. — Pain  in  sacrum  >  after  rising 
from  bed  and  moving  about ;  <  lying  down. — Red,  intensely  itching  blotches 
on  1.  sacral  region. 

83.  LiOvrer  Limbs. — Growing  pains  in  r.  leg  during  night. — Burning  on 
inside  of  thighs. — Raw,  excoriated  surfaces  on  inner  thighs  extending  into 
groins,  <  1.  side. — Red  itching  blotches  on  inside  1.  foot,  and  outside  ankle. 

84.  Generalities. — Inability  to  sit  still,  or  lie  still  in  bed  from  feeling  of 
fidgets ;  cannot  keep  mind  from  thinking. 

25.  Skin. — Itching  on  all  parts. — Red  elevated  pimples  like  stings  of 
insects;  intense  itching;  itching  changes  location  by  scratching;  <  after 
undressing  in  evening;  during  night  till  4  a.m. 

s6.  Sleep.— Sleepless ;  not  fatigued  by  loss  of  sleep. — Sleep  broken  by 
bruised  pain  in  1.  temporal  region. 

97.    Fever. — Perspiration  on  forehead  on  awaking  4  a.m. 


Apocynnm  AndrossBmifolinm. 

Spreading  Dogbane.    N.  O.  Apocynaceae.    Tincture  from  the  root 

Clinioal. — Diarrhoea.    Dropsy.    Nausea.    Neuralgia  of  face.    Vomiting.    Wan- 
dering rheumatism.    Worms. 

ChaFaoteristios. — It  has  been  proved  in  large  doses,  and  its  most 
prominent  symptoms  are  :  Trembling  of  the  body.  Prostration  and 
trembling.    Swollen  sensations  of  face  and  body.    Swelling  of  hands 


APOCYNUM  CANNABINUM  147 

and  feet ;  shomng  its  relation  to  dropsical  states  like  Apoc.  can.  and 
SUoph.  Heaviness  with  great  desire  to  sleep.  Flying  pains  in 
diflFerent  parts.  Itching  of  body  and  face.  Acute  rheumatism  with 
great  stiffness.  General  rheumatic  pains.  Profuse  sweat  of  whole 
body.  The  {lains  go  from  above  downward  ;  are  <  when  breathing  ; 
and  on  turning  to  left  side.  Hale  has  cured  with  it  rheumatic  gout : 
'*  Acute  pains  in  the  joints  attended  with  cramps,  bilious  stools  and 
flying  pains  in  the  teeth.  The  tincture  in  drop-doses  has  been  known 
to  eaqpel  ascandes  and  other  worms."  It  has  been  used  for  expelling 
renal  calculi  and  gravel. 

SelatioiiB. — Compare :  Bry.  Iris.,  Colch.,  Benz.  ac.    Also  Apoc. 
can.,  Alston.,  Stroph.  (botan). 

SYMPTOMS. 

a.    Head. — Pains  and  stiffness  in  back  of  head  and  neck. 
S.    Nose. — Everything  smelled  like  honey. 
(L    Face. — Twitching  in  face. — ^Violent  pain  in  1.  zygoma. 
7, 8.    Teeth  and  Mouth.—Pains  in  all  teeth  of  1.  lower  jaw. — Most 
deliglitfnl  taste  in  the  mouth. 

II,  IS.  Stomach  and  Atxlomen.— Vomiting  and  purging;  >  from 
copious  evacuation. — Shooting  pain  in  1.  groin. — Constipation. 

14,  iG.  Urinary  and  Sexual  Organs.-— Profuse  flow  of  clear  urine.— 
Profuse  menstruation  lasting  eight  days  with  violent  pressing  pain. 

SI.  Umbs. — Swelling  of  hands  and  feet. — Most  violent  pains  in  all  the 
joints. — ^Mnch  pain  in  knee  and  r.  shoulder. — Cramps  and  burning  in  soles. — 
Severe  pain  in  joint  of  L  big  toe. 


Apocynom  Gannabinum. 

Indian  (American)  Hemp.  N.  O.  Apocynaceae.  Provings  were  made 
with  fresh  plant-tinctures,  or  fresh  or  powdered  root-tinctures 
or  infusions.  Watery  infusions  (with  just  enough  spirit  to  keep 
them  from  fermenting)  are  said  to  be  more  efficadous  than 
tinctures.  The  whole  fresh  plant,  root  included,  should  be 
used  for  making  the  tinctiure  or  infusion. 

OttaiMl. — Ascites.  Catarrh.  Coryza.  Diabetes  insipidus.  Diarrhcea.  Dropsies, 
EnoRsis.  Heart,  affections  of.  Hydrocephalus.  Menorrhagia.  Metrorrhagia. 
Naotea.    Neuralgia.    Snuffles.    Tobacco-heart    Urinary  difficulties.    Vomiting. 

CSiajrausteristios. — ^The  clinical  effects  of  Sirophanihus  and  the 
symptoms  produced  on  patients  to  whom  it  has  been  given  in  large 
doses,  clearly  show  the  relationship  between  it  and  Apocynum.  Both 
produce  intense  gastric  disturbance,  extreme  depression  of  the  heart's 
action,  and  both  control  dropsical  efiFusions  and  produce  diuresis. 
Apo.  c.  depresses  the  heart,  kidneys,  and  intestines,  relaxing  sphincters. 
It  causes  an  intense  sinking  sensation  ;  drowsiness  and  a  bewildered 
state  of  mind.    Dizziness.    Haemorrhages.    The  dropsies  of  Apocynutn 


BOSTON  UXIVI:R^lTy 


SchocI  cf  .'.Isuicijic. 


148  APOCYNUM   CANNABINUM 

are  general  dropsies  with  or  without  organic  disease ;  swelling  of 
every  part  of  the  body;  cardiac  dropsies.  The  excretions  are 
diminished,  especially  urine  and  sweat.  Hydrocephalus  has  been 
cured  with  it :  '*  Child  lying  in  stupor,  with  constant  involuntary 
motion  of  one  arm  and  leg."  "  Paralysis  of  left  side  ;  one  eye  motion- 
less, one  rolling." 

Three  cases  of  neuralgia  of  the  right  side — ^groin,  hip,  and  in  one 
case  region  of  right  kidney — have  been  cured  with  this  remedy.  All 
were  violent,  extorting  cries.  In  one  case  the  pain  set  in  very  sud- 
denly and  the  shghtest  jar  aggravated.  Hale  says  the  kidneys  are  the 
peculiar  seat  of  the  operation  of  the  drug,  and  that  it  is  in  renal 
dropsies  that  it  is  especially  curative.  It  has  cured  diabetes  insipidus 
with  "  a  sense  of  sinking  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  with  great  debility." 
Haemorrhages,  especially  menorrhagia,  and  haemorrhages  at  the  change 
of  life  have  been  cured  with  it.  Hale  has  found  it  restore  the  menses 
when  given  in  cases  of  dropsy. 

Diarrhoea  is  <  immediately  after  eating.  Food  or  water  is 
immediately  ejected,  though  hungry.  There  is  <  on  waking  in  the 
morning.    Many  of  the  symptoms  are  <  after  sleep. 

BsSMonB*'--Cotnpare :  Apoc.  andr.,  Alstonia  const,  Strophanth., 
Acet  ac,  Apis  (thirsUess  in  dropsies),  Arsen.,  Bell.,  Bry.,  Chi.,  Colch., 
Digit,  (dropsy  ;  slow  pulse),  Elat.,  Helleb.  (hydrocephalus ;  ascites) ; 
Alo.,  Gamb.,  and  Trombid.  (diarrhoea),  K.  ca..  Lye,  Merc,  Merc.  suL, 
the  Loganiaceae — Nux  v.,  I^at.,  Curare  ;  Spig.,  Scill.,  Sul.,  Verat. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Bewildered ;  nervous,  low-spirited. 

2.  Head. — Dizzy.— Very  marked  piercing  pain  in  r.  temple  followed  by 
vertigo. — ^Vertigo  suddenly  appearing  and  disappearing. — Hydrocephalus: 
stupor,  sight  of  one  eye  totally  lost,  the  other  nearly  so ;  forehead  projecting ; 
sutures  open ;  stage  oi  exudation. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  inflamed ;  <  morning  and  evening. — As  if  sand  in 
them. 

5.  Nose. — ^Violent  coryza. — Nose  and  throat  filled  with  thick  yellow 
mucus  on  waking  in  morning. — ("Snuffles"  in  infants.) — Peculiar  dryness  of 
mucous  membranes  of  nose  with  sensation  of  sti£Fness,  followed  by  secretion 
of  thick  yellow  mucus,  preceded  in  some  cases  by  a  thin,  irritating  discharge. 

6.  Face. — Face  pale,  covered  with  cold  sweat  (diarrhoea). — Dry  lips. 

8.  Mouth. — Dry  tongue,  immoderate  thirst.— Tongue  coated. — Constant 
spitting,  increase  of  mucus  and  saliva. 

II.  Stomach. — ^Thirst  on  waking. — Great  thirst;  but  water  disagrees, 
causing  pain,  and  is  immediately  thrown  o£F  {An,), — Cannot  tolerate  food  or 
drink,  which  is  immediately  ejected. — Distension  after  a  moderate  meal. — 
Feels  hungry,  but  when  she  eats  it  settles  in  epigastrium,  turns  sour,  and 
hurts. — Extreme  epigastric  sinking. — Oppression  at  epigastrium  and  chest 
excessive,  can  hardly  get  breath  enough  to  smoke  a  cigar. — ^Ascites,  often  with 
chronic  diarrhoea. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Gentle  diarrhoea  in  the  morning,  no  pain. — Diar- 
rhoea explosive,  involuntary  immediately  after  eating. — Stool  copious,  3rellow 


APOMORPHINUM  i49 

or  brownish,  like  mush ;  sometimes  containing  undigested  food. — Extreme 
prostration  after  stool. — Constipation  though  fasces  not  hard. — Piles  with 
feeling  as  of  a  wedge  being  hammered  into  anus. — ^Tenesmus  of  rectum. — 
Bearing-down  pain  in  anus. — ^Evacuations  very  .  scanty. — ^Watery  stools. — 
Symptoms  always  inmiediately  after  eating. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urinary  organs  torpid,  urine  scanty,  but  flows 
as  easily  as  oil. — Severe  expulsive  pains  of  bladder. — Urine  copious  and 
afanost  invduntaiy  from  relaxed  sphincters. — Profuse  light-coloured  urine ;  no 
»diment — Enuresis. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Penis  and  scrotum  swollen,  dropsical. 

xfi.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Exhausting  monorrhagia  (continuous 
or  paroocysmal). — Blood  expelled  in  large  clots,  sometimes  in  fluid  state. — 
AmeoGcrhoea  in  young  girls ;  abdomen  and  legs  bloated. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Oppression ;  can  scarcely  speak ;  speaks  in 
sharp  staccato ;  must  take  deep  breatiis.— Violent  hoarse  cough,  <  at  night. 
— Haemoptysis. — Cough  short  and  dry,  loose  and  rattling,  with  oppression. — 
Shortt  unsatisfactory  respirations. 

19.  Heart. — Flutterings,  dartings,  prostrated  feeling  in  cardiac  region. — 
Quick,  sharp,  catching  pain  in  heart  with  palpitation. — Pulse  slow,  laboured.-— 
Irregular,  intermittent,  at  times  feeble,  then  slow. — Pulse  quick,  feeble  when 
moved.— Fainting  on  moving  the  head. — Palpitation  troublesome  on  walking; 
heart  action  scarcely  perceptible. 

SI.  I«unt>8. — Rheumatic  condition. — ^Joints  stiff,  esp.  on  moving  in  the 
morning.— Constant  involuntary  motion  of  one  leg  and  one  arm. 

sa.    Upper  Umbs. — Finger  nails  of  bluish  red  colour. 

13.  Lower  Limbs. — Aching  in  both  knees. — CEdema  of  feet,  ankles,  and 

^^ 

14.  Generalities. — Excretions  diminished,  esp.  urine  and  sweat. 

A  Sleep. — ^Drowsy  in  afternoon,  restless  at  night — Stupor.-— On  going 
ta  bed  desire  to  sleep,  but  inability  to  do  so.-— Drowsy  before  and  after  nausea 
aad  vomiting. 

ST.  Fever. — Body  covered  with  large  drops  of  cold  sweat— Dropsy  after 
Kslet  fever ;  after  abuse  of  quinine. 


Apomorphinmn. 


An  alkaloid  obtsuned  from  Morphia,  but  containing  one  equivalent  less 
of  water— C„  H,,  NO,  (Morphine  is  C,y  H,^  NO3).    Solution. 


L— Alcholism.    Opium  habit    Pregnancy,  vomiting  of.    Sea-sickness. 
Vooiituig,  cerebral ;  reflex. 

C9ianoteil8io8«— Apomorphine  contains  the  emetic  properties  of 
Opium.  It  causes  very  rapid  vomiting,  most  rapid  when  injected  sub- 
cotaneously.  Vomitmg  without  previous  nausea.  Drowsiness. 
Faiotness.  The  peculiarity  of  the  vomiting  is  its  suddenness,  com- 
pktenessy  and  the  absence  of  pain  or  continued  nausea.    It  has  been 


ISO  ARALIA   RACEMOSA 

used  with  success  in  cases  of  sympathetic  vomiting,  and  from  pressure 
of  a  tumour  on  the  brain.  Halbert  has  given  Apomorph.  yn  with 
success  in  a  desperate  case  of  combined  alcoholism  and  opism.  The 
symptoms  were  constant  nausea ;  constipation  ;  insomnia ;  delirious 
headache  ;  extreme  emaciation  ;  pronounced  hysteria. 
Relations. — Compare :  Opium,  Ipec,  Ant.  t,  Cer.  ox. 

Aqua  Marina. 

Sea-water.    Dilutions. 

01illicaL-*Biliousness.  Constipation.  Headache.  Sea-sidcness.  Seaside, 
effects  of. 

CharaoieriBiies. — Aq.  mar.  has  been  principally  used  (in  high 
potencies)  for  the  effects  of  residence  near  the  sea  (as  biliousness, 
constipation,  headache,  &c.).  It  has  been  used  in  wineglassful  doses 
and  also  in  potencies  as  a  remedy  for  sea-sickness.  It  has  been 
proved  by  C.  Wesselhoeft  Among  the  symptoms  were :  Neuralgic 
pains  down  right  temple  and  forehead.  Faceache  left  side  ;  cold 
water  intolerable.  Sensation  of  a  hair  or  fishbone  in  throat,  tickling 
and  ur^ng  to  swallow,  causing  cough,  which  does  not  reUeve.  Pain 
on  swaDowing,  extending  to  ear  and  temples.  Nausea ;  and  nauseous 
sensation  in  stomach  and  abdomen.  This  symptom  seems  peculiar  : 
''Constant  hawkiujg  and  raising  of  phlegm,  tough  and  white  like 
cotton."  The  leading  indication  for  it  is :  <  at  seaside ;  or  on  the  sea. 

BalationB. — Compare:  Nat.  mur.,  Chlorum  (but  in  addition  to  its 
chief  ingredient,  sea-water  contains  in  solution  every  inorganic  sub- 
stance in  the  world) ;  also  Silica  marina. 

Aqnilegia  Yulgaris. 

Garden  Columbine.  N.  0.  Ranunculaceas.  Tincture  of  fresh  wild  plant 

in  bloom. 
Olinioal— Clavus.    Hysteria. 

Oharaoterlsties.— Hansen  gives  the  following  indications  for  this 
unproved  drug:  "Clavus  hystericus  of  women  in  climaxis,  with 
vomiting  of  green  substance,  especially  morning.  Globus  hystericus." 

^BsSMimA.— Compare :  Aeon.,  Act.  n,  and  other  Ranunculaceae. 

Aralia  Raoemosa. 

Spikenard  (American  name).    Grows  in  rich  woodlands  throughout 
U.S.A.    N,  0.  Araliacese.    Tincture  of  fresh  root. 

OUnicaL — ^Asthma.  Cotigh,  Diarrhoea.  Haemorrhoids.  Hay-fever.  Leucorrhcea. 
Prolapsus  ani. 

Charaoteristics. — Aralia  was  used  by  the  old  herbalists  and  by 
eclectics  as  a  remedy  in  phthisis  and  coughs,  and  also  for  leucorrhoea  and 


ARALIA  RACEMOSA  151 

other  complaints  of  women  whose  secretions  are  acrid  or  suppressed. 
The  homoeopathic  uses  have  been  chiefly  based  on  a  proving  by  Dr. 
S.  A.  JoneSy  in  whom  it  developed  an  attack  of  asthma.  The  symptoms 
were :  Loud  wheezing  respiration  coming  on  immediately  on  lying 
down  at  midnight ;  and  he  particularly  noted  that  inspiration  was  very 
loud  and  more  difficult  than  expiration.  The  right  lung  appeared 
more  adGFected  than  the  left.  On  turning  to  left  side,  left  side  seemed 
affected,  and  right  side  became  quite  free.  As  the  attack  passed  off 
phlegm  came  more  freely,  had  a  salty  taste,  and  felt  warm  in  the 
mourn.  The  characteristic  cough,  according  to  Burnett,  is  "  a  fit  of 
coughing  occurring  before  midnight,  either  immediately  on  lying 
down  or  more  commonly  after  a  short  sleep."  Cou§h  occurring  at 
II  p.m..  after  a  short  sleep.  Profuse  perspiration  whilst  asleep.  Dr. 
Jones  also  experienced  diarrhoea  and  prolapse  of  rectum  ;  soft  yellow 
stools  ;  srfter  stool  an  aching  pain  in  the  rectum,  extending  upwards 
on  the  left  side. 

BelationB. — Compare:  Botanical  relations,iGinseng.,  Hedera  helix ; 
Calc.  (turning  on  one  side,  symptoms  go  to  that  side,  relieving  opposite 
side) ;  Rumex  c  (cough  at  11  p.m.)  ;  Chlorum(opp.  of  Aral.— inspira- 
tion easy,  expiration  difficult). 


STHFTOHEk 

X.    Mind. — Fear  of  lung  disease ;  cannot  be  shaken  o£F. 
5.    Nose. — Smarting  soreness  of  posterior  nares»  caused  by  passage  of 
acrid  mucus,  with  peculiar  soreness  of  alae  nasi  as  if  fissured. 
g.    Throat.— Nausea  in  throat 

iz.  Stomach.  —  Faintly  defined  nausea  in  throat  and  stomach,  and 
sensation  in  intestines  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in. 

13.  Stool  and  Rectum. — Feeling  as  if  about  to  have  loose  stool, 
voided  with  great  difficulty  only  a  teaspoonf ul  of  soft  yellow  faeces.— Mucous 
membrane  of  rectum  came  down  like  a  tumour. — ^After  stool,  whilst  still 
sitting,  an  aching  pain  in  rectum,  extending  upwards  on  the  1.  side. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Acrid,  offensive  leucorrhoca,  with  bear- 
ing-down pains. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Dry,  wheezing  respiration,  sense  of  im- 
pending suffocation,  and  rapidly  increasing  dyspnoea. — Very  loud,  musical 
whistling  during  both  inspiration  and  expiration,  but  louder  during  inspira- 
tion ;  <  lying  down ;  obliged  to  sit  up. — R.  lung  appeared  more  afiFected  than 
1.— When  the  attack  was  over,  I  lay  on  my  r.  side,  and  then  it  seemed  as  if  all  the 
oppression  and  discomfort  was  in  r.  lung. — On  turning  over  it  soon  felt  as  if  1. 
lung  was  affected,  while  r.  was  entirely  relieved. — Constant  desire  to  clear 
chest,  so  that  I  could  inspire  better. — ^All  obstruction  seemed  to  be  in  inspira- 
tion.--On  making  forcible  expiration  to  clear  chest,  raw,  burning  sore  feeling 
behind  whole  length  of  sternum  and  in  each  lung,  most  intense  behind 
sternum. — After  rising  in  morning  raised  some  loose  phlegm  easily. — Spas- 
modic cough  at  night,  awakens  after  the  first  sleep  and  cannot  sleep  again  on 
account  of  it ;  caused  by  tickling  in  throat  with  constriction  of  chest ;  has  to 
sit  up  and  cough  violently ;  sometimes  caused  by  a  feeling  of  a  foreign  body 


152  ARANEA   DIADEMA 

in  the  throat ;  sputam  at  acme  of  attack  scanty ;  then  increased,  warm  and 
saltish. — Immediately  on  lying  down  an  attack  of  asthma, 

24.    Generalities.— Weak,  prostrated,  half-sick,  and  filled  with  a  vague 
feeling  of  nausea. 


Aranea  Diadema. 

The  Cross  Spider.    N,  0.  Arachnida.    Tincture. 

GUnioal.— Bones,  affections  of.  Catalepsy.  Chills.  Dysmenorrhoea.  Dyspepsia. 
Haemorrhages.  Haemorrhagic  diathesis.  Headache.  Hydrogenoid  constitution. 
Intermittents.  Malarial  cachexia.  Menstruation,  irreguLarities  of.  Neuralgia. 
Punctured  wounds.  Scorbutic  affections.  Scurvy  rickets.  Spleen,  affections  of. 
Toothache. 

ChftraoteriBties. — Grauvogl  is  our  chief  authority  for  the  use  of 
Aranea.  It  is  one  of  the  leading  remedies  for  the  hydrogenoid  con- 
stitution as  described  by  him,  and  for  intermittent  fevers  and  other 
intermittent  afiFections.  By  hydrogenoid  constitution  he  meant 
abnormal  sensitiveness  to  damp  and  cold  ;  and  inability  to  live  near 
fresh  water,  either  rivers  or  lakes,  or  in  damp,  chilly  places.  This 
gives  the  <  from  bathing ;  from  damp  weather ;  damp  localities,  or 
habitations  ;  <  drawing  in  cold  air.  Chilliness  followed  by  little  or  no 
fever.  Chill  and  neuralgic  attacks  at  the  same  hour  every  day,  every 
other  day,  week,  month,  or  regular  period.  Attacks  are  violent  and 
sudden.  Sensation  of  swelling  in  many  parts,  head,  face,  hands ;  of 
numbness  ;  of  coldness  as  if  bones  were  made  of  ice.  Haemorrhages 
from  many  parts ;  from  wounds.  Punctured  wounds.  Exhaustion. 
Pains  like  electric  currents.  Great  desire  to  lie  down ;  many  symp- 
toms >  lying  down.  Toothache  <  night  after  lying  down.  On 
lying  down  in  bed  and  touching  bed-clotiies,  whether  linen  or  wool, 
has  a  chill.  Many  symptoms  occur  on  the  right  side.  Chill  not  > 
by  external  warmth  ;  no  sweat  with  fevers. 

BelationB. — Compare :  Mygale,  Theridion,  Tarentula,  Ipec,  Nux 
v.,  Ars.  (intermittents  and  bone  affections)  ;  Cedron  (intermittents  of 
hot  climates  ;  Aran.,  of  cold  climates  chiefly).  It  antidotes :  Chi., 
Quinine,  Merc.    Antidoted  by :  Smoking  tobacco. 

STMPTOHS. 

z.    Mind.— Despondent ;  longs  for  death. 

2.  Head. — Headache  (in  the  forehead),  relieved  by  smoking  tobacco  and 
going  out  into  the  open  air. — Confusion  and  pressure  in  the  head,  mitigated 
by  supporting  the  head. — ^Vertigo  and  flickering  before  eyes,  before  headache  ,* 
when  sitting  up  ;  must  lie  down.  — ^Confusion  of  head ;  ^ter  retiring ;  evening 
when  studying ;  with  pressure  as  if  in  bones  of  r.  temple,  >  by  pressure 
and  sweating.^Headache  >  entirely  in  open  air. — Headache,  with  burning 
eyes  and  heat  of  face — Burning  heat  in  forehead  and  face. 

3.  Eyes. — Glimmering  and  glittering  before  eyes ;  preceding  headache. 
— Burning ;  stinging ;  shooting  in  eyes. 


ARANEA  DIADEMA  153 

7.  Teeth.— Patofulness  of  all  the  teeth  as  soon  as  he  goes  to  bed  in 
the  evening. — Sharp  sensation  of  cold  in  the  teeth  (incisive)  every  day  at  the 
same  hoar. — Sensitive,  cold  sensation  in  r.  lower  incisors,  esp.  on  drawing  in 
air ;  came  on  again  next  day  at  same  hour. — Sadden  violent  pains  in  teeth  of 
whole  apper  and  lov^er  jaw,  at  night,  immediately  after  lying  down. 

8.  Mouth. — Instantly  a  painful  sensation,  as  though  arising  from 
several  points,  darted  along  the  tongae,  painfully  affecting  tongue,  jaws,  and 
head ;  the  efiFect  was  instantaneous,  like  a  shock  from  an  electric  battery. — 
Tongue  seemed  almost  paral3rsed,  utterance  thick  and  heavy,  and  the  pains  at 
root  of  tongue  and  in  lower  jaw,  esp.  at  joint,  most  excruciating.— Bitter  taste, 
with  coated  tongue ;  relieved  by  smoking. 

iz.  Stomach. — ^Thirst  during  the  fever  and  during  the  greater  part  of 
the  other  so£Ferings. — Dejection  and  lassitude,  with  thirst. — Coryza,  with  thirst. 
— ^Eating  causes  headache  and  spasms. — ^Vomiting,  with  fever. — Epigastrium 
painful  to  pressure. 

iSl  Abdomen. — Swelling  of  the  spleen  (after  intermittent  fever  was 
suppressed  by  Quinine). — Enlarged  spleen  with  chilliness. — Fulness  and 
heaviness  in  the  abdomen  as  from  a  stone,  with  sensation  of  sinking  in  the 
epigastrium. — Borborygmi  in  the  abdomen,  and  heaviness  in  the  thighs,  every 
day  at  the  same  hour. — Colic,  with  shuddering  tov^ards  evening. 

13.  Stool. — Diarrhcea ;  arms  and  legs  as  if  asleep. — Stools  watery,  with 
g)reat  rumbling  in  bowels  as  if  of  fermentation. — Liquid,  difficult  evacuation, 
with  colic,  which  is  ameliorated  by  friction  on  the  abdomen. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Dysmenia,  spasms  commencing  in 
stomach. — Catamenia  too  early,  too  frequent,  too  profuse,  of  too  long  duration. 
—Periods  eight  days  too  early,  too  strong,  and  too  copious. — Metrorrhagia ; 
bright-coloured  blood.-— Discharge  of  viscid  mucus  from  the  vagina.— Viscous 
leucorriicea. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.  —  Haemoptysis.  —  Violent  haemoptysis  in 
anaemic  and  debilitated  subjects. 

sa.  Upper  Umbs. — ^Numbness  of  parts  supplied  by  ulnar  nerve. — Dull, 
penetrating  pains  in  the  bones  and  in  all  parts  of  the  body,  esp.  in  the  humerus 
and  the  forearm. — ^At  night  a  sensation  as  if  the  hands  and  forearms  were 
larger  and  heavier. — Sensation  on  the  ring  and  little  fingers  as  if  they  were 
asleq). 

^  Lower  Limbs.— Boring  and  digging  in  the  r.  tibia  and  os  calcis, 
continoing  on  moving  the  foot,  and  disappearing  by  continuing  the  motion. — 
Ulcer  on  the  1.  heel. 

84.  Generalities.— Haemorrhages  from  all  the  organs.— Neuralgic  pains, 
flK)6t  on  r.  side,  >  by  hard  pressure,  <  at  menstrual  period,  esp.  before, 
bat  still  daring  whole  cycle ;  <  i3  at  night,  unbearable,  driving  her  out 
of  bed ;  <  3  to  8  p.m. ;  aggravations  recurring  like  clockwork  ;  menses 
every  three  weeks.— <}reat  exhaustion  and  lassitude. — Desires  to  keep  con- 
stantly moving  when  sitting. —  Subsultus  tendinum. — Catalepsy;  periodic 
headache ;  <  in  damp  weather. 

90.  Sleep. — As  soon  as  he  lies  down  at  night  a  violent  pain  in  all  his  teeth 
—Restless  sleep  with  frequent  waking. — Restless ;  on  awaking,  soine  part  of 
te  body  feels  as  if  it  were  swollen. 

27.    Fever.— Before  chill :  cutting  cramp  in  stomach ;  vomiting ;  back- 


154  ARANEA  SCINENCIA 

ache.<— Cold  all  the  time,  cannot  get  warm ;  chUly  as  if  bones  made  of  ice  even 
in  summer;  <  during  rain. — Chilliness  after  being  in  water. — Chill  with 
clock-like  regularity ;  as  clock  strikes  four  daily. — ^Thirst,  fever  and  sweat  may  be 
absent — Chill  every  other  day  at  precisely  the  same  hour. — During  chill :  pains 
in  head,  stomach,  knees. — ^Afterwards:  vomiting. — During  heat:  headache 
(but  less  violent  than  during  chill),  with  drowsiness. — ^After  heat :  vomiting 
and  prostration ;  lies  as  if  dead ;  stinging  in  eyes. — Sweat  absent ;  sweat  with- 
out thirst ;  sweat  with  thirst. 


Aranearom  Tela. 

Cobweb  (of  black  spider  found  in  barns,  cellars,  and  dark  places). 
Tincture  or  trituration. 

QUaleaJ^— Sleeplessness. 

Charaoteristios. — Cobweb  has  been  used  as  a  remedy  from 
ancient  times.  It  has  also  been  experimented  with  on  healthy 
persons.  It  very  rapidly  lowers  the  frequency  of  the  pulse  rate.  In 
some  it  has  produced  **  a  calm  and  delightful  state  of  feeling,  followed 
by  a  disposition  to  sleep."  "  The  most  delicious  tranquillihr,  resembling 
the  action  of  opium,  and  followed  by  no  bad  effects."  Twenty  grains 
given  to  an  old  and  infirm  asthmatic  produced  ^*  slight  but  pleasant 
delirium."  Muscular  energy  is  increased,  could  not  be  kept  in  bed, 
but  danced  and  jumped  about  the  room  aU  night. 


Aranea  Scinencia. 

A  grey  spider  found  in  Kentucky  on  old  walls.    Does  not  spin  a  web. 
N.O.  Arachnida.    Tincture. 

GlinioaL — Debility.    Eyes,  affections  of.    Headache. 

Ghapaoteristics. — Aran.  scin.  has  been  proved  in  1st  and  2nd 
dilutions.  One  remarkable  symptom  noticed  was :  '^  Constant 
twitching  of  under  eyelids,"  which  brings  this  spider  into  line  with  the 
choreic  MygaU.    Eyes  inflamed,  weak,  watery,  lids  swollen.    Rather 

Erofuse  flow  of  saliva ;  sweet  taste  in  mouth.  Much  dull,  stupid 
eadache  of  considerable  intensity,  especially  in  postero-superior  part 
of  head  ;  unable  to  rest  for  it ;  could  not  collect  thoughts  with  it. 
Felt  as  if  he  had  been  drinking.  Sleepiness.  All  symptoms  <  in 
warm  room. 

BelaiionB. — Compare:  Spiders  generally.  Agar.;  Carb.  v.  (< 
warm  room,  also  Puis.,  Apis,  Sul.,  &c.). 


ARCTIUM   LAPPA  155 


Arbntus  Andrachne. 

Strawberry  Tree  of  the  Levant.    N.  O.  Ericaceae.    Tincture  of  young 

shoots. 

CWriital — Arthritis.    Eczema.    Gout    Rheumatism.    Urine,  disorders  of . 

ChaimtterigtleB, — This  is  one  of  Dr.  Cooper*s  remedies.  He  cured 
several  cases  of  eczema  with  it,  and  observed  that  it  produced  pains  in 
the  joints  of  a  gouty  or  rheumatic  character.  Hence  he  was  led  to 
g^ve  it  in  certain  inveterate  cases  of  arthritis.  In  one  case  the  patient 
noticed  that  it  "  cleared  his  urine."  ArbuUn  has  a  reputation  among 
the  allopaths  as  a  urinary  remedy.  Arbutus  is  allied  to  Uva  ursi, 
which  belongs  to  the  Ericaceae*  One  ratient  who  was  benefited  by  the 
remedy  had  <  in  north-east  winds.  The  larger  joints  are  principally 
affected,  and  the  slightest  movement  sets  up  inflammation.  The  tree 
sheds  its  bark  annually,  which  gives  the  signature  of  its  use  in 
skin  cases. 

L — Compare :  Led.,  Kalm.,  Bry. 


Arctium  Lappa. 


Lappa  officinalis.    Lappa  major.  Arcion  (Greek).  Great  Clote  Burre. 
Burdock.    N.  U.    Compositae.    Tincture  of  fresh  root. 


-Acne.     Bunion.     Dwuytren's   contraction.     Eczema  serpiginosa. 

Eruptions.  Glands,  affections  of.  uonorrhcea.  Gout.  Impotence.  Leucorrhoea. 
Pbosphaiuria.  Rheumatism.  Ringworm.  Scrofula.  Sterility.  Ulcers.  Uterus, 
prolapse  of. 

Chanusteristies. — ArcHum  -lappa  has  been  extensively  proved, 
notably  by  Dr.  Jeanes  and  Dr.  S.  A.  Jones  {H,  /?.,  1893).  The  provings 
in  the  main  confirm  the  teachings  of  antiquity  in  regard  to  this  remedy. 
It  has  been  given  from  the  earliest  times  for  prolapsus  uteri,  sterility, 
milky  urine,  and  sores  about  the  joints.  A  large  number  of  the 
symptoms  were  observed  in  the  skin  (acne ;  eczema,  especially  scalp) 
and  mucous  membrane,  eruptions  and  discharges.  It  is  one  of  the 
remedies  which  have  been  successful  in  curing  uterine  prolapse.  In 
skin  a£Eections  it  has  been  used  externally  as  a  glycerole,  as  well  as 
internally.  A  writer  in  Amer.  Homasop,  recommended  the  local  use  of 
the  seedling  roots  in  acne.  The  roots  are  softened  by  soaking  in  water 
for  two  hours ;  then  the  blunt  end  is  rubbed  on  each  individual  pimple. 
It  is  not  to  be  repeated  oftener  than  once  a  week.  It  was  one  of 
Culpepper's  remedies  for  fetid  sweat  of  axillse. 

blatioiuu — Compare :  The  Compositas,  Am.,  Calend.,  Cina,  &c. ; 
Bry.  (rheumatism)  ;  Fraxinus  Amer.,  Lil.  t.,  and  Sep.  (in  uterine  pro- 
lapse) ;  Calc.  ph.  (phosphaturia) ;  Vinca  minori  Viol.  trie.  (skin). 


156  ARECA 

STHPTOHS. 

3.    Head. — Pain  in  head  in  region  of  veneration — Eczema  of  scalp. 

3.    Eyes. — Feeling  as  if  the  eye  was  small  and  constricted. — Styes. 

6.    Face. — Inveterate  acne. — Spreading  vesicular  eruption,  great  tearing 
and  itching. — Herpetic  eruption  on  r.  ala  nasi. 

zi.    Stomach. — Flatulent  dyspepsia,  belching  inodorous  gas. 

I3»  Stools. — Frequent  yellow  stools  in  forenoon,  with  nausea. — 
Diarrhoea  alternating  with  rheumatic  symptoms. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Milky  phosphatic  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Loss  of  sexual  desire.— Cutting,  squeezed 
pain  in  whole  length  of  urethra ;  scalding  on  micturition. — Ringworm-like 
patch  of  eruption  on  thigh  beside  testicles  ;  groins  raw. 

z6.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Prolapse  of  uterus  with  much  bearing- 
down  {Arct  L  has  beeii  called  the  "  uterine  magnet  ")• — Leucorrhoea. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — ^Tickling  in  rima  glottidis  with  loose- 
sounding  cough,  but  no  expectoration. — Acute  tingling,  cutting  pain  under 
middle  of  sternum,  extending  across  breast. — Short  breath  on  exertion. 

ig.  Heart. — Pain  in  heart  with  indescribable  movement  under  sternum  ; 
exceedingly  rapid  pulse  with  frequent  intermissions. 

20.    Back. — Pains  in  back  about  eighth  dorsal  vertebra. 

31.  Limbs.— Rheumatic  and  gouty  pains. — Soreness  of  muscles. — Dull 
pains,  all  <  by  motion ;  with  high-coloured  urine ;  weary  and  sleepy. — 
Rheumatic  pains  entirely  relieved  by  onset  of  diarrhcea. — Pains  in  joints. — 
Sharp,  darting,  fugitive  pains  in  tendons  (Dupuytren's  contraction). — Bunion. 

24.  Generalities.— Axillary  glands  suppurate.— CEdema  and  dropsical 
swellings. 

25.  Skin.— Boil$.*-Moist,  offensive  eruptions,  greyish  white  crusts ;  esp. 
when  glands  are  swollen. — Old  sores,  esp.  about  joints. 


Areca. 

Areca  catechu.  Fruit:  Areca-nut,  Betel-nut.  N.  0.  Palmeae. 
Trituration  of  the  nut,  and  triturations  and  solutions  of 
the  alkaloids,  Arecoline  and  Tenaline. 

dlnlesL— Helminthiasis.    Myopia.    Salivation.    Tapeworm. 

Charaoteristies. — ^The  Betel-nut  is  in  very  common  use  in  the 
East  as  a  masticatory  for  sweetening  the  breath  and  hardening  the 
gums.  It  is  also  used  as  a  source  of  catechu,  but  the  true  catechu 
is  an  extract  of  Uncaria  gambir  of  the  Leguminosae.  The  chief 
medical  use  of  the  Areca  nut  has  been  in  helminthiasis  in  dogs ;  but 
it  is  not  altogether  without  danger.  Some  animals  to  which  it  was 
administered  experienced  in  five  minutes  great  difficulty  of  breathing, 
slight  cough,  and  fell  down  on  one  side,  and  some  died.  The  dose 
given  for  this  purpose  is  one  grain  to  eacn  pound  of  the  dog's  weight. 
The  HydrobramaU  of  Arecoline  has  been  used  to  cause  contraction  of 


ARGENTUM   METALUCUM  i57 

the  pupiL     It   acts    more  promptly  and  more  energetically  than 

Escrinc^  but  its  duration  of  action  is  snorter.    According  to  Ricapet  it 

smpasses  Pihcaifine  as  a  salivatory.    It  arrests  the  heart's  action 

in  diastole  in  poisonous  doses,  and  m  non-toxic  doses  increases  the 

amplitude  of  the  pulsations  without  increasing  their  frequency.    It 

promotes  the  contractibility  of  the  intestines,  and  as  a  teniafuge  it 

requires  no  additional  laxative.    It  should  be  given  in  pills  coated  with 

gelatin  or  keratin.    According  to  F.  Hobday  (quoted  in  Amer.  Horn,, 

xxiv.  123),  Tenalinc  is  a  much  safer  and  more  certain  anthelmintic 

than  Arecolinc    He  advises  a  dose  of  one  minim  of  the  solution  to  the 

pound-weight  of  the  animal,  either  given  pure  or  with  a  little  water. 

It  is  not  to  be  given  hypodermically. 

Argentom  Gyanatom. 

Silver  Cyanide.    Ag  CN.    Trituration, 
CHnteal,— Angina  pectoris.  Asthma.  Cough.  Cramps.  CEsophagus,  spasms  of . 

Ghanust6Fi8tie8« — ^As  a  result  of  inhaling  fumes  whilst  silvering 
with  "Argentine  "  a  woman  experienced  some  very  severe  poisoning 
symptoms,  among  which  the  most  prominent  were  in  the  throat : 
scraping  in  throat.  Sense  of  constriction  and  burning.  Violent  pain 
in  supra-sternal  fossa  and  under  manubrium  stemi  every  time  she 
tamed  to  one  side.  Suffocative  attack.  Respiration  difficult  and 
short  Constant  dry,  spasmodic  cough,  allowing  her  to  articulate  but 
one  word  at  a  time.  Painful  cramps  in  feet.  The  face  and  tongue 
were  very  red. 

Argentom  lodatnm. 

Iodide  of  Silver.    Ag  I.    Trituration. 

WhilfUl^ — Catarrh.    Hoarseness.    Paralysis.    Syphilis. 

ChanuxteristtOB. — Hale  has  suggested  Arg.  tod.  as  a  remedy  in 
conditions  presenting  symptoms  of  both  the  components.  In  practice 
he  found  it  of  great  V3lut  in  disorders  of  the  throat,  pharynx,  larynx, 
and  bronchia  ;  in  some  peculiar  mental  disorders ;  glandular  affec- 
tions ;  catarrhs,  and  affections  of  the  heart. 

Argentom  Metallioam. 

SQver  Leaf  and  Precipitated  Silver.    Ag  (A.  W.  107*66).    Trituration. 

OUbImL— Blepharitis.  Brain-fag.  Caries.  Chlorosis.  Cough.  Diabetes. 
Enuresis  noctnma.  Epilepsy.  Epithelial  tissue,  affections  of.  Exostosis.  Heart, 
afiectioosof.  Hif^ointf  disease  of •  Hysterical  joint.  Joints^  ajfcctions  of.  Laryngitis. 
Ovaries,  affections  of.  Phthisis.  Pollutions.  Rheumatism.  Uterus,  cancer  of ; 
prohqxe  oC    Voice,  loss  of. 

C3iaraoteri8tioB.— ilf^^^/tfm  affects  all  the  cartilages,  and  hence 
all  j(unts  and  bones,  with  tearing  and  bruised  pains,  tenderness  and 


158  ARGENTUM   METALLICUM 

weakness ;  painful,  so-called  "  hysterical  ^'  joint,  articular  rheumatism 
without   swelling;    pain  in   rib  cartilages  and  especially  the  left. 
Exostosis  on  skull.    The  muscular  system  is  also  a£Fected  with  cramps 
in  limbs  ;    calves  feel  too  short  on  going    downstairs ;    stifFness ; 
numbness  ;  electric-like  shocks  in  joints  and  limbs  ;  painless  twitchings. 
The  heart  is  specially  aCFected ;  frequent,  spasmodic,  though  painless 
twitchings  in  whole  heart  muscle.  <  lying  on  back ;  fears  apoplexy. 
Sensation  as  if  heart  stood  still  followed  by  trembling,  then  irregular 
violent  throbbing.    Palpitation,  at  night ;  during  pregnancy.    Sys- 
temic convulsions.    Epileptic   attacks   followed  by  delirious  rage, 
jumping  about,  striking  those  near.    In  society  disinclined  to  talk ; 
discouraged.    (Reaction  from  this  :  great  inclination  to  talk,  mind 
very  clear.)    Vertigo*  on  entering  a  room  after  a  walk.    Vertigo  on 
looking  at  running  water.    As  if  drunk.    Frontal  headache  of  business 
men.    Headache  increasing  gradually  and  ceasing  suddenly,  at  acme 
as  if  a  nerve  being  torn,  usually  1.  side.    Viscidity  of  saliva  and 
mucous  expectoration,  which  is  easy.    From  the  mucous  membranes 
generally  there  is  secretion  like  boiled  starch ;  or  there  may  be  thin 
and  at  the  same  time  a  thick  yellow  or  greenish  discharge.    Great 
hunger  even  after  a  full  meal.  Extreme  dryness  of  mouth,  tongue  sticks 
to  palate.    (This  sjrmptom  with  the  polyuria  points  to  diabetes,  in  which 
Arg.  is  particularly  indicated  if  there  is  swelling  of  the  ankles.)    Spas- 
modic enuresis  noctuma.    Effects  of  onanism  :  impotence  ;  atrophy  of 
penis ;  bruised  pains  in  testicles.    Pains  in  left  ovary  ;  feels  enormously 
swollen  ;  with  this,  prolapse  of  uterus  (scirrhus).  Metrorrhagia,  large 
lumps  with  violent  pains,  <  by  every  motion.    Arg,  met.  acts  more  on 
the  left  side  than  the  right ;  left  ovary  is  affected  :  "  Prolapsus  uteri 
with  pains  in  left  ovary."    It  corresponds  to  deep-seated  insidious 
disease.    In  the  mental  sphere  it  a£Fects  the  intellect  more  than  the 
afiFections.    Headache  of  business  men.    Left-sided  headadie  as  if  in 
brain  substance.    Headache  and  dyspepsia  induced  by  mental  agita- 
tion, nursing  the  sick,  mental  exertion.    Suited  to  thin  patients  with 
hollow  eyes,  pale  skin,  tendency  to  tubercle,  caries,  cancer,  deep 
ulcers,  imbecility.    The  more  deeply  seated  the  troubles  are  the 
more  likely  are  they  to  be  painless.    Tenderness  is  prominent  in 
Arg,  met.    Tearing  pressure   and  pains    in    the    bones.     Articular 
rheumatism  without  swelling.    Parts  feel  bruised  when  pressed  on. 
Hoarseness  of  singers  and  speakers,  <  speaking  or  singing.  Laughing 
causes  cough.    Restless  sleep  ;  electric  shock  through  body  wakens 
her.    Symptoms  <  in  sleep  ;  nausea  in  dreams ;  seminal  emissions. 
On  waking,  limbs  powerless.    Paralytic   weakness.     <  By  touch  ; 
pressure ;   riding   in   carriage ;  lying  on  back ;    sitting ;    stooping. 
At  noon  ;    at   night   (profuse   urine).      Uncovering   (diills   before 
midnight).     Entering  warm  room.    Sun. 

Belattons. — ^Zinc  (itching  in  canthi — Zn.  more  in  inner  cantbi 
and  acts  more  on  muscular  system  and  skin^.  Pallad.  (ovaries ; 
Pall.,  r.,  Arg.,  1.).  Stan,  (cough  excited  by  laugning).  Foll&ws  well  : 
Alum.,  Plat  Is  followed  well  by:  Calc,  Puis.,  Sep.  Antidoted  by. 
Merc,  Puis,  (an  occasional  dose  of  Puis,  favours  action  of  Arg.  nit.  in 
ophthalmia).    Teste  classes  Arg.  met  with  Merc,  and  with  Axsen. 

Gauaaon.-— Onanism.    Sunstroke. 


y 


ARGENTUM   METALLICUM  159 


SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — ^Restlessness,  which  forces  one  to  walk  quickly. — lU-huniOttr 
and  aversiQD  to  talking. — ^When  pleased,  excessively  merry,  but  cries  a  long 
time  about  a  trifle. — Delirioas  rage  (mania  ;  after  epilepsy). 

s.  Head. — Dulness^  and  sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  head. — Con* 
fusion,  as  if  caosed  by  smoke,  and  sensation  of  intoxication,  with  tingling 
in  the  head. — Dizziness,  with  obscurity  of  vision,  or  with  drowsiness,  and 
falling  of  the  eyelids. — ^Pressing,  tearing  pain  in  the  skull,  principally  in  the 
temporal  bones»  rene^wed  every  day  at  noon,  with  soreness  of  the  external 
liead,  aggravated  by  pressure  and  contact,  ameliorated  in  the  open  air. — 
Migraine  (1.)  as  if  in  brain  substance,  coming  gradually  to  a  great  height ; 
ceasing  suddenly. — I>rawing  and  pressive  pain  in  the  occiput,  as  if  caused  by 
a  foreign  substance,  ^^th  a  sensation  of  stifiFness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck. — 
Nombing  pressure  in  the  sinciput. — Compression  in  the  brain,  with  nausea 
and  burning  in  the  epigastrium,  on  reading  and  stooping  for  any  time. — 
Qamp-like  pains  and  shootings  in  the  head. — Pain,  as  of  excoriation  in  the 
scalp,- on  the  slightest  pressure. — Cramp-like  and  pressive  pains  in  the  bones 
of  the  head. — ^Painf  ul  dartings  in  the  temporal  muscles,  and  in  the  forehead. 
—Pimples  on  the  temples,  with  pain,  as  of  ulceration. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Itching  in  the  eyes,  and  principally  in  the  angles. — ^Swelling 
and  redness  of  the  edge  of  the  eyelids. — Stricture  of  lachrymal  duct. 

4.  £ars. — Shootings  in  the  ears,  with  incisive  pain,  which  extends  to 
the  base  of  the  brain. — Gnawing  itching  in  the  external  ear,  causing  the  part 
to  be  scratched  till  it  bleeds. — Itching  of  the  lobes  of  the  ears.— ^nsation  of 
stoppage  of  the  ears. 

$.  Nose. — ^Epistaads,  after  blowing  the  nose,  or  preceded  by  itching 
and  tickling  in  the  nose. — Stoppage  of  the  nose,  with  itching  in  the  nostrils. — 
Tulent  fluent  coryza,  with  frequent  sneezing. — Flowing  of  purulent  matter, 
mixed  with  clots  of  blood,  from  the  nose. 

(k  Face. — Redness  of  the  face. — Pale  and  earthy  face. — Gnawing, 
cramp-like,  and  pressive  pains  in  the  bones  of  the  face  (in  the  r.  zygoma, 
sometimes  in  the  L ;  a  violent  pain  in  the  bone  of  the  r.  lower  jaw). — Swelling 
of  die  upper  lip,  immediately  under  the  nose. 

7.  Teeth. — Pain  in  the  teeth,  as  if  the  gums  had  receded. — Painful 
sibility  of  the  gums  on  being  touched. — Gums  loosened,  and  readily 

bleeding. 

8.  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth. — Sensation  of  dryness  on  the 
foogoe,  though  it  be  moist. — ^Accumulation  of  a  viscid  saliva  in  the  mouth, 
with  shuddering  (sometimes  the  teeth  seem  coated  with  it,  maybe  sticking 
diem  together,  the  lower  with  the  upper,  making  talking  difficult). — ^Vesicles 
00  the  tongue,  with  burning  pain  of  excoriation. 

g.  Throat. — Soreness  in  the  throat,  as  if  there  were  a  timiour  in  the 
gullet,  with  difficulty  of  swallowing. — Hoarseness  (or  complete  aphonia  in 
singers,  speakers,  &c)  and  scraping  in  the  throat. — Inflammation  of  the 
throaty  with  sensation  of  excoriation  on  swallowing  and  on  breathing. — ^The 
throat  feels  more  sore  from  coughing  than  when  swallowing,  although  the 
food  passes  with  difficulty. — ^Yawning  gives  pain  in  the  fauces. — Pricking  and 


i6o  ARGENTUM   METALLICUM 

tingling  in  the  throat. — ^Accumulation  of  greyish  and  viscid  mucus  in  the 
throat,  with  easy  expectoration. 

10.  Appetite. — Repugnance  to  all  food,  even  to  the  thought  of  it,  with 
prompt  satiety. — ^Appetite  much  increased,  he  is  hungry  after  eating  a  full 
meal.— -Desire  for  wine. — Gnawing  hunger,  which  cannot  t>e  appeased  by 
food. 

11.  Stomach. — Pyrosis. — Hiccough  on  smoking  tobacco.— Constant 
nausea  and  uneasiness. — Burning  in  the  stomach,  ascending  to  the  chest. — 
Inclination  to  vomit,  and  vomiting  of  acrid  matter,  of  a  disagreeable  taste, 
and  which  leaves  in  the  thros^t  a  sensation  of  scraping  and  of  burning. — 
Pressure  in  the  epigastrium. 

12.  Abdomen. — ^Violent  pressure  on  the  entire  abdomen,  extending  to 
the  pubis,  appearing  as  soon  as  one  begins  to  eat ;  aggravated  by  breathing, 
and  mitigated  by  rising  up. — Pressive  and  painful  inflation  of  the  abdomen. 
— Cutting  pains. — ^Tension  in  the  abdominal  muscles. — Contraction  of  the 
muscles  of  the  abdomen  on  walking. — Loud  borborygmL 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Frequent  inclination  to  go  to  stool,  with  scanty 
evacuation  of  soft  matter. — Dry,  sandy  stool  after  dinner. — ^Vomitings  during 
the  stool. — Pain  of  contraction  in  the  abdomen,  after  a  stool  in  the  morning. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  inclination  to  make  water,  with 
abundant  emission  (diabetes). 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  testes. — 
Pollutions. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs.-— Prolapsus  uteri,  with  pain  in  the  1. 
ovary. 

17,  Respiratory  Organs. — Pain  of  excoriation  in  the  larynx,  esp.  on 
coughing. — ^Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  trachea,  which  detaches  itself 
on  stooping,  -laughing,  or  going  upstairs,  and  which  is  easily  expelled  by 
expectoration. — ^Abundant  accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  chest. — Cough 
excited  by  incisive  pain  in  the  trachea,  with  expectoration  of  serous  matter. — 
Sensation  of  rawness  or  soreness  of  the  larynx. — Cough,  caused  by  stinging, 
cutting  in  the  trachea,  with  mucus  in  the  chest,  and  expectoration  of  trans- 
parent mucus,  like  boiled  starch. — Paroxysms  of  coughing,  short  and  rattling, 
during  the  day,  with  easy  expectoration  of  thick  and  whitish  matter. 

18.  Chest. — Stitches  in  the  (r.)  side  of  the  chest,  when  inhaling  and 
exhaling. — Pressure  in  the  chest. — Pressure  and  shooting  in  the  sternum  and 
in  the  sides  of  the  chest. — Pain  in  the  lower  (1.)  rib  cartilages. — Incisive  pain 
in  the  sides  of  the  chest,  on  breathing  and  on  stooping  forward. — Cramp-like 
pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  chest  and  in  the  sides. 

ig.  Heart. — Painless  twitching  in  cardiac  muscle,  <  lying  on  back; 
with  feeling  that  he  would  have  apoplexy. — Sensation  as  if  heart  stood  still, 
followed  by  trembling,  then  irregular,  violent  thobbing. — Palpitation:  at 
night ;  during  pregnancy. — In  evening,  in  bed,  quick  pulse  with  thirst 

2a  Neck  and  Back. — Cramp-like  pains  in  the  shoulders  and  in  the 
shoulder-blade. — Pains,  as  of  bruising  or  of  drawing  in  the  loins. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Tension  and  acute  pullings,  cramp-like  and  pressive 
pains  in  the  arms  and  hands. — Cramp-like  pressive  pains  in  the  bones,  and 
in  the  joints  of  the  hands  and  fingers.— -Contraction  of  the  fingers. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Shooting,  pressive,  and,  as  it  were,  paral3rtic  pain, 


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM  i6i 

in  the  CQzo^emoral  jointi  when  walking.— Jerking  in  the  muscles  of  the 
thighs.— Oramp-like,  acate,  and  incisive  pains  in  the  knees  and  in  the  ankle- 
bones.— Cramp  in  the  calves  of  the  legs,  with  sensation  of  contraction  of  the 
muscles,  on  going  downstairs. — Pain,  as  of  bruising  and  throbbing,  in  the 
jotats  of  the  feet — Cramp-like  pain  in  the  bones  and  in  the  joints  of  the  feet 
and  toes.— Tearing  in  the  bones  of  the  feet  and  toes. — Sensation  of  numbness 
in  the  heel  and  in  the  tendo  Achillis. — Feet  cedematous  (diabetes). 

94.  Generalities. — Pressure,  cramp-like,  pulling,  principally  in  the 
limbs  and  in  the  bones. — Bruising  pain,  chiefly  in  the  sacrum  and  the  joints 
of  the  k>wer  limbs. — Boring  pain  in  the  joints. — Sensation  of  soreness  in  the 
joints.— Strong  effects  on  the  secretions  (^  the  mucous  membranes. — Sensation 
of  eicoriation  in  the  skin  and  internal  organs. — Sensation  of  numbness  and 
sdfFness  in  the  limbs;  as  if  asleep. — Epileptic  attacks. — ^Aggravation  of  the 
symptoms  every  day,  in  the  afternoon. — Burning  itching  in  different  parts  of 
the  skia — Eruption  of  pimples,  with  burning  pain,  as  of  excoriation. — ^Anxious 
dreams. — Shuddering  and  cold,  esp.  in  the  afternoon  and  at  night. — 
Noctamal  sweat. 


Argentom  Nitricam. 

Nitrate    of     Silver.     Lunar    Caustic.     Ag   NO3.      Trituration    and 

solution. 

CUaimL—Acidity.  Addison's  dtscase.  Atuemia,  Chancre.  Dyspepsia,  Epilepsy. 
EmdaUcms.  Erysipelas.  Eyes,  affections  of.  FlahUenu.  Gastric  ulcer.  Gonorrhoea. 
Hoiuis,  stoelling  of.  Headache.  Heartburn.  Impetigo.  Locomotor  ataxy.  Neural- 
|ia.  Ophthalmia  neonatorum.  Paralysis.  Prostate,  enlargement  of.  Scarlatina. 
Small -poz.  spinal  irritation.  Syphilis.  Taste,  altered.  Throat,  affections  of. 
Tomgue  ulcerated.    Warts.    Zona. 

dianuiteristios. — It  was  the  use  of  Argeniutn  niL  in  olden  times 
in  the  treatment  of  epilepsy  which  led  to  the  production  of  the 
laoaentable  cases  of  lead-coloured  pigmentation  of  the  skin  called 
Argyna.  Homoeopathic  experience  has  proved  the  applicability  of 
the  drug  to  many  cases  of  epilepsy  and  the  Heedlessness  of  employ- 
ing a  dosage  that  entails  any  risk  whatever.  The  cases  of  epilepsy 
caBing  for  this  drug  are  those  caused  by  fright,  or  occurring  at  the 
menstroal  period.  For  days  or  hours  before  the  attack  the  pupils  are 
dilated,  and  after  the  attack  the  patient  is  very  restless  and  has 
trembling  of  the  hands. 

Among  the  leading  symptoms  of  Arg.  n.  are  :  Great  tremor.  Ner- 
vous feeling ;  sensation  as  if  being  squeezed  in  a  vice.  Feeling  of 
constriction  in  various  parts  as  of  a  band  of  iron  round  chest  or 
waist.  A  feeling  as  if  the  body  or  some  part  of  the  body  were 
expanding.  Migraine,  with  feeling  as  if  head  were  enormously  en- 
larged ;  >  tightly  bound.  Defective  co-ordination.  Paralyses  of 
motion  and  sensation ;  a  peculiar  numbness  accompanied  with 
hyperaestbesia.  Sensation  of  a  splinter  sticking  in  various  parts. 
Burning  sensations.    Gowers  has  recorded  a  case  in  which  the  use  of 

YOU  I.  12 


i62  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM 

Afg.  If.  for  stomach  trouble  caused  (like  lead),  drop-wrist,  gout,  and 
albuminuria.  In  allopathic  practice  the  dyspepsia  for  which  it  is 
given  is  <  before  food,  when  the  stomach  is  empty.  The  opposite 
condition  is  the  leading  indication  in  homoeopathic  practice.  E.  P. 
Brewer  {Hakn.  Monthly ^  July,*  1883)  has  recorded  a  proving,  (the 
prover,  a  young  man,  taking  on  three  consecutive  days  one  grain  a 
day  of  Afg,  n,  triturated  with  sugar  of  milk),  in  which  a  number  of 
motor  and  sensory  symptoms  were  elicited,  reminding  Dr.  Brewer  of 
locomotor  ataxy,  in  which  it  has  been  used  with  success  by  old-school 
practitioners.  This  use  also  has  led  to  many  cases  of  argyria.  Among 
the  symptoms  of  this  proving  were  :  ^'  Mental  operations  sluggish  ; 
continued  thought  required  special  efiEort,  but  exertion  of  mind  did  not 
aggravate  the  heaviness  and  fulness  of  head.  Lower  extremities  (loins, 
sacrum,  and  particularly  gastrocnemii)  fatigued ;  as  if  they  would 
suddenly  fail  him.  Loss  of  ambition.  Building  air  castles  by  day  : 
monstrous  dreams  by  night."  Another  peculiar  symptom  was  :  chilly 
down  the  back  beginning  close  to  occiput  extending  to  extreme  tip  of 
coccyx  at  noon  every  day  ;  >  by  warmth  ;  at  5  p.m.  chills  subsided, 
no  sweat,  but  profound  sleepiness,  without  sleep  but  enchanted  with 
vivid  imagination  :  burning  heat  followed.  There  was  burning  in  one 
spot  in  front  of  rectum,  probably  in  prostate  gland.  Micturition 
more  frequent,  burning  in  urethra.  The  headache  was  >  by  Ad.  r. 
In  a  proving  by  myself  one  of  the  most  marked  symptoms  was  a  kind 
of  numb  sensitiveness  of  the  skin  of  the  arms — sl  hyperaesthetic- 
anaesthetic  state,  increased  sensitiveness  to  contact,  but  diminished 
power  of  distinguishing  sensations.  Other  symptoms  were  sore  throat 
with  white  patches,  rheumatic  pains  in  (left)  wrist  (which  I  have  since 
confirmed),  and  finger  joints,  with  external  tenderness  of  bony  promi- 
nences, pain  on  rising  in  right  sacro-iliac  notch.  Soreness  of  muscles  of 
neck  and  back.  Urticarious  spots  in  various  parts.  In  poisoning  cases 
complete  loss  of  consciousness,  insensibility,  and  convulsions  have 
occurred.  Some  of  the  notable  digestive  symptoms  are  :  **  Irresistible 
desire  for  sugar."  "  Fluids  go  right  through  him."  Belching  accom- 
panies most  gastric  affections.  Green  stools  are  remarkable.  "  Green 
mucus  like  chopped  spinach  in  flakes."  '^  Stool  turning  green  after 
remaining  on  diaper."  "  Stool  expelled  with  much  spluttering."  "  Stool 
shreddy,  red,  green  muco-lymph  or  epithelial  substance."  There  is  a 
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  >  on  standing  or  walking,  but  severe 
when  rising  from  a  seat.  (Stt/.,  Caust.)  Arg.  n.  has  irresistible  desire 
for  sugar,  which  at  the  same  time  <.  Kent  relates  a  case  illustrating 
this.  A  nursing  infant  had  a  grass-green  diarrhoea  which  failed  to 
yield  to  Merc,  Ars,,  and  Cham.  At  last  Kent  discovered  that  the 
mother  ate  a  pound  of  candy  a  day.  Arg.  n.  was  given  and  the  candy 
stopped  and  the  child  soon  got  well.  Intestinal  catarrh  with  shreddy 
membranous  discharges  is  often  cured  by  Atg.  n, 

A  mental  peculiarity  is  one  of  apprehension  and  fear  :  when 
ready  to  go  to  church,  &c.,  diarrhoea  sets  in.  Fears  projecting  comers 
of  buildings  and  high  buildings.  The  sight  of  high  buildings  makes 
him  giddy  and  causes  him  to  stagger  ;  it  seems  as  if  houses  on  both 
sides  of  street  would  approach  and  crush  him.  Imagines  he  cannot 
pass  a  certain  point  {Kali  bro.).  When  crossing  a  bridge  has  an  almost 


ARGENTUM   NITRICUM  163 

irresistible  desire  to  jump  over.  Impulsion  to  walk  very  fast  {Lil.  L), 
Mucoos  membranes  affected,  punilent  and  bloody  discharges  ; 
membranous  diarrhoea  with  agonising  pains.  Epithelium  affected 
(cancers).  Most  symptoms  are  <  night ;  very  nervous  at  night.  < 
At  ni^t  or  in  morning  on  rising  (epileptic  attacks).  Day  h^f  more 
cou^,  night  half  more  diarrhoea.  <  On  awaking.  At  11  a.m.  ner- 
vous attacks  >  by  stimulants.    Chill  down  back  every  day  at  noon. 

<  In  warm  room ;  over  a  fire ;  in  summer ;  warmth  of  bed ;  >  by 
warm  drinks.  >  In  cool  open  air,  >  washing  with  cold  water ;  < 
from  cold  food  ;  <  ice  creams.  Motion  generally  <  ;  but  walking  in 
open  air  >  back  pains,  which  are  <  sitting.  Lying  on  right  side  = 
pains  in  abdomen  ;  palpitation.  Heat  <  ;  but  there  is  also  <  from 
uncovering  ;  aversion  to  uncovering.  <  Rising  from  sitting.  <  In- 
spiration. <  Touching  the  parts.  >  Bending  double.  <  Thinking 
intently.  <  Riding.  >  Tight  bandage  (headache).— Stfj^rf  to  : 
Hysteric  nervous  persons  ;  headaches  from  mental  causes  characterised 
by  dulness  of  head.  Women  with  menstrual  disturbances.  Cachetic 
sbte.  Scrawny,  feeble,  dried-up-looking  women.  Guernsey  puts  it, 
''withered  and  dried  up  by  disease.  A  child  looks  like  a  withered  old 
man."  It  corresponds  in  lower  potencies  to  Grauvogl's  carbo-nitro- 
genoid  constitution  (Su/.,  Cupr.) ;  in  higher  to  the  hydrogenoid  or 
sycotic  constitution.  A  large  number  of  symptoms  appear  on  the 
left  side. 

Belatioiis. — Antidoted  by :  Nat.  m.  (chemical  and  dynamic), 
Arsen.,  Milk.  Antidotes  to  Nit.  ac.  and  Arg.  nit. :  Puis.,  Calc,  Sep.  ; 
next  in  importance.  Lye,  Sil.,  Rhus,  Phos.,  Sul.  //  antidotes :  Am. 
caust,  effects  of  tobacco.  Inimical :  Coff.  c.  (it  increases  the  nervous 
headache).  FoUows  well :  Bry.,  Spig.  (dyspepsia)  ;  Caust.  (urethral 
affections)  ;  Sponpa  (goitre)  ;  Verat.  (flatus).  Is  followed  well  by  : 
Lye  (flatus).  Similar  to  :  Arg.  met.  (A.  met.  acts  on  cartilages,  Arg. 
nit  more  on  mucous  membranes,  skin,  bone,  and  periosteum,  and  is 
suited  to  herpetic  patients)  ;  to  Aur.,  Cup.,  K.  bich.,  Lach.,  Merc, 
Merc,  cor.,  Merc,  iod.,  Nat.  m..  Nit  ac,  Thuj.  In  complaints  from 
pressure  of  clothes,  like  Calc,  Bry.,  Caust.,  Lye,  Sarsap.,  Stan.  In 
congestive  headaches,  like  Glon.  and  other  Nit.  ac  compounds.  In 
fish-bone  sensation  in  throat.  Nit.  ac.  Hep.  (Hep.  <  by  cold  ;  Arg.  n. 

<  in  warm  room).     Puis,  is  its  nearest  analogue. 

Oanaatioii. — ^Apprehension,  fear  or  fright.  Eating  ices.  Intem- 
perate habits.  Mental  strain  and  worry.  Onanism  and  venery. 
Sugar.    Tobacco  (boys). 

SYMPTOMS. 

X.  Mind. — Mental  anxiety. — ^Very  impulsive ;  always  in  a  hurry  but 
accomplishes  nothing ;  in  continual  motion  ;  he  walks  fast. — Hurries  rest- 
le^y  to  fulfil  engagements,  fears  to  be  late  when  there  is  plenty  of  time. — 
Melancholic ;  does  not  undertake  anything  lest  he  should  not  succeed. — Im- 
pulse to  throw  herself  from  the  window. — Frequent  errors  of  perception; 
mistakes  distances ;  fears  house-corners. — ^Time  seems  to  pass  very  slowly. — 
Apprehension  when  ready  to  go  to  church  or  opera,  bringing  on  diarrhoea. — 
Easily  angered  or  excited,  anger  brings  on  symptoms,  cough,  pain,  &c. — Pro- 


i64  ARGENTUM   NITRICUM 

found  melancholy ;  imagines  if  left  alone  will  die ;  apprehends  incurable 
disease  of  brain. — Nightly  nervousness,  with  heat  and  fulness  in  the  head. — 
Nervous,  faintish,  and  tremulous  sensation. — Awful  faces  appear  on  shutting 
eyes. — ^Apathy. — Mental  operations  sluggish ;  thought  requires  effort. — Com- 
plete loss  of  consciousness.-^Memory  impaired,  cannot  find  the  right  word. — 
Building  castles  in  the  air  by  day  :  monstrous  visions  by  night 

a.  Head.— Vertigo,  with  headache. — Morning  headache  (when  he 
awakens). — Excessive  congestion  of  blood  to  the  head. — Stitches  in  1.  frontal 
eminence. — Cannot  walk,  talk,  or  think,  the  head  gets  so  giddy. — Dulness, 
mental  confusion,  dizziness,  tendency  to  fall  sideways. — Staggers  on  stooping ; 
on  shutting  eyes. — Dizzy  at  sight  of  high  houses,  feels  as  if  they  would  close 
or  fall  in  upon  him. — Momentarily  blind  with  mental  confusion  ;  buzzing  in 
ears,  nausea,  trembling. — Digging  up,  incisive  motion,  through  the  1.  hemi- 
sphere of  the  brain. — Pressing  boring  pains,  in  small  spots ;  in  bones ;  in  1. 
temple. — Hemicrania;  epileptiform;  periodic;  boring  pain  <  1.  frontal 
eminence,  >  tight  band  ;  from  mental  emotion  or  strain,  loss  of  friends,  loss 
of  sleep ;  sometimes  pain  so  severe  he  loses  senses ;  paroxysms  frequently 
culminate  in  vomiting  of  bile  or  sour  fluid. — Occipital  headache. — ^Occipital 
headache  decreases,  frontal  headache  increasing. — Congestive  headache  with 
throbbing  carotids,  must  loosen  cravat ;  head  feels  much  enlarged  ;  as  if  bones 
of  skull  separated,  with  increased  temperature. — Sensation  of  constriction  of 
scalp  ;  as  if  something  tightly  drawn  over  skull. — Drawing  in  bands  over  sur- 
face of  brain,  apparently  in  membranes  or  sinuses. — Headache,  with  chilli- 
ness.— Headache  relieved  by  t3ring  a  handkerchief  tightly  around  the  head. — 
Headache  worse  in  the  open  air. — ^Aching  in  one  side  of  the  head,  with  en- 
larged feeling  in  corresponding  eye. — Itching,  creeping,  crawling  of  the  hairy 
scalp  (as  from  vermin) ;  roots  of  hair  feel  as  if  pulled  upward. 

3.  Eyes. — Photophobia. — Asthenopia  from  want  of  accommodation; 
even  coarser  kinds  of  work  strain. — Suddenly  becomes  far-sighted. — Cloud 
over  1.  eye ;  grey  spots  and  serpent-like  bodies  l>efore  sight ;  black  motes 
(esp.  r.). — Opacity  of  the  cornea;  ulceration  of  cornea  in  infants. — ^Acute 
granular  conjunctivitis,  conjunctiva  intensely  pink,  or  scarlet  red  ;  discharge 
profuse,  inclined  to  be  muco-purulent. — Purulent  ophthalmia;  pus  thick 
yellow  and  bland,  <  in  warm  room  or  from  fire,  >  open  air. — Ophthalmia 
neonatorum,  pus  thick,  yellow,  profuse  and  bland  (internally  ;  and  locally  in 
2  gr.  to  ounce  solution) ;  after  failure  of  Puis,  and  Merc, — Blepharitis,  thick 
crusts  on  lids ;  canthi  red  as  blood  ;  swollen  red  caruncula  (standing  out  like 
a  lump  of  red  flesh);  clusters  of  intensely  red  vessels  extend  from  inner 
canthus  to  cornea ;  granular  conjunctivitis  ;  <  by  warmth. — Iritis.— Sight 
and  eyes  seem  to  suffer  as  abdominal  sufferings  increase. 

4.  Ears. — Deafness ;  ringing ;  buzzing  noises ;  feeling  of  distraction 
(1.) ;  earache. — ^Whizzing  in  1.  ear  with  feeling  of  obstruction  and  hard  hearing. 

5*  Nose. — ^Violent  itching,  obliged  to  rub  until  it  looks  raw. — ^Coryza 
with  chilliness,  lachrymation,  sickly  look,  sneezing  and  stupefying  headache 
(over  the  eyes) ;  has  to  lie  down.— Discharge  of  (whitish)  pus  with  clots  of 
blood.— Discharge  like  boiled  starch. — Ulceration  of  nostrils. — Bruised  pains 
in  bones. 

6.  Face. — Sunken,  pale,  bluish  countenance ;  yellow,  dirty-looking. — 
Sickly  appearance.— Dried-up  look.— Prematurely  old  look.— Hard  blotches 


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM  165 

00  vermtfion  border  of  upper  lip,  paler  than  lip  and  sore  to  touch.— Lips  dry 

and  TOcid  without  thirst. 

7.  Teeth. — Gnms  swollen,  inflamed,  bleed  easily,  painful  when  touched. 
—Gums  tender  and  bleed  easily;  but  neither  painful  nor  swollen. — Proso- 
palgia, esp.  in  infra-orbital  branch  of  fifth  nerve  and  nerves  going  to  teeth  ; 
pain  intense,  at  its  height  accompanied  by  unpleasant  sour  taste  in  the  mouth. 
—Face  convulsed ;  jaws  clenched. — ^Teeth  sensitive  to  cold  water. — Toothache 
wlien  chewing ;  eating  cold  or  sour  things. 

8.  Mouth. — Dry  tongue  with  thirst.— Papillae  prominent,  erect,  feeling 
sore ;  tip  of  tongue  red  and  painful. — ^Tongue  white  and  moist. — Red  streak 
down  middle  of  tongne. — Fetid  odour  from  mouth. — Ptyalism.— Thick  phlegm 
in  month. — ^Moatfa  coated  inside  whitish  grey. 

9.  Throat. — Dark  red  appearance  of  uvula  and  fauces. — ^Sensation  as  if 
a  spHnter  were  stuck  in  when  swallowing,  breathing,  or  moving  the  neck. — 
Thick,  tenacious  mucus  in  the  throat,  obliging  him  to  hawk. — Rawness,  sore- 
xiess,and  scraping  in  the  throat.— ^Burning  and  dryness  in  fauces  and  pharynx. 
—White  patches  in  throat — Paroxysms  of  cramp  in  the  oesophagus.— Ulcers : 
mercurial,  syphilitic,  and  scrofulous. 

so.  Appetite. — Irresistible  desire  for  sugar  (but  it  <) ;  in  the  evening. — 
Desire  for  cheese. — Sweetish-bitter  taste. — Eating  relieves  nausea,  but  < 
shimach  psdns. — ^Warm  drinks  >  ;  cold  drinks  or  ices  <  stomach  pains. — 
Eating  or  a  swallow  of  wine  >  head  :  coffee  <. — ^The  least  food  <  pain  of 
gastralg^  ;  flatulence. — Fluids  go  right  through  him  (in  cholera  infantum). — 
Warm  fluids  >,  cold  <  pains  in  stomach. — ^After  heavy  meal,  epileptic  fit. — 
Kausea  after  each  meal,  esp.  after  dinner. 

n.  Stomach. — Gastralgia,  esp.  in  delicate,  nervous  women ;  brought 
on  by  any  emotion,  loss  of  sleep,  or  at  menstrual  period. — Inflammation  of  the 
stomadi;  gastro-enteritis. — Gnawing  pain  in  the  1.  side  of  the  stomach. — 
Pressure  with  heaviness  (sensation  of  lump)  and  nausea. — ^Trembling  and 
throbbing  in  stomach. — Most  gastric  complaints  are  accompanied  by  violent 
belctiing. — Eructations  of  air  accompanied  by  a  mouthful  of  undigested  food 
(PJbo.,  Per,). — ^After  yawning,  feeling  as  if  stomach  would  burst ;  wind  presses 
upwards^  but  the  oesophagus  feels  spasmodically  closed ;  hence  an  ineffectual 
effort  to  eructate,  with  excessive  strangulation,  pressing  pain  in  stomach, 
taintish  nausea,  confluence  of  water  in  the  mouth  and  inability  to  stir ;  the 
paroxysm  ceased  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  amidst  frequent  and  violent  out- 
msh  of  wind.— Vomiting  of  some  fluid,  of  bile,  black  vomit ;  with  anxiety  in 
precordia. — ^The  vomited  substance  tinged  the  bedding  black. — ^Awakens  at 
Budnight  with  oppression  at  stomach,  as  from  a  heavy  lump,  inducing  vomit- 
ing ;  in  the  morning  throws  up  glairy  mucus,  which  can  be  drawn  into  strings. 
— ^Warmth  at  epigastrium. — Gnawing  ulcerative  pain  in  epigastrium. — Sting- 
ing, ulcerative  pain  in  1.  side  of  stomach,  worse  from  touch  and  deep  inspira- 
tion.— Pain  increases  and'.decreases  slowly. — Small  spots  between  xiphoid  and 
navel  sensitive  to  slightest  pressure  ;  pains  radiate  in  all  directions. — Pain  in  1. 
side  of  stomach  t>elow  true  ribs,  <  during  inspiration  and  on  touching  the 
parts. — Stomach  pains  are  accompanied  by  intense  spasm  of  chest  muscles  and 
dyspnoea ;  excessive  accumulation  of  wind ;  nervous  feeling  or  sensation  as  if 
sqneeeed  in  a  vice. 

IS.    AtNloiiien.-*-Sensation  as  of  a  ball  ascending  from  abdomen  to  throat. 


i66  ARGENTUM   NITRICUM 

—Stitches  through  the  abdomen  (1.  side)  like  electric  shocks,  esp.  when 
changing  from  rest  to  motion.— Pain  in  abdomen  as  if  sore ;  with  great 
hunger ;  >  after  eating,  but  a  trembling  sets  in  in  its  place.— Violent  attacks 
of  pain  at  irregular  intervals  ;  patient  rolls  on  floor ;  descending  colon  tender 
to  touch ;  tapeworm-like  stool  passes.  —  Fulness,  heaviness,  and  distensioa 
with  anxiety. — Flatulence. — Griping.— Cutting  pains. — Constriction  as  if 
tightly  tied  with  a  band. — Pain  in  hypochondria; — Intolerance  of  lacing 
round  hypochondria. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Cholera  infantum  in  dried-up,  mummy-like 
children,  stools  green,  slimy,  noisy,  flatulent,  <  at  night. — Like  spinach  in 
flakes.— Green,  slimy,  shreddy  stools,  with  severe  bearing-down  in  hypogas- 
trium;  membranous  stool  like  unsegmented  tapeworm;  blood,  slime,  and 
epithelium;  often  with  much  flatus;  after  eating  sugar;  after  drinking;  "as 
soon  as  the  least  drink  is  taken  it  goes  through"  ;  from  any  excitement— Ad- 
vanced dysentery,  with  suspected  ulceration. — Constipation  and  dry  faeces. — 
Taenia  or  ascarides  with  itching  at  anus. — Piles  with  burning  or  tenesmus ; 
bleeding. — Burning  in  one  spot  in  anterior  wall  of  rectum  (probably  in  pros- 
trate gland). 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Nephralgia ;  pain  by  touching  region. — Urine 
dark  red ;  contains  deposit  of  renal  epitheUum  and  uric  acid  crystals  (esp. 
after  CausL). — Quick  urging  to  urinate ;  frequent  and  copious  emission  of  pale 
urine.— Incontinence  night  and  day.— Urethra  from  meatus  to  bladder  hot  and 
burning ;  <  at  meatus  and  behind  scrotum. — Urine  burning  while  passing, 
urethra  feels  as  if  swollen. — Inability  to  pass  urine  in  a  projecting  stream. — 
Oozing  of  mucus  from  urethra  :  thick,  white  at  night. — Stitches  in  extremity 
of  urethra ;  cutting  from  posterior  part  of  urethra  to  anus,  when  emitting  last 
drop  of  urine. — Inflammation,  and  violent  bturning  or  shooting  pains  in  the 
urethra,  with  increased  gonorrhoea. — Priapism,  bleeding  of  the  urethra. — 
Stricture  of  the  urethra. — Dysuria,  bloody  urine  and  fever. — Ulcerative  pain  in 
middle  of  urethra,  as  from  a  splinter. — Stream  of  urine  spreads  asunder. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Chancre-like  ulcer  on  prepuce. — Ulcers  on 
the  prepuce ;  small,  covered  with  pus  ;  later,  spreading,  bowl-shaped,  with  a 
tallow-like  coating. — Impotence ;  erections,  but  they  fail  when  coition  is 
attempted. — ^Want  of  desire,  organs  shrivelled. — Coition  painful,  urethra  as  if 
put  on  stretch  or  sensitive  at  orifice. — Painful  tension  during  erection,  chordee, 
bleeding  from  urethra,  and  shooting  in  urethra  from  behind  forward. — 
Urethra  swollen,  hard,  knotty,  painful. — Spasmodic  contraction  of  cremaster 
muscle,  testicle  drawn  high  up. — Pain  in  testes  and  scrotum  as  from  pins  and 
needles,  <  r. — Orchitis. — Burning  in  spot  in  anterior  of  rectum  (prostate 
gland). 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Ovarian  pains,  feels  as  if  an  enormous 
swelling  in  side  affected. — Prolapsus  with  ulceration  of  os  or  cervix;  with 
copious  yellow,  corroding  leucorrhcea  and  frequent  bleeding  from  points  of 
ulceration. — Menses  irregular ;  scanty  (with  asthma). — Menses  too  copious  or 
too  scanty,  too  soon  or  too  late. — ^All  symptoms  <  before  and  during  menses. — 
Coition  painful,  followed  by  bleeding  from  the  vagina. — Orgasms  at  night. — 
Metrorrhagia. — Metrorrhagia,  with  nervous  erethism  at  change  of  life ;  also  in 
young  widows  and  those  who  have  borne  no  children  ;  returning  in  attacks, 
region  of  ovaries  painful,  with  pains  radiating  to  sacrum  and  thighs.— During 


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM  167 

pregnancy^  stomach  as  if  it  would  burst  with  wind ;  head  feels  expanded. — 
Puerperal  convulsions ;  just  after  attack  lies  quiet,  but  becomes  very  restless 
before  another. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.—  Pure  nervous  asthma ;  spasm  of  respiratory 
muscles ;  great  dyspnoea,  <  in  crowded  room. — Muco-purulent  sputa  seeming 
to  come  from  wall  of  lar3mx. — Expectoration  purulent,  mixed  with  light 
blood. — Internal  soreness  of  the  larynx  and  pit  of  the  throat,  worse  mornings. 
— Chronic  laryngitis  of  singers;  raising  the  voice  causes  cough. — Marked 
hoarseness,  sometimes  loss  of  voice ;  feeling  as  if  something  clogging  vocal 
cords.— Cough  with  sense  of  soreness  in  1.  side  preventing  lying  on  it. — Even- 
ing cough  worse  from  tobacco  smoke. — Cough  >  evening  and  night. — Suffoca- 
tive cough  at  noon. — Cough  in  paroxysms  induced  by :  phlegm  in  larynx ; 
irritation  under  sternum ;  fit  of  passion ;  laughing ;  stooping ;  smoking ; 
ascending  stairs ;  lying  down ;  on  awaking. — Haemoptysis. 

A  Chest. — ^Aching,  tensive  pain  in  various  parts  of  chest  in  small  spots. 
— ^Weight  as  of  a  stone  in  middle  of  sternum. — Burning  in  chest ;  sensation  of 
warmth  between  scapulae  and  sternum.— Violent  cramps  and  pain  in  muscles 
of  chest. 

19.  Heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart  in  paroxysms,  with  nausea. — ^Violent 
palpitation  of  the  heart;  in  afternoon  with  faintish  nausea;  caused  by  any 
emotional  excitement  or  any  sudden  muscular  exertion;  from  l3dng  on  r. 
side. — Angina  pectoris,  intense  pain  in  chest  and  about  heart,  can  hardly 
breathe. — ^Irregular  (intermittent)  action  of  heart  (with  an  unpleasant  sensa- 
tion of  fulness),  <  when  noticing  it,  >  when  moving  about  in  open  air. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Muscles  of  r.  side  of  neck  sore  and  stiff. — Sore- 
ness in  lumbo-sacral  region. — Heaviness  in  os  sacrum,  extending  along  pelvis 
with  painful  drawing. — Heaviness,  with  paralytic  sensation,  preventing  long 
sitting,  and  obliging  him,  when  walking,  to  stretch  the  dorsal  spine. — Pain  in 
small  of  back,  <  rising  from  sitting ;  >  standing  or  walking. — Pain  in  sacro- 
iliac symphyses,  feeling  as  if  bones  were  loose  there. — Fatigue  in  back. — 
Pressure  in  back  at  night. 

M.    Limbs. — ^Trembling. — Lassitude. — ^Weariness  of  forearms  and  legs. 

82.  Upper  Limbs. — Drawing  in  shoulders. — Pain  in  1.  shoulder  and 
arm. — Rheumatic  pain  in  1.  wrist — Left  arm  heavy. — Nightly  boring  pain  in 
ulna. — Hyperaesthetic  numbness  of  arms  and  shoulders. — Pain  in  wrist,  and 
finger  joints. — Hands  tremble. — Numbness  of  finger  tips. 

13.  Loveer  Limbs. — Staggering  gait. — Lassitude  of  lower  limbs  with 
dizziness  as  if  intoxicated. — Pain  in  calves  all  night ;  weary  as  after  a  long 
journey.  (Paralytic  heaviness  and  debility,  so  that  he  did  not  know  where  to 
pat  them.)--Heaviness  and  debility  of  the  legs. — Limbs,  esp.  knees,  start  up 
at  night. — ^Weariness  with  rigidity. — (Edema  of  feet. 

84.  Generalities. — Insensibility;  face  and  upper  limbs  convulsed; 
trismus ;  pupils  dilated. — Epileptic  attacks  caused  by  fright,  or  during  men- 
struation (at  night,  or  in  the  morning  when  rising). — Chorea-like  convulsive 
motion  of  all  the  limbs. — Fatigue. — ^Tremulous  weakness,  accompanied  with 
general  debility. — Expanding  sensation,  esp.  in  face,  in  head,  with  feeling 
as  if  bones  of  skull  separated ;  with  increase  of  temperature. — ^Anaesthetic- 
faypenesthetic  condition  of  surface. — Sticking  sensations  in  various  parts. — 
Emaciation. — Dropsy ;  cedema  of  legs  and  ascites. — Loss  of  voluntary  motion. 


i68         ARISTOLOCHIA  SERPENTARIA 

—Paraplegia  from  debilitating  causes.— Sensation  of  splinters  in  various  parts, 
esp.  in  mucous  membranes. 

25. — Skin. — Wart-shaped  excrescences. — Skin  blue-grey,  violet,  or  bronze 
to  real  black. — Bluish-black  eruption ;  (in  scarlet  fever). — Itching.— Itching 
pimple. — Impetigo.— Zona. — Small-pox. — £r3rsipelas. — Urticaria. — Skin  brown, 
tense,  and  hard. — ^Warts. 

26.  Sleep. — Restless  at  night;  when  he  does  sleep  has  all  sorts  of 
troubled  dreams. — Restless,  stupefied  sleep,  with  horrid  dreams  of  serpents, 
&c. — Prevented  falling  asleep  by  fancies  and  images. — ^Wakes  in  the  morning, 
dreams  he  is  hungry  and  wakes  with  flatulence  and  spasms  and  twinges. — 
Soporous  condition. — Nightly  nervousness  with  heat  of  head. — Restless  sleep 
with  stupefaction  and  headache. 

37.  Fever.— Chilliness  and  nausea.— Chills,  shifting  or  constant,  are  more 
lasting  than  the  heat  and  return  quickly  on  uncovering ;  both  stages  without 
thirst.— Chilliness. — Chilly  down  back,  at  noon,  extending  from  occiput  to  tip 
of  coccyx  up  back  and  over  shoulder. — Night  sweat. — Morning  sweat. — 
Scarlet  fever. 


Aristoloohia  Milhomens. 

A.  cymbifera.    A.  glandifera.    Brazilian  Snake-root.    N.  0.  Aristolo- 
chiaceae.    Tincture  of  the  flowers. 

OlinicaL— Diabetes.    Ezfaavasations.    Heart,  pain  in.    Tendo  Achillis,  pain  in. 

Choraoteristios.— This  medicine  was  proved  by  Mure.  I  do  not 
know  of  any  clinical  verifications.  Prominent  among  the  symptoms 
are :  Lancinating  and  pricking  pains  in  various  parts.  Lancinating 
pain  at  apex  of  heart  stopping  breath.  Excoriations  of  lips  and 
gums.  Cramp-like  pains  in  left  tendo  Achillis.  "  The  whole  leg  is 
covered  with  large  irregular  patches  formed  by  extravasated  blood.'' 
The  mouth  is  pasty  in  the  morning.  Anorexia.  Colic  followed  by 
diarrhceic  stool.  Burning  at  anus.  Disturbed  rest.  Disgusting 
dreams.  Head  burning  hot.  Great  thirst  and  bitter  mouth  ;  makes 
water  more  frequently  than  usual. 


Aristolochia  Serpentaria. 

Serpentary.    Virginia  Snake-root.     N.  0.  Aristolochiaceae.     Tritura- 
tion of  dried  roots. 

Olinieal. — Dyspepsia.    Flatulence. 

Chanotaristios. — Serpentary  was  proved  by  Jorg's  provers  and 
others.  Its  chief  effects  were  noticed  in  the  gastro-enteric  organs, 
nausea,  vomiting,  abdominal  distension,  flatulence,  and  urging  to  stool. 


ARMORACEA  SATIVA  169 

Increased  and  afterwards  lost  appetite.  Irritation  of  the  urinary  and 
genital  organs  with  frequent  desire  to  micturate.  As  with  A,  milho- 
mensj  there  was  disturbed  rest ;  also  heat  of  the  head. 

BTMPTOHB. 

I.    Mind. — Peevish  mood.— Disinclination  for  work. 
a.    Head.— Sticking  in  forehead  extending  to  base  of  brain.— Increased 
warmth  of  head. 

8.    Mottth.— Copious  salivation  with  frequent  spitting 

11.  Stomach.— Increased  appetite ;  yet  able  to  eat  little,  since  the  first 
morsels  satisfy.— Loss  of  appetite. — Nausea  and  vomiting ;  vomiting  did  not 
cease  till  stomach  was  entirely  emptied.— Distended  feeling  as  if  too  full- 
Heaviness  >  by  emission  of  much  flatus. 

12.  Abdomen.— Colic  in  umbilical  region.— Distension,  rumbling  un- 
easiness, cutting  pains,  with  at  times  emission  of  flatus  and  eructations  which 
relieve. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Distressing  itching  about  anus.— Frequent  desire 
for  stool,  with  evacuation  of  scanty,  hard,  tenacious  faeces,  with  much  flatu- 
lence.— Frequent  desire  with  evacuation  of  more  gas  than  faeces. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — General  irritation  of  urinary  and  genital  organs. 
—Violent  desire  to  urinate  with  great  increase  in  quantity  of  urine.— Frequent 
desire  but  only  a  little  brownish  urine  passed. 

80.    Neck.- Pressive  pain  in  nape  of  neck. 


Armoraoea  Sativa. 

Cochlearia  armoracea.    Horse-radish.    N.  0.  Cruciferae.    Tincture 

of  root. 

Clinical.— Albuminuria.  Aphonia.  Asthma.  Cataract.  Colic.  Cornea,  spots 
on.  Eruptions.  Eyes,  affections  of.  Gonorrhoea.  Gravel.  Headache.  I^ucor- 
rfaoea.  Lungs,  oedema  of .  Rheumatism.  Scurvy.  Strangury.  Toothache.  Ulcers. 
Urinary  disorders. 

Ghapaoteristios.— ilrmor.  sat,  and  also  Cochlear,  officin.,  are  old- 
world  anti-scorbutics,  and  homceopathic  provings  have  conhrmed  the 
old  experience.  Armor,  has  the  anti-scorbutic  properties  of  the  other 
Cruciferae,  and  is  specially  efficacious  in  scurvy  from  eating  salt. 
The  essential  oil  is  said  to  be  identical  with  that  of  Sinapis.  The 
mucous  membranes  are  afiFected :  mucous  stools ;  gonorrhoea ;  leucor- 
rhcea ;  pituitous  asthma  and  pituitous  phthisis  have  been  t}eneiited 
by  it.  There  are  peculiar  symptoms  in  connection  with  the  teeth. 
Some  violent  abdominal  pains  were  experienced.  Tearing  pains 
from  the  belly  through  to  back,  down  the  back,  and  setding  in 
sacrum.  ''  Colic  with  backache ''  appears  to  be  a  leading  indication. 
Wandering  chronic  rheimiatism.  Touch  or  slight  pressure  <  many 
symptoms.    Bending  forward  >. 


I70  ARMORACEA  SATIVA 

Relatioiui. — Compare:  The Crucif erae  generally.  Canth.,  Caps., 
Rhus,  Sinap. ;  Arg.  n.  (diarrhoea  from  nervous  excitement). 

Causation. — Checked  foot-sweat    Nervous  excitement.    Cold. 

BTHPTOHB. 

1.  Mind. — Difficult  thinking  in  evening. — Irresolution. 

2.  Head.— Headache,  now  one  side  now  the  other ;  <  opening  the  eyes 
(wide),  but  not  on  reading  or  motion. — ^Violent  headache  with  nausea;  < 
sitting  up. — Aching,  boring  pains  in  head,  as  if  brain  bursting. 

3.  Eyes. — Obscuration  of  sight  for  some  minutes. — Lachrymation. — 
Spots  on  cornea. — Swelling  of  eyes. — Styes. — Rheumatic  ophthalmia, 

6.  Face.— Twitching  of  1.  corner  of  mouth,  4  a.m. — Soreness  of  upper 
lip. 

7.  Teeth. — Dull  sensation  in  teeth,  as  if  they  were  soft  and  became 
bent  and  moved  in  their  sockets  on  chewing. — Scurvy  of  salt-eaters. — Dental 
fistula. 

S.  Mouth. — Paralysis  of  tongue. — Biting  sensation  on  tongue. — ^Tongue 
furred  white. — ^Very  offensive  odour  from  mouth  and  lungs. 

9.  Throat. — Dryness  of  pharjmx,  larnyx,  and  posterior  nares. — Scraping 
in  throat  with  nausea. — Hawking  thick,  viscid  mucus. 

11.  Stomach. — Unnatural  craving  for  food  with  profuse  painless  diar- 
rhoea.— Belchings  of  sulphurous  odour,  like  garlic. — Bilious  regurgitations.-^ 
From  region  of  stomach  the  pain  draws  through  both  sides  towards  back. — 
Cramp  in  stomach;  pain  drives  to  despair. — Crampy,  tensive  pain  above 
epigastrium  apparently  in  diaphragm,  >  by  bending  forward. 

12.  Abdomen. — Spasms  through  to  back  and  loins. — Borborygml  in 
morning. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Profuse  painless  diarrhoea  with  craving  for  food. 
— Diarrhoea  after  great  nervous  excitement. — ^Tenesmus  all  night  till  morning, 
sometimes  discharging  a  little  blood. — Mucous  stools. — Involuntary  passage  of 
mucus  from  anus. — Itching  and  burning  at  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Uneasiness  in  region  of  kidneys. — Increased 
desire  and  increased  secretion. — Urination  difficult,  causing  burning,  tender- 
ness, and  inflammation  of  urethra  as  in  first  stage  of  gonorrhoea. — Strangury. 
— Gravel. — ^Albuminuria. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Burning  or  cutting  at  glans  during  mictu- 
rition ;  felt  also  before  or  after. — Gonorrhoea. — Impotence. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Stringy  black  blood  passes  from  the 
vagina  when  urinating ;  also  during  the  night. — Menses  :  every  ten  or  fifteen 
days;  suppressed  with  chlorosis. — Leucorrhoea  and  menostasis. — Since 
climaxis  cramp  in  stomach. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — ^Aphonia;  with  blood-spitting;  oppressed 
breathing. — Promotes  expectoration,  and  relieves  cough ;  increases  activity 
of  respiratory  organs. — Mucous  asthma,  and  consumption. — CEdema  of  lungs. 
— Chest  painful  to  touch. 

21.  Limbs.— Twitchings  in  limbs. — ^Towards  morning  pain  in  all  joints 
when  l3ang  still ;  <  l3dng  on  side ;  >  on  motion  and  when  getting  up. — 
Suppressed  foot  sweat. 

a6.    Sleep. — Sleep  very  refreshing ;  awoke  with  clearer  mind  than  usual. 


ARNICA  171 


Arnica. 


Arnica  montana.     LeopardVbane.     Fallkraut.     N,  0.  Compositae. 
Tincture  of  whole  fresh  plant.    Tincture  of  root. 


I'-Ahsccss.  Apoplexy.  Back,  pains  in.  Baldness.  Bed-sores.  Black- 
««.  BoOs.  Brainy  affections  of.  Breath,  fetid.  Bronchitis.  Bruises.  Carbuncle. 
Chest,  affections  cf.  Chorea.  Corns.  Cramp.  Diabetes.  Diarrhoea.  Dysentery. 
Bcckymosis.  Excoriations.  Exhaustion.  Eyes,  affections  of.  Feet,  sore.  Hamate^ 
mesis.  Hcemaiuria.  Headache.  Heart,  affections  of.  Impotence.  Labour,  Lum' 
ha^.  Meningitis,  Mental  alienation.  Miscarriage.  Nipples^  sore.  Nose,  afftctions 
of.  Paralysis.  Pelvic  hcematocde.  Pleurodynia.  Purpura.  Pycemia.  Rheumatism. 
Splenalgia.  Sprain.  Stings.  Suppuration.  Taste,  disorders  of.  Thirst  Traumatic 
wr.    Tomoars.    Voice,  affections  of    Whooping^ough.    Wounds.    Yawning, 

Chanotfiristtes. — Growing  on  the -mountains.  Arnica  may  be 
said  to  possess  a  native  affinity  to  the  effects  of  falls.  As  its  German 
name,  Fallkraut,  attests,  its  value  as  a  vulnerary  has  been  known  from 
remote  times.  It  may  be  said  to  be  the  traumatic  par  excellence. 
Trauma  in  all  its  varieties  and  effects,  recent  and  remote,  is  met  by 
Arnica  as  by  no  other  single  drug,  and  the  provings  bring  out  the 
appropriateness  of  the  remedy  in  the  symptoms  it  causes.  Tumours 
in  many  parts,  following  injury,  have  been  cured  by  Arnica^  including 
scirrhous  tumours  of  the  breast  Nervous  affections  as  chorea  after 
fadls.  It  is  suited  to  plethoric  red-faced  persons  ;  ^^  Arnica  is  particu- 
larly adapted  to  sanguine,  plethoric  persons,  with  lively  complexions 
and  disposed  to  cerebral  congestion.  It  acts  but  feebly  on  persons 
who  are  positively  debilitated,  with  impoverished  blood  and  soft 
flesh.  This  may  be  the  reason  why  it  is  eaten  with  impunity  by 
herbivorous  animals  as  Linneus  remarks"  (Teste).  It  is  suited  to 
persons  who  are  extremely  sensitive  to  mechanical  injuries,  and  who 
feel  the  effects  of  them  long  after  ;  persons  easily  made  train-sick  or 
sea-sick.  Patients  complain  that  the  bed  is  hard  no  matter  how  soft 
it  may  be.  Am.  corresponds  to  the  effects  of  violent  cough  or 
sneezing  ;  the  child  cries  before  cough  comes  on  (or  with  the  cough) 
in  whooping-cough.  Chronic  bronchitis  when  patients  have  bruised, 
weak  aching  in  the  chest,  or  great  sensitiveness  of  the  chest  on 
exertion,  or  walking.  Allied  to  wounds  are  haemorrhages,  and  Arnica 
caoses  and  cures  haemorrhages  of  many  kinds :  dilatation  and  rupture 
of  small  blood-vessels.  Vomiting,  coughing,  purging,  accompanied 
by  streaks  of  blood  in  ejecta ;  extravasation  of  blood  into  the  con- 
junctiva as  in  whooping-cough.  Haemorrhages  into  the  tissues  of 
internal  oi^gans  or  the  skin.  An  odd  symptom  of  Arnica  is  "  coldness 
of  the  nose."  A  case  of  facial  (left)  neuralgia,  face  swollen,  dark  red, 
very  painful  to  touch,  was  cured  vdth  Arnica  {radix)^  the  guiding 
symptom  being  *'cold  nose."  Patient  had  bitter  taste  ;  was  very 
excitable^  and  <  at  night.  Ussher  notes  that  the  local  use  of  Arnica 
produced  an  extraordinary  grovirth  of  hair  on  a  limb.  This  suggested 
the  use  of  an  oil  mixed  with  Am.  ix  in  a  case  of  baldness,  which  was 
followed  with  marked  success.  Am.  affects  the  left  uf)per  extremity 
and  Uie  ri^t  chest    There  is  a  putridity  in  connection  with  Arnica 


172  ARNICA 

excretionsy  as  with  Baptis.,  which  it  resembles  in  typhoid  conditions : 
putrid  breath ;  fetid  sweat.    With  Arnica  there  is  apt  to  be  inces- 
sant passing  of  stool  and  urine  in  these  states.     Nash  gives    the 
following  as  "  leaders "  :    "  Stupor,  with  involuntary  discharge    of 
faeces  and  urine."    "  Fears  being  touched  or  struck  by  those  coming 
near  him."    ''  Putrid  smell  from  mouth."    "  Bruised,  sore  feeling  in 
uterine  region  ;  cannot  walk  erect."    ''  While  answering  falls  into  a 
deep  stupor  before  finishing."    "  Head  alone,  or  face  alone,  hot ;  rest 
of  body  cool."  ^'  Many  small  boils,  painful,  one  after  another,  extremely 
sore."  ''  Suddenness  "  is  a  feature  of  Am.  pains  and  action.   P.  P.  Wells 
relates  a  cure  of  double  pleuro-pneumonia  in  a  child  with  sudden 
stabbing  pains  on  both  sides  of  the  chest  almost  preventing  breathing. 
Arnica  instantly  caused  a  violent  aggravation,  the  next  instant  relief 
was  perfect,  and  the  child  fell  asleep  breathing  naturally.    I  once  ran 
a  piece  of  wire  into  the  tip  of  one  of  my  fingers,  causing  paralysing 
pain.    I  applied  Am,  i  x  at  once,  and  the  p^n  was  better  ins^uitly 
— seeming  to  be  wiped  out  from  the  point  of  injury  up  the  arm. 
There  is  <  in  damp,  cold  weather  with  Arnica^  which  is  included 
by  Grauvogl  among  the  remedies  suited  to  the  hydrogenoid  consti- 
tution (comp.  Batyt.  c).    Motion  and  exertion  <.    (Bruised,  aching 
sensation  in  chest  on  walking.)    >  Lying  down,  and  lying  with  head 
low  ;  but  <  lying  on  left  side. 

Arnica  should  not  be  used  externally  where  there  is  broken  skin. 
For  torn  and  lacerated  wounds  Calendula  must  be  used  locally. 

Relations, — ^Teste  takes  Arn.  as  the  type  of  his  first  group,  which 
includes  Ledum,  Crot.  t.,  Fer.  magnet.,  Rhus  t.,  Spig.  Compare: 
Abrot.,  Absinth.,  Calend.,  Chamom.,  Cina,  Gnaphal.,  and  other  Compo- 
sitae.  Complementary:  Aeon.  Similar  to:  Aeon.,  Am.  c,  Croton 
(swashing  in  abdomen),  Arsen.,  Baptis.  (typhoid  states — Bap.  "  feels 
ill,"  Am.  "  feels  well,"  resents  being  thought  ill),  Bell.,  Bry.,  Cham., 
Chi.,  Euphras.,  Calend.,  Hep.,  Hyper.,  Ham.,  Ipec,  Led.,  Merc,  Puis., 
Ran.  seel.,  Rho.,  Ruta,  Staph.,  Silic,  Symph.,  Sul.,  Sul.  ac,  Verat. 
Follows  well:  Aco.,  Ipec,  Verat.,  Apis.  Followed  well  by:  Aco.,  Ars., 
Bry.,  Ipec,  Rhus  t.  Action  aided  by :  Arsen.  (dysentery  and  varicose 
veins).  Injurious  in:  Bites  of  dogs  or  rabid  or  angry  animals. 
Antidote  to :  Am.  c,  Chi.,  Cicut.,  Fer.,  Ign.,  Ipec,  Seneg.  Antidoted 
by :  Camph.,  Ipec  (to  massive  doses) ;  Coffee  (headache) ;  Aco.,  Ars., 
Chi.,  Ign.,  Ipec.  (to  potencies).  Wine  increases  unpleasant  effect  of 
Arnica. 

Gansatlons. — Mechanical  injuries.  Fright  or  anger.  Excessive 
venery  (vaginitis  in  the  female,  impotence  in  the  male). 

BTHPTOMB. 

I.  Mind. — Hypochondriacal  anxiety  with  fear  of  dying  and  disagreeable 
temper. — Declines  to  answer  any  questions. — Great  agitation  and  anguish, 
with  groans. — Unfitness  for  exertion,  and  indifference  to  business. — ^Appre- 
hension and  despair. — Over-excitement  and  excessive  moral  sensibility. — 
Great  sensitiveness  of  the  mind  with  anxiety  and  restlessness.— Tendency  to 
be  frightened. — Quarrelsome. — Combative,  quarrelsome  humour. — ^Tears.— 


ARNICA  173 

Shedding  of  tears  and  exclamations  of  rage. — Opinionated. — Foolish  gaiety, 
lerity,  and  mischievousness. — ^Absence  of  ideas. — Depression  of  spirits  and 
abseaoe  of  mind. — Says  there  is  nothing  the  matter  with  him  (in  typhoid 
fever,  &c). — ^Abstraction  and  mnsing. — Unconsciousness  (like  fainting  after 
mechanical  injuries). — Delirium. 

2.  Head. — Whirling  giddiness  with  obscuration  of  the  eyes,  chiefly  on 
getting  up  after  sleeping,  on  moving  the  head,  or  in  walking. — Giddiness,  with 
omsea ;  when  moving  and  rising ;  better  when  lying. — ^Vertigo  when  shutting 
eye&— Pressive  pains  in  the  head,  principally  in  the  forehead. — Cramp-like 
compression  in  the  forehead  zls  if  the  brain  were  contracted  into  a  hard  mass, 
chiefly  when  near  the  fire. — Pain,  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  the  brain. — 
Darting  pullings,  and  shootings  in  the  head,  principally  in  the  temples. — In- 
cisive pain  across  the  head. — Cutting  through  the  head,  as  with  a  knife,  followed 
by  a  sensation  of  coldness. — Stitches  in  the  head,  esp.  in  the  temples  and  fore- 
head—Effects from  concussion  on  the  brain. — Pain  in  the  head  over  one  eye, 
with  greenish  vomiting  (after  a  strain  of  the  back). — Heat  and  burning  in  the 
head,  with  absence  of  heat  from  the  body. — Burning  and  heat  in  the  head,  the 
rest  of  the  body  is  cool  (night  and  morning,  <  from  motion,  >  when  at 
rest).— Heaviness  and  weakness  of  the  head. — Pains  in  the  head,  brought 
00,  or  aggravated  by  walking,  ascending,  meditating,  and  reading,  as  well  as 
after  a  meal. — ^Tingling  at  the  top  of  the  head. — Immobility  of  the  scalp. 

^  Eyes. — Pain,  like  excoriation,  in  the  eyes  and  in  the  eyelids,  with 
dsfficalty  in  moving  them. — Red,  inflamed  eyes. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes 
vitb  snggillation  after  mechanical  injuries. — Biurning  in  the  eyes,  and  flowing 
of  burning  tears. — Eyelids  swollen,  and  with  ecchymosis. — Pupils  contracted. 
— Ejfes  dull,  cloudy,  and  downcast. — Eyes  prominent,  or  half  open. — Fixed, 
amious  look. — Obscuration  of  vision. 

4.  Ears. — Pain,  as  of  contusion  in  the  ears. — ^Acute  pulling  in  the  ears. 
-Shootings  in  and  behind  the  ears. — Hardness  of  hearing,  and  buzzing  before 
the  ears ;  from  blows. — Blood  from  ears. 

5  Nose. — Pain,  as  of  contusion  in  the  nose. — ^Tingling  in  the  nose. — 
Nose  swollen,  with  ecchymosis. — ^Nasal  haemorrhage. — Ulcerated  nostrils. — 
Coryza,  with  burning  in  the  nose. — Cold  nose  (A.  radix), 

6  Face. — Face  pale  and  hollow,  or  yellow  and  bloated. — Heat  in  the 
face  without  heat  in  the  body. — Hard  swelling,  shining  redness  and  heat  in 
one  dieek,  with  throbbing  pain. — Pufiing  of  cheeks  on  breathing. — Tingling 
round  the  eyes,  in  the  cheeks,  and  in  the  lips. — Pustulous  eruption  on  the  face, 
chiefly  round  the  eyes. — Dryness,  burning  heat,  swelling,  and  Assures  in  the 
iq>&^U]ceration  of  the  corners  of  the  mouth. — Paralysis  of  the  lower  jaw. — 
Piunfol  swelling  of  the  submaxillary  glands,  and  of  those  of  the  neck. — 
Trismus,  with  the  month  closed. 

7.  Teeth. — Pain  in  the  teeth,  with  swelling  of  the  cheeks  and  tingling 
in  the  gums. — Sensation  of  pulling  in  the  teeth  while  eating. — Loosening  and 
elongiition  of  the  teeth. — ^Toothache  after  operation. 

8.  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth,  with  thirst. --Saliva  mixed  with 
hk)od.--Sensation  of  excoriation  and  itching  on  the  tongue. — ^Tongue  dry,  or 
loaded  with  a  white  coating. — Putrid  smell  from  the  mouth  in  the  morning. 

9.  Throat. — Sensation  as  if  there  were  something  hard  in  the  throat — 
Dc0utition  hindered  by  a  kind  of  nausea, — Noise  while  swallowing. — Burning 


174  ARNICA 

in  the  throat,  with  uneasiness,  as  from  internal  heat. — Bitter  mucus  in  the 
throat. 

10.  Appetite.— Taste  putrid  or  bitter,  or  slimy.— Bitter  taste,  esp.  in  the 
morning.— Thirst  for  cold  water,  without  fever. — Longing  for  alcoholic 
drinks. — ^Thirst  for  water,  or  desire  to  drink,  with  repugnance  to  all  liquids. — 
Loathing  of  food — principally  milk,  meat,  broth,  and  tobacco. — Liking  for 
vinegar. — ^Want  of  appetite,  and  tongue  loaded  with  a  white  or  yellowish 
coating. — (In  the  evening)  immoderate  appetite,  with  sensation  of  fulness  and 
cramp-like  pressure  in  the  abdomen,  immediately  after  a  meal. — Irritable  and 
plaintive  humour,  after  a  meal  in  the  evening. 

11.  Stomach. — Frequent  eructations,  esp.  in  the  morning,  empty,  bitter, 
putrid,  as  from  rotten  eggs. — Belches  after  coughing. — Rising  <k  a  bitter 
mucus  or  of  salt  water. — Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  chiefly  in  the 
morning. — Nausea,  and  empty  vomiturition. — Retching  even  in  the  night, 
with  pressure  in  the  precordial  region. — ^Vomiting  of  coagulated  blood,  of  a 
deep  colour.— After  drinking  (or  eating),  vomiting  of  what  has  been  taken, 
often  with  a  mixture  of  blood. — Pressure,  fulness,  contraction,  and  cramp-like 
pain  in  the  stomach  and  in  the  precordial  region. — Shootings  in  the  pit  of 
the  stomach,  with  pressure  extending  to  the  back,  and  tightness  of  the 
chest 

12.  Abdomen.— Shootings  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,  with  difficulty  of 
breathing. — Pressure  in  the  hepatic  region. — ^Abdomen  hard  and  swollen,  with 
pain  of  incisive  excoriation  in  the  sides,  chiefly  in  the  morning,  mitigated  by 
the  emission  of  wind. — Pain  in  the  umbilical  region  when  moving. — Shocks 
across  the  abdomen. — Pain,  as  of  contusion,  in  the  sides. — Flatulence,  having 
the  smell  of  rotten  eggs. — Cutting,  colicky  pains  in  the  abdomen. — Colic  with 
strangury. — Tympanites. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Constipation,  with  ineffectual  attempts  to  go  to 
stool. — Stools  in  the  form  of  pap,  of  an  acid  odour.— Flatus,  smelling  like 
rotten  eggs. — Diarrhoea,  with  tenesmus. — Frequent,  scanty,  small,  mucous 
stools. — Involuntary  stools,  chiefly  during  the  night ;  thin,  brown,  or  white. — 
Stools  of  undigested  matter. — Purulent,  bloody  stools. — Haemorrhoids. — Pres- 
sure in  the  rectum.— Tenesmus. — ^Thread-worms. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Tenesmus. — Spasmodic  retention  of  urine,  with 
pressure  in  the  bladder.— I ne£Eectual  attempts  to  make  water. — Involuntary 
emission  of  urine,  at  night  in  bed,  and  in  the  day,  when  running. — Frequent 
micturition  of  pale  urine. — Urine  of  a  brownish  red,  with  sediment,  of  a  brick 
colour. — Emission  of  blood. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Bluish  red  swelling  of  the  penis  and  of  the 
scrotum. — Inflammatory  swelling  of  the  testes  (in  consequence  of  contusion). 
— Purple-red  swelling  of  the  penis  and  testicles,  after  mechanical  injuries. — 
Hydrocele. — Painful  swelling  of  the  spermatic  cord,  with  shooting  in  the 
testes,  extending  to  the  abdomen. — Sexual  desire  increased,  with  erections, 
pollutions,  and  seminal  emission  on  the  slightest  amorous  excitement. — Im- 
potence from  excess  or  abuse. 

id.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Discharge  of  blood  from  the  uterus, 
between  the  periods,  with  nausea. — Excoriation  and  ulceration  of  the  breasts. 
— Soreness  of  the  parts  after  a  severe  labour. — ^Violent  after-pains. — Erysipela- 
tous inflammation  of  the  mammae  and  nipples.— Violent  stitches  in  middle 


ARNICA  175 

of  1.  breast. — ^Vomiting  of  pregnancy.— Threatened  abortion  from  fall,  &c. — 
Feeling  as  if  f cetus  were  lying  crosswise.— Tumour  of  breast, 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.- Dry,  short  cough,  produced  by  a  titillation 
in  the  larynx. — Cough  at  night  during  sleep. — Paroxysm  of  cough,  preceded 
by  tears,  and  cough  with  children  after  having  wept  and  sobbed  from  caprice 
and  waywardness. — ^Whooping-cough ;  child  cries  before  the  cough  comes  on ; 
and  after. — Cough  with  bloodshot  eyes,  or  nose-bleed. — Even  3rawning  pro- 
vokes a  cough.— Cough  with  expectoration  of  blood ;  the  blood  is  clear, 
frothy,  mixed  with  coagulated  masses  and  mucus. — Even  without  cough  there 
is  expectoration  of  black,  coagulated  blood  after  every  corporeal  effort. — 
Inability  to  eject  the  mucus ;  what  the  cough  detaches  is  therefore  swallowed. 
—On  coughing,  shooting  pains  in  the  head,  or  a  bruise-like  pain  in  the  chest. 
—Breath  fetid;  short,  and  panting.— Excessive  diflficulty  of  breathing. — 
Cough  worse  in  the  evening  till  midnight,  from  motion,  in  the  warm  room, 
and  after  drinking. 

18.  Chest.— Respiration  short,  panting,  difficult,  and  anxious.— Rattling 
in  the  chest. — Oppression  of  the  chest  and  difficulty  of  breathing. — Respiration 
frequently  slow  and  deep. — Shootings  in  the  chest  and  sides,  with  difficulty  of 
respiration,  aggravated  by  coughing,  but  breathing  deeply,  and  by  movement ; 
better  from  external  pressure. — Pain,  as  of  a  bruise  and  of  compression  in  the 
chest — Burning  or  rawness  in  the  chest. — Sensation  of  soreness  of  the  ribs. — 
Stitches  in  the  chest  (1.),  aggravated  from  a  dry  cough,  with  oppression  of 
breathing  ;  <  from  motion,  >  from  external  pressure. 

19.  Heart.— Beating  and  palpitation  of  the  heart.— Pain  from  liver  up 
through  L  chest  and  down  1.  arm  ;  veins  of  hands  swollen,  purplish  ;  sudden 
pain  as  if  heart  squeezed  or  had  got  a  shock  (angina  pectoris). — Heart 
strained ;  irritable ;  stitches  in  ;  from  1.  to  r. — Painful  prickings  in  the  heart, 
with  fainting  fits. 

90.  Neck  and  Back.— Weakness  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck  ;  the  head 
falls  backwards. — Painful  swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  neck. — Pains,  as  from 
a  bruise,  and  of  dislocation  in  the  back,  in  the  chest,  and  the  loins.— ^Tingling 
in  the  back. — Great  soreness  of  the  back. — Dragging-down  pain  and  sense  of 
weight  in  loins. 

2a.  Upper  Limbs.— Pain,  as  if  from  fatigue,  and  crawling  in  the  arms 
and  in  the  hands. — Pain,  as  of  dislocation,  in  the  joints  of  the  arms  and 
hands. — ^Tingling  in  the  arms. — Sensation  of  soreness  of  the  arms. — Sensation, 
as  if  the  joints  of  the  arms  and  wrists  were  sprained. — Dartings  in  the  arms. 
—Veins  in  the  hands  swollen,  with  full  and  strong  pulse. — Want  of  strength 
in  the  hands  on  grasping  anything. — Cramps  in  the  fingers. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Pains,  as  from  fatigue  or  from  dislocation,  or  acute 
drawing  in  the  different  parts  of  the  lower  limbs. — Painful  paralytic  weakness 
in  the  joints,  chiefly  of  the  hip  and  knee. — ^Want  of  strength  in  the  knee,  with 
failing  of  the  joint  when  walking. — ^Tension  in  the  knee,  as  from  contraction 
of  the  tendons. — Pale  swelling  in  the  knee. — Sensation  of  soreness  in  the  legs. 
— Inflammatory  erysipelatous  swelling  of  the  feet  with  pain,  and  aggravation 
of  the  pain  by  movement. — Hot,  painful,  hard,  and  shining  swelling  of  the 
great  toes. — ^Tingling  in  the  legs  and  feet. 

24.  Generalities.— Tearing,  drawing  in  outer  parts.— Pricking,  from 
without,  inward.— Pressing  in  inner  parts.— Tingling  in  outer  parts.— Acute 


176  ARNICA 

drawing,  crawling,  pricking,  or  paralytic  pains,  and  sensation  as  from  a  bruise 
in  the  limbs  and  the  joints,  as  well  as  in  the  injured  parts. — Pain,  as  if  sprained 
in  outer  parts,  and  in  the  joints. — Pains,  as  of  dislocation. — Rheumatic  and 
arthritic  pains. — Restiessness  in  the  diseased  parts,  which  causes  them  to  be 
constantly  in  motion. — ^Aggravation  of  pains  in  the  evening  and  at  night,  as 
well  as  from  movement,  and  even  from  noise. — Unsettied  pains,  which  pass 
rapidly  from  one  joint  to  the  other. — Soreness  of  the  whole  body,  with 
tingling. — StifiFness  of  the  limbs  after  exertion. — Muscular  jerking. — Stiffness 
and  weariness  of  all  the  limbs. — Sensation  of  agitation  and  trembling  in  the 
body,  as  if  all  the  vessels  were  throbbing. — Extreme  sensibility  of  the  whole 
body,  chiefly  of  the  joints  and  of  the  skin. — Over-sensitiveness  of  the  whole 
body. — Bleeding  of  internal  and  external  parts  (vomiting  of  blood). — Ebulli- 
tion of  the  blood,  and  congestion  in  the  head,  with  heat  and  burning  in  the 
upper  parts  of  the  body ;  and  cold,  or  coolness,  in  the  lower  parts. — Fainting 
fits,  with  loss  of  consciousness,  in  consequence  of  mechanical  injuries. — Con- 
vulsions, traumatic  trismus  and  tetanus. — General  prostration  of  strength. — 
Paralytic  state  (on  the  1.  side)  in  consequence  of  apoplexy. — Dropsy  of  inner 
parts. 

35.  Skin. — Hot,  hard,  and  shining  swelling  of  the  parts  afiFected. — Stings 
of  insects ;  snake-bites. — Red,  bluish,  and  yellowish  spots,  as  if  from  contu- 
tions. — Black  and  blue  spots  on  the  body. — Yellow-green  spots,  caused  either 
by  a  bruise  or  by  disease. — Bed  sores  ;  blue  mortification. — Miliary  eruption. 
— Petechiae. — Many  small  boils,  or  blood-boils  ;  one  after  another,  extremely 
sore. 

26.  Sleep.— Great  drowsiness  during  the  day,  without  being  able  to 
sleep. — Inclination  to  sleep,  early  in  the  evening. — Comatose  drowsiness  with 
delirium. — Wakens  at  night  with  a  hot  head,  and  is  afraid  to  sleep  for  fear  of 
its  recurrence. — ^Anxious  dreams  about  animals. — Sleep  not  refreshing  and  full 
of  anxious  and  terrible  dreams,  and  waking  with  starts  and  frights. — Dreams 
of  death,  of  mutilated  bodies,  of  unbraiding,  of  indecision. — During  sleep, 
groans,  talking,  snoring,  involuntary  stools  and  urine. — Giddiness  on  waking. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse  very  variable,  mostly  hard,  full  and  quick. — Chilliness, 
internally,  with  external  heat. — Great  chilliness,  with  heat  and  redness  of  one 
cheek. — Chilliness  of  the  side  on  which  he  lies. — Head  alone,  or  face  alone, 
hot,  rest  of  body  cool. — Shivering,  principally  in  the  evening,  and  sometimes 
with  a  sensation  as  if  one  were  sprinkled  with  cold  water. — Heat  in  the 
evening  or  at  night,  with  shivering  on  raising  the  bed-clothes,  even  slightly, 
and  frequentiy  with  a  pain  in  the  back  and  in  the  limbs. — Dry  heat  over  the 
whole  body,  or  only  in  the  face  and  on  the  back. — Fever,  with  much  thirst,  even 
before  the  shiverings. — Before  the  fever,  dragging  sensation  in  all  the  bones. 
— Intermittent  fever  ;  chill  in  the  morning  or  forenoon  ;  drawing  pains  in  the 
bones  before  the  fever ;  changes  his  position  continually  ;  breath  and  perspira- 
tion ofiFensive. — During  the  apyrexia,  pain  in  the  stomach,  want  of  appetite 
and  loathing  of  animal  food. — Perspiration  smelling  sour  or  offensive — some- 
times cold. — ^Typhus,  putrid  breath  and  stool. — Nocturnal  acid  sweat 


ARSENICUM  ALBUM  177 

Arsenicum  Album. 

The  white  oxide  of  Metallic  Arsenic.    As^  O3.    Solution  and 

trituration. 

ClMg>l> — Abscess.  Acne  rosacea.  Alcoholism.  Amenorrhcea.  Afutmia* 
Aphtkct.  Asthma,  Atrophy,  Bronchitis.  Browtp-ague,  Cctcum^  affections  of. 
Cancer,  Cancrum  oris.  Carbuncle.  Cholera  Asiatica.  Cholera,  Cold.  Coldness, 
Commissares,  soreness  of.  Cough.  Coxalgia.  Croup,  Dandriff.  Delirium 
tremens.  Depression  0)  spirits.  Diarrhoea,  Diphtheria,  Dropsy,  Duodenum. 
Dyspepsia,  Ears,  affections  of.  Bcsema,  Endometrius,  Enteric  fever.  Epithelioma. 
Erysipelas,  Eye,  affections  of.  Face,  eruption  on.  Fainting.  Fever,  Gangrene, 
Gastric  ulcer.  Gastritis.  Gastrodynia.  Glandular  swellings.  Gout.  Hay-asthma, 
Headache.  Heart,  affections  of.  Hectic.  Herpes  zoster.  Hodgkin's  disease.  Hydro* 
thorax.  Hypochondriasis,  Ichthyosis.  Indigestion.  Intermittent  fever.  Irritation, 
Jaundice.  Kidney,  diseases  of.  Leucorrhoea.  Lichen,  Lips,  eruption  round;  epithe* 
liomaof.  Locomotor  ateu^.  Lung  affections.  Lupus.  Malignant  pustule.  Measles* 
Melancholia,  Menstruation,  disorders  of.  Miliary  eruptions.  Morphasa.  Myelitis, 
Nails,  diseased.  Nettle-rash.  Neuralgia.  Neuritis.  Noma  pudendi.  Numbness, 
Peritonitis.  Perityphlitis.  Pityriasis,  Plethora.  Pleurisy,  Pleurodynia,  Pneu* 
monia.  Psoriasis.  Purpura.  Pyofmia,  Pyelitis.  Remittent  fever.  Rheumatic  gout. 
Rheumatism.  Rickets.  Ringworm,  Scaldbead.  Scarlatina.  Sciatica.  Scrofulous 
affections.  Sea-bathing,  effects  of.  Sea-sickness.  Shiverings.  Stomach,  affections  of 
Strains.  Suppuration.  Thirst.  Throat,  sore.  Tobacco-haoit,  Tongue,  affections  of. 
Trachea,  affections  of.  Traumatic  fever.  Typhus.  Ulcers.  Vomiting,  Whooping- 
eough.     Worms,    Wounds.    Yellow  fever, 

Chanusteristios. — Arsenic  is  the  horse's  remedy  ;  as  Puis,  is  the 
sheep's,  and  Antim.  crud.  the  pig's.  The  reprehensible  fashion  of 
'<  doctoring  "  horses  with  Arsenic  is  merely  an  abuse  of  a  therapeutic 
fact  The  horse  is  an  animal  on  whose  power  of  endurance  and 
'*  wind  "  enormous  demands  are  made,  and  Arsenic  is  the  remedy  for 
the  effects  of  feats  of  prolonged  endurance.  The  Arsenic  habit  of 
the  Styrian  mountaineers  has  arisen  from  the  discovery  of  its  power 
of  strengthening  the  muscles  both  of  the  limbs  and  of  the  breathing 
apparatus.  But  in  another  way  the  horse  typifies  the  Arsenic  tem- 
perament. The  mental  symptoms  of  any  (hrug,  when  pronounced, 
carry  precedence  of  all  others.  The  horse  is  an  exceedingly  nervous 
anioiial,  constantly  moving  about,  restless  to  a  degree,  and  very  prone 
to  take  fright — quite  a  picture  of  the  Arsenic  temperament.  Accord- 
ing to  Teste  Arsen,  acts  much  more  powerfully  on  vegetable-eating 
animals  than  on  camivora  (opp.  Nux  v.) ;  and  it  is  suited  to  the  effects 
of  excess  of  vegetable  diet,  melons,  strawberries,  and  fruits  in  general, 
especially  watery  fruits. 

The  arsenic-eaters  of  the  Tyrol  can  take  as  much  as  six  grains  of 
white  arsenic,  or  the  sulphide,  every  two  days.  They  maintain  that 
it  imparts  a  sense  of  invigoration  and  enables  them  to  carry  enormous 
loads  up  perpendicular  mountains.  According  to  one  account  it  is 
resorted  to  by  populations  who  live  on  vegetable  food  almost 
exclusively.  *'  It  strengthens  the  muscles,"  an  old  indulger  in  the 
habit  is  reported  to  have  said,  '^  helps  to  digest  our  coarse  bread  and 
potatoes,  and  allows  us  to  breathe  freely  and  easily.  Meat-eaters  have 
no  need  for  such  a  thing,  but  with  us  it  is  a  necessity."  It  is  difficult 
to  say  how  far  this  is  a  directly  ''  tonic,"  effect,  anci  bow  far  curative 

V03U  I.  13 


178  ARSENICUM  ALBUM 

of  the  dyscrasia  generated  by  the  conditions  of  life.  The  fine  skin 
and  glossy  hair  of  the  young  women  among  the  arsenic-eating  popu- 
lations is  remarkable,  and  is  comparable  to  the  fine  coats  of  arsenic- 
fed  horses.  On  the  other  hand,  '*  staring  coat "  in  animals,  and  "  dry, 
rough,  scaly,  unhealthy-looking  skin ''  in  human  beings  are  keynote 
indications  for  the  remedy.  In  this  connection  may  be  mentioned 
the  effects  on  the  crew  of  the  ship  Ziotif  which  carried  arsenic  as  a 
portion  of  its  cargo.  This  was  exposed  somewhat  to  the  sun's  rays, 
and  the  crew  noticed  a  peculiar  smell.  Soon  they  all  began  to  notice 
themselves  growing  stout,  and  on  reaching  Philadelphia  from  England 
they  had  all  gained  much,  one  to  the  extent  of  two  stones  in  weight. 

Restlessness  is  one  of  the  grand  characteristics  of  Arsenic.  Even 
the  stupor  of  Arsenic  is  interrupted  by  fits  of  restlessness  with  anxious 
moaning.  Patients  are  anxious,  full  of  the  fear  of  death,  restlessness 
compelling  them  to  frequently  change  their  position.  Hence  the 
applicability  of  the  drug  in  many  nervous  affections,  notably  chorea. 
Jerks  and  starts  on  faUing  asleep.  Irritability,  desperately  angry ; 
almost  furious.  Despair,  hopelessness,  unutterable  misery.  The 
irritability  and  sadness  of  malarial  cachexias  ;  of  the  cachexias  of 

?[uinine,  mercury,  and  syphilis.    Low  types  of  disease  ;  typhoid  states. 
nflammations  of  great  intensity  with  tendency  to  destruction   of 
tissue.      Burning,  lancinating   pains.      Burning  is   another  of    the 
leading  characteristics  of  Arsenic,    No  other  remedy  has  it  in  more 
pronounced  degree.     The  peculiarity  of  the  ''burnings*'  of  Ars.  is 
that  they  are  >  by  heat  (herein  comparing  with  Capsic.).    The  burn- 
ing in  the  throat  is  >  by  eating  or  drinking  hot  things.    On  the  other 
hand  cold  food  and  cold  drinks  <  stomach  irritations  ;  hence  Ars,  is 
of  signal  use  for  effects  of  eating  ices  and  drinking  ice-water.    Arsen. 
affects  the  entire  alimentary  tract.    The  Ups  are  so  dry  and  parched  and 
cracked  that  the  patient  often  licks  them  to  moisten  them.  The  mouth 
is  aphthous,  ulcerated,  or  gangrenous.    The  stomach  is  so  irritable 
that  the  least  food  or  drink  causes  distress  or  vomiting,  or  stool  or 
both  together.    Abdominal  pains  are  intense,  causing  the  patient  to 
turn  and  twist     Haemorrhoids  are  exceedingly  painful  as  if  burning 
needles  plunged  in.    States  of  lowered  vitality.     The  prostration  of 
Arsen.  is  remarkable.    With  it  there  is  the  desire  to  move  or  be  moved 
constantly.     The  patient  is  exhausted  from  the  slightest  exertion. 
Exhaustion  is  not  felt  while  lying  still,  but  as  soon  as  he  moves  he  is 
surprised  to  find  himself  so  weak.    The  prostration  seems  out  of  pro- 
portion to  the  rest  of  his  illness.    Must  lie  down.    Exhaustion  from 
hill-climbing,  breathless,  sleepless.    Thirst  for  httle  and  often  {Ant,  /., 
Lyc.)f  wants  it  very  cold  and  immediately  rejects  it  {Pkos,  as  soon  as 
it  becomes  warm).    Before  and  after  the  cough  of  Arsenic  there  is  an 
attack  of  asthma  (Phos.)     Arsen.  has  a  great  place  in  acute  coryza 
and  hay-fever.    The  fluent  coryza  is  corrosive,  reddening  the  upper 
lip,  and  has  more  burning  than  either  Merc,  or  Cepa.    Also  it  is  < 
out  of  doors,  and  >  in  warmth,  which  distinguishes  it  from  Cepa 
especially.     Arsenic  is  predominantly  right-sided.     The  neuralgias 
affect  the  right  side  most ;  the  right  lung  ("  acute,  sharp,  fixed  or 
darting  pain  in  apex  and  through  upper  third  of  right  lung '')  is  more 
affected  than  the  left ;  also  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  hence 


ARSENICUM  ALBUM  179 

typhlitis.  Many  dropsical  conditions  are  controlled  by  Arsen. 
Especially  has  it  done  brilliant  work  in  cases  of  hydrothorax.  It 
has  been  called  the  '^  liquid  trochar/'  on  account  of  the  expeditious 
way  in  which  it  will  remove  a  watery  effusion.  The  patient  cannot 
lie  down  ;  must  sit  up  to  breathe  ;  anxious  ;  restless  ;  <  about  i  a.m. 
It  is  suited  to  the  full  plethoric  habit.  Pufifiness  in  one  of  its  cha- 
racteristics ;  and  from  this  to  dropsy.  All  mucous  membranes  are 
irritated.  The  skin  is  cold  and  clammy.  Scurfy  eruptions.  Bran- 
coloored  scales  on  head  coming  down  to  forehead.  Arsenic  has  cured 
epithelioma  of  the  lips  and  closely  corresponds  to  the  cancerous 
ifiathesis.  Many  cures  of  cancer  have  been  reported  under  its  use, 
both  in  the  crude  and  in  potencies.  When  the  subjective  symptoms 
of  Arscn,  are  present,  it  will  cure  in  the  potencies.  When  the 
homcBopathicity  is  more  crude  the  lower  potencies  will  be  required  : 
in  this  case  the  Arscn.  appears  to  act  directly  on  the  cancerous 
tissoe  and  cancerous  elements  in  the  system. 

Arsenic  is  a  haemorrhagic :  it  acts  on  both  blood  and  blood-vessels. 
Varices  bum  like  fire.  Anaemia,  chlorosis,  pyaemia  all  come  within  the 
scope  of  ArsemCf  which  corresponds  also  to  states  resulting  from  losses 
of  blood,  as  venesection,  metrorrhagia,  haemoptysis. 

The  Conditions,  especially  of  time  and  temperature,  are  all- 
important  with  Arsenic.  Unless  these  correspond  in  the  patient, 
fiaibire  will  be  more  frequent  than  success.  Arsenic  is  one  of  the 
greatest  of  periodics.  I  once  treated  some  members  of  a  family  who 
all  had  attacks  of  fever  of  short  duration,  recurring  regularly  every  six 
weeks,  from  living  in  rooms  papered  with  arseniod  papers.  Its 
periods  are  :  every  day  ;  every  third  or  fourth  day  ;  every  fortnight ; 
every  six  weeks ;  every  year.  There  is  pronounced  night  aggrava- 
tion, the  pains  are  unsupportable  with  restlessness.  <  Midnight  and 
after  (Aeon,  is  rather  before  midnight)  ;  <  3  a.m.  There  is  <  from 
cold  and  damp  ;  >  warmth.  Arsen.  loves  warmth  like  Nux  v.,  Psor., 
Hebar,  Silic,  Mag.  mur,  and  other  hydrogenoids,  and  herein  is 
diSdentiated  from  SuL^  Ant,  crud.^  lod.,  Afds,  and  Puis.  Arsen.  hugs 
the  fire  and  likes  warm  wraps.  <  Lying  on  afiEected  side,  or  wiUi 
hod  low.     >  Lying  with  head  high. 

BelatioiUL — Antidotes:  To    poisonous    doses — milk,    albumen, 

demulcent  drinks,  followed  by  emetics  of  mustard.  Sulphate  of  Zinc 

or  Sulphate  of  Copper  (Tartar  emetic  is  too  irritating).    Castor  oil 

is  the  best  purgative.   Chemical  antidotes  :  Animal  charcoal,  Hydrated 

;         peroxide  of  iron,  Magnesia,  Limewater.    Dynamic  antidote :  Opium  ; 

j         it  may  be  administered  by  clyster  if  not  retained  on  stomach.  Brandy 

/         and  stimulants  if  there  is  depression  and  collapse.    If  urine  is  sup- 

i  pressed,  Sweet  spirits  of  nitre  in  large  quantities  of  water. 

I  Antidotes  of  potencies :  Camph.,  Chi.,  Chin,  sul..  Per.,  Graph.,  Hep., 

^  lod.,  Ipec.,  Nux  v.,  Sambuc,  Tabac,  Verat.     Arsen.  is  antidote  to: 

Carb.  v.,  ChL,  Per.,  Graph.,  Hep.,  lod.,  Ipec,  Lach.,  Merc,  Nux  v., 

Phos.,  Sambuc,  Strych.,  Tabac,  Verat.    Follows  well:  Aco.,  Agar., 

Am.,  Bell.,  Cham.,  Chi.,  Ipec,  Lach.,  Verat.  Followed  well  by :  Aran,  d., 

Nox  v.,  lod.,  Sul.    Rhus  follows  well  in  skin  afiFections,  especially 

m  cases  treated  allopathically  with  large  doses  of  arsenic.    Comple- 

maitary:  All.  sat,  Carb.  v.,  Phos.    Similar  to  :  Aco.,  Apoc,  Arg.  n., 


i82  ARSENICUM  ALBUM 

round  the  mouth. — Eruption  on  the  mouth  and  on  the  lips,  near  the  red  part. 
— Cancer  of  the  face  and  lips  with  burning  pain. — Hard  knots  and  cancerous 
ulcers,  having  thick  scurf  with  lard-like  bottoms  on  the  lips. — Lips  excoriated, 
with  a  sensation  of  tingling. — Swelling  and  bleeding  of  the  lips. — Swelling  of 
the  submaxillary  glands,  with  contusive  pain,  and  soreness  on  being  touched. 
— Paralysis  of  the  lower  jaw. — Drawing  stitches  here  and  there  in  the  face. 

7.  Teeth. — Sharp  aching  pains,  or  successive  pullings  in  the  teeth  and 
gums,  chiefly  at  night,  extending  sometimes  to  the  cheek,  to  the  ear,  and  to 
the  temples;  with  swelling  of  the  cheek  and  insupportable  pains,  which 
impel  to  furious  despair,  or  which  are  aggravated  when  one  lies  on  the 
diseased  side,  and  mitigated  by  the  heat  of  the  fire. — Convulsive  grinding 
of  the  teeth.— Sensation  of  elongation  and  painful  loosening  of  the  teeth,  with 
swelling  and  bleeding  of  the  gums. — Pain  in  teeth  >  by  hot  applications. 

8.  Mouth. — Offensive  smell  from  the  mouth. — Secretion  of  abundant 
tough,  fetid,  bloody  saliva. — Great  dryness  of  the  mouth,  or  accumulation  of 
saliva,  sometimes  bitter  or  bloody. — ^The  mouth  is  reddish-blue,  inflamed, 
burning. — ^Tongue  bluish  or  white. — Ulceration  of  the  tongue,  with  blue 
colour. — ^Torpor  and  insensibility  of  the  tongue,  as  if  it  were  burnt — ^Tongue 
brownish  or  blackish,  dry,  cracked,  and  trembling. — ^Tongue  a  bright  red. — 
Tongue  white  as  chalk,  as  if  painted  white. — ^Tongue  red  with  a  silvery  white 
coat. — ^Tongue  stiff  like  a  piece  of  wood. — Ulceration  of  the  tongue  on  the 
anterior  edge. — Swelling,  inflammation,  or  gangrene  of  the  tongue. — ^Angina 
gangrenosa  (with  aphthae). — ^Aphthae  in  the  mouth. — Speech  rapid,  precipitate. 

g*  Throat. — Burning  in  the  throat. — Scraping,  sharp  pain,  with  burning 
in  the  throat. — Inflammation  and  gangrene  of  the  throat. — Spasmodic  constric- 
tion of  the  throat  and  of  the  oesophagus,  with  inability  to  swallow. — Deglutition 
painful  and  difficult,  as  if  from  paralysis  of  the  oesophagus. — Sensation  of  great 
dryness  in  the  throat  and  in  the  mouth,  which  induces  continual  drinking. — 
Accumulation  of  greyish  or  greenish  mucus  of  salt  or  bitter  taste  in  the  throat. 

ID.  Appetite. — Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  chiefly  after  having  drunk  or 
eaten,  also  in  the  morning. — ^Astringent,  or  putrid,  or  acid  taste  in  the  mouth. 
— Food  appears  acid,  insipid,  or  too  salt. — Insipidity  of  food. — Bitter  taste  of 
food,  particularly  of  bread  and  beer. — Complete  adypsia  ;  or  violent  burning, 
choking,  and  unquenchable  thirst,  making  it  necessary  to  drink  constantly, 
but  little  at  a  time. — Desire  for  cold  water,  for  acids,  for  brandy,  for  coffee 
and  milk. — ^Want  of  appetite  and  of  hunger,  frequently  with  burning  thirst — 
Insurmountable  dislike  to  all  food,  chiefly  meat  and  butter. — Everything  that 
is  swallowed  causes  a  pressure  in  the  oesophagus,  as  if  it  had  stopped  there. — 
Continual  craving,  with  want  of  appetite  and  prompt  satiety. — ^After  a  meal, 
nausea,  vomiting,  eructations,  pains  in  the  stomach,  colic,  and  many  other 
sufferings. — ^After  having  drunk,  shivering  or  shuddering,  return  of  vomiting 
and  diarrhoea,  eructations  and  colic. 

zz.  Stomach. — Frequent  eructations,  particularly  after  having  drunk  or 
eaten,  mostly  empty,  acid,  or  bitter. — Regurgitation  of  acrid  matter,  or  of 
bitter  greenish  mucus. — Frequent  and  convulsive  hiccoughs,  principally  in 
the  night. — Frequent  and  excessive  nausea,  sometimes  rising  even  to  the  throat, 
with  inclination  to  vomit,  necessity  for  lying  down,  sleep,  swooning,  trembling, 
shuddering,  or  heat,  pains  in  the  feet,  &c. — Flow  of  water  from  the  stomach, 
like  water-brash.— Vomitings,  sometimes  very  violent,  and  principally  after 


ARSENICUM  ALBUM  183 

having  dnink  or  eaten,  or  at  night,  towards  the  morning ;  vomitmg  of  food 
and  of  drink,  or  of  mucons,  bilious,  or  serous  matter,  of  a  yellowish,  greenish, 
brownish,  or  blackish  colour ;  vomiting  of  saguineous  matter. — ^While  vomiting, 
violent  pains  in  the  stomach,  sensation  of  excoriation  in  the  abdomen,  cries, 
buming  internal  heat,  diarrhoea,  and  fear  of  death. — ^Inflation  and  tension  of 
the  precordial  region  and  of  the  stomach. — Excessive  pain  in  the  epigastrium, 
and  in  the  stomach,  chiefly  on  being  touched. — Pressure  in  the  stom2u:h  as 
from  a  stone,  or  as  if  the  heart  would  burst,  and  excessive  anguish  in  the  pre- 
cordial region,  with  complaints  and  lamentations. — Sensation  of  constriction, 
crunp-like  pains,  pulling,  piercing,  and  gnawing  in  the  stomach. — Burning  in 
the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  stomach. — Inflammation  or  induration  of  the 
stomach. — Cramp  in  the  stomach  (2  a.m.). — Cancer  in  the  stomach. — Sensation 
of  cold,  or  insupportable  heat  and  burning  in  the  precordial  region,  and  in  the 
stooiach. — ^The  pains  in  the  stomach  manifest  themselves  mostly  after  a  meal, 
or  in  the  night. — ^Tetters  on  the  pit  of  the  stomach. 

za.  Abdomen. — Compression  in  the  region  of  the  liver. — Swelling  of 
the  spleen. — Excessive  pains  in  the  abdomen,  principally  on  the  left  side,  and 
often  with  great  anguish  in  the  abdomen. — Inflation  of  the  abdomen. — Ascites. 
—Swelling  of  the  abdomen  as  in  ascites. — Hard  bloated  abdomen. — ^Violent 
totting  pains,  cramp-like  pains,  digging,  pulling,  tearing,  and  gnawing  in  the 
abdomen. — ^Attacks  of  colic  occur  chiefly  after  having  drunk  or  eaten,  or  in 
tlie  night,  and  are  often  accompanied  by  vomiting  or  diarrhoea,  with  cold, 
internal  heat,  or  cold  sweat. — Burning  pains  with  anguish. — Sensation  of  cold, 
or  msnpportable  buming  in  the  abdomen. — Pain,  as  from  a  wound  in  the 
abdomen,  chiefly  on  coughing  and  laughing. — Swelling  and  induration  of  the 
mesenteric  glands — ^Much  flatulency,  with  rumbling  in  the  abdomen. — 
Flatolency  of  a  putrid  smell. — Painful  swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands. — Ulcer 
above  the  naveL 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.  —  Constipation,  with  frequent,  but  ineffectual 
inclination  to  evacuate. — ^Tenesmus,  with  burning  in  the  anus. — Involuntary 
and  nnperceived  evacuations. — ^Violent  diarrhoea,  with  frequent  evacuations, 
naosea,  vomiting,  thirst,  great  weakness,  colic,  and  tenesmus. — Nocturnal 
diarrhoea,  and  renewal  of  the  diarrhoea,  after  having  drunk  or  eaten. — Burning 
stools^  with  violent  pains  in  the  bowels,  with  tenesmus,  thirst,  worse  after 
eating. — Buming  and  corrosive  evacuations ;  faeces  with  mucus,  or  bilious, 
sanguineous,  serous,  painless,  involuntary,  &c.,  of  greenish,  yellowish,  whitish 
colour,  or  brovimish  and  blackish  ;  fetid  and  putrid  evacuations ;  evacuations 
of  ondigested  substances. — Emission  of  mucus  by  the  anus,  with  tenesmus. — 
Prolapsus  of  the  rectum  :  with  much  pain. — Itching,  pain  as  from  excoriation, 
and  burning  in  the  rectum  and  in  the  anus,  as  well  as  in  the  haemorrhoidal 
tumours,  chiefly  at  night — Shootings  in  the  haemorrhoidal  tumours. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.  —  Retention  of  urine,  as  from  paralysis  of  the 
bladder. — Frequent  inclination  to  make  water,  even  at  night,  with  abundant 
eoiission. — ^Incontinence  of  urine,  which  escapes  almost  involuntarily,  even  at 
ni^t,  in  bed. — Difficult  and  painful  emission  of  urine. — Scanty  urine,  of  a 
deep  yellow  colour. — Urine  aqueous,  greenish,  brownish,  or  turbid,  with 
mncQS-like  sediment. — Sanguineous  urine. — Burning  in  the  urethra  on  making 
vater.^Involuntary  discharge  of  buming  urine. 

IS*   Male  Sexual  Organ8«--Itching,  shooting,  and  burning  in  the  glans 


i84  ARSENICUM  ALBUM 

and  in  the  prepuce. — Inflammation,  painful  and  gangrened  swelling  of  the 
genital  parts. — Glans  swollen,  cracked,  and  bluish. — Swelling  of  the  testes. — 
Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  the  scrotum. — ^Nocturnal  pollutions. — ^Flowing 
of  the  prostatic  fluid  during  loose  stools. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Venereal  desire  in  women.— Catamenia 
too  early  and  too  copious,  attended  by  much  suffering. — Catamenia  suppressed, 
with  pains  in  the  sacrum  and  in  the  shoulders. — Leucorrhoea  acrid,  corrosive^ 
thick,  and  yellowish. — Scirrhus  uteri. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Catarrh,  with  hoarseness,  coryza,  and 
sleeplessness. — ^Voice  rough  and  hoarse. — ^Voice  trembling  or  unequal;  at 
one  time  strong,  at  another  weak. — ^Tenacious  mucus  in  the  larynx  and  the 
chest— Bronchitis,  with  difiicult  secretion  of  mucus. — Sensation  of  dryness 
and  burning  in  the  larynx. — Spasmodic  constriction  of  the  larynx. — Dry 
cough,  sometimes  deep,  fatiguing,  and  shaking,  principally  in  the  evening 
after  lying  down,  or  at  night,  obliging  the  patient  to  assume  an  erect  posture ; 
also  after  drinking  ;  on  being  in  the  fresh  and  cool  air,  during  movement,  or 
during  expiration,  and  often  with  difficulty  of  respiration,  suffocating,  contrac- 
tive pain,  or  sensation  as  of  excoriation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  the 
chest ;  pain,  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  abdomen,  shootings  in  the  hypochondria, 
in  the  epigastrium,  and  in  the  chest,  &c. — ^Arrest  of  breathing  with  cough. — 
Cough  excited  by  a  sensation  of  constriction  and  suffocation  in  the  larynx,  as 
if  by  the  vapour  of  sulphur. — Respiration  oppressed,  anxious,  short. — Oppressed, 
laboured  breathing,  esp.  when  ascending  a  height ;  in  cold  air ;  when 
turning  in  bed. — Periodical  attacks  of  cough.— Cough  with  expectoration  of 
sanguineous  mucus,  sometimes  with  burning  heat  over  the  whole  body. — 
Difficult  expectoration,  or  scanty  and  frothy. 

18.  Chest. — Shortness  of  breath,  difficulty  of  respiration,  choking,  dysp- 
noea, and  attack  of  suffocation,  sometimes  with  cold  sweat,  spasmodic 
constriction  of  the  chest  or  of  the  larynx,  anguish,  great  weakness,  body 
cold,  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  paroxysm  of  cough. — ^The  sufferings 
occur  chiefly  in  the  evening  in  bed,  or  at  night,  when  lying  down  ;  also  in 
windy  weather,  in  the  fresh  and  cold  air,  or  in  the  heat  of  a  room,  or  when 
warmly  clothed,  on  being  fatigued,  on  being  angry,  on  walking,  on  moving, 
and  even  on  laughing. — Respiration  anxious,  stertorous,  and  wheezing. — 
Oppression  of  the  chest  on  coughing,  on  walking,  and  on  going  upstairs. 
---Constriction  and  compression  of  the  chest,  sometimes  with  great  anxiety, 
inability  to  speak,  and  fainting  fits. — ^Tension  and  pressure  in  the  chest. — 
Stitches  and  pressing  in  the  sternum. — Shooting  pains  in  the  chest  and  in  the 
sternum. — Chilliness  or  coldness  in  the  chest. — Shivering,  or  great  heat  and 
burning  in  the  chest. — Heat,  burning,  itching  in  the  chest.— Yellowish  spots 
on  the  chest. 

IQ.  Heart. — Violent  and  insupportable  throbbings  of  the  heart,  chiefly 
when  lying  on  the  back,  and  esp.  at  night. — Irregular  beatings  of  the  heart, 
sometimes  with  anguish. — Cramp  in  the  heart. — Heart-beats  irritable. — 
Palpitation  with  anguish,  cannot  lie  on  back ;  <  going  upstairs. — Palpi- 
tation and  trembling  weakness  after  stool ;  must  lie  down. — Palpitation 
after  suppressed  herpes  or  foot*sweat.— -Angina  pectoris. — Hydropericardium. 
—Fatty  degeneration. 

SO.    Neck  and  Back.-— CEdematous,  painless  swellings  of  the  neck  and 


ARSENICUM  ALBUM  185 

d  the  lower  jaw. — ^Tetters  between  the  shoulder-blades. — ^Violent  and  burning 
pain  in  the  back,  powerfully  aggravated  by  the  touch.— Acute  drawing  pains 
in  the  back  and  between  the  shoulder-blades,  which  necessitate  lying  down, 
tt.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Acute  drawing  pains  in  the  arms  and  in  the  hands. 
--Swelling  of  the  arms,  with  blackish  pustules  of  a  putrid  smell.— Acute  drawing 
pains  in  the  night,  beginning  from  the  elbow  and  extending  to  the  armpits. — 
Acute  pulling  and  shooting  in  the  wrists. — Cramps  in  the  fingers. — ^At  night, 
sensation  of  fulness  and  swelling  in  the  palms  of  the  hands. — Excoriation 
between  the  fingers. — Hard  swelling  of  the  fingers,  with  pain  in  the  finger- 
bones.— Ulcersat  the  extremities  of  the  fingers,  with  burning  pain. — Discoloured 
nafls. 

t^  Lo^^er  Limbs. — Cramp  in  the  legs.—- Acute  drawing  pains  in  the 
hq>s»  extending  to  the  groins,  the  thighs,  and  sometimes  even  to  the  ankle- 
boaes,  with  uneasiness,  which  obliges  one  to  move  the  limb  constantly. — 
Tearing  and  stinging  in  the  hips,  legs,  and  loins — ^Tearing  in  the  tibia. — Rheu- 
matic pain  in  the  legs,  and  esp.  in  the  tibia. — Paralytic  weakness  of  the  thigh. 
*-Patn,  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  joint  of  the  knee. — Old  ulcers  on  lower  limbs, 
with  burning  and  lancinating  pains. — Contraction  of  the  tendons  of  the  ham. 
--Tetters  on  the  ham. — Cramps  in  the  calves  of  the  legs. — ^Affections  of  the 
shin-bones. — ^Buming  and  shooting  ulcers  in  the  leg. — Itching  herpes  in  the 
bends  of  the  knee.— Varices. — Fatigue  in  the  l^s  and  in  the  feet. — Swelling 
of  the  foot,  burning,  hard,  and  shining,  with  burning  vesicles  of  a  blue-blackish 
cotoor  on  the  instep. — Corrosive  and  ulcerous  vesicles  on  the  soles  of  the  feet 
and  on  the  toe&— Pains  in  the  fleshy  part  of  the  toes,  as  if  they  were  galled  by 
valldng. 

14*  Gtaieralitiea. — Paroxysms  of  su£Fering  with  anxiety,  coldness,  rapid 
iahst  of  strength,  and  wish  to  lie  down. — Burning,  chiefly  in  the  interior  of 
the  parts  a£Fected,  or  sharp  and  drawing  pains. — Nocturnal  pains,  which  are 
fdt  even  during  sleep,  and  which  are  so  unbearable  that  they  excite  despair 
and  fmy.— -Aggravation  of  su£Fering  by  conversation,  as  well  as  after  a  meal, 
m  the  morning  on  rising,  in  the  evening  in  bed,  on  lying  on  the  part  afFected, 
or  during  repose  after  prolonged  exercise ;  mitigated  by  external  heat,  as  well 
as  by  assuming  a  standing  posture,  or  by  walking,  and  movement  of  the  body. 
—Return  of  sufferings  periodically. — (Edematous  swellings,  with  burning  pain 
in  the  parts  affected. — Excessive  indolence,  and  dread  of  all  exertion. — ^Want 
of  stroigth,  excessive  weakness,  and  complete  asthenia,  even  to  prostration, 
sometimes  with  paralysis  of  the  lower  jaw,  eyes  dull  and  deep,  and  mouth 
open.— Rapid  failure  of  strength,  and  sensation  of  weakness  as  if  from  want 
of  food— Inability  to  walk  ;  the  patient  is  obliged  to  remain  lying  down. — 
When  lying  down,  the  patient  feels  stronger,  but  on  rising,  falls  from  weak- 
ness.—Deficiency  of  blood ;  dropsy  of  outer  and  inner  parts ;  inflammation 
of  mucous  membranes ;  ulcers  in  the  glands. — Emaciation  and  atrophy  of  the 
^vhole  body,  with  colliquative  sweats,  great  weakness,  face  earthy,  and  eyes 
sottken,  with  a  dark  ring  surrounding  them. — ^Violent  convulsive  attacks, 
spasms  and  tetanus. — Epileptic  fits,  preceded  by  burning  in  the  stomach, 
pressore  and  heat  in  the  back,  extending  to  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  to  the 
bnin,  with  dizziness.— <Edematous  inflation  and  swelling  of  the  whole  body, 
chiefly  of  the  head  and  face,  with  enlargement  of  the  abdomen,  and  engorge- 
ment of  the  glands. — Burning  pains  of  inner  or  exterior  parts  (glands).— 


i86  ARSENICUM  ALBUM 

Emaciation.^Trembling  of  the  limbs,  chiefly  the  arms  and  legs. — ^Trem- 
bling of  the  limbs  (in  drunkards). — StifiFness  and  fixedness  of  the  limbs, 
sometimes  with  sharp  rheumatic  pains. — Paralysis  and  contraction  of  the 
limbs. — Paralysis,  especially  of  the  lower  extremities. — Faintingfits,  sometimes 
with  dizziness  and  swelling  of  the  face. — Fainting,  from  weakness,  with 
scarcely  perceptible  pulse. — Sensation  of  torpor  in  the  limbs,  as  if  they  were 
dead. 

25.  Skin.— Desquamation  of  the  skin  of  the  body.— Skin  dry  as  parch- 
ment, cold  and  bluish.— ^Yellowish  colour  of  the  skin. — Shootings,  hot  itching, 
and  violent  burning  in  the  skin. — Reddish  or  bluish  spots  in  the  skin. — 
Petechiae.— Inflamed  spots,  as  from  morbilli,  chiefly  in  the  head,  face,  and  neck. 
— Miliary  eruptions,  red  and  white. — Conical  pimples,  whitish  or  reddish,  with 
burning  itching. — Nettle-rash. — Eruption  of  painful  black  pustules. — Eruption 
of  itchy  pimples,  small  and  tickling. — Eruption  of  small  red  pimples,  which 
increase  and  change  into  gnawing  ulcers,  covered  with  a  scurf. — ^Vesicular 
eruptions. — Herpes,  with  vesicles,  and  violently  burning,  esp.  at  night, 
or  with  coverings,  like  fish-scales. — Skin  jaundiced ;  general  anasarca ;  black 
blisters.— Pustules  filled  with  blood  and  pus.— Tettery  spots,  covered  with 
phlyctenae  and  furfur,  with  burning  nocturnal  pains. — Ulcers  with  raised  and 
hard  edges,  surrounded  by  a  red  and  shining  crown  ;  with  the  bottoms  like 
lard,  or  of  a  blackish-blue  colour,  with  burning  pains  or  shooting,  principally 
When  the  parts  affected  become  cold. — Ulcers,  hard  on  the  edges,  stinging, 
burning  spongy  ;  with  proud  flesh  ;  turning  black ;  flat ;  pus  thin,  ichorous 
(cancers). — Fetid  smell,  ichorous  suppuration,  ready  bleeding,  putridity,  and 
bluish  or  greenish  colour  of  the  ulcers. — ^Thin  crusts  or  proud  flesh  on  the 
ulcers. — Spacelus. — ^Want  of  secretion  in  the  ulcers. — Carbuncles  (burning). — 
Inflammatory  tumours  with  burning  pains.— Warts. — Ulcers  in  form  of  a  wart 
— Chilblains. — ^Varices. — Discoloured  nails. 

26.  Sleep,— Constant  drowsiness,  with  strong  and  frequent  yawnings. — 
Nocturnal  sleeplessness,  with  agitation  and  constant  tossing. — Drowsiness  in 
the  evening. — Coma  vigil,  often  interrupted  by  groans  and  grinding  of  the 
teeth. — Unrefreshing  sleep  ;  in  the  morning  it  seems  as  if  more  sleep  were 
needed. — Starting  of  the  limbs  when  on  the  point  of  falling  asleep. — During 
sleep,  startings  with  fright,  groans,  talking,  querulous  exclamations,  grinding 
of  the  teeth,  convulsive  movements  of  the  hands  and  fingers,  sensation  of 
general  uneasiness,  and  tossing. — In  sleep,  lying  on  the  back,  with  the  hand 
under  the  head. — Light  sleep  ;  the  slightest  noise  is  heard,  though  the  patient 
dreams  continually. — Frequent  dreams,  full  of  cares,  threats  apprehensions, 
repentings  and  inquietude ;  anxious,  horrible,  fantastic,  lively  and  angry 
dreams ;  dreams  of  storms,  of  fire,  of  black  waters  and  darkness;  dreams  with 
meditation.^In  the  night,  jerking  of  the  limbs,  heat  and  agitation,  burning 
under  the  skin,  as  if  there  were  boiling  water  in  the  veins,  or  cold,  with 
inability  to  get  warm,  stifling  sensation  in  the  larynx,  asthmatic  attacks,  great 
agitation,  and  anguish  at  the  heart. — Frequent  waking  during  the  night,  with 
difficulty  in  sleeping  again. — Sleeplessness,  from  anguish  and  restlessness, 
with  tossing  about  (after  midnight). 

27.  Fever. — Cold  over  the  whole  body,  sometimes  with  cold  and  viscid 
sweat—General  coldness,  with  parchment-like  dryness  of  the  skin,  or  with 
profuse,  cold,  clammy  perspiration. — Chilliness  without  thirst ;  worse  after 


ARSENICUM   HYDROGENISATUM      187 

drinking ;  with  stretching  of  the  limbs  and  restlessness ;  with  external  heat 
at  the  same  time ;  when  walking  in  the  open  air. — Shiveringsand  shuddering, 
chiefly  in  the  evening  in  bed,  or  on  walking  in  the  open  air,  or  after  having 
drank  or  eaten,  and  often  with  the  addition  of  other  sufferings,  such  as  sharp 
pains  in  the  limbs,  headache,  oppression  of  the  chest,  and  difBculty  of  respira- 
tion, drawing  in  the  limbs,  anxiety  and  restlessness. — Universal  heal^  principally 
at  night,  and  (rften  with  anxiety,  restlessness,  delirium,  heaviness  and  perplexity 
in  the  head,  dizziness,  vertigo,  oppression  and  pricking  in  the  chest,  redness 
of  the  skin,  &c — Febrile  attacks,  mostly  in  the  morning  or  evening  often  with 
shivering  and  heat  slightly  developed,  burning  thirst  or  perfect  adypsia, 
quartan  or  tertian,  or  sometimes  quotidian ;  sufiFerings  before  the  attack,  and 
sweats  after,  on  going  to  sleep ;  apyrexia  (or  shivering  or  heat),  with  great 
weakness,  dropsical  affections,  pains  in  the  regions  of  the  liver  and  of  the 
spleen,  dull  or  shooting  headache,  sharp  and  drawing  pains  in  the  limbs,  in 
the  back  and  in  the  head,  pressure,  fulness,  tension,  and  burning  in  the 
stomach  and  in  the  epigastrium,  prickings  in  the  chest  and  in  the  sides, 
difficulty  of  breathing,  anxiety,  face  puffed,  earthy,  &c. — Pulse  irregular,  or 
quick,  weak,  small,  and  frequent,  or  suppressed  and  trembling. — Pulse  frequent 
in  the  morning,  slower  in  the  evening. — Frequent  colliquative,  or  cold  and 
viscid  sweats;  sweat  at  night,  or  in  the  evening  on  going  to  sleep,  or  in  the 
morning  on  waking ;  partial  sweat,  chiefly  on  the  face  and  legs. — Perspiration 
at  the  beginning  of  sleep,  or  all  night ;  cold,  clammy,  smelling  sour  or  offen- 
sne. — ^During  perspiration,  unquenchable  thirst ;  sifter  the  fever,  attack  of 
headache, — Perspiration,  which  imparts  a  yellow  colour  to  the  linen  and  to 
the  skin. — During  the  sweat,  heaviness  in  the  head,  buzzing  in  the  ears  and 
trembling  of  the  limbs. 

Arsenicum  Bromatmn. 

Bromide  of  Arsenic.    As  Br3« 
GUnfoaL— Acne.    Diabetes. 

CharactoriBtfawk — ''Acne  rosacea,  with  violet  papules  on  the 
nose.    Diabetes  mellitus  "  (Hansen). 


Irsenicom  Hydrogenisatom. 

Arseniuretted  Hydrogen.    As  H3.    Solution  in  distilled  water. 

QUoaL— Collapse  of  cholera.   Hiccough.    Suppressed  menses.   Yellow  fever. 

CSharaoteriBtiOB. — Arsen,  hydro,  was  used  by  Drysdale  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  Arsenic  in  the  collapse  stage  of  cholera.  The  symptoms 
set  in  suddenly  but  develop  slowly.  In  poisoning  cases  death 
often  took  place  in  the  second  week,  and  one  person,  who  recovered, 
suffered  seven  weeks.    Though  like  Ars.  alb.  in  general  symptoms,  the 


i86  ARSENICUM  ALBUM 

Emaciation.— Trembling  of  the  limbs,  chiefly  the  arms  and  legs.— Trem- 
bling of  the  limbs  (in  drunkards).— Stiffness  and  fixedness  of  the  limbs, 
sometimes  with  sharp  rheumatic  pains. — Paralysis  and  contraction  of  the 
limbs. — Paralysis,  especially  of  the  lower  extremities. — Faintingfits,  sometimes 
with  dizziness  and  swelling  of  the  face. — Fainting,  from  weakness,  with 
scarcely  perceptible  pulse.— Sensation  of  torpor  in  the  limbs,  as  if  they  were 
dead. 

35.  Skin. — Desquamation  of  the  skin  of  the  body. — Skin  dry  as  parch- 
ment, cold  and  bluish. — ^Yellowish  colour  of  the  skin. — Shootings,  hot  itching, 
and  violent  burning  in  the  skin. — Reddish  or  bluish  spots  in  the  skin. — 
Petechiae. — Inflamed  spots,  as  from  morbilli,  chiefly  in  the  head,  face,  and  neck. 
— Miliary  eruptions,  red  and  white. — ^Conical  pimples,  whitish  or  reddish,  with 
burning  itching.— Nettle-rash.— Eruption  of  painful  black  pustules.— Eruption 
of  itchy  pimples,  small  and  tickling. — Eruption  of  small  red  pimples,  which 
increase  and  change  into  gnawing  ulcers,  covered  with  a  scurf. — ^Vesicular 
eruptions. — Herpes,  with  vesicles,  and  violently  burning,  esp.  at  night, 
or  with  coverings,  like  fish-scales. — Skin  jaundiced ;  general  anasarca ;  black 
blisters,- Pustules  filled  with  blood  and  pus.— Tettery  spots,  covered  with 
phlyctenae  and  furfur,  with  burning  nocturnal  pains. — Ulcers  with  raised  and 
hard  edges,  surrounded  by  a  red  and  shining  crown  ;  with  the  bottoms  like 
lard,  or  of  a  blackish-blue  colour,  with  burning  pains  or  shooting,  principally 
When  the  parts  affected  become  cold. — Ulcers,  hard  on  the  edges,  stinging, 
burning  spongy  ;  with  proud  flesh  ;  turning  black ;  flat ;  pus  thin,  ichorous 
(cancers). — Fetid  smell,  ichorous  suppuration,  ready  bleeding,  putridity,  and 
bluish  or  greenish  colour  of  the  ulcers. — ^Thin  crusts  or  proud  flesh  on  the 
ulcers. — Spacelus. — Want  of  secretion  in  the  ulcers. — Carbuncles  (burning). — 
Inflanmiatory  tumours  with  burning  pains. — Warts. — Ulcers  in  form  of  a  wart 
—Chilblains.— Varices.— Discoloured  nails. 

26.  Sleep. — Constant  drowsiness^  with  strong  and  frequent  yawnings. — 
Nocturnal  sleeplessness,  with  agitation  and  constant  tossing. — Drowsiness  in 
the  evening. — Coma  vigil,  often  interrupted  by  groans  and  grinding  of  the 
teeth. — Unrefreshing  sleep  ;  in  the  morning  it  seems  as  if  more  sleep  were 
needed. — Starting  of  the  limbs  when  on  the  point  of  falling  asleep. — During 
sleep,  startings  with  fright,  groans,  talking,  querulous  exclamations,  grinding 
of  the  teeth,  convulsive  movements  of  the  hands  and  fingers,  sensation  of 
general  uneasiness,  and  tossing. — In  sleep,  lying  on  the  back,  with  the  hand 
under  the  head. — Light  sleep  ;  the  slightest  noise  is  heard,  though  the  patient 
dreams  continually. — Frequent  dreams,  full  of  cares,  threats  apprehensions, 
repentings  and  inquietude ;  anxious,  horrible,  fantastic,  lively  and  angry 
dreams ;  dreams  of  storms,  of  fire,  of  black  waters  and  darkness ;  dreams  with 
meditation.^In  the  night,  jerking  of  the  limbs,  heat  and  agitation,  burning 
under  the  skin,  as  if  there  were  boiling  water  in  the  veins,  or  cold,  with 
inability  to  get  warm,  stifling  sensation  in  the  larynx,  asthmatic  attacks,  great 
agitation,  and  anguish  at  the  heart. — Frequent  waking  during  the  night,  with 
difficulty  in  sleeping  again. — Sleeplessness,  from  anguish  and  restlessness, 
with  tossing  about  (after  midnight). 

27.  Fever. — Cold  over  the  whole  body,  sometimes  with  cold  and  viscid 
sweat.— General  coldness,  with  parchment-like  dr3aiess  of  the  skin,  or  with 
profuse,  cold,  clammy  perspiration. — Chilliness  without  thirst ;  worse  after 


ARSENICUM   HYDROGENISATUM       187 

drinkiiig ;  with  stretching  of  the  limbs  and  restlessness ;  with  external  heat 
at  the  same  time ;  when  walking  in  the  open  air. — Shiverings  and  shuddering, 
chiefly  in  the  evening  in  bed,  or  on  walking  in  the  open  air,  or  after  having 
drank  or  eaten,  and  often  with  the  addition  of  other  sufferings,  such  as  sharp 
pains  in  die  limbs,  headache,  oppression  of  the  chest,  and  difficulty  of  respira- 
tion, drawing  in  the  limbs,  anxiety  and  restlessness. — Universal  hea^  principally 
at  ni^t,and  often  with  anxiety,  restlessness,  delirium,  heaviness  and  perplexity 
ia  the  head,  dizziness,  vertigo,  oppression  and  pricking  in  the  chest,  redness 
of  the  skin,  &c — ^Febrile  attacks,  mostly  in  the  morning  or  evening,  often  with 
shivering  and  heat  slightly  developed,  burning  thirst  or  perfect  adypsia, 
quartan  or  tertian,  or  sometimes  quotidian  ;  sufferings  before  the  attack,  and 
sweats  after,  on  going  to  sleep ;  apyrexia  (or  shivering  or  heat),  with  great 
weakness,  dropsical  afiFections,  pains  in  the  regions  ojf  the  liver  and  of  the 
spleen,  dull  or  shooting  headache,  sharp  and  drawing  pains  in  the  limbs,  in 
the  back  and  in  the  head,  pressure,  fulness,  tension,  and  burning  in  the 
stomach  and  in  the  epigastrium,  prickings  in  the  chest  and  in  the  sides, 
difficulty  of  breathing,  anxiety,  face  pufiFed,  earthy,  &c. — Pulse  irregular,  or 
quick,  weak,  small,  and  frequent,  or  suppressed  and  trembling. — Pulse  frequent 
in  the  morning,  slower  in  the  evening. — Frequent  colliquative,  or  cold  and 
Tisdd  sweats ;  sweat  at  night,  or  in  the  evening  on  going  to  sleep,  or  in  the 
morning  on  waking ;  partial  sweat,  chiefly  on  the  face  and  legs. — Perspiration 
at  the  b^inning  of  sleep,  or  all  night ;  cold,  clammy,  smelling  sour  or  offen- 
sive.— During  perspiration,  unquenchable  thirst ;  after  the  fever,  attack  of 
headache, — Perspiration,  which  imparts  a  yellow  colour  to  the  linen  and  to 
the  skin. — During  the  sweat,  heaviness  in  the  head,  buzzing  in  the  ears  and 
trembling  of  the  limbs. 

Arsenicum  Bromatom. 

Bromide  of  Arsenic.    As  Br3« 

Qj^^l!^- — ^Acne.    Diabetes. 

GharaeteristlOB. — "Acne  rosacea,  with  violet  papules  on  the 
nose.    Diabetes  mellitus  "  (Hansen). 


Arsenicum  Hydrogenisatum. 

Arseniuretted  Hydrogen.    As  H3.    Solution  in  distilled  water. 

OlBtoJ, — Collapse  of  cholera.    Hiccough.    Suppressed  menses.    Yellow  fever. 

CharaoterisilOB. — Arsen.  hydro,  was  used  by  Drysdale  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  Arsenic  in  the  collapse  stage  of  cholera.  The  symptoms 
set  in  suddenly  but  develop  slowly.  In  poisoning  cases  death 
often  took  place  in  the  second  week,  and  one  person,  who  recovered, 
sofiered  seven  weeks.    Though  like  Ars.  alb.  in  general  symptoms,  the 


i88  ARSENICUM   lODATUM 

gas  has  symptoms  of  its  own.    A  striking  case  of  sudden  suppression 
of  menses  was  cured  with  it  after  failure  of  Ars.  a. 

BelationB. —  Compare:  Arsen.  alb.  antidoted  by:  Am.  acet. 
(breathing) ;  Sinapisms  (breathing) ;  Nux  v.  (fever) ;  drinks  con* 
taining  sulphuretted  hydrogen. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2.    Head. — Stapef3ring  feeling  in  the  head  as  if  a  load  were  there. 
0.    Face. — Face  looks  old  and  has  an  expression  of  pain. 

zz.  Stomach. — Loss  of  appetite. — Tormenting  hiccough  with  over- 
sensitive epigastrium. 

Z2«  Abdomen. — ^Abdomen  burning  outside;  cold  feet. — Constipation, 
with  a  feeling  of  heaviness  and  stiffness  like  a  weight  in  the  abdomen. 

Z3.  Anus. — Frequent  flying  pains  in  perineum  to  anus  or  upwards  in 
anterior  wall  of  rectum. 

Z4.  Urinary  Organs.— Pressure  in  kidneys  extending  to  shoulder- 
blades. — Discharge  at  times  of  large  quantities  of  pale  urine. — Haematuria. 

Z5.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Foreskin  and  glans  covered  with  numerous 
pustules  leaving  round  superficial  ulcers. 

ze.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Sudden  suppression  of  menses  with 
internal  chills  for  three  days,  followed  by  tearing  pains  in  hands  and  feet, 
confused  head,  ringing  in  ears ;  red  diarrhoea ;  dry,  red,  cracked  tongue ;  night 
cough,  causing  retching  {Ars.  h,  cured  immediately  after  failure  of  Ars.  a.). 

vj.  Respiratory  Organs.— Ammoniacal  breath.  —  Constriction  of 
chest 

90.    Back.— Pain  as  if  something  sticking  behind  r.  shoulder-blade. 

34.  Generalities.— Coldness  of  limbs. — Great  prostration  and  malaise. 
— <From  cold  and  damp ;  general  chilliness  on  slight  exposure  in  change  of 
temperature. 

25.  Skin. — Dark-brown,  sallow  look  of  skin. — Deadness  from  hands  up 
to  middle  of  forearm,  and  feet  to  knees,  then  nose  and  region  of  eyebrows, 
with  cessation  of  pulse. — Hair  becomes  white  over  the  "deadened"  parts. 

27.  Fever.— Much  heat  and  burning  in  different  parts  of  the  body, 
particularly  over  renal  region. 


Arsenicum  lodatom. 

Iodide  of  Arsenic.    As  I3.  Trituration. 

CiinioaL— i4cff«  rosacea  Aneurism.  Angina  pectoris.  Breast,  tumour  of. 
Bronchitis.  Cancer.  Catarrh.  Consumption.  DehUity,  Dropsy.  Epithelioma. 
Gastritis.  Hay-fever.  Hearty  affections  of.  Hydrothorax.  Laryngitis.  Leucocy- 
thcemia.  Lichen.  Liver,  affections  of.  Lungs,  affections  of.  Meades.  Otorrhoea. 
Pneumonia.    Rheumatism.    Scrofulous  ophthalmia.    Syphilis. 

OhanotevistlOB.— This  medicine  was  originally  used  by  H. 
Nankivelly  on  analogical  grounds,  in  cases  of  phthisis.  It  has  had  a 
short,  independent  proving,  and  symptoms  observed  on  patients  have 
increased  the  pathogenesis.    The  Conditions  resemble  more  closely 


ARSENICUM   lODATUM  189 

those  of  Afsen.  than  those  of  lod. :  <  from  cold  wind  ;  >  warmth. 
Great  vital  prostration.     <  From  any  exertion. 

It  is  a  medicine  of  wide  range  and  great  power.  Chronic  inflam- 
matory states  of  the  lungs  and  bronchial  tubes,  with  profuse,  greenish- 
ydlow,  pus-like  expectoration  and  short  breath  are  especially  relieved 
bj^  it  Kent  observed  in  a  proving  made  by  himself  that  a  thick, 
yellow  discharge  resembling  honey  is  characteristic,  and  he  cured 
with  it  a  case  of  disease  of  the  nasal  bones,  with  weak  intellect,  in  a 
girl,  being  guided  by  the  symptom  :  ''  Discharge  excoriating,  thick, 
and  yellow."  There  was  also  great  improvement  in  the  mental 
state.  Hale's  keynote  of  the  remedy  is :  The  peculiar  and  per- 
sistently irritating,  corrosive  character  of  all  the  discharges.  In  nay- 
fever,  otorrhcea,  and  leucorrhoea,  with  fetid,  corrosive  discharge, 
and  in  diarrhoea  where  the  evacuations  "  scald,''  it  is  indicated.  It 
has  been  used  successfully  in  tumours,  including  epithelioma.  L.  B. 
Wells  cured  a  case  of  left  axillary  tumour  in  a  lady  aet.  49.  A  gland 
the  aze  of  a  hen's  egg,  exuding  a  fluid  which  formed  a  hard,  brown 
crust.  The  tumour  was  painful  and  very  sensitive.  Left  breast  en- 
larged, indurated,  and  very  sore.  There  was  also  yellow,  bloody,  and 
irritating  leucorrhoea  with  swelling  of  labia  (Hale).  In  many  cases  of 
weakened  heart  I  have  found  Ars.  iod.  of  signal  service,  more 
e^edaHy  when  associated  with  chronic  lung  conditions.  Many  skin 
affections  have  been  remedied  by  it ;  particularly  dry,  scaly,  burning 
and  itching  eruptions  as  psoriasis,  tinea,  impetigo,  pityriasis.  The 
consumption-diathesis  is  in  itself  a  strong  indication  for  the  remedy. 

I>uring  the  influenza  epidemic  in  this  country  Ars,  iod.  was 
specific  for  "pink-eye,"  the  form  it  took  among  horses,  but  it  was  not 
found  of  such  general  utility  among  human  patients. 

Ars.  iod,  has  a  marked  action  on  the  stomach,  and  when  given  low 
needs  to  be  given  after  food,  if  unpleasant  symptoms  are  to  be  avoided. 
In  one  patient  there  was  nausea  immediately  after  each  dose.  In 
another  there  was  aggravation  of  a  pain  he  had  in  the  epigastrium, 
aod  vomiting  one  hour  after  food.  An  observer  reported  in  the  Lancet 
the  following  :  "  At  first  appetite  is  increased  but  after  taking  it  ten 
or  twelve  days  pain  is  felt  at  epigastrium,  with  thirst,  dry  throat, 
slight  fever,  sometimes  diarrhoea  and  tenesmus ;  skin  becomes  dry, 
and  the  quantity  of  urine  increased.  If  continued  the  nervous  system 
becomes  extremely  irritable  and  wakefulness  supervenes."  In  several 
persons  taking  low  attenuations  I  have  observed  headaches  con- 
firming those  of  the  provers.  From  the  3X  a  woman  experienced 
this  :  "  Violent,  dull,  heavy  pain  at>ove  root  of  nose,  as  if  she  would 
go  silly."  She  never  had  anything  of  the  kind  before.  From  the  i  x 
a  man  had  ''  a  heavy  headache,  across  forehead,  as  if  he  would  like  to 
go  to  sleep ;  so  weak  he  could  hardly  move  about."  All  ceased  when 
he  had  fimshed  the  medicine.  Wandering  rheumatic  pains  were  felt 
by  one  prover.    Great  vital  prostration.    Paralysis. 

Bautioiis. — Cotnpare :  Bacil. ;  in  acrid  discharges.  Nit.  ac, 
Ailanth.,  Arum,  Ars.,  Arsen.  metal,  and  its  salts.  Useful  after :  Sulph.  in 
I^thisis  pulmonalis,  and  after  Conium  in  sensitive  lump  in  breast. 
Antidote:  Bry.  relieved  pain  and  pyrosis.    Complementary:  Pho« 

CMUatton.— Study  (headache). 


I90  ARSENICUM   lODATUM 

STMPTOHS. 

I.    Mind. — ^Irritibility. — Unable  to  study. 

a.  Head.— Dulness  of  head,  with  dull  pain  in  1.  malar  bone  and  occa- 
sional slight  frontal  headache  all  morning. — Bad  headache  on  waking,  lasting 
all  day ;  dull,  heavy ;  pressing  from  within  outwards,  <  on  motion,  stooping, 
or  studying.-— Severe  frontal  headache  with  dulness  of  entire  head  during  fore- 
noon, with  stiffness  and  soreness  of  1.  side  of  neck,  <  when  moving  head. — 
Pain  over  root  of  nose  as  if  she  would  go  silly. — Head  seemed  enormously 
large  and  heavy  with  the  pain.— Scalp  covered  with  inflammatory  scaly 
eruptions. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  weak,  with  burning  pain;  smarting;  secretion  of 
meibomian  glands  increased. 

4.  Ears.— Very  sharp  pain  in  forehead  and  ears  « I.),  when  riding  in  a 
sharp,  cold  wind. 

5.  Nose.— Chronic  nasal  catarrh,  discharge  gluey,  like  yellow  honey, 
excoriating. 

6.  Face. — Face  sallow ;  peaked ;  cadaverous,  with  purple,  livid  hue. 

7.  Teeth. — Intermittent  pains  in  first  r.  upper  molar. 

9.  Throat. — ^Throat  dry. — Hawking  up  from  throat  thick  mucus  and 
clotted  blood ;  it  seemed  to  come  from  head  and  relieve  the  pain. 

ID.  Appetite. — Loss  of  appetite. — Appetite  at  first  increased,  later  pain  in 
epigastrium. — Intense  thirst,  with  uncontrollable  desire  for  cold  water,  which 
is  almost  immediately  ejected. 

zz.  Stomach. — Distressing  nausea  and  vomiting. — Pain  and  pyrosis 
unbearable ;  <  rising  after  sitting ;  >  raising  wind  and  a  greasy  fluid  as  after 
eating  pork. — (Subacute  gastritis.)— Vomiting  an  hour  after  food. 

za.  Abdomen. — Abdomen  hard  and  distended  with  flatus,  which  is 
constantly  discharged. — Cutting  pains,  obliging  to  bend  double. 

Z3.  Stool  and  Anus. — Continual  aching  in  anus,  with  seeming  inability 
to  keep  sphincter  closed;  amounts  to  real  dysenteric  straining  at  stool. — 
Excoriating  diarrhoea. — Diarrhoea  or  dysentery ;  stools  not  at  all  at  night,  but 
urging  commencing  on  beginning  to  move  in  morning. 

Z4.  Urinary  Organs. — Skin  dry,  urine  increased. — (Diseases  in  uro- 
genital organs,  esp.  in  females  with  scrofulous  taint) 

z6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Lump  in  mamma,  sensitive  to  touch 
and  painful ;  nipple  retracted. 

vj.  Respiratory  Organs. — Slight  hacking  cough,  with  dryness  and 
stoppage  of  the  nostrils. — ^Asthmatic  sensations;  must  sit  up  to  breathe. — 
Expectoration  heavy  night  and  morning.  —  Frequent  cough  with  muco- 
purulent and  occasionally  stringy  expectoration.— Greenish-yellow  pus-like 
expectoration;  haemorrhage  (chronic  induration  of  the  lungs). — Chronic 
bronchitis  with  diflicult  expectoration  and  short  breath. — Pneumonias  that 
fail  to  clear  up. 

ZQ.  Heart. — Irregular  pulse  ;  cardiac  weakness ;  pain  either  with  or  with- 
out valvular  disease,  esp.  when  accompanied  vdth  induration  of  lung  tissue. 

ao.  Neck  and  Back. — Soreness  of  back,  esp.  of  back  of  neck,  as  if  he 
had  been  beaten. — Burning  heat  in  lumbar  region,  as  if  the  clothes  were 
on  fire. 


ARSENICUM   METALLICUM  191 

tz.  Limbs. — Sbaip  pain  in  upper  third  of  r.  humerus  while  writing ; 
sifter  tea  minutes  shifted  to  metacarpal  bones,  and  was  then  felt  in  1.  femur. 
—Cold  limbs. 

^  Lower  Limbs. — Peculiar  chilliness  back  of  1.  thigh,  followed  by 
formication  and  weight  of  1.  foot,  the  latter  extending  later  up  the  leg ; 
clothes  feel  cold ;  partially  >  by  walking ;  removed  by  applied  warmth. — 
Severe  laming  pain  L  calf. — Painful  formication  outer  border  1.  foot,  followed 
by  burning  on  instep. 

S5.  Skin. — ^Persistent  itching  of  various  parts  of  body,  most  of  t>ack. — 
Chronic  skin  a£Fections. — Psoriasis. 


Arsenicum  Metalllcam. 

Metallic  Arsenic.    As  (A.  W.  74*9).    Tritiuation. 

GUniGsL — Constipation.  Coryza.  Diarrhoea.  Eyes,'  afifections  of.  Haemor- 
liMidsw    Headache.    Itching.    Sciatica.    Syphilis. 

CharaoteristioB. — ^The  symptoms  of  metallic  arsenic  are  very  like 
those  of  Ars.  alb,,  but  not  entirely.  The  following  may  be  regarded 
as  the  most  peculiar  :  Symptoms  recur  every  14  days ;  coryza  every 
21  days.  P^ns  extend  from  one  part  to  another  ;  or  leave  one 
part  and  appear  in  another.  Attacks  come  suddenly  and  go  slowly, 
or  vice  vend.  Enlarged  or  swollen  feeling  of  brain,  head,  eyelids, 
hands,  and  fingers.  Cutting,  burning,  stinging  pains.  Itching  in 
many  parts,  skin  peels  off  in  small  scales.  Hot  bathing  <  pain  in  hip. 
<  Lying  on  1.  side  (heart).  Washing  >  itching  of  anus.  Cold 
bathing  >  itching  of  face.  <  On  waking  in  morning.  Thinking 
of  symptoms  <.  Many  symptoms  appear  on  r.  side.  Ars,  met.  lights 
up  syphilis  after  being  many  years  dormant. 

Belations. — Compare :  lod.,  Merc.,  Nat.  c.  in  syphilis ;  Nux  v. 
(drowsy  after  sound  sleep) ;  Rhus  (pain  in  back,  hips,  &c.) ;  Sul. 
(pulse) ;  Ars.  alb.  Useful  in  pterygium  after  failure  of  Nux  v.  and 
Spigel.  Aniidoted  by :  Bell,  (sore  throat) ;  Nat.  c.  (syphilitic 
symptoms). 

Causation. — Laughing  (headache).    Thinking  (headache). 

STMPTOHS. 

I.  Mind. — Memory  weak,  esp.  of  what  is  read ;  cannot  take  in  what 
he  reads. — Fears  will  be  poisoned. 

8.  Head. — Heavy,  dull  feeling  in  forehead  above  frontal  sinuses  in 
morning. — Fulness ;  on  waking  at  night. — ^As  if  brain  were  too  large  and  it 
would  burst — Glow  over  1.  brow. — Pain  1.  side  extending  to  ear  and  eye, 
with  nausea. — Headache  when  writing,  thinking,  laughing. — Hair  falls  off. 

3.  Eyes. — Soreness  of  eyes ;  irritated  and  red  or  sore. — Upper  lid  sore 
and  feeb  swollen. — Ptery^um  (r). 


i82  ARSENICUM  ALBUM 

round  the  mouth. — Eruption  on  the  mouth  and  on  the  lips,  near  the  red  part. 
— Cancer  of  the  face  and  lips  with  burning  pain. — Hard  knots  and  cancerous 
ulcers,  having  thick  scurf  with  lard-like  bottoms  on  the  lips. — Lips  excoriated^ 
with  a  sensation  of  tingling. — Swelling  and  bleeding  of  the  lips. — Swelling  of 
the  submaxillary  glands,  with  contusive  pain,  and  soreness  on  being  touched. 
— Paralysis  of  the  lower  jaw. — Drawing  stitches  here  and  there  in  the  face. 

7.  Teeth. — Sharp  aching  pains,  or  successive  puUings  in  the  teeth  and 
gums,  chiefly  at  night,  extending  sometimes  to  the  cheek,  to  the  ear,  and  to 
the  temples;  with  swelling  of  the  cheek  and  insupportable  pains,  which 
impel  to  furious  despair,  or  which  are  aggravated  when  one  lies  on  the 
diseased  side,  and  mitigated  by  the  heat  of  the  Are. — Convulsive  grinding 
of  the  teeth.— Sensation  of  elongation  and  painful  loosening  of  the  teeth,  with 
swelling  and  bleeding  of  the  gums. — Pain  in  teeth  >  by  hot  applications. 

8.  Mouth. — Offensive  smell  from  the  mouth. — Secretion  of  abundant 
tough,  fetid,  bloody  saliva. — Great  dryness  of  the  mouth,  or  accumulation  of 
saliva,  sometimes  bitter  or  bloody. — ^The  mouth  is  reddish-blue,  inflamed, 
burning. — ^Tongue  bluish  or  white. — Ulceration  of  the  tongue,  with  blue 
colour. — Torpor  and  insensibility  of  the  tongue,  as  if  it  were  burnt — ^Tongue 
brownish  or  blackish,  dry,  cracked,  and  trembling. — ^Tongue  a  bright  red. — 
Tongue  white  as  chalk,  as  if  painted  white. — ^Tongue  red  with  a  silvery  white 
coat. — ^Tongue  stiflF  like  a  piece  of  wood. — Ulceration  of  the  tongue  on  the 
anterior  edge. — Swelling,  inflammation,  or  gangrene  of  the  tongue. — ^Angina 
gangrenosa  (with  aphthae). — Aphthae  in  the  mouth. — Speech  rapid,  precipitate. 

g*  Throat. — Burning  in  the  throat. — Scraping,  sharp  pain,  with  burning 
in  the  throat. — Inflammation  and  gangrene  of  the  throat. — Spasmodic  constric- 
tion of  the  throat  and  of  the  oesophagus,  with  inability  to  swallow. — Deglutition 
painful  and  difiicult,  as  if  from  paralysis  of  the  oesophagus. — Sensation  of  great 
dryness  in  the  throat  and  in  the  mouth,  which  induces  continual  drinking. — 
Accumulation  of  greyish  or  greenish  mucus  of  salt  or  bitter  taste  in  the  throat 

ID.  Appetite. — Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  chiefly  after  having  drunk  or 
eaten,  also  in  the  morning. — ^Astringent,  or  putrid,  or  acid  taste  in  the  mouth. 
— Food  appears  acid,  insipid,  or  too  salt. — Insipidity  of  food. — Bitter  taste  of 
food,  particularly  of  bread  and  beer. — Complete  adypsia  ;  or  violent  burning, 
choking,  and  unquenchable  thirst,  making  it  necessary  to  drink  constantly, 
but  little  at  a  time. — Desire  for  cold  water,  for  acids,  for  brandy,  for  cc^ee 
and  milk. — ^Want  of  appetite  and  of  hunger,  frequently  with  burning  thirst. — 
Insurmountable  dislike  to  all  food,  chiefly  meat  and  butter. — Everything  that 
is  swallowed  causes  a  pressure  in  the  oesophagus,  as  if  it  had  stopped  there. — 
Continual  craving,  with  want  of  appetite  and  prompt  satiety. — ^After  a  meal, 
nausea,  vomiting,  eructations,  pains  in  the  stomach,  colic,  and  many  other 
sufiEerings. — ^Af  ter  having  drunk,  shivering  or  shuddering,  return  of  vomiting 
and  diarrhoea,  eructations  and  colic. 

II.  Stomach. — Frequent  eructations,  particularly  after  having  drunk  or 
eaten,  mostly  empty,  acid,  or  bitter. — Regurgitation  of  acrid  matter,  or  of 
bitter  greenish  mucus. — Frequent  and  convulsive  hiccoughs,  principally  in 
the  night. — Frequent  and  excessive  nausea,  sometimes  rising  even  to  the  throat, 
with  inclination  to  vomit,  necessity  for  lying  down,  sleep,  swooning,  trembling 
shuddering,  or  heat,  pains  in  the  feet,  &c.— Flow  of  water  from  the  stomach, 
like  water-t>rash.— Vomitings,  sometimes  very  violent,  and  principally  after 


ARSENICUM  ALBUM  183 

having  dnink  or  eaten,  or  at  night,  towards  the  morning ;  vomiting  of  food 
and  of  drink,  or  of  mncons,  bilious,  or  serous  matter,  of  a  yellowish,  greenish, 
brownish,  or  blackish  colour ;  vomiting  of  saguineous  matter. — ^While  vomiting, 
violent  pains  in  the  stomach,  sensation  of  excoriation  in  the  abdomen,  cries, 
burning  internal  heat,  diarrhoea,  and  fear  of  death. — Inflation  and  tension  of 
the  precordial  region  and  of  the  stomach. — Excessive  pain  in  the  epigastrium, 
and  in  the  stomach,  chiefly  on  being  touched. — Pressure  in  the  stomach  as 
from  a  stone,  or  as  if  the  heart  would  burst,  and  excessive  anguish  in  the  pre- 
cordial r^on,  with  complaints  and  lamentations. — Sensation  of  constriction, 
cramp-like  pains,  pulling,  piercing,  and  gnawing  in  the  stomach. — Burning  in 
the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  stomach. — Inflammation  or  induration  of  the 
stomach. — Cramp  in  the  stomach  (2  a.m.). — Cancer  in  the  stomach. — Sensation 
of  cold,  or  insupportable  heat  and  burning  in  the  precordial  region,  and  in  the 
stomach. — ^The  pains  in  the  stomach  manifest  themselves  mostly  after  a  meal, 
or  in  the  night — ^Tetters  on  the  pit  of  the  stomach. 

IS.  Abdomen. — Compression  in  the  region  of  the  liver. — Swelling  of 
the  spleen. — Excessive  pains  in  the  abdomen,  principally  on  the  left  side,  and 
often  with  great  anguish  in  the  abdomen. — Inflation  of  the  abdomen. — ^Ascites. 
— Swelling  of  the  abdomen  as  in  ascites. — Hard  bloated  abdomen. — ^Violent 
catting  pains,  cramp-like  pains,  digging,  pulling,  tearing,  and  gnawing  in  the 
abdomen. — Attacks  of  colic  occur  chiefly  after  having  drunk  or  eaten,  or  in 
the  night,  and  are  often  accompanied  by  vomiting  or  diarrhoea,  with  cold, 
internal  heat,  or  cold  sweat — Burning  pains  with  anguish. — Sensation  of  cold, 
or  insupportable  burning  in  the  abdomen. — Pain,  as  from  a  wound  in  the 
abdomen,  chiefly  on  coughing  and  laughing. — Swelling  and  induration  of  the 
mesenteric  glands — ^Much  flatulency,  with  rumbling  in  the  abdomen. — 
Flatulency  of  a  putrid  smell. — Painful  swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands. — Ulcer 
above  the  navel. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.  —  Constipation,  with  frequent,  but  ineffectual 
inclination  to  evacuate. — ^Tenesmus,  with  burning  in  the  anus. — Involuntary 
and  nnperceived  evacuations. — ^Violent  diarrhoea,  with  frequent  evacuations, 
nansea,  vomiting,  thirst,  great  weakness,  colic,  and  tenesmus. — Nocturnal 
diarrhoea^  and  renewal  of  the  diarrhoea,  after  having  drunk  or  eaten. — Burning 
stools,  with  violent  pains  in  the  bowels,  with  tenesmus,  thirst,  worse  after 
eating. — Burning  and  corrosive  evacuations ;  faeces  with  mucus,  or  bilious, 
sanguineous,  serous,  painless,  involuntary,  &c.,  of  greenish,  yellowish,  whitish 
colour,  or  brownish  and  blackish  ;  fetid  and  putrid  evacuations ;  evacuations 
of  undigested  substances. — Emission  of  mucus  by  the  anus,  with  tenesmus. — 
Prolapsus  of  the  rectum  :  with  much  pain. — Itching,  pain  as  from  excoriation, 
and  homing  in  the  rectum  and  in  the  anus,  as  well  as  in  the  haemorrhoidal 
tnmoiirs»  chiefly  at  night. — Shootings  in  the  haemorrhoidal  tumours. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.  —  Retention  of  urine,  as  from  paralysis  of  the 
bladder. — Frequent  inclination  to  make  water,  even  at  night,  with  abundant 
emission. — ^Incontinence  of  urine,  which  escapes  almost  involuntarily,  even  at 
ni^t,  in  bed. — Difficult  and  painful  emission  of  urine. — Scanty  urine,  of  a 
deep  yellow  colour. — Urine  aqueous,  greenish,  brownish,  or  turbid,  with 
mncos-like  sediment — Sanguineous  urine. — Burning  in  the  urethra  on  making 
water. — Involuntary  discharge  of  burning  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.--Itching,  shooting,  and  burning  in  the  glans 


i86  ARSENICUM  ALBUM 

EmactaHon.— Trembling  of  the  limbs,  diiefly  the  arms  and  legs.— Trem* 
bling  of  the  limbs  (in  cimnkards). — Stiffness  and  fixedness  of  the  limbs, 
sometimes  with  sharp  rheomatic  pains. — ^Paralysis  and  contraction  of  the 
limbs. — Paralysis,  e^>ecially  of  the  lower  extremities. — ^Fainting  fits,  sometimes 
with  dizziness  and  swelling  of  the  face. — ^Fainting,  from  weakness,  with 
scarcely  perceptitrfe  pnlse. — Sensation  of  torpor  in  the  limbs,  as  if  they  were 
dead. 

25.  Skin.— Desquamation  of  the  skin  of  the  body.— Skin  dry  as  parch- 
ment, cold  and  blnish.— Yellowish  colour  of  the  skin.— Shootings,  hot  itching, 
and  violent  burning  in  the  skin. — Reddish  or  bluish  spots  in  the  skin. — 
Petechias — Inflamed  spots,  as  from  morbilli,  chiefly  in  the  head,  face,  and  neck. 
— ^Miliary  eruptions^  red  and  white. — Conical  pimples,  whitish  or  reddish,  with 
burning  itching. — ^Nettle-rash. — Eruption  of  painful  black  pustules. — Eruption 
of  itchy  pimples,  small  and  tickling. — ^Eruption  of  small  red  pimples,  which 
increase  and  change  into  gnawing  ulcers,  covered  with  a  scurf. — ^Vesicular 
eruptions. — Herpes,  with  vesicles,  and  violently  burning,  esp.  at  night, 
or  with  coverings,  like  fish-scales. — ^Skin  jaundiced ;  general  anasarca ;  black 
blisters.— Pustules  filled  with  blood  and  pus.— Tettery  spots,  covered  with 
phlyctens  and  furfur,  with  burning  nocturnal  pains. — Ulcers  with  raised  and 
hard  edges,  surrounded  by  a  red  and  shining  crown  ;  ^th  the  bottoms  like 
lard,  or  of  a  blackish-blue  colour,  with  burning  pains  or  shooting,  principally 
when  the  parts  affected  become  cold.— Ulcers,  hard  on  the  edges,  stinging, 
burning  spongy ;  with  proud  flesh  ;  turning  black ;  flat ;  pus  thin,  ichorous 
(cancers). — ^Fetid  smell,  ichorous  suppuration,  ready  bleeding,  putridity,  and 
bluish  or  greenish  colour  of  the  ulcers. — ^Thin  crusts  or  proud  flesh  on  the 
ulcers. — Spacelus. — ^Want  of  secretion  in  the  ulcers.— Carbuncles  (burning). — 
Inflammatory  tumours  with  burning  pains. — ^Warts. — Ulcers  in  form  of  a  wart. 
— Chilblains. — Varices. — Discoloured  naOs. 

96.  Sleep.— <^onstant  drowsiness,  with  strong  and  frequent  yawnings. — 
Nocturnal  sleeplessness,  with  agitation  and  constant  tossing. — ^Drowsiness  in 
the  evening.— Coma  vigil,  often  interrupted  by  groans  and  grinding  of  the 
teeth. — ^Unrefreshing  sleep ;  in  the  morning  it  seems  as  if  more  sleep  were 
needed. — Starting  of  the  limbs  when  on  the  point  of  falling  asleep. — ^During 
sleep,  startings  with  f  right,  groans,  talking,  querulous  exclamations,  grinding 
of  the  teeth,  convulsive  movements  of  the  hands  and  fingers,  sensation  of 
general  uneasiness,  and  tossing. — In  sleep,  lying  on  the  back,  with  the  hand 
under  the  head. — Light  sleep  ;  the  slightest  noise  is  heard,  though  the  patient 
dreams  continually. — Frequent  dreams,  full  of  cares,  threats  apprehensions, 
repentings  and  inquietude ;  anxious,  horrible,  fantastic,  lively  and  angry 
dreams ;  dreams  of  storms,  of  fire,  of  black  waters  and  darkness ;  dreams  with 
meditation.— In  the  night,  jerking  of  the  limbs,  heat  and  agitation,  burning 
nnder  the  skin,  as  if  there  were  boiling  water  in  the  veins,  or  cold,  with 
inability  to  get  warm,  stifling  sensation  in  the  larynx,  asthmatic  attacks,  great 
agitation,  and  anguish  at  the  heart. — Frequent  waking  during  the  night,  with 
difficulty  in  sleeping  again. — Sleeplessness,  from  anguish  and  restlessness, 
with  tossing  about  (after  midnight). 

27.  Fever.— Cold  over  the  whole  body,  sometimes  with  cold  and  viscid 
sweat — General  coldness,  with  parchment-like  dryness  of  the  skin,  or  with 
profuse,  cold,  clammy  perspiration. — Chilliness  without  thirst ;  worse  after 


ARSENICUM   HYDROGENISATUM       187 

dnnkmg;  with  stretching  of  the  limbs  and  restlessness ;  with  external  heat 
at  the  same  time ;  when  walking  in  the  open  air. — Shiverings  and  shuddering, 
chiefly  in  the  evening  in  bed,  or  on  walking  in  the  open  air,  or  after  having 
dnmk  or  eaten,  and  ctf ten  with  the  addition  of  other  sufferings,  such  as  sharp 
pains  in  the  limbs,  headache,  oppression  of  the  chest,  and  difficulty  of  respira- 
tion, drawing  in  the  limbs,  anxiety  and  restlessness. — Universal  heat,  principally 
at  ni^t,  and  often  with  anxiety,  restlessness,  delirium,  heaviness  and  perplexity 
ia  the  head,  dizziness,  vertigo,  oppression  and  pricking  in  the  chest,  redness 
of  the  skin,  &c — ^Febrile  attacks,  mostly  in  the  morning  or  evening,  often  with 
shivering  and  heat  slightly  developed,  burning  thirst  or  perfect  adypsia, 
qoartan  or  tertian,  or  sometimes  quotidian ;  sufferings  before  the  attack,  and 
sweats  after,  on  going  to  sleep ;  apyrexia  (or  shivering  or  heat),  with  great 
weakness,  dropsical  affections,  pains  in  the  regions  cd  the  liver  and  of  the 
spleen,  dull  or  shooting  headache,  sharp  and  drawing  pains  in  the  limbs,  in 
&e  back  and  in  the  head,  pressure,  fulness,  tension,  and  burning  in  the 
stomach  and  in  the  epigastrium,  prickings  in  the  chest  and  in  the  sides, 
difficulty  of  breathing,  anxiety,  face  puffed,  earthy,  &c. — Pulse  irregular,  or 
quick,  weak,  small,  and  frequent,  or  suppressed  and  trembling. — Pulse  frequent 
in  the  morning,  slower  in  the  evening. — Frequent  colliquative,  or  cold  and 
fisdd  sweats ;  sweat  at  night,  or  in  the  evening  on  going  to  sleep,  or  in  the 
morning  on  waking ;  partial  sweat,  chiefly  on  the  face  and  legs. — Perspiration 
at  the  b^inning  of  sleep,  or  all  night ;  cold,  clammy,  smelling  sour  or  offen- 
sive.— During  perspiration,  unquenchable  thirst ;  after  the  fever,  attack  of 
headadie; — Perspiration,  which  imparts  a  yellow  colour  to  the  linen  and  to 
the  skin. — ^During  the  sweat,  heaviness  in  the  head,  buzzing  in  the  ears  and 
trembling  of  the  limbs. 

Arsenicum  Bromatum. 

Bromide  of  Arsenic.    As  Br3« 
dfadML— Acne.    Diabetes. 

GharacteriBtios. — "Acne  rosacea,  with  violet  papules  on  the 
nose.    Diabetes  mellitus  "  (Hansen)* 


Arsenicum  Hydrogenisatum. 

Arseniuretted  Hydrogen.    As  H3.    Solution  in  distilled  water. 

fflhikali    Collapse  of  cholera.    Hiccough.    Suppressed  menses.   Yellow  fever. 

Ghanustaristios. — Arsen.  hydro,  was  used  by  Drysdale  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  Arsenic  in  the  collapse  stage  of  cholera.  The  symptoms 
set  in  suddenly  but  develop  slowly.  In  poisoning  cases  death 
often  took  place  in  the  second  week,  and  one  person,  who  recovered, 
suffered  seven  weeks.    Though  like  Ars.  alb.  in  general  symptoms,  the 


198  ARUM   DRACUNCULUS 

of  desire.— *Penis  flaccid. — Fine  shooting  pains  in  coorse  of  1.  spermatic  cord. 
— Chronic  pruritus  scroti  of  twelve  years'  standing  (cured  in  prover). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness  on  awaking  in  morning. — 
Hoarseness ;  expectorates  thick  mucus. — Rattling  of  mucus  at  every  full  ex- 
piration, which  disappears  in  morning. — Excess  of  mucus  in  lar3mx ;  increased 
soreness  and  great  disposition  to  cough. — Laryngeal  symptoms  deep-seated  and 
persistent.— As  of  larynx  partly  obstructed.— About  midnight  great  oppression  of 
breathing,  soon  passing  off,  leaving  rattling  in  larynx  and  trachea. — Parox3^sms 
of  dyspnoea  with  aching  in  chest. — ^Violent  asthmatic  attacks  at  night ;  from 
cold. — Loose  cough  with  dry  soreness  of  throat,  like  catarrh;  rattling  of 
mucus ;  <  lying  down  at  night. — Expectoration  thick,  heavy,  yeUowish-white, 
with  continuation  of  a  violent  cough. — Hoarse,  croupy  cough  with  sore  throat ; 
rattling  laryngeal  breathing,  swelling  of  air  passages  threatening  su£Eocation« 

zg.  Heart. — Heart  beats  so  violently  as  to  shake  the  walls  of  the  chest. 
— ^With  increased  heart's  action,  aching  in  precordial  region  and  down  1.  arm  ; 
flushing  of  hands  and  face. — Pulse  full,  hard,  somewhat  jerking,  soon  becomes 
small  and  irregular  ;  very  feeble  after  a  large  dose. 

SO,  Neck  and  Back. — Shooting  pains  1.  anterior  inferior  triangle  of 
neck,  near  clavicle. — ^Aching  along  the  spine,  most  between  shoulder-blades 
and  in  lumbar  region. — Great  weakness  across  loins;  feeling  of  extreme 
prostration  continuing  to  increase,  had  to  retire  early. 

21.  Limbs. — Fine  pricking  or  tingling  sensation  in  feet  and  hands,  be- 
ginning in  r.  foot,  afterwards  attacking  in  regular  succession  r.  hand,  1.  foot 
and  1.  hand.— Aching  pains  along  outer  aspect  of  1.  foot,  immediately  followed 
by  a  similar  pain  in  corresponding  part  of  1.  hand. 

92.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Tingling  or  slight  stinging  in  fingers ;  all  over  r. 
hand,  which  is  redder  and  warmer  than  1.  and  appears  somewhat  swollen. — 
Aching  pain  in  1.  forearm,  1.  hand,  and  r.  humerus ;  r.  hand  remains  red  and 
swollen. — Shooting  and  aching  pains  in  1.  brachial  plexus  of  nerves. — Shooting 
at  styloid  process  of  r.  ulna. 

2^  Lower  Limbs. — Tingling  in  toes. — Shooting  pain  down  r.  thigh. — 
Burning  in  soles. 

25.    Skin. — Urticaria  and  other  eruptions. 


Arum  Draomicolas. 

A.  dracunculuS)  Willd.    N.O.  Araceae.    Tincture  of  root 

ClinioaL— Nettle-rash.    Pricking  pains. 

ChaFBiOteristios. — A,  dracun.  is  commonly  cultivated  in  gardens. 
It  has  a  fetid  smell  which  is  apt  to  cause  headache.  The  following 
effects  of  pounding  the  root  and  tearing  up  leaves  and  stems  have 
been  observed :  Styptic  metallic  taste  at  back  of  mouth.  Pricking, 
mingled  with  intolerable  itching  in  fingers,  as  if  hand  plunged  among 
nettles.  On  rubbing  the  fingers  together,  sensation  as  if  avast  number 
of  stings  were  driven  perpendicularly  into  them. 


ARUM  MACULATUM  199 

Amm  Italioum. 

A.  Italicanii  Miller.    N,0.  Aracese.    Tincture  of  root. 
dUteL—Brain-fag.    Colic.    Fever.    Headache.    Hoarseness.    Itching. 

Gharaeteristics. — Dr.  P^ul  Pitet  is  the  authority  for  this  medicine. 
The  chief  symptoms  observed  were  the  following  :  Headache,  chiefly 
in  occiput,  <  in  damp  weather.  Dull  pain  in  brain  from  least  intellec- 
tual effort.  Colic  in  umbilical  region  with  diarrhoea.  Smarting  and 
tearing  pains  in  rectum  during  stool.  Burning  behind  sternum.  Burn- 
ing in  fingers,  <  by  pressure.  Skin  covered  with  miliary  vesicles 
descjnamates.  Prickling  and  formication  as  from  hundreds  of  needles 
on  tips  of  fingers.  The  colic  is  <  by  wine,  brandy,  coffee.  Itching  is 
<  6  p.m.  Hoarseness  9  p.m.  Damp  weather  <.  Unconquerable 
drowsiness  in  morning.  Copious  night  sweat,  especially  on  chest, 
smelling  of  ivy. 

^^^ikHffilfi — Compare :  Araceae ;  ^thusa  c,  Pic.  ac,  Anac.  (brain- 
fag). 


Aram  Macnlatam. 

Cockoo-pint    N,0.  Araceae.    Tincture  of  fresh  tuber  or  corm. 

CUalflftL— Aacarides.  Asthma.  Catarrh.  Coryza.  Nasal  polypus.  Prolapsus 
ani.    Scorbutus.    Swallowing,  constant 

Quunustarifltios. — ^The  leading  symptoms  of  Arum  mac.  are  as 
foDows  :  Inflammation  and  ulceration  of  mucous  membranes.  Violent 
irritation  of  nose  and  eyes.  Pain  left  side  of  nose.  Nasal  poljrpus.  Bleed- 
ing from  mucous  membranes  and  cavities.  Tongue  swollen,  pricking, 
stinging,  burning,  excoriated.  Burning,  stinging  pains  in  mouth  and 
lips  **  as  with  a  hundred  needles."  Tickling  and  burning  in  throat. 
Sensation  of  a  swelling  in  left  side  above  larynx.  Hoarseness.  From 
abdomen  ascending  to  chest  an  oppression  over  whole  chest,  with  hot 
breath  ;  it  then  rose  into  throat.  Burning,  constricting  pain  in  stomach. 
Ascarides  have  been  cured  by  it ;  also  prolapsus  ani. 

Balatioiia. — AniidoUd  by :  Sweet  oil,  milk,  butter.  Gum  relieves 
pmigent  ^ect  on  mouth.    Compare :  Arum  t. 

STHPTOMB. 

8.  Mouth. — Gums  bleed  readily. — Tongue  so  swollen  he  could  not 
swallow. 

9.  Throat. — Pain  in  the  throat,  with  difficult  deglutition,  as  if  from 
constriction  in  the  oesophagus,  with  constant  inclination  to  swallow;  after 
drinking  sensation  as  if  something  were  attached  to  the  epiglottis. — Obstinate 
hoarseness. — ^Pressore  in  the  larynx. — Tickling,  with  inclination  to  cough. 

n.    Atxlomen.— "Sensation  of  emptiness  after  breakfast  in  the  abdomen^ 


20O  ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM 

as  after  vomiting ;  with  contraction  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  anxiety  and  fear. 
— Severe  aching  between  the  navel  and  the  hip,  esp.  when  standing  opri^t, 
or  lying  on  the  side,  or  drawing  a  deep  inspiration,  with  great  sensitiveness  of 
the  part  affected  to  external  pressure. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Clear,  watery  urine ;  exhaling  a  smell  of  burnt 
horn,  and  depositing  a  cloudy  sediment. 

z6.    Female  Sexual  Organs.— Catamenia  profuse. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Phlegm  in  the  respiratory  organs.— Violent 
tight  cough,  with  scanty  expectoration. — ^Af  ter  much  coughing,  expectoration 
of  mucus  streaked  with  yellow. — Sanguineous  expectoration. 

84.  Generalities. — Violent  convulsions. — Great  physical  depression  and 
lassitude. — Irrepressible  inclination  to  sleep  after  meals,  the  face  becoming 
redder  than  usual  during  sleep. 


Armn  Triphyllum. 

Indian  turnip.    N.O,  Araceae.    Tincture  of  fresh  tuber  or  corm. 

OUnioal. — ^Brain,  inflammation  of.  Clergyman's  sore  throat  Delirium.  Diph- 
theria. Glandular  swellings.  Headache.  Jaw-joint  painful.  Mouthy  sore.  Scarlatina, 
Tonguet  cracked.    TyphoW  fever.    Voice,  hoarse. 

Gharaoteristios.— ilr.  tri.  is  the  most  important  of  the  Arums. 
Its  irritating  properties  are  well  marked ;  excitable  and  irritable  in 
mind  and  body.  It  is  especially  irritating  to  the  nose  and  throat. 
This  with  its  scarlet  rash  suggested  its  appropriateness  in  cases  of 
scarlatina  of  malignant  type,  in  which  it  has  met  with  great  success. 
An  indication  of  its  curative  action  in  scarlatina  is  the  urine  becoming 
more  abundant  and  watery.  Raw,  bloody  surfaces  appear  on  Ups,  on 
mouth,  on  nose,  &c.  With  the  rawness  there  is  itching.  "  Picks  lips 
till  they  bleed,  comers  of  mouth  sore,  cracked,  and  bleeding  "  is  a 
characteristic  indication  ;  also, ''  picking  ends  of  fingers  "  and ''  boring 
nose  "  (especially  side  of  nose).  Tongue  cracked  and  bleeding.  Urine 
scanty  or  suppressed.  Patient  passes  into  unconsciousness  and  shdes 
down  in  bed.  Dr.  Lippe,  who  is  one  of  the  greatest  authorities  on 
this  remedy,  said  it  should  not  be  given  low  or  repeated  often.  "  Bores 
head  in  pillow  "  is  an  indication  when  the  brain  is  involved.  Kent 
points  out  that  almost  all  the  discharges  are  acrid  and  cause  irritation 
of  orifices.  He  defines  the  hoarseness  as  that  of  public  speakers  who, 
after  long  exertion,  get  cold  (as  from  a  draught),  and  suddenly  are 
unable  to  finish.  (With  Rhus  the  hoarseness  is  at  the  beginning  and 
passes  off  by  using  the  voice.)  Ar.  L  prominently  affects  the  1.  side. 
It  has  a  headache  <  from  hot  coffee  and  has  cured  headache  <  from 
too  hot  clothing. 

Relations. — It  is  antidoted  hy:  Butter-milk,  Lac.  ac,  Acet  ac., 
Puis.  Compare :  The  other  Arums  and  Calad. ;  Ailanth.  (scarla- 
tina :  depressing,  stupid,  drowsy  sleep) ;  Cina  (boring  nose) ;  Am. 
c.  (acrid  discharge  from  nose  in  scarlatina,  but  right  parotid  more 


ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM  201 

decidedly  a£Fected  in  Am.  c,  and  drowsiness  is  marked);  Am.  m. 
(scarlatina) ;  Arg.  n.  (scarlatina,  painful  red  blotches  left  side  of  tongue) ; 
Ais.,  Canth.y  Caps. ;  Castor,  (na^  discharge  watery  and  acrid  but  with 
violent  tearing  pain  at  root  of  nose) ;  Caust,  Cepa,  Crocus  (elevated 
papillae,  but  tongue  white) ;  Hepar,  Hydr.  ac,  lod.,  Kali  iod.,  Lach., 
Lya,  MerCy  Mez.,  Mur.  ac.,  Nit.  ac,  Phytol.,  Sang.,  Silia,  Sul.  Useful 
4^er:  Hep.y  Nit.  ac.,  Caust,  Seneg.    Incompatible:  Calad. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  MincL — Restlessness  or  irritability. — In  delirium  bores  in  nose ;  picks 
at  one  spot  or  at  dry  lips. — Great  delirium. — ^Absence  of  mind ;  giddy. 

8.  Head. — Child  has  headache,  puts  hand  on  back  of  head  and  cries  ; 
a  raw  spot  appears  on  lip,  comers  of  mouth,  or  on  nose,  emitting  one  drop 
of  blood ;  urine  scanty ;  this  raw  spot  may  occur  on  the  hand  when  the 
child  bores  and  digs  at  it. — Dull  headache  ;  upper  part  feels  cold,  as  if  open 
and  without  covering. — ^Violent  headache ;  pressing  on  r.  or  both  sides ;  < 
from  hot  coffee  ;  >  after  dinner,  and  after  breakfast. — (Headache  from  too 
warm  dothing,  from  becoming  hot.)— Head  burning  hot. — ^Tinea  capitis. 

3.  Byes. — Aversion  to  light. — Quivering  of  L  upper  lid. — Catarrh  of 
lachrymal  sac ;  bores  into  side  of  nose. 

5*  Nose. — Sore,  discharge  of  burning  ichorous  fluid  from  nose,  excoria- 
ting nostrils  and  upper  lip. — ^Nose  stopped ;  can  only  breathe  with  mouth  open ; 
diy  coryza. — R  nostril  open,  1.  blocked. 

0.  Face. — ^Tongue  sore,  red  papillae  elevated ;  cracked  and  bleeding 
(strawberry  tongue). — Lips  dry ;  swollen,  cracked  ;  corners  of  mouth  sore, 
bleeding,  cracked ;  picks  them. — Face  swollen. — Swelling  of  submaxillary 


8.    Mouttu — ^Mouth  burns  and  is  so  sore  that  he  requires  drink  and  cries 
when  anything  is  offered. — Extreme  salivation,  saliva  acrid. 

g.  Throat. — ^Throat  sore,  feels  excoriated ;  cannot  swallow.— Clergy- 
man's sore  throat,  or  sore  throat  of  one  who  speaks  a  great  deal. 

10.    Appetite.— Appetite,  loss  of. 

n.  Abdomen. — Sensation  of  emptiness  after  breakfast  in  the  abdomen, 
as  after  vomiting ;  with  contraction  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  anxiety  and 
fear.— Severe  aching  between  the  navel  and  the  hip,  esp.  when  standing 
opri^ty  or  lying  on  the  side,  or  drawing  a  deep  inspiration,  with  great 
senaidveness  of  the  part  affected  to  external  pressure. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — DiarrhGea,  typhoid-like. — Stool  like  cornmeal 
nmsh. — Stocd  dark  brown,  watery,  thin,  acrid. — ^Thin  faeces  escape  from  anus, 
and  keep  the  parts  raw  and  burning. 

24.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  discharge  of  abundant  pale  urine. — 
Clear,  watery  urine  and  smelling  like  burnt  horn,  and  depositing  a  cloudy 
sediment — ^Very  scanty  secretion  of  urine,  sometimes  passing  none  for  a  day. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — ^Tearing  pain  in  r.  testicle,  sometimes 
extending  to  atxlomen;  comes  and  goes  suddenly. — Smarting  at  end  of 
penis. 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Cutting  pain  in  either  ovary. — Menstrual 
blood  darker. — ^Menses  checked  for  two  mondis,  returned. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs.— Hoarseness  (clergyman's  sore  throat),  < 


ao2  ARUNDO  MAURITANICA 

from  talking.— -Voice  uncertain,  constantly  changing  (goes  off  into  a  squeak 
on  attempting  to  speak  or  sing). — ^Accumulation  of  mucus  in  trachea,— Cough 
hurts  the  throat  and  anno3rs  the  patient 

x8.    Chest.— Raw  feeling  in  chest— Lungs  (esp.  1.)  feel  sore. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiff*neck ;  with  intolerable  pressing  headache. 
— Pain  in  region  of  atlas  vertebra,  extending  to  r.  side. — Sore,  moist  places  on 
coccyx. 

24.  Generalities. — Burning  in  many  parts— ear,  lips,  tongue,  palate, 
throat,  anus,  lungs,  upper  arms. 

25.  Skin. — Erythema  of  scarlet  rash,  skin  peels  afterwards. — Itching  of 
scarlet  eruption. — ^One  of  the  first  indications  for  this  drug  is  the  appearance 
of  raw,  bloody  surfaces,  which  may  be  on  the  lips,  buccal  cavity,  nose,  back 
of  ear,  &c. 

26.  Sleep. — Sleeplessness  from  soreness  of  mouth  or  itching  of  skin. 

27.  Fever.— Dry  heat  of  skin. 


Arondo  Haoritanioa. 

An  Italian  Grass.    N.  O.  Gramineae.    Tincture  of  the  root  sprouts. 

CllnieaL— Catarrh.  Coryza.  Dentition.  Diarrhcea.  Bar,  discharge  from. 
Hay-fever.    Stomacace.    Urine,  deposit  in. 

CharaoteristioB. — Arundo  is  a  reedy  grass  and  the  tincture  is 
made  from  the  root-shoots.  It  has  not  been  much  tested  clinically, 
but  its  chief  sphere  has  been  proved  to  be  in  catarrhal  conditions. 
Constant  (serous)  diarrhoea  of  nursing  or  teething  children.  Urine 
deposits  much  red  sand.  Mouth  excoriated.  Thirst  Coryza  and 
snuffling.  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.  Purulent  discharge  from  the  ear. 
Arundo  has  cured  a  case  of  hay-fever,  the  symptoms  beginning  with 
"burning  and  itching  of  palate  and  conjunctiva."  Chagon  is  the 
authority  for  the  pathogenesis. 

Relations.— Com^ar^.'  Other  Gramineae,  Ananth.,  Lolium.  Also 
Cepa,  Sul.,  Calc.  c,  Lye,  Sabad.,  Psor. 

BTMPTOMB. 

z.    Mind. — Lascivious  ideas. — Laughs  easUy. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo  on  getting  out  of  bed. — Painful  undulation  in  frontal 
region. — Deep-seated  pains  in  sides  of  head. — Roots  of  hairs  painful. — Hair 
fails  ofiE  entirely  in  children. — Scurf. 

3.  Eyes. — Ophthalmia  in  children. — Blepharitis. — Undulating  luminous 
openings  appear  wherever  he  looks. — Fluttering  luminous  objects. — Cannot 
look  up. — Pricking,  itching,  burning  in  conjunctiva. 

4.  Ears. — Burning  itching  in  auditory  canals,  coincide  with  pain  in 
sublingual  glands. — ^The  inflammation  of  ears  begins  with  shooting  pains  in 
concha,  extends  to  external  meatus ;  finaUy  with  itching  and  discharge  of 
blood. — Purulent  discharge  from  ears.-— Eczema  behind  ears. — Sound  of 
little  bells  in  ears. 


ASAFCETIDA  203 

5.  Note.— Pain  at  root  of  nose.— CiMTza  with  snuffling.-— In  the 
beginning  water  runs  from  nose,  later  green  mucus  and  thick,  white,  slimy 
masses ;  with  sneezing,  pieces  of  indurated  greenish  mucus. 

6.  Face. — Erysipelas  on  r.  cheek. — Pricking  in  point  of  chin. 

8.  Mouth. — Mouth  excoriated. — Pains  in  sublingual  glands. — Salivation. 
— Burning  and  itching  of  palate. 

11.  Stomach.— Wants  to  belch  but  cannot. — Coldness  in  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  liver. — Pricking  in  spleen.^Acute  pain  at 
umbilicus. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Stools  at  first  hard,  soon  become  loose. — 
Constant  diarrhoea  (serous)  of  nursing  or  teething  children. — Greenish  stools. 
— Stools  followed  by  burning  at  anus. — Pricking  at  anus. — Piles  and  pro- 
lapse of  rectum. 

14.  Urinaiy  Organs. — ^Much  red  sand  in  urine.^-After  urinating, 
weight ;  burning  itching  in  urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sexual  desire ;  lascivious  ideas  ;  frequent 
erections. — Pain  in  spermatic  cords  after  coitus. — Difficult  tireathing  after 
coitus. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Uterine  catarrh.— Violent  desire  for 
coition  ;  or  aversion  to  it. — Early,  profuse,  long-lasting  menses ;  blood  dark 
clotted. — Pains  start  from  1.  side  of  jaw,  along  1.  eyebrow,  extending  to 
shoulders  and  loins  and  finally  settling  on  pubis,  burning  like  fire. — Excessive 
secretion  of  milk  causes  pain  in  1.  breast 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Catarrhal  cough. — Sputa  at  first  bluish, 
then  white,  and  so  alternately. — ^After  expectorating  bruised  feeling  in  pit  of 
throat. — ^After  cough  :  burning  in  epigastrium  ;  larynx  obstructed. — ^Accumu- 
lation of  mucus  in  bronchi  causes  anxiety. 

90.  Neck  and  Back.— Startings  in  neck ;  crawling  on  1.  side  of  it.— 
Acute  pain  under  L  scapula. 

21.    Limbs.— (Edema  of  limbs.— Pain  in  limbs  as  if  tightly  bandaged. 


AsafoBtida. 

Nartbex  asafcetida.    N,  O.  Umbdliferse.    Tincture  of  the  gum- 
resin  (obtained  by  incision  from  the  living  root). 

OUnloaL — ^Asthma.  Bone,  disease  of.  Chorea.  Diarrhoea.  Dyspepsia 
Flatulence.  Headache.  Heart,  affections  of.  Hypersensitiveness.  Hysteria 
Iritis.  Laciatiofh  disorders  of.  Mercury,  effects  of.  Neuralgia.  Obesity.  Orbita* 
neuralgia.    Ozaena.    Syphilis.    Tympanitis.    Ulcers.    Whitlow. 

CBuunuiteKlsties. — ^The  symptoms  of  AsafaHda  present  an  almost 
perfect  picture  of  hystena,  of  the  flatulent  order.  Reversed 
peristalsis  of  stomach  and  bowels.  Excessive  abdominal  distension 
and  sensation  as  if  everything  in  the  abdomen  would  bm^t  through 
the  mouth.  After  belching  of  wind  strong  rancid  taste  in  mouth. 
Sinking  sensation  at  epigastrium,  <  11  a.m.  Hysteria  from  suddenly 
suppressed  discharges.    Many  of  the  discharges  of  Asaf.  are  fetid : 


204  ASSAFCETIDA 

watery  stools  of  most  disgusting  odour  ;  profuse  and  greenish  ;  fetid 
flatus.  Eructations  smelling  like  garlic.  Hiccough-like  contractions 
of  diaphragm.  Griping  (into  a  baU)  pain  below  navel  while  standing. 
Heat  in  spleen  and  abdomen.  Stitches  in  right  hypochondrium, 
towards  the  diaphragm.  Asaf.  affects  the  left  side  generally:  left 
side  of  abdomen  ;  left  hypochondrium  ;  left  side  of  neck  and  nape  ; 
left  arm ;  left  leg.  Hysterical  restlessness  and  anxiety.  Eyes  in- 
flamed, dry  sensation,  >  in  open  air.  The  fetid  smell  of  the  drug 
may  be  regarded  as  one  of  its  "  signatures."  Fetid  discharge  from 
nose ;  bones  affected.  The  following  is  a  strong  characteristic :  Bones 
of  orbits  bruised,  sore,  and  sensitive  (iritis  ;  after  abuse  of  Mercury. 
Merc,  has  less  of  the  sensitiveness).  Caries  of  bones.  Multiple 
nodes  on  roof  of  mouth,  discoloured,  bone  deeply  involved. 
Deficient  milk  with  oversensitiveness  after  confinement  Periosteal 
affections  ending  in  ulcers  which  are  so  sensitive  that  no  dressing 
is  tolerated.  Pressing  pains  in  various  parts,  especially  pressure 
from  within  outwards,  <  in  room,  >  in  open  air.  Many  s^ptoms 
come  on  or  are  <  after  eating  or  drinking.  Heat  in  face  after  eating. 
Diarrhoea  after  eating.  Suited  to :  nervous  and  hysterical  people ; 
phlegmatic,  scrofulous,  and  syphilitic  who  have  taken  much  Mercury. 
Sensitiveness  to  contact  is  a  leading  characteristic.  Most  pains  are 
accompanied  by  numbness  in  the  affected  parts.  Many  symptoms 
appear  while  sitting  and  are  >  in  open  air.  Touch  >  pain  in  head ; 
on  touch  pains  cease  or  change  place.    Scratching  >  itching. 

Relationfl. — Aniidoied  by:  Puis., Caust.,  Camph.,  Chi.,  Merc,  Val. 
Useful  in  ailments  from :  Puis.,  Merc,  Alcohol.  Similar  to :  Arg.  n. 
(>  open  air) ;  Aur.  (bone  diseases,  iritis) ;  Castor.,  Chi.,  Caust.,  Crot.  t 
(whooping-cough) ;  Hep.  (sensitiveness  round  ulcers ;  faints  from 
pains),  Mang.  acet.,  and  Kali  iod.  (nodes  :  Mang.,  bluish  ;  K.  iod., 
pink;  pain  unbearable.  Asaf.  the  nodes  are  multiple  and  dis- 
coloured) ;  Ign.,  Merc,  Mosch.,  Phos.,  Puis.,  Thuj.,  Val.  Compare 
family  relations:  Ammoniac,  Cicut,  Con. 

Oansation.— Checked  skin  affections. 

BTHPTOMB, 

1.  Mind. — Dissatisfied  with  one's  self ;  complaints  about  one's  troubles. 
—Hysterical  restlessness  and  anxiety. — Unsteady  and  fickle. — lU-humour; 
irritable  ;  apprehensive. — Over-sensitive,  excitable. — If  he  thinks  of  having 
taken  the  drug,  it  causes  faintness. 

3.  Head. — Pressive  pain  in  forehead  from  within  outward;  with  it 
vertigo  and  vanishing  of  sight. — Single  deep-penetrating  stitches  in  left 
frontal  eminence. — Heaviness  and  pressure  in  forehead  and  r.  half  of  the 
head. — Drawing,  pressive  pains  like  a  plug,  in  sides  of  head  or  temples ;  most 
on  1.  side. — ^The  pains  in  the  head  cease,  or  change  from  touch. — Rush  of 
blood  to  head  and  warmth  of  face.— All  headaches  <  towards  evening ;  in 
room  while  at  rest,  sitting  or  lying ;  >  when  rising  or  moving  about  in  the 
open  air. 

3.  Eyes.— *  Nocturnal  throbbing  pains  in  and  around  the  head  ; 
syphilitic  iritis. — Extensive  superficial  ulceration  of  the  cornea,  with  burning, 


ASAFCETIDA  205 

sticking,  or  pressive  pains,  from  within  outward  ;  rest  and  pressure  relieve. — 
Sharp  pain  extending  through  eye  into  head  on  touching. — Sensation  of 
dryness  in  the  eyes. — Dryness  and  burning  in  the  eyes. — Severe  boring  pains 
over  the  eyebrows. 

4.  Ears.— Hardness  of  hearing,  with  discharge  of  offendve,  thin  pus 
from  the  ears. 

5.  Nose.— Ozaena ;  discharge  of  very  ofiEensive  greenish  matter  from 
the  nose ;  bones  swollen  and  inflamed  after  Mercury  or  in  scrofula. 

0.  Face. — Sensation  of  numbness  in  the  bones  of  the  face ;  painless 
tension  in  various  places. — Swelling  of  the  lower  lip. — ^Numbing  pressure  on 
chin. 

7.  Teeth.— Grindmg  of  teeth.— Bluntness  of  teeth. 

8.  Mouth.— Greasy,  rancid  taste  in  mouth  ;  and  of  phlegm  hawked  up. 
—  Speech  unintelligible  ;  tongue  white,  swollen  (chorea).  —  Constantly 
chewing,  and  working  frothy  slime  out  of  mouth. 

g^  Throat. — Sensation  of  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  throat — Dryness 
of  month,  throat,  and  cesophagus. — Sensation  of  a  ball  rising  in  the  throat, 
obliging  frequent  swallowing  to  keep  it  down,  and  causing  at  times  difficult 
tv^cathing  ;  globus  hystericus. — Sensation  in  the  oesophagus  as  if  the 
peristaltic  motions  were  from  below  upward. 

u.  Stomach. — Ravenous  hunger. — Desire  for  wine. — Disgust  for  all 
food. — Pulsation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  perceptible  to  the  hand  and  eye 
even. — Rising  in  throat — Loathing;  indination  to  vomit — Sensation  of 
fuhiess  and  distension  in  stomach. — Eructations ;  smelling  like  garlic ;  tasting 
nmdd,  sharp,  or  putrid. — Flatus  passing  upward,  none  down. 

12.  Abdomea.  —  Great  distension  of  the  abdomen. — Pulsations  in 
abdomen. — Heat  in  spleen  and  abdomen. — Colic  with  distension  and  a 
"rising-np"  feeling ;  >  by  external  pressure  ;  at  height  of  pain,  fainting. — 
Sense  of  fulness,  and  as  if  beaten,  in  epigastrium  and  whole  abdomen. — 
Pressive  pain  on  drawing  in  alxiominal  muscles.  Landnations ;  dartings  in 
abdominal  musdes. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Pain  in  perineum,  as  from  something  dull  press- 
ing out — Stool  prctfuse,  wateiy,  or  thick,  papescent,  brown,  and  exceedingly 
offensive. — Diarrhoea,  very  offensive,  with  pain  in  the  alxiomen  and  discharge 
of  fetid  flatus.— Stool  stinkmg ;  slow  ;  difficult ;  hard. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  brown,  and  of  pungent  smell. — Urine 
smells  like  ammonia. — Spasm  in  the  bladder  during  and  after  urination. 

15.  Male  Seicual  Organs. — Faintness  is  worse  after  seminal  emis- 
sions.— Urging  towards  genitals ;  aching  in  testes  ;  <  from  touch  or  motion. 
— Keedle-like  stitches  in  penis. — Drawing  in  glans ;  <  afternoon. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Labour-like  pains  in  uterine  region, 
with  cutting  and  bearing-down.— Excited  sexual  desire. — Leucorrhcea  pro- 
fuse, greenish,  thin,  and  offensive. — Swelling  and  inflammation  of  the 
genitals. — Mammae  tur^d  with  milk ;  when  not  pregnant. — Deficient  milk 
with  over-sensitiveness. — Milk  increased ;  or  diminished. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Spasmodic  dyspnoea,  as  if  the  lungs  could 
not  be  suffidently  expanded. — ^Asthmatic  attacks.---Obstinate  titillating  cough, 
<  night — Hoarse,  ringing,  shori  cough,  excited  by  tickling  in  trachea,  with 
asthmatic  f eding  therein  ;  spasmodic  contraction  of  thorax  and  accumulation 
of  stringy  mucus.— Cough  on  gaping. — Greasy-tasting  sputa. 


2o6  ASARUM   EUROPCEUM 

x8.  Chest. — Oppressive  pressing,  aching  pains  in  the  chest. — Stitches  in 
chest  (r.  side),  from  within  outward. 

zg.  Heart  and  Pulse. — Nervous  palpitation,  with  small,  quick,  irre- 
gular pulse. — Continual  pain  about  heart  region. — ^At  times  heart  feels  bound 
tightly,  as  if  it  could  not  beat ;  afterwards  only  on  exertion  or  walking. — 
Heart  feels  swollen  to  bursting. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Fine  burning  stitches  in  and  behind  r.  scapula, 
extending  to  ribs. — ^Very  violent  sacral  pains. — Cannot  work  on  account  d  the 
backache. — Crawls  run  over  back  in  afternoon. 

92.  Upper  Limbs. — Sensation  as  if  bones  of  the  arm  were  bending. 
— Darting  pains  in  the  bones ;  caries  in ;  caries  of  the  periosteum. — ^Tearing 
stitches  in  upper  arm  and  forearm  down  to  tips  of  fingers. — Painfulness  of 
the  periosteum,  accompanied  with  great  sensitiveness ;  nodes. — ^Twitching 
in  the  muscles  of  the  arms. — ^Aching,  drawing,  beaten  pain  in  wrist  joints. 
— ^Whitlow,  pains  <  night 

93.  Lower  Limbs. — Psoas  abscess  and  disease  of  pelvic  honts. — 
Twitching  of  the  muscles  of  the  legs. — Carious  ulcer  on  the  tibia. — Pain  as  of 
a  splinter  sticking  in  r.  fibula. — Swelling  and  caries  oi  the  tibia,  and  bones  of 
the  feet — Stitches  and  pulsation  in  the  big  toe. 

94.  Generalities.— Asthma  of  different  kinds.— Sense  of  rigor.— Body 
heavy  and  bloated. — Hysterical  attacks. — Hysteria,  with  much  trouble  about 
throat  or  oesophagus. — ^Twitching  and  jerking  in  the  muscles. — Dull  stitches 
(periodically)  from  within  outwards,  changed  or  relieved  by  touch. — Pains 
mostly  in  tiie  inside  (flexor  side)  of  the  joints  and  limbs. — St  Vitus'  dance. 

95.  Skin. — Itching,  better  by  scratching;  pricking,  burning  skin. — 
Ulcers  with  high,  hard  edges,  sensitive  to  touch,  easily  bleeding ;  old  ulcers 
on  forearm,  wrist,  hand ;  ulcers,  esp.  when  affecting  the  bones ;  pus  profuse, 
greenish,  thin,  offensive,  even  ichorous. — Ulcers,  very  painful  to  contact,  esp. 
in  the  circumference,  gangrenous. 

96.  Sleep. — Much  against  his  habit,  he  is  much  inclined  to  sleep. 

97.  Fever. — Pulse  small,  rapid,  and  unequal. — Heat  in  the  face  after 
dinner,  with  anxiety  or  drowsiness,  without  thirst — Chills  run  over  body 
from  time  to  time. 


Asarom  EoropoBun. 

Asarabacca.  Hazelwort.  WildNard.  (Mountainous  woods  in  Europe.) 
N,  O.  Aristolochiaceas.    Tinctures  of  root  and  whole  fresh  plant 

01iniosI«— Alcoholism.  Anus,  prolapse  of.  Catarrhs.  Cholerine. .  Diarrhoea. 
Dysmenorrhosa.  Eyes,  affections  of ;  operations  on.  Fidgets.  Headache.  Hysteria. 
Levitation,  sensation  of.    Typhus. 

Charaoteristios.— Before  Hahnemann's  time  Asar.  was  little 
known  except  as  an  emetic.  His  proving  brought  to  light  some 
unique  characteristics.  Most  remarkable  is  a  state  of  over- 
sensitiveness   of   the    nerves,  the    scratching  of  linen  or   silk,  or 


ASARUM   EUROPCEUM  207 

even  the  thought  of  it,  is  insufferable.  Sensation  of  lightness 
of  the  limbs,  thinks  she  is  gliding  through  the  air  when  she 
walks.  Nervous  irritability  and  exaltation.  Sensation  as  though 
whole  body  or  single  parts  were  being  pressed  together.  Pain  as 
from  contraction  in  forehead,  temples,  and  behind  ear,  with  water- 
ing and  burning  of  the  eyes ;  <  afternoon,  >  when  sitting,  and  by 
washing.  Byes  inflamed,  bleared,  staring.  Weak  sight,  <  bright 
light  When  reading  sensation  as  if  eyes  would  be  pressed  asunder. 
Cold  air  and  cold  washing  >.  With  a  single  dose  of  Asar.  200  I  cured 
a  case  of  subacute  inflammation  of  eyes  and  Uds  which  had  lasted 
some  months  after  an  attack  of  influenza,  the  indications  being  **  >  in 
open  air,  and  by  washing  in  cold  water.''  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
suited,  according  to  Guernsey,  to  chilly  persons  who  are  always 
shrinking  from  the  cold ;  c^.,  literary,  sedentary  men  who  are  sick 
and  chilly.  It  is  useful  for  the  darting  pains  remaining  after  opera- 
tions on  the  eyes.  Several  symptoms  are  <  in  cold,  dry  weather ; 
in  clear,  fine  weather ;  in  dry  weather.  >  In  damp,  wet  weather  ;  on 
wetting  affected  parts.  Sensation  of  skin  stretched  over  right  external 
ear.  Deafness.  Plugged  sensation.  Pressure,  tension,  and  con- 
tractive sensations  are  leading  features  of  Asar.  Accumulation  of 
cold  watery  saliva  in  mouth.  Hunger  in  early  morning.  Constant 
nausea.  Vomiting,  with  diarrhoea  and  violent  coUc.  Stool  of  jelly- 
like mucus.  Menstrual  colic.  Headache  before  and  after  menses. 
Violent  pain  in  small  of  back,  which  scarcely  permits  her  to  breathe, 
at  beginning  of  menses.  Deschere  reports  a  case  of  dysmenorrhcea 
in  a  nervous,  fidgety  woman  of  twenty-seven,  who  had  intense  back- 
ache during  first  two  days,  so  severe  that  she  could  not  move.  It 
often  rose  to  the  dorsal  region,  when  it  would  take  away  her  breath. 
Cured  with  Asar.  50,  one  dose  every  evening.  Heat  especially  of  face, 
and  in  palms  of  hands.  When  retching  all  symptoms  <  except 
stupidiW  of  the  head,  which  is  >. 

ReiktionB. — Antidotes:  Camph.,  vinegar  and  vegetable  acids. 
Followed  well  by :  Bismuth.  Compare :  Aeon.,  Alo.  (stringy  stools) ; 
Camph.  (cholerine) ;  Cupr.,  Hep.,  Ipec.  (cholerine) ;  Merc,  (stringy 
stools) ;  Nux  v.,  Phos.,  Pod.,  Puis,  and  Sul.  ac.  (stringy  stools) ;  Sep., 
Stram.,  Tabac.,  and  Verat  (cholerine).  Asaf*  (over-sensitiveness). 
Sticta  pul.,  Calc,  Can.  ind..  Gels.,  Thuj.,  Ol.  jec.  asel.  (levitation). 
Mosch.,  Tarent,  Meph.,  Zinc,  (fidgety  feet). 

BTMPTOMB. 

1.  Mind. — Nervous  irritability  and  exaltation  of  the  senses. — Merely 
thinking  some  one  might  scratch  with  finger-tip  or  nail  on  linen,  &c.  s:  dis- 
agreeable thrill  through  him,  arresting  thought  and  action. — Cold  "  shivers  " 
from  any  emotion. — Condition  of  mind  as  if  just  falling  asleep ;  a  gradual 
vanishing  of  ideas. — Imagines  he  is  hovering  in  the  air  like  a  spirit ;  when 
walking  in  the  open  air. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  as  if  drunk,  on  rising  from  a  seat ;  on  walking. — 
Giddiness,  pressure  or  aching  in  head,  chiefly  temples,  forehead,  and  above 
root  of  nose. — ^Very  sensitive,  compressive  headache  in  forehead,  temples,  and 


2o8  ASARUM   EUROPCEUM 

behind  the  ears  (1.  side  of  head),  with  watering  and  burning  of  the  eyes,  < 
afternoon  (5  p.m.),  >  when  sitting,  and  by  washing,  but  not  by  wiping. — Head- 
ache <  by  intellectual  exertion.— Tension  of  whole  scalp,  making  hair  fed 
painful ;  cannot  bear  combing. — Head  dull  and  stupid ;  feels  the  pulsation  of 
arteries  in  occiput. 

3.  Eyes.— Obscuration  of  sight.— When  reading,  sensation  in  eyes  as 
if  they  would  be  pressed  asunder. — Inflamed  eyes,  blear-eyedness. — Inflamed 
eyes,  burning  in  the  lids,  esp.  the  canthi.— The  eyes  stare.^The  cold  air 
is  pleasant  to  the  eyes ;  sunshine,  light,  and  wind  are  intolerable. — Painful 
dryness  of  the  interior  of  the  eyes. — ^Asthenopia  with  congestive  headache ; 
eyes  <  morning  and  evening ;  >  middle  day,  and  by  bathing  them  in  cold 
water. — Sharp  pain  over  1.  eye,  running  of  tears,  and  sensitive  to  light. 

4.  Ears. — Over-sensitiveness  of  nerves ;  scratching  of  linen  or  silk  is 
insupportable. — Pressure  and  tension  in  the  region  of  the  orifice  of  the 
meatus  auditorius. — Deafness  in  one  or  both  ears. — Sensation  as  if  ears  closed 
or  plugged  with  some  foreign  substance. 

6.  Face. — Warm  feeling  in  face ;  all  symptoms  disappear  on  applying 
cold  water,  but  return  soon  after. 

8.  Mouth. — Disgusting  taste  in  the  mouth. — ^Accumulation  of  cold, 
watery  saliva  in  the  mouth. — Bread  tastes  bitter, — ^Tobacco  tastes  bitter  when 
smoking. — Burning  across  tongue. — Biting  on  tongue.— Tongue  somewhat 
whitish  and  thickly  furred. — Stomacace. 

9.  Throat.— Tough  phlegm  in  throat ;  can't  raise  it 

11.  Stomach. — Eructations  putrid  or  sour,  setting  the  teeth  on  edge. — 
Frequent  empty  eructations. — ^Violent,  empty  retching,  which  increases  all  the 
symptoms,  only  relieving  the  stupid  feeling  about  the  head,  which  decreases. 
— Heartburn. — ^Attacks  of  nausea ;  <  after  eating  ;  tongue  clean. — Want  of 
appetite,  even  nauseated  by  food. — Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit — ^Vomiting 
with  great  anguish,  under  violent  exertion,  with  chilUness. — ^Vomiting,  with 
diarrhoea  and  violent  colic. — Pressing  digging  and  feeling  of  discomfort  in 
pit  of  stomach. — Horrible  sensation  at  epigastrium  on  waking  (in  drunkards). 
— Unquenchable  longing  for  alcohol. 

12.  Abdomen. — Oppression  around  navel,  three  or  four  times  after 
each  meal,  lasting  one  hour. — Pain  in  region  of  descending  colon,  with 
discharge  of  stringy  mucus. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea,  consisting  of  tenacious  mucus. — A 
long  yellow  twisted  string  of  inodorous  mucus,  with  pain  in  abdomen. — 
Lientery. — During  stool,  discharge  of  thick,  black  blood. — Prolapsus  ani 
during  stooL — ^After  stool,  pressing  and  straining,  and  discharge  of  white, 
viscid,  bloody  mucus. — Before  stool,  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  and  sharp 
stitches  in  the  rectum,  from  above  downward. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Violent  pains  in  1.  groin,  darting  through 
urethra  to  glans. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Menses  too  early  and  long-lasting,  blood 
black. — Headache  often  appears  before  and  after  menses. — Violent  pain  in 
small  of  back,  at  the  appearance  of  menses,  scarcely  permitting  her  to  breathe. 
— ^Tenacious  yellow  leucorrhcea. — ^Vaginal  fistula. — Nausea  of  pregnancy. — 
Threatened  abortion  from  excessive  sensibility  of  nerves. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Stitches  and  constriction  in  larynx ;  >  by 


ASCLEPIAS  SYRIACA  209 

coo^ — ^Frequent  cough  on  account  of  mucus  in  chest ;  mucus  rises  into 
throat,  causing  difficult  breathing,  and  finally  cough  with  expectoration. — 
Constant  short,  hacking  cough  of  consumptives. 

18.  Chest.— Sharp  pressure  in  region  of  last  ribs  as  with  the  back  of  a 
knife. — Pain  round  both  lungs  as  if  they  were  constricted  by  a  wire. — 
Frequent  stitches  in  both  lungs  during  inspiration. 

sz.  Uinhs. — Lightness  of  all  the  limbs ;  he  does  not  perceive  that  he 
has  a  body. 

88.  Upper  Liint>8. — Sweat  in  axillae  smelling  sour. — Laming  pain  in 
L  wrist. 

S3.  Ijoiwer  Liint>s. — Dull  pressure  in  the  right  hip. — Chronic  sciatica. — 
Gur:^ing  sensation  in  patella. 

84.  Generalities. — Excessive  sensibility  of  all  the  nerves ;  when  merely 
thinking  (and  this  he  must  continually)  that  some  one  might,  with  the  finger- 
tip or  naul,  scratch  even  lightly  on  linen  or  similar  materials,  a  most  disagree- 
able sensation  thrills  through  him,  arresting  momentarily  all  his  thoughts  and 
actions. 

86.  Sleep. — Great  drowsiness  by  day. — Frequent  yawning. — Short  breath 
by  ni^t. — Nightly  vexatious  dreams,  about  humiliations. — Restless  sleep. 

87.  Fever. — ^Pulse  full  and  accelerated. — Chilliness  and  coldness,  after 
eating  and  drinking,  with  heat  of  the  head. — Nervous  chilliness ;  single  parts 
get  icy  cold.— Cold  feeling  not  >  by  covering  or  heat  of  room. — Heat  esp. 
in  the  face,  and  in  the  palms  of  the  hands. — Perspiration  smelling  sour 
at  ni^t  in  the  armpits. — Easily  excited  perspiration,  esp.  on  the  upper  part 
of  the  body. — Slow  fevers. 


Asdepias  Syriaca. 


A.  comuti.    Milkweed  or  Silkweed.    N.  O,  Asclepiadaceae.    Tincture 

of  root 

GUnlesL— Abortion.  Bronchitis.  Catarrhal  fever.  Dropsy.  DysmenonhoBa. 
Hay-fever.  Headache.  Indigestion.  Influenza.  Pleurisy.  Rheumatism.  Unemia. 
Uteiae  pains. 

OharaoterlstiOB. — Asclep.  syr.  has  especial  influence  on  nervous 
tissues.  Nervous  headache  ;  as  if  a  sharp  instrument  were  thrust 
throii^  from  one  temple  to  the  other  \  with  vomiting  ;  followed  by 
sweating  or  profuse  urination.  Belching  of  food  with  its  proper 
taste.  Influenza  and  hay-fever.  Dropsy  after  scarlatina  or  heart 
disttfle.  Headache  from  checked  sweat  or  retention  of  efiFete 
matters.  Uraemia.  Acute  rheumatism  confined  to  large  joints  with 
mudi  pain  and  swelling.  Intermittent,  pressing,  uterine  pains; 
threa^tened  miscarriage. 

I^f^l^^^na, — Compare :  Act.  r.,  Bry.,  Colch.,  Asclep.  tub. 

SYMPTOMS. 

8.    Head. — Vertigo,  dulness,  and  stupidity,  with  headache  (1.)— Violent 
headache  between  the  eyes;  sense  of  constriction  across  the  forehead. — 
VOL.  I.  15 


2IO  ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA 

Headache  from  suppressed  perspiration,  or  from  the  retention  of  effete 
matters  in  the  S3rstem. — Nervous  headaches,  followed  by  sweating  or  profuse 
urination. — When  the  drug  did  not  cause  sweating  or  profuse  urination,  it 
caused  violent  headache  with  quick,  full  pulse  and  nausea. — ^A  feeling  (after 
vomiting)  ^  if  some  sharp  instrument  were  thrust  from  one  temple  to  the 
other. 

8.    Mouth. — ^Tongue  covered  with  a  white  fur. 

g.  Throat. — Burning  and  tickling  in  the  fauces,  with  nausea  and  head- 
ache. 

10.  Appetite. — Great  appetite  even  a  few  hours  after  a  meal. — Increased 
appetite,  notwithstanding  the  vomiting  and  headache,  with  constipation. 

11.  Stomach. — Excessive  nausea ;  with  violent  headache ;  violent  vomit- 
ing and  retching. — Severe  and  long-continued  vomiting,  leaving  behind  it  a 
sensation  of  rawness  in  the  stomach  and  a  slight  pain,  coldness  of  the  surface 
of  the  skin,  and  feeble  pulse,  and  a  feeling  as  if  a  sharp  instrument  thrust 
through  from  one  temple  to  the  other. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Increased  secretion  of  bile. — Slight  inclination 
to  evacuate  the  bowels ;  with  nausea  and  diuresis. — Diarrhoea,  with  nausea 
and  vomiting,  with  excoriation  of  the  anus. — Copious  stools  of  soft,  fluid 
consistence,  yellowish  in  colour,  and  attended  with  some  griping  pain. — Con- 
stipation ;  pain  in  r.  side,  lower  limbs,  loss  of  appetite. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Ardor  urinae. — Increased  flow  of  urine. — Pale- 
coloured  urine,  vrith  light  specific  gravity. — Increase  of  solid  matters  in 
urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Tickling  sensation  at  the  end  of  the  penis. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Intermittent,  bearing-dovra,  labour-like 
pains  (during  dropsy) ;  pressing  from  sacrum  to  hypogastrium,  with  scanty 
flow.— Suppression  of  menses  (during  dropsy). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Increase  of  the  bronchial  secretions. — Burn- 
ing and  tickling  in  fauces. — (Influenza ;  catarrhal  fevers ;  bronchitis ;  hay- 
fever.)— Pain  in  1.  side  of  chest  on  deep  inspiration  (pleurisy). 

19.  Heart  and  Pulse. — ^Action  of  heart  lessened ;  pulse  slow. — Feeble 
pulse  after  vomiting. 

20.  Back. — Cutting  and  aching  about  lowest  dorsal  vertebra. 

21.  Limbs. — Large  joints  affected. 

26.  Sleep. — Drowsy ;  sleepiness ;  hard  sleep  during  the  night. 

27.  Fever. — Coldness  of  surface  after  vomiting. — Diaphoresis ;  profuse 
sweat 

Asdepias  Tuberosa. 

Pleurisy-root.    Butterfly-weed.    N.  O.  Asclepiadaceae.    Tincture  of 

fresh  root. 

Clinioal.— Alopecia.  Asthma.  Bilious  fever.  Bronchitis.  Catarrh.  Chancre. 
Colic  Cough.  Diarrhoea.  Dysentery.  Headache.  Heart,  affections  of.  Influ- 
enza. Ophthalmia.  Pericarditis.  Pleurisy.  Pleurodynia,  Rheumatism.  Scrofula. 
Syphilis. 

CharaoteviBtiOB. — Asclep,  tub,  causes  sharp,  stitching,  pricking 
pains ;  <  by  motion.    It  is  of  the  hydrogenoid  type,  corresponding 


ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA  211 

to  catarrhal  complaints  from  cold  and  damp  weather.  Rheumatic 
pains  affect  the  body  diagonally,  1.  upper  and  r.  lower,  or  the  opposite. 
MiKcnlar  and  articular  rheumatism  with  stitching  pains,  dark  red 
urine  and  hot,  perspiring  skin.  Sensitive  to  tobacco.  Pain  in  fore- 
head and  abdomen  from  coughing.  Griping  and  sharp  peritoneal 
pains  <  by  pressure.  Dysentery  in  autumn  ;  and  painful  diarrhoea 
with  griping  and  tenesmus.  Warm  feeling  in  chest.  Dyspnoea. 
Cough  hard  and  dry ;  or  hoarse,  croupy  with  tight  breathing  and 
constriction  of  laivnx,  and  acute  pleuritic  pains.  Pains  in  lungs 
>  bending  forward.  Stitches  in  1.  side  shooting  over  to  r.  and  up  to 
L  shoulder.  Influenza  with  pleuritic  pains.  Cutting  pain  behind 
sternum  ;  intercostal  spaces  near  sternum  tender  to  pressure.  Pain 
like  pricking  of  a  needle  in  region  of  heart.  Contracting  pain  in 
heart.  Sharp  pains,  starting  from  1.  nipple  downward  with  stiffness 
of  L  side  of  neck.  Excessive  weakness,  walking  seems  impossible. 
Bilious  marsh-fever  on  rice  plantations.  High  fever  with  hot  sweat. 
Catarrhal  complaints  from  cold  and  damp  weather.  Diarrhoea  is  < 
in  winter.  Symptoms  <  in  morning  ;  on  rising ;  by  motion  ;  by 
coaghing ;  by  tobacco.    Chest  pains  <  4  a.m.  and  4  p.m. 

SdatioUL — Compare :  Agar,  (diagonal  pains) ;  Bry.  ;  Verat. 
rdieved  pains  with  stool  at  night.    Dulc.  «  cold  and  damp). 

STHPTOHB. 

I.  Mind. — ^Weakness  of  memory ;  thinking  difficult. — ^At  9  p.m.  cheer- 
fal,  mood  changed^  and  without  any  cause  he  became  fretful  and  feverish. 

ft.  Head. — Feeling  of  drunkenness  with  weakness  of  sight  after  smoking 
a  very  little. — Swimming  of  the  head  with  dulness  behind  forehead. — Dull 
headache  in  the  forehead  and  vertex,  <  by  motion ;  >  by  lying  down. — 
Headache  in  the  morning  on  rising. — Headache  >  after  a  foot-bath. — Head- 
adie  pressing  deeply  on  the  base  of  the  skull. — Pain  in  the  forehead  from 
coughing. — Alopecia, 

3.  £ye8. — Eyes  look  duU,  fatigued,  and  heavy  (as  after  long  illness). — 
Ophthahnta,  with  itching  and  pain  in  eyes. — Peeling  of  sand  in  the  eyes. — 
Vision  disturbed  ;  large  spots  before  the  eyes. 

5.  Nose. — Fluent  coryza,  with  much  sneezing. — Blowing  of  blood  from 
L  nostriL — Itching  of  the  nose. — Snuffles  of  children. 

6.  Face. — Hippocratic  face  after  violent  diarrhoea. — ^Yellow  complexion 
—Vesicles  on  lips. — Itching  of  lips. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tecth  yellow-coated. —  Bleeding  of  the  gums.— Tongue 
covered  with  a  tough  yellow  coating. — ^Taste  putrid. — ^Taste  of  blood, 

9.  Throat. — Slight  constriction  of  throat,  and  pricking  in  larynx. 

XX.  Stomach.  —  Loss  of  appetite ;  esp.  in  morning.  —  Insatiable 
hunger. — Sensitive  to  tobacco. — Eructations. — ^Nausea,  and  efforts  to  vomit ; 
in  the  morning  when  rising. — In  stomach :  nervous  pains ;  disagreeable 
mag^t ;  boming. — In  evening,  violent  gastralgia  after  supper ;  it  seems  as  if 
coughing  would  bruise  the  stomach. — Cramp. 

22.  Abdomen. — Grumbling  in  r.  hypochondrium. — ^Throbbing  in  1. 
hypochondriom. — Rumbling  in  the  bowels,  with  uneasiness,  or  sharp,  cutting 


212  ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA 

pains  and  soreness. — Burning  borborygmi. — Colic  pains  from  flatulence. — 
Colic  on  going  upstairs. — Dull  pain  in  bowels  on  pressure. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Emission  of  fetid  flatulence. — Soft  and  fetid 
stool  at  II  a.m.,  preceded  by  rumbling  in  the  bowels. — Early  morning  diar- 
rhcea  (i  to  3  a.m.),  sudden  discharge. — ^Winter  diarrhoea. — ^Autumnal  dysen- 
tery.— ^Tenesmus. — ^At  11  a.m.  another  stool,  almost  black,  with  many 
ascarides  and  yellow  spots  like  fat,  with  a  feeling  as  if  a  stream  of  fire  passed 
through  abdomen. — Stools  :  dysenteric ;  like  white  of  eggs ;  yellow ;  green  ; 
clammy ;  smelling  like  rotten  eggs  ;  enveloped  in  froth ;  like  moss. — ^With 
stool :  colic. — ^After  stool :  colic  continues  long. — Constipation  after  diarrhoea. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Lancinating  pain  in  urethra,  excoriation  of  glans 
penis  in  several  places,  with  commencement  of  sanious  and  purulent  secre- 
tion.— Urine  very  red  :  looks  as  if  blood  were  in  it. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Plabbiness,  perspiration,  and  insipid  smell 
of  genitals. — Excoriation  of  glans  penis  in  several  places,  with  commencement 
of  sanious  discharge  (chancre) ;  >  by  bathing  with  urine. — ^Weakness  ; 
erection  without  desire. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Menorrhagia,  with  violent  bearing- 
down. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Dry  cough,  with  constriction  of  throat ; 
causing  pain  in  forehead  and  abdomen ;  dry,  hacking  cough,  <  night  and 
morning;  from  irritation  of  larynx  or  bronchia. — Respiration  painful,  esp. 
at  base  of  1.  lung. — Breath  smells  like  pepper. — Humid  asthma;  < 
after  eating ;  <  after  smoking  a  little.— Oppression  and  difficulty  of  breathing; 
in  paroxysms,  like  asthma. 

18.  Chest. — ^Warm  feeling  in  chest. — Sharp  pains  shooting  from  1.  nipple 
downward,  with  stiffness  of  1.  side  of  neck. — Pain  moves  up  to  behind  the 
sternum,  and  becomes  more  sharp  and  cutting,  <  drawing  a  long  breath,  or 
moving  the  arms  (as  in  triturating). — ^The  spaces  between  the  ribs,  close  to  the 
sternum,  are  sensitive  to  pressure,  and  the  pain,  which  is  quick  and  darting, 
shoots  over  from  1.  to  r.  side,  and  up  to  1.  shoulder. — Pain  in  chest  relieved  by 
bending  forward. — ^Acute  pleuritic  pain  in  r.  side,  with  dry,  hacking  cough, 
and  scanty  mucous  expectoration. — Pain  in  chest  low  down,  in  diaphragm. — 
Sharp  pains  from  1.  nipple  downward,  with  stiffness  1.  side  neck. 

19.  Heart  and  Pulse. — Constrictive  pain  in  the  heart. — ^Tenderness  to 
pressure  over  heart. — Lancinating  pains  ;  like  pricking  of  a  needle  in  region 
of  heart. — Pain  beneath  1.  nipple  with  palpitation. — Pulse  slightly  accelerated. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiff-neck  (1.) ;  on  waking. — Lancinating  pains 
in  back  and  between  the  shoulders. — Pains  shooting  from  1.  chest  into  L 
shoulder. — Sharp  pain  in  loins  near  sacrum ;  lumbago. 

21.  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pain  in  all  the  joints. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Shairp,  shooting  pains  in  r.  shoulder. — Pain  in  1. 
shoulder,  shooting  from  1.  chest. — Pains  near  wrists. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Itching  of  thighs  and  nates  but  no  eruption. — 
Coxalgia  in  r.  hip. — Corns  painfuL 

24.  Generalities. — ^Weak  and  languid,  as  if  he  had  been  sick  a  long 
time. — Emaciation. — Numbness  of  whole  body. 

25.  Skin. — ^Vesicles,  pimples,  and  pustules  all  over  the  body,  esp. 
on  arms,  legs,  and  face  ;  itching. 


ASPARAGUS  213 

9ft.    Sleep. — ^Drowsy. — Uneasy^  restless  sleep. — ^Troublesome  dreams. 

07.  Fever. — Chill  towards  noon ;  with  cold  feet  though  room  is  warm. — 
Feverish  afternoon. — High  fever  with  hot  sweat. — Rheumatic ;  catarrhal ; 
bilious  marsh  fevers  of  rice  plantations. 

Asimina  Triloba. 

Paw  Faw,  or  Custard  Apple.    N.  0.  Anonaceae.    Tincture  of  ripe  and 
unripe  fruit,  green  leaves,  bark,  and  root 

CMnteal*— Aphthae.  Carbuncle.  Cramp.  Diarrhcea.  Fever.  Scarlatina. 
Tbroat,  8ore. 

Chancterifltloflu — ^The  Anonacece,  to  which  Asimina  belongs,  are 
allied  to  the  Magnolia  family.  From  eating  the  unripe  fruit  five 
children  developed  high  fever,  sore  throat,  and  a  scarlet  eruption,  with 
diarrhcea,  one  of  them  having  eventually  a  carbuncle.  It  has  also 
been  proved.  The  mouth,  throat  and  stomach  are  irritated.  Drinks 
much.    Desire  for  ice-cold  things  and  <  after  eating. 

BalatioiUk— Com^ari^.-  Caps.,  Bell.,  Illic.  anis  (colic). 

STHPTOHS. 

8,  9*  Mouth  and  Throat. — ^Mouth  feels  corroded;  fauces  red, 
swoOen ;  tonsils  and  submaxillary  glands  enlarged. 

u.  Stomach. — Nausea  and  belching;  soreness  in  regions  of  stomach 
and  abdomen  on  pressure. 

IS.    Atxlomen.— Cdic. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea  after  eating ;  yellowish  discharges ; 
soreness  of  anus  when  wiping  it — Sudden  urging  to  stool,  with  sensation 
as  if  a  stick  the  thickness  of  a  thumb  passed  down  the  rectum ;  followed 
by  a  sudden  diarrhoeic  stool,  repeated  every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  with 
ghiiimi^ss,  drowsiness,  and  weak  voice. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness ;  the  voice  is  weak  and  talking 
is  an  effort,  as  if  the  mucous  membrane  was  thickened. 

18.  Chest. — Cramp  in  chest,  lasting  three  hours,  with  blueness  of  face. 
15.    Skin. — Itching  when  undres^ng. — Scarlet  rash  followed  by  des- 

quaumtion. 

26.  Sleep. — Fever,  with  sleepiness. — Drowsiness  and  sleeplessness  alter- 
nating. 

S7.  Fever. — Fever  heat,  with  desire  for  something  icy-cold;  with 
drowsiness ;  with  much  thirst 


Asparagus. 


A.  officinalis.    N.  0.  Liliaceae.    Tincture  of  young  sprouts. 

fflfa*ff^f — Coryza.    Diabetes.    Dropsies.    Heart  disease.    Urinary  disorders. 

G9ianuiteKiBtio& — Like  other  Uliaceous  plants  Aspar.  acts  on  the 
heart|  Jddneys,  and  dropsical  effusions.    Severe  coryza  and  nasal 


214  ASPARAGUS 

catarrh,  with  profuse  secretion  of  thin,  whitish  fluid  from  left  nostril, 
afterwards  right  Frequent  violent  sneezing.  Copious  discharge  of 
tenacious  mucus  from  the  throat,  not  easily  loosed,  but  brought 
up  by  hawking  or  paroxysms  of  cough.  Frequent  urination,  with 
fine  stinging  in  the  meatus  ;  followed  by  stitches  out  of  the  urethra. 
After  urinating  burning  in  urethra  with  sensation  as  if  some  were 
still  passing.  Increased  urine  beer-brown,  without  sediment  Urine 
strong-smelling  ;  odour  peculiar ;  deposits  greasy  sediment  on  sides 
of  vessel ;  gravel.  Prurigo  pudendi.  Fulness  in  chest ;  hydrothorax. 
Visible  violent  palpitation  ;  while  sitting ;  with  anxious  restlessness, 
increased  by  motion  or  ascending ;  with  oppression  of  chest  Pulse 
weak,  slow,  irregular.  Pain  at  left  acromion  process,  under  clavicle 
and  down  left  arm.  Constant  desire  to  be  carried  about  in  the 
arms. 

RdationB. — Antidoied  by :  Aeon,  (prostration,  feeble  pulse,  pain 
in  shoulder) ;  Apis.  Antidote  to :  Coffea.  Compare :  Conval.  maj., 
Sarsap.,  Arn.,  Aur.  mur.,  Cannab.,  Digit,  Spigel. 


SYMPTOMS. 

a.  Head. — ^Vertigo  in  forehead  ;  head  confused,  as  during  an  attack  of 
vertigo  ;  dizziness  in  the  forehead,  followed  by  aching  in  the  temples,  chiefly 
the  1.  one  ;  aching  in  the  forehead  over  the  eyes,  or  a  sensation  c^  confusion 
in  the  fore  part  of  the  head  ;  aching  in  the  temples,  aggravated  by  pressure ; 
weight  in  the  forehead. 

3«    Eyes. — Darting  and  tingling  in  the  eyes ;  sight  more  piercing. 

6.  Face. — Paleness  of  the  face ;  increase  of  heat  in  the  face ;  cheeks 
burning. 

11.  Stomach. — ^Taste  insipid,  sweetish  (as  of  copper) ;  softness  of  the 
saliva,  as  if  it  were  mixed  with  blood. — ^Thirst  increased. — Eructations; 
flatulency  in  the  stomach;  nausea  in  the  morning,  on  waking,  followed 
by  vomiting  of  food,  mixed  with  bile  and  slimy  matter  ;  afterwards  diarrhcea 
of  bile  and  of  f ascal  matter. 

12.  Abdomen. — Sensation  of  fulness  in  the  abdomen,  pinching  in  the 
umbilical  region,  at  night,  with  painful  sensibility  to  the  touch.— Inflation  of 
the  abdomen ;  frequent  emission  of  wind. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Bilious  diarrhoea,  with  pain  as  of  excoriation  in 
the  anus,  colic,  and  dragging  in  the  groins. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  straw  colour,  scanty,  soon  becomes 
turbid,  with  littie  white  specks ;  afterwards  (about  four  hours),  a  white  flaky 
sediment ;  the  urine  deposits  a  fatty  sediment  on  the  sides  of  the  vessel ; 
urine  brown,  without  sediment ;  dear,  and  of  a  fetid  smell ;  a  peculiar  smell 
from  the  urine. — Urgent  inclination  to  urinate ;  frequent  and  scanty  emission 
of  urine,  preceded  by  a  sensation  as  if  a  foreign  body  were  introducing  itself 
into  the  urethra,  and  followed  by  a  burning  sensation  ;  diminished  secretion 
of  urine ;  augmentation,  in  the  last  stage  of  experimenting ;  burning  in  the 
urethra ;  fine  stitches  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra ;  sometimes  incisive  pains, 
sometimes  with  dragging  in  the  groins,  colic,  diarrhoea,  and  pain  in  the  anus, 


ASPARAGUS  215 

sometiines  ^with  a  sensation  as  though  there  were  more  urine  to  pass. — Urine 
loaded  with  phosphates  and  the  urate  of  ammonia  (in  renal  dropsy). — Gravel 
passes  in  small  quantities  with  the  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Excitation  of  sexual  appetite ;  dartings  in 
the  ^ans  x>enis. 

xO.  Female  Sexual  Organs.--Catamenia  continue  a  day  beyond  the 
usual  time. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Frequent  sneezing ;  hawking,  with  irresis- 
tible inclination  to  cough»  but  without  power  to  detach  mucus  ;  paroxysms  of 
coughing,  which  compel  the  patient  to  rise  from  his  seat,  abating  after 
breakfast ;  violent  cough,  attended  by  oppression  of  the  chest,  and  copious 
expectoration  of  mucus. — ^Violent  cough,  inducing  retchings. — ^Abundant 
secretion  of  mucus  in  the  throat ;  a  constant  rattling  of  mucus  in  the  chest, 
with  roughness  in  the  throat 

iS.  Chest. — Oppression  of  the  chest,  esp.  when  writing  ;  dyspnoea 
hrougbt  on  by  motion,  on  going  upstairs,  and  sometimes  in  the  night-time, 
obliging  the  patient  to  sit  up  in  bed. — Pressure  on  the  chest,  sometimes  after 
breakfast,  also  with  tension  in  breathing ;  feeling  of  emptiness  within,  with 
weight  on  the  chest ;  shootings  at  different  parts  of  the  chest,  esp.  below 
the  L  shoolder-blade  ;  sometimes  in  the  1.  side,  in  breathing  ;  severe  shooting 
pain  across  the  r.  side  when  sitting  down. 

xg.  Heart. — Palpitations  of  the  heart,  which  are  visible  and  audible 
even  during  very  gentle  movements,  and  which  frequently  recur^  accompanied 
by  agitation  and  anxiety  during  motion,  and  on  ascending  the  stairs  ;  violent 
when  seated ;  irregular  beating  of  the  heart,  rapid,  redoubled,  almost  im- 
perceptible,— Shooting  pains  in  the  region  of  the  heart  after  a  meal. — Pulse 
slightly  accelerated ;  feeble. 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — Pain  near  the  shoulders  on  touching  the  part ; 
rheumatic  pain  between  the  shoulders. — Sensation,  as  if  something  passed 
through  the  kidneys,  and  penetrated  to  the  abdominal  vertebras,  on  the  patient 
sitting  down. — Pains  in  the  region  of  the  false  vertebrae. 

^  Lower  Limt>s. — ^Pain,  as  of  dislocation,  in  the  right  femoral  joint, 
whidi  causes  lameness. — Shootings  in  the  knees,  at  night,  afterwards  under 
the  L  patella,  on  being  seated. — Bruise-like  pain  in  the  1.  thigh,  with  difficulty 
in  walking,  and  esp.  in  mounting  the  stairs ;  internal  pain,  as  of  excoria- 
tion, on  touching  the  part ;  also  in  the  femoral  articulation,  and  the  knee,  on 
bending  the  limb ;  the  r.  leg  su£Fers  more  than  the  1.,  and  is  also  much 
weaker. — Severe  drawing  pains  in  the  calf  of  the  r.  leg,  in  the  morning, 
on  waking,  and  on  extending  the  limb ;  cramps  in  both  calves. — Drawing 
in  the  great  toe,  in  consequence  of  a  wound. 

04.  Cieiieralities. — Symptoms  aggravated  by  motion.— Drowsiness, 
with  yawning;  yawning  in  the  morning. — Increase  of  natural  heat;  pulse 
quick,  small,  esisily  stopped  ;  rapid  while  seated. — ^Anxiety,  with  palpitation  of 
tiie  hear^  and  ill-humour ;  calmness  of  mind. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  back 
and  limbs.--Concretions  of  lithic  acid  in  the  joints.— Great  languor  and 
disiodination  to  physical  or  mental  exertion. 


2i6  ASTACUS   FLUVIATILIS 


Astacns  Fluviatilis. 

Cancer    fluviatilis.      Crawfish    or    River  Crab.     N.  0.  Crustaceae. 
Tincture  from  whole  animaL 

ClioleaL— Biliousness.  Colic.  Coagh.  Diarrhoea.  Fever.  Glands,  enlarged. 
Intermittent  fever.  Jaundice.  Liver  complaints.  Nettle-rash.  Neuralgia. 
S/uverings,    Stomach,  disorders  of.    Toothache.    Tumours. 

GharaoteristiOB. — ^The  well-known  effects  of  shell-fish,  as  well 
as  of  other  fish,  in  producing  nettle-rash  is  exemplified  in  Asiacus 
beyond  all  other  varieties.  The  lacquer-workers  of  the  East  have 
discovered  in  the  river-crab  the  best  antidote  to  the  effects  of  Rhus 
which  they  employ  in  their  craft.  The  liver  is  markedly  affected,  and 
a  great  characteristic  is  "  nettle-rash  with  liver  complaint."  Jaundice 
of  children.  Itching  of  various  parts.  Crusta  lactea,  with  large 
lymphatic  glands.  Enlarged  glands  of  neck  in  children  and  old 
people.  Pain  and  tenderness  of  Uver,  jaundice,  stools  of  pipe-clay 
colour.  Inward  chilliness  and  sensitiveness  to  air ;  <  uncovering. 
Violent  fever  with  headache,  glowing  red  face,  inward>  chilliness. 
Nervous  crawls  over  body.  Tumours,  recent  Gout  of  drinking 
people.    Stinging  pains  are  felt  in  various  parts.    A  notable  remedy. 

RtlMonB.—Antidotcd  by :  Aeon.  Compare :  Apis,  Rhus, 
Homarus,  Chloral,  Nat  m. 

STHPTOHEL 

I.    Mind. — ^Apprehensiveness,  with  amdety  in  chest 

a.  Head. — Dulness  in  head. — On  head,  neck  and  chest  inflammation, 
with  red  spots  filled  with  serum,  gone  after  a  sweat — ^A  thick,  crusty  eruption 
on  scalp,  with  enlarged  lymphatic  glands. 

3.  Eyes.  Dilated  pupils.— Dim  vision.— Sees  coloured  spots  when 
reading.— Motion  of  eyes  painful. — ^Yellow  conjunctiva. 

4.  Ears. — Sensation  as  if  a  foreign  body  obstructed  passage  of  r.  ear, 
causing  slight  deafness. — Heat  and  redness  oi  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Nose-bleed,  relieving  the  attacks. 

6.  Face.— ^At  intervals  darting  like  lightning  from  temple  to  cheek. — 
Face  glowing  and  red  with  fever. — Erysipelas  with  nettle-rash. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Toothache  at  intervals;  dull  drawing,  as  if  tooth  being 
drawn  out. — ^Toothache  in  whole  lower  r.  jaw,  with  cold  feeling  in  an  eye- 
tooth. 

8.  Mouth. — Canker-spots  in  mouth ;  scorbutus. — Fishy  taste,  followed 
by  nausea  spreading  through  chest 

XI.  Stomach. — Fulness  and  pressure  in  stomach ;  burning  in  epigas- 
trium.— Empty  eructations;  with  sneezing  and  yawning. — Nausea  and 
vomiting. 

la.  Abdomen. — Severe  pain  in  duodenum. — Liver  inflamed,  sensitive- 
ness to  pressure. — ^Jaundice ;  of  little  children. — Pressure  in  region  of  spleen. 
— Colicky  pain  with  tenesmus  and  prostration ;  >  sitting,  <  walking. 


ASTERIAS   RUBENS  217 

13.  stool.— ^tool,  colour  of  pipe-day ;  pain  in  liver.— Diarrhoea,  with 
^tQmiting  and  colicky  pain. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pain  in  kidneys,  stinging  in  night ;  <  when  in- 
haling.—Fishy-smeUing  urine. — Urging,  scanty  discharge,  burning  during  and 
after  urination ;  reddish  sediment — Urine  pale,  acid  ;  quantity  of  albumen. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Restless  sleep  from  strong  sexual  excite- 
ment—Averse to  coition  ;  diminished  power ;  scrotum  relaxed. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Dyspnoea,  with  anxiety  and  rattling  of 
mocus.— Cou^  from  tickling  in  larynx  <  during  day. — Cough  did  not  molest 
him  when  walking,  but  returned  as  soon  as  he  sat  down. 

as.  Skin. — Nettle-rash  over  whole  body ;  with  liver  complaint — Itching 
on  various  parts. — ^Jaundice ;  of  children. — Erysipelas,  with  fever,  headache, 
and  increased  sweat. 

27.  Fever. — Sensitiveness  to  air  no  matter  how  great  the  feeling  of  heat 
—Inward  chilliness  and  sensitiveness  to  air ;  <  from  uncovering. — Nervous 
crawls  all  over  body. — Chilly  confusion  of  the  head,  face  red,  swollen  ; 
eyelids  swollen ;  great  prostration  and  slight  delirium. — ^Violent  fever,  with 
headache,  glowing  red  face,  inward  chilliness  and  sensitiveness  to  air. 


Asterias  Rubens. 

Star-fish.    N.  0.  Radiata.    Tincture  of  fish. 

GUataL— Acne.  Apoplexy.  Cancer,  Constipation.  Convulsions.  Epilepsy. 
Headache.  Heart,  affections  of .  Hysteria.  Salivation.  Sycosis.  Tongue,  paralysis 
of ;  swdlii^  of.    Ulcers^   Uterus,  affections  of. 

(SuffacteristioB.— The  star-fish  was  used  by  Hippocrates  in 
nferine  diseases.  This  shows  its  pathogenetic  relationship  to  Sepia 
and  Murex,  It  is  also  an  ancient  remedy  for  epilepsy.  It  powerfully 
affects  the  mind  and  head,  producing  symptoms  strongly  suggesting 
apoplexy.  The  face  is  red,  and  there  is  strong  congestion  to  the 
head,  which  is  hot  and  feels  as  if  surrounded  with  hot  air.  Certain 
forms  of  cerebral  congestion  with  obstinate  constipation.  Electric 
shocks  in  the  head.  Nightly  lancinating  pains  in  the  breasts  have  led 
to  its  successful  use  in  cases  of  mammary  cancer.  Petroz  used 
AsUr.  r.  successfully  in  old  skin  affections,  old  ulcers,  and  in  cancers. 
He  found  that  it  only  acted  on  the  latter  when  on  the  left  side.  (I 
have  a  case — ^probably  not  cancerous— of  tumour  of  the  left  breast, 
diminishing  under  this  remedy ;  but  I  have  also  seen  it  act  well  on 
the  ri^t  breast).  Sexual  desire  increased,  sexual  excitement.  A 
poshing-out  sensation  in  womb,  impeding  walking,  recalling  Sepia. 
H.  C  Allen  mentions  it  as  a  remedy  for  acne  having  small  puncta 
with  black  tipis  and  small  red  bases.  Symptoms  are  <  at  night ;  by 
motion^  and  in  cold,  damp  weather.  Tears  >  the  mentaJ*  state. 
Teste  says  the  malaise  is  <  by  heat  Great  desire  for  cold  drinks 
Coffee  <  all  the  symptoms,  and  excites  them  anew  several  days  after 


2i8  ASTERIAS   RUBENS 

they  have  disappeared.    AsL  r.  is  a  very  important  remedy  too 
seldom  used. 

Balationfl. — Aniidoted  by:  Plumb.,  Zn.  Compare:  Murex,  Sepia; 
Astac.  fl.,  Homarus  ;  Erythrinus  ;  Crot.,  Grat.,  Gamb.,  Jatrop.,  Thuj., 
Bell.,  Lil.  t.  Follows  well :  Bell.,  Carb.  an.,  Ck)n.,  Silic,  Sul.,  Calc- 
Incompatible :  Coffee,  Nux  v.  (Ipec.  relieved  after  Nux  v.  aggra- 
vated.)   Teste  includes  Aster,  r.  in  the  Sulphur  group  of  antipsoncs. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — ^Anxious,  apprehensive,  impatient ;  easily  excited  by  any 
emotion,  esp.  contradiction. — ^The  slightest  cause  moves  to  tears. — Has 
hallucinations  :  that  he  is  away  from  home  ;  hears  voices  and  replies. — Sense 
of  impending  misfortune  ;  fears  bad  news. — Cerebral  excitement  in  opposite 
directions  :  sadness,  desire  to  weep ;  extraordinary  mirth ;  desire  to  give 
one's  self  up  to  intellectual  labour,  or  some  violent  exercise  ;  slight  dulness  of 
the  mental  faculties. — Delicacy  of  the  moral  perceptions. 

a.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  transient,  when  walking,  with  insensibility  of  lower 
limbs. — Heat  of  head  as  if  surrounded  with  hot  air. — Sudden  sensation  of 
fulness  in  the  head,  as  if  congested. — Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  as  if  it  would 
burst. — ^Throbbings. — Sensation  of  confusion  in  the  brain. — ^Wakes  at  night  as 
if  brain  shaken  with  electric  shocks ;  fears  apoplexy. — Cerebral  congestions 
accompanying  obstinate  constipation. — Severe  pressure  in  forehead  seemed  to 
crush  eyes  with  heavy  weight — Boring  pain  along  1.  eye  (with  dimness  of 
sight)  comes  and  goes  suddenly ;  causes  contraction  of  brows. — Pain  in 
occiput,  r.  side,  making  it  difficult  to  walk. — Dull  occipital  headache  (after 
breakfast)  coming  and  going  suddenly. — Bones  of  skull  and  scalp  sore. — 
Fulness  of  the  head,  whose  sides  seem  to  swell  out ;  stitches  in  the  r.  temple  ; 
passing  stitches  in  the  forehead,  temples,  and  esp.  in  the  occiput ;  transitory 
pains  in  r.  parietal  region  ;  pressive  pains  in  forehead  or  sinciput,  which  passes 
off  towards  noon.— A  sort  of  emptiness  in  the  head ;  the  consciousness  is 
almost  lost ;  thoughts  about  apoplexy ;  this  sensation,  which  lasts  a  few 
minutes,  is  followed  by  fever,  with  a  hard,  quick  pulse,  violent  beating  in  the 
r.  carotid ;  these  symptoms  continue  until  the  end  of  the  following  day. — ^The 
cerebral  symptoms  come  on  in  the  morning,  cease  in  the  daytime,  and  come 
on  again  in  the  evening. 

3.  Eyes. — Heat  and  redness  in  the  eyes,  weary  look,  difficulty  of  bearing 
the  light — Eyes  are  drawn  t>ackwards. — ^Winking  of  the  eyelids,  the  free 
margin  of  which  is  red. 

4.  Ears. — Lightning-like  stitches  in  the  meatus  auditorius.— Violent 
reports  in  the  ears ;  noise  in  the  ears  as  from  waves. — Dulness  of  hearing  in 
the  r.  ear. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis ;  sneezing  and  coryxa  in  the  morning  on  waking. 

6.  Face. — Red,  flushed  face. — ^Transitory  or  permanent  flush  in  the 
face. — A  sort  of  stupid,  meaningless  expression  in  the  physiognomy. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Acute  and  pressing  stitches  in  the  upper  teeth. 

8.  Mouth. — Swelling  of  the  tongue ;  pulling  pains  in  the  tongue ; 
heaviness  of  speech,  profuse  flow  of  saliva. 

9.  Throat. — Pressing  irritation  of  the  throat — Dull  pain  apparently  all 
along  the  oesophagus. 


ASTERIAS  RUBENS  219 

10.  Appetite. — ^Loss  of  appetite ;  or  else  a  strange  and  uncertain  appe- 
ite ;  aversion  to  meat ;  dulness  of  taste. 

11.  Stomach. — Frequent  eructations ;  dull  or  constrictive  p^n  at  the 
precordial  r^ion. 

IS.  Abdomen. — Shocks  of  dull  pain  in  the  r.  side  of  abdomen  and  near 
ombificus. — ^Incarcerated  wind. — Violent  colic,  with  shuddering,  alternating 
with  flushes  of  heat  in  the  face.— Alternate  swelling  and  sinking  of  the 
abdomen  during  the  twenty-four  hours. — Pulling  in  the  abdominal  wails. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Obstinate  constipation,  12  to  15  days  without 
stool,  which  was  of  hard  round  substances  size  of  an  olive. — Constipation, 
with  ineffectual  urging  to  stool. — ^Diarrhoea;  liquid,  brown-coloured  stool, 
spirting  oat  with  force. — Several  soft  stools  in  the  daytime. — Heat  in  the 
rectum ;  haemorrhoidal  tumour  ;  piles. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  frequent,  clear,  profuse ;  or  else  thick  and 
slimy ;  heat  m  the  urethra  while  the  urine  passes  out. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sexual  desire  increased ;  erotic  thoughts. — 
Frequent  erections  during  sleep  or  in  the  morning. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Twitching  in  the  womb.— Pushing 
sensation  in  the  womb. — Sense  of  pressure  on  the  inferior  organs  of  the 
abdomen,  which  hinders  walking ;  sensation  as  if  the  menses  would  appear. 
—Delayed  menses. — ^Unusual  dampness  of  the  vagina,  which  affords  a  feeling 
of  case. — ^Delay  of  the  menses,  although  the  usual  colic  and  other  symptoms 
are  present ;  these  only  cease  on  the  appearance  of  the  menses,  which  are 
more  profuse  than  usual. — Excitement  of  the  sexual  instinct,  every  morning 
in  bed  ;  violent  and  constant  desire,  with  nervous  agitation,  and  apprehension 
of  not  being  able  to  support  these  painful  sensations. — Lancinating  pains  in 
breasts. — L.  breast  feels  drawn  in. — Induration  (1.)  and  ulceration. — Swelling 
of  the  breasts  as  when  the  menses  are  about  to  appear. — Itching  spots. — 
Miliary  or  f  urf  uraceous  eruption  between  the  breasts. 

18.  Chest.- Whole  1.  chest  painful,  <  motion.— Darting  pain  towards 
internal  part  of  chest  from  before  backward,  extending  under  L  nipple  into 
whole  internal  part  of  arm  to  extremity  of  little  finger. — Stitches  in  the  anterior 
portion  of  the  diest  on  the  r.  and  1.  of  sternum. — Pain  under  sternum. — Sensa- 
tion as  if  1.  breast  were  drawn  in. — Nightly  anxiety,  caused  by  undulating 
beatings  in  the  chest. 

11^  Heart.— Palpitation  ;  pulse  hard  and  frequent— Strong  and  frequent 
beating  of  the  heart ;  jerking  palpitations.— The  heart  seems  to  have  ceased 
beating. — Anxiety  at  the  heart. 

sa.  Neck  and  Back.— Scrofulous  ulcer  1.  neck.— Pulling  in  the  back 
and  sacrum. 

as.  Upper  Limbs.— Axillary  glands  swollen  hard  and  knotted.— Un- 
eatsinest  in  the  upper  extremities. — Pain  extending  from  thumb  to  the 
shoskler-joint — Numbness  of  hands,  with  coldness  of  the  arm. — Lancinating 
pain  at  L  elbow ;  circular  red  spot  at  the  1.  elbow,  which  becomes  covered 
with  a  forfuraceoas,  dry,  and  friable  layer. — Considerable  itching  around  the 
nail  of  the  L  thumb. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Lassitude  and  great  weakness  of  the  lower  ex- 
tremities.— Pdin  in  the  L  hip. — Burning  stitches  in  the  great  trochanter  and 
the  coKO-femoral  articulation  of  tiie  1.  side.— Stitches  at  the  fore  part  of  the 


220  ATHAMANTHA 

thigh.— Pain  in  the  joints  of  the  foot— Painful  pulling  in  the  sole  of  the  foot. 
—Gouty  pain  in  the  joint  formed  by  the  1.  big  toe  with  the  first  metatarsal 
bone ;  redness  and  heat  of  the  skin  at  this  place. — ^Violent,  very  unpleasant 
itching  at  the  thighs  and  legs,  <  towards  six  o'clock,  evening,  in  open  air. — 
Eruptions  on  the  thighs  and  insteps,  consisting  of  small,  itching  vesicles,  which 
tear  easily  and  change  to  small,  burning,  large  and  superficial  ulcers,  lasting 
several  days  before  cicatrising. 

24.  Generalities.— Night  aggravation.— Cancer  pains.— Shocks  in  head. 
—Sycosis.— Flabby  lymphatic  constitutions.— Ck)mplaints  <  in  cold,  damp 
weather. 

25.  Skin.— Itch.— Tetters.— Ulcers  with  sensitive  edges,  fetid  discharge. — 
Acne,  black-tipped  puncta,  small  red  bases. — Dry,  harsh  skin,  earthy  appearance. 

Astragalus  Menziesii. 

A.  Menziesii,  Gray.    N,  0.  Leguminosae.    Tincture  of  leaves. 

CninioaL-^Emptiness,  sensation  of.    Face,  bones  of,  painful.    Headache. 

CharaoteristioB* — From  eating  some  of  the  green  leaves  J.  M. 
Selfridge  experienced:  Burning  in  pharynx,  oesophagus,  stomach. 
Fulness  right  temple  and  right  upper  jaw  ;  slight  nausea,  with  shiver- 
ing and  chilliness ;  dizziness  and  fulness  of  the  head.  Later,  weakness 
and  sense  of  emptiness  in  stomach  ;  eating  relieved  empty  sensation, 
but  not  the  weakness.  I^ressive  pains  in  both  temples  ;  later,  slight 
pain  in  left  maxilla  ;  and  still  later,  aching  in  right  maxilla,  witti 
pressure  in  both  bones. 


Athamantha. 

A.  oreoselinum,  L^      Peucedanimi  oreoselinum,  Munch.     "Grund- 
heil."    N.  0.  Umbelliferae.    Tincture  of  fresh  plant 

Cttlnio*!.— Head,  confused.    Headache.    Indigestion.    Vertigo. 

CharaotepifltioB. — ^This  medicine  has  been  very  little  employed. 
It  was  proved  by  Franz,  and  has  produced  some  peculiar  symptoms. 
There  is  a  dull,  befoggea  condition  of  brain,  recalling  jEikusa,  "  Fool's 
parsley."  A  stupefaction  and  confusion  rises  like  a  vapour  from  the 
lower  part  of  the  occiput ;  on  motion  and  walking.  Vertigo  >  lying. 
Pressure  and  numbness  of  head  and  upper  teeth.  Pressure  on  one 
eyeball  from  below  upward.  Bitter  taste  and  bitter  mucus  in  air 
passages.  Icy  coldness  of  feet  and  hands.  Sleep  heavy  and  pro- 
found, prolonged  in  the  morning  to  later  period  than  usual. 

EalationB* — Compare :  Umbelliferas,  especially  i£thus.  cyn. 

SYMPTOMS. 

a.    Head.— Vertigo,  decreased  on  lying  down ;  or  else  with  dragging 
pains  from  side  to  side  in  the  brain.— Stupidity,  and  as  if  the  head  were 


ATROPINUM  221 

paralysed  at  the  occiput,  with  sensation  as  though  a  vapour  ascended 
there,  while  walking. — Pressure  in  the  head,  with  numbness,  and  the  like 
sensation  in  the  upper  teeth. — Cloudiness,  with  dull  pains  in  the  head. — 
Constriction  in  the  sides  of  the  head,  attended  with  giddiness ;  pressure  out- 
wards at  the  temples. 

3.  Eyes. — Pressure  from  above  downwards  on  the  eyeballs. 

4.  Ears. — Ears  as  if  stopped  up  with  cotton. 

SjU.  Mouth  and  Stomach.— Accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth, 
with  sensation  of  dryness  on  the  tongue ;  bitter  taste,  chiefly  after  every 
meal— Eructations,  sometimes  incomplete,  with  uneasiness  as  from  hunger,  or 
withoot  taste,  and  preceded  by  borborygmi  in  the  abdomen. — Extreme  hunger 
before  supper,  with  an  afflux  of  bitter  saliva. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pullings  and  pinchings  in  1.  hypochondrium. — Rheu- 
matic shooting  pains  externally,  esp.  in  walking,  extending  to  the  legs. 

13.  Stools. — Sudden  stools,  of  a  kind  which  cannot  be  retained,  preceded 
by  cutting  pains. 

17,  iS.  Respiratory  Organs  and  Chest.— -In  the  larynx  a  bitter  taste, 
vfaidi  is  not  removed  even  by  vomiting ;  after  supper,  an  accumulation  of  a 
serous  liquid  in  the  larynx,  tickling  in  the  trachea,  which  excites  vomiting. — 
The  thoracic  viscera  are  as  if  loaded ;  painful  pinching  in  L  cavity  of  the 
thorax,  increased  during  inspiration ;  burning  iancinations  at  the  exterior  of 
the  chest,  on  L  side,  while  sitting  down. 

ss.    Upper  Limbs. — Pullings  in  the  metacarpal  bones  of  1.  thumb. 

^  Lower  Limbs. — Sensation  of  heat  in  1.  thigh ;  pain,  as  of  a  bruise. 
In  the  thighs,  even  while  seated,  as  also  on  walking ;  pressure  from  within 
outwards  in  the  knee-joint,  in  wsdking,  ceasing  during  repose,  and  recurring 
when  again  in  motion. — Sensation  of  scraping  on  1.  instep,  while* sitting; 
tearing  and  burning  in  1.  little  toe. 

14.  Generalities. — Sensation  of  weakness  and  heaviness,  chiefly  in  the 
eyes. — Icy  coldness  of  the  feet  and  hands,  with  shivering  of  the  whole  body, 
and  a  lassitude  which  renders  frequent  repose  needful ;  burning  sensation, 
sometimes  in  one  place,  sometimes  in  another,  which  disappears  when  the 
part  is  touched,  leaving  an  excessive  coldness  and  numbness  (deadness)  of  one 
finger;  increased  heat  in  the  head,  at  night,  with  agitated  pulse,  and  over- 
excitement  of  the  mental  and  physical  powers,  without  thirst. — Nocturnal 
sleep,  heavy  and  profound,  prolonged  in  the  morning  to  a  later  period  than 
QsaaL 


Atropinom. 


Atropine.  An  alkaloid  of  Belladonna.  Cx7  H^^  NO3.  The  efiFects 
of  the  Sulphate  of  Atropine,  the  preparation  most  in  use,  are 
included.    Solution. 

OUnlcaL— Blepharospasm.  Convulsions.  Enuresis.  Epilepsy.  Eyes,  affections 
of.  Gastric  ulcer.  Locomotor  ataxy.  Mania.  Neuralgias.  Pancreatitis^  Spinal 
hrilation.    Stammering.    Tetanus.    Vision,  disorders  of.    Wryneck* 

ChanoteFiBtios. — Atropine,  as  the  most  active  principle  in 
BeBadonna,  produces,  as  we  should  expect,  most  of  the  characteristic 


222  ATROPINUM 

efiFects  of  that  drug;  but  at  the  same  time  the  two  are  not  identical 
Airop.  produces  hyperaesthesia  of  the  sensory  nerves.  The  most 
numerous  symptoms  have  been  observed  in  the  eyes.  All  kinds  of 
illusions  of  vision.  Everything  appears  large.  Motes  over  everything. 
I  once  cured  with  it  a  lady  who  had  an  appearance  of  shadows  passing 
over  whatever  she  lookedf  at  It  has  shown  an  afiinity  for  the  pancreas, 
which  relates  it  to  lod.^  Kali  iod,,  and  Iris,  A  case  of  chronic  wry- 
neck, of  three  years'  standing,  was  relieved  and  finally  cured  within 
two  weeks  by  injections  of  ^rv  ^^^^  ^^  platysma,  the  dose  being 
increased  up  to  ^V^-  "^^^^  was  in  old-school  practice.  It  has 
caused  difficulty  of  speech  :  frequent  stuttering,  especially  at  words 
difficult  to  pronounce  ;  articulation  indistinct,  rapid  and  chattering. 

BelatlonB. — It  antidotes :  Muscarine  and  Opium.    //  is  aniidoied 
by  :  Op.  and  Physostigma.     Like  Bell.,  it  is  a  right-side  medicine. 

STMPTOHS. 

z.  Mind. — Frenzied  with  excitement — Spectral  illusions;  sees  insects 
and  crawling  things  and  tries  to  catch  them. — Mania,  tries  to  escape. — ^When 
spoken  to  often  turns  his  head  to  wrong  side. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo  on  turning  head  suddenly. — Peeling  as  if  head  were 
screwed  up ;  walking  caused  the  most  severe  sticking  pains;  >  towards  ii 
a.m.,  and  disappeared  by  evening. — Head  very  hot. — Headaches  of  epileptics. 
— Sticking  pains  in  back  of  skull  and  over  eyes,  <  every  motion  and  stepping. 
— Sticking  1.  temple  on  waking,  extending  into  ear  and  eye  ;  >  moving  in 
open  air. — Headache,  with  flushed  face,  blindness,  and  delirium. 

3.  Eyes. — Objects  appear  large,  with  red  halo. — Everything  seems 
elongated,  objects  appear  in  a  cloud.— Clouds  of  flies ;  motes ;  bright  spots ; 
stars ;  flashes. — Figures  on  carpet  appear  constantly  and  successively  to  rise 
in  her  face. — Diplopia.— Sharp  neuralgic  pains  in  and  about  eyes.— At  9  p.m. 
eyelids  heavy,  difficult  to  keep  open. 

6.    Face. — Face  hot  and  very  red. — Deathly  pallor. 
8.    Mouth. — Mouth  dry. — ^Tongue  thick ;  cannot  articulate  distinctly. — 
Tongue  semi-paralysed. — Speech  slow,  embarrassed,  stuttering,  chattering. 

Q.  Throat. — Burning  caused  by  coughing.  —  Dryness.  —  Dysphagia; 
swallowing  causes  paroxysms  of  suffocation. — ^Throat  dark  red. 

II.  Stomach.—  Vomiting  of  food ;  after  hot  drinks ;  with  severe  sticking 
pains  in  umbilical  region. — >  After  vomiting. — Region  of  stomach  very 
sensitive ;  sweUing  in  pyloric  region. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  micturition. — ^Involuntary,  but  scanty ; 
nocturnal  enuresis. — Cutting,  drawing  pains  in  1.  ovary,  extorting  screams, 
>  bending;  ovary  swollen  and  tender  during  menses. — Epilepsy  from 
ovarian  irritation. 

IQ.  Heart. — Failure  of  action  from  chloroform  and  other  cardiac 
paralyzers. — ^Accelerated  pulse. 

30.  Back. — Burning  in  back  under  sternum  and  in  region  of  stomach. — 
Spinal  irritation,  pressure  causes  pallcx-,  nausea,  t)elching,  and  retching. 

21.    Limbs. — Numbness ;  heaviness ;  paralysis  of  limbs. 

24.  Generalities. — Hyperassthesia  of  some  nerves :  ophthalmic,  auditory, 
olfactory,  vaginal,  spinal,  8olar*plexus,  nerves  of  uterus  and  bladder. — Great 


AURUM  ARSENICICUM  223 

deare  for  open  air  (faintness). — ^Veiy  weak  in  the  open  air. — Giddiness  and 
staggering.— >  From  motion. 

aO.    Sleep.— Disturbed  by  gastric  pains.— Restless  throiigh  night— Waked 
by  frightful  dreams. 


Aurantiom. 

Citms  vulgarisL     Orange.     N.  0.    Rutaceae.     Tincture  of  peel   of 

Seville  orang^. 

QfariiMiL — Choking,  sensation  of.  Faintness.  Headache.  Metrorrhagia. 
Keoralsia.    Palpitation.    Throat,  rising  in. 

Ouuneteristios. — ^Tbe  tincture  of  the  peel  is  used  as  a  pleasant 
bitter  tonic  in  the  old-school  practice.  On  sensitive  individuals 
oranges  in  any  form  produce  pathogenetic  efiEects.  One  patient  of  my 
own  could  never  eat  an  orange  without  experiencing  a  fearful  taste  at 
the  back  of  the  nose  and  tiiroat,  lasting  many  days  and  causing 
choking  sensations  and  faintness.  Nervous  afiFections  predominate  ; 
neuralgias  of  various  kinds.    The  skin  is  the  seat  of  many  symptoms. 

BdattoilB.— Com^ari^  .•  Citrus  Limonum,  Ruta,  Angustura. 

STHPTOMS. 

I.    Mind.— Oreat  excitement ;  quick  motions. 

s.    Head. — R.  ade  hemicrania. 

fi.  Face. — ^Neuralgia  in  face ;  shooting,  gnawing  pains,  most  in  temples, 
esp.  r.  side. 

7.   Teeth.— Constant  toothache.— Teeth  become  carious ;  wear  off. 

9.  Throat. — Something  seems  to  rise  in  throat  and  choke  her. — Fearful 
taste  at  back  of  nose  and  throat,  lasting  for  days  and  causing  choking  sensation 
aod  faintness. 

14.    Urinary  Organs. — Pains  in  kidneys  and  bladder. 

ift.   Female  Sexual  Organs.— Too  copious  menses. 

18.    Chest. — Pleurodynia. 

IQ.   Heart. — Palpitation. 

8|.  Oeneralitie8.*-Siiited  for  diseases  of  old  men,  esp.  with  coldness 
and  chilliness. — ^An  orange  eaten  before  breakfast  is  said  to  destroy  the 
craving  for  alcohol  in  drunkards. 

S5.  Skin. — Itching  general  or  more  often  only  in  upper  limbs,  with 
redness  and  swelling  of  hands. — Eruption  and  other  symptoms  like 
yariatina. 

Aurom  Arsenicicom. 

Arseniate  of  Gold.    Trituration. 

Cancer.  Chlorosis.  Headache  (syphilitic).  Lupus.  Phthisis. 


S^pbilis. 

CBianuitofisUos.— The   arseniate   of   gold  was   first   used   by 
Chrestien  in  cases  of  phthisis.    Later  it  has  been  used  by  others  in 


224  AURUM   METALLICUM 

syphilis,  especially  chronic  S3rphilitic  headaches,  lupus,  anaemia, 
chlorosis.  The  first  effect  of  the  remedy  is  to  cause  rapid  increase  of 
appetite.  The  peristaltic  contractions  of  stomach  and  intestines  are 
excited  and  absorption  accelerated. 


Auram  Bromatum. 

Bromide  of  Gold.    Au  Br,.    Trituration. 

OlinieaL — Epilepsy.    Heart,  affections  of.    Migraine.   Night  terrors. 

CharacteriBtiOB. — ^This  is  an  unproved  salt  of  gold.  It  has  been 
recommended  by  Dr.  E.  M.  Hale  as  being  superior  to  other  prepara- 
tions of  gold,  especially  in  certain  nervous  afiFections  of  an  epileptiform 
character,  as  migraine,  night  terrors,  somnambulism.  Also  in  valvular 
diseases  of  the  heart  and  hypertrophy,  attacks  of  faintness  with 
coldness  and  feeble  pulse  alternating  with  attacks  of  congestion  and 
red  face  with  palpitation. 


Aurom  lodatum. 

Iodide  of  Gold.     Au  I,. 

CHplffiJt — Larynx,  spasm  of.    Paresis,  senile ;  syphilitic.   Syphilis. 

CharaoteriBtiOB. — ^This  is  another  unproved  ^old  salt  brought 
forward  by  Hale,  and  used  by  him  with  success  in  cases  of  above- 
named  diseases  where  symptoms  of  the  components  were  present 


Aunim  Metallicam. 

Aurum  foliatum  (metallic  gold).    Au  (A.  W.  I96*8),    Trituration. 

QliiiieaL— Alcohol,  effects  of.  Amenorrhoea.  Angina  pectoris.  Asthma.  Baru 
actions,  Breathf  offensive.  Corpulency.  Depression.  Ears,  affections  of .  Erethism. 
Erysipelas.  Eye,  ajficUons  of.  Fevers.  Gonorrhoea.  Haemorrhages.  Haemorrhoids. 
Hemtopia.  Hydrocele,  Jaundice.  Leucorrhoea.  Locomotor  ataxy.  Melandioly. 
Melanosis.  Mercurial  poisoning.  Naso-pharyngeal  catarrh.  Night  terrors.  Outna. 
Paralysis,  Phthisis.  Fining  boys.  Scrofula.  Smell,  disordered,  SyphiUs.  Testicles, 
affections  of;  undeveloped.  Tongue,  nodules  on.  Tumours,  uterus,  induration 
of.    Vertigo.    Vision,  disordered. 

CharaoteriBtioB. — Gold  a£Fects  profoundly  the  entire  organism, 
exercising  a  solvent  action  on  the  tissues,  producing  ulcerations  and 
the  disappearances  of  new  growths.  Hence  it  is  one  of  the  best 
antidotes  to  mercurial  over-dosing,  and  especially  in  cases  of  syphilis. 


AURUM  METALLICUM  Hi 

Scrofula  and  caries  of  bone  also  find  in  Aurum  a  remedy.    It  also 
produces  rushes  of  blood  and  haemorrhages.      Boring  pains    and 
burning  stitches  predominate.    No  drug  produces  more  acute  mental 
depression  than  Aurumj  and  in  any  case  where  this  profound  melan- 
choly is  found,  Aurum  must  be  well  studied.    There  is  a  condition  of 
melancholy,  hoplessness,  profound  depression,  tendency  to  suicide  and 
longing  for    death.      Anthrophobia.      Ag^vation  from    emotion. 
Complaints  after  grief,  fright,  anger,  disappointed  love,  contradiction, 
reserved  displeasure.     Hysteria,  laughs  and  cries  alternately.     The 
head  is  giddy,  full,  hot.     Rush  of  blood  to  the  head.    Vertigo  as  if 
turning  in  a  circle  when  stooping,  goes  off  on  rising.    As  if  drunk 
when  walking  in  the  open  air.     Sensation  as  if  a  current  of  air  were 
rushing  through  the  head,  if  not  kept  warm.      Bones  of  skull  painful, 
especially  lying  down.     Vertical  half -sight.    Fiery  sparks.    Caries  of 
mastoid  process  of  bones  of  nose.      Ozaena.     In    the    abdominal 
region,  as  with  Merc.y  there  is  swelling  of  liver,  jaundice.     Hernia, 
inguinal    or  umbilical ;  and  in  children.     Onanism.      The   sexual 
organs  are  markedly  affected.     Induration  of  testes.      Undeveloped 
testicles   in    puny    boys.       SwelUng    or   neuralgia    of   testicle  (r). 
Uterus  prolapsed  and  indurated  ;  the  weight  of  it  causes  prolapse. 
(The  chloride  of  gold  and  sodium  acts  more  powerfully  in  these 
conditions.)     Shelton  has  recorded  as  effects  on  girls  working  with 
gold  leaf  the  occurrence  of  a  "thick  leucorrhoeal  discharge,  not 
offensive,  white  or  yellowish,  occasionally  profuse,  invariably  <  by 
walking."    Suffocative  attacks,  with  suffocative  oppression  of  chest. 
Amdous  palpitation  from  congestion  to  the  chest.    Palpitation,  with 
anguish  and  tremulous  fearfulness.     Pain  in  heart  region  extending 
down  left  arm  to  fingers.    There  are  boring  pains  in  bones,  <  at 
night  Over-sensitiveness  to  all  pain.  Hysterical  spasms,  with  laughing 
and  crying  alternately.      Great  ebulUtions  with  congestion  to  the 
bead  and  chest,  and  palpitation  of  the  heart.     Frightful  dreams ;  he 
sobs  aloud  when  asleep.     Chilliness  predominates;    shivering   in 
open  air ;   coldness  of  hands  and  feet,  sometimes  lasting  all  night. 
Heat,  only  in  the  face.    Perspiration  in  the  morning  hours ;  mostly 
on  and  around  the  genitals.    Ulcers  which  attack  the  bones.    Warts, 
scrofulous,  syphilitic,  mercurial.    "  <  From  sunset  to  sunrise "  is  a 
leading  Condition  of  Aurum,     Paralytic  drawing  in  the  hmbs  in 
the  morning  when  awaking  ;  and  on  getting  cold.      <  At  night ;  in 
morning  ;  on  getting  cold  ;  by  rest.    Shivering  on  getting  into  bed.  > 
Moving ;  walking ;  getting  warm.     Suited  to  sanguine  people  with 
black  hair  and  dark  eyes,  olive-brown  complexion.    Also  light-haired 
scrofulous  persons.     Pining  boys,  girls    at  puberty,  and  old  age. 
Syphilitic  and  mercurial  patients. 

Belatioiis. — Compare:  Luet.  (syphilis) ;  Am.  c,  Arg.  met.,  Arg.  n., 
Ars. ;  Asaf.  (pains  about  eyes ;  but  Asaf .  has  >  from  pressure ; 
mercurial  caries) ;  Bell. ;  Caps,  {caries  of  mastoid,  corpulency) ; 
Calc.  c.  (night  terrors  ;  leucophlegmatic  ;  Aur.  has  more  over-sensitive- 
ness and  erethism) ;  Calc.  ph. ;  Coccul.  (empty  feeling) ;  Chi.  and  Coff. 
{h)per-excitation) ;  Cup.  (asthma) ;  Dig.,  Fer. ;  Glon.  (hyperaemia  of 
Inng  from  heart) ;  Hep.,  lod.  j  Kah  bich.  (deep  ulcers,  scrofulous 
ophthalmia,  ozaena,  syphilis);  IL  ca.;  K.  iod.  (syphilis) ;  K.  bro.  (anguish 
VOL.  I.  i6 


/ 
/ 


i26  AURUM  METALLICUM 

at  heart  and  desire  to  move  about) ;  Lach.,  Lye.,  Merc,  Nit  ac. ;  Nux  v., 
Hiernia;  prolapsed  uterus);  Pallad.,  Platin.,  Puis.,  SpigeL,  Sol. nig., 
Sil.,  Sep.,  Sul. ;  Tarent.  (heart  as  if  turned  round) ;  Thuj.,  Ver.  v. 
AnHdoted  by :  ML,  Chi.,  Coccul.,  Coflf,,  Cup.,  Merc,  Puis.,  Spi.,  Sol.  nig. 
Antidote  to :  Merc,  SpigeL,  Chronic  effects  of  alcohol.  Kali  iod. 

Causation. — Mercury.  Alcohol.  Iodide  of  Potassium.  Effects 
of  gcitd ;  fright ;  anger ;  disappointed  love  ;  contradiction  ,*  reserved 
displeasure. 

8T1IPT0H& 

z.  Mind. — Melancholy,  with  inquietude  and  desire  to  die. — Irresis- 
tible impulse  to  weep. — Longing  to  see  one's  relationSi  resembling  nostalgia. 
— Imagines  he  has  lost  the  affection  of  his  friends;  this  makes  him 
weep. — Sees  obstacles  everywhere. — Hopeless. — Suicidal;  desperate;  in- 
clined to  jump  off  heights  ;  to  dash  himself  into  a  chair.— Sad,  feels  that  all 
is  against  her  and  life  is  not  desirable,  and  the  thought  of  death  alone 
gives  pleasure. — Great  anguish,  which  even  induces  a  disposition  to  suicide, 
with  cramp-like  contractions  in  the  abdomen. — Excessive  scruples  of 
conscience. — Despair  of  oneself,  and  of  others. — lU-humour  and  aversion  to 
conversation. — Grumbling,  quarrelsome  humour. — ^The  least  contradiction 
excites  his  wrath. — ^Alternate  peevishness  and  cheerfulness. — ^Anger  and 
passion. — ^Alternation  of  gaiety,  or  of  irritability  with  melancholy. — Hypochon- 
driacal humour. — ^Weakness  of  the  intellectual  faculties. — ^Weakness  of  the 
memory. 

s.  Mead. — ^Vertigo :  when  stooping,  as  if  turning  in  a  circle ;  >  on 
rising ;  as  if  drunk  when  walking  in  open  air ;  feels  as  if  he  would  fall  to  L  ; 
must  lie  down,  even  then  for  some  time  it  returns  on  slightest  motion. — 
Fatigue  from  intellectual  labour. — Sudden  stupefaction,  with  loss  of  sense. — 
Pain,  like  that  of  a  bruise  in  the  brain,  esp.  in  the  morning,  or  during 
intellectual  labour,  and  sometimes  inducing  confusion  of  ideas. — Pain  in  the 
head,  as  if  the  air  passed  over  the  brain,  when  it  is  not  kept  very  warm. — ^Acute 
drawing  pains  in  the  head. — Beating  and  hammering  pain  on  one  side  of  the 
head. — Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head. — Congestions  to  and  heat  in  the  head, 
with  sparks  before  the  eyes,  and  glossy  bloatedness  of  the  face,  aggravated  from 
every  mental  exertion. — Buzzing  in  the  head. — ^Pain  in  the  bones  of  the 
cranium,  esp.  on  lying  down. — Exostosis  on  the  head ;  on  the  r.  vertex,  with 
boring  pain. — Falling  off  of  the  hair. 

3.  Eyes. — Pain  in  the  eyes  aggravated  by  touch,  as  if  the  ball  of  the 
eye  were  pressed  inwards. — ^Tension  in  the  eyes,  with  diminution  of  sight — 
Burning  pain  and  redness  in  the  eyes. — Obscuration  of  the  sight. — Black 
spots  before  the  eyes. — Eyes  very  prominent. — Flames  and  sparks  before  the 
eyes. — ^Vertical  half -sight. — Hemiopia  ;  objects  are  seen  cut  in  horizontal  lines. 
— Eyes  better  by  moonlight  and  after  violent  muscular  exercise. — Objects 
seem  smaller  and  more  distant. 

4.  Ears. — Hearing  too  sensitive. — Pain  in  the  ears,  like  internal  tension. 
— Caries  of  the  mastoid  process.— Flow  of  fetid  pus  from  the  ears.— Over- 
sensitive to  noises,  but  music  >  . — ^Annoying  dryness  in  ears  and  nose  with 
difficult  hearing. — Hardness  of  hearing  from  hypertrophy  of  the  amygdalae, 
with  embarrassed  speech. — Humming  in  the  ears. — Roaring  in  the  ears. 


AURUM   METALLICUM  227 

5.  Nofle. — Pain  in  the  nasal  bones  on  being  touched.— Gnawing 
piK^ii^ — ^Inflammatory  swelling  and  redness  of  the  nose,  followed  by 
desquamation. — Caries  of  the  bones  of  the  nose. — Nasal  cavities  ulcerated  and 
covered  with  thick  crusts. — Running  from  the  nose  of  a  fetid  greenish-yellow 
matter.-^Stofypage  of  the  nose. — Fluent  coryza.— Nose  red,  swollen;  tip 
knobby,  red. — Cancer. — Furfuraceous  desquamation  of  the  epidermis  ot  the 
nose; — Increased  sensibility,  or  absence  of  smell. — Sweetish  putrid  smell,  or 
smeD  of  brandy  before  the  nose. — ^Fetid  odoiir  from  the  nose. 

ft.  Face. — ^Face  puffed,  and  shining  as  if  from  sweat. — Inflammation 
of  the  bones  of  the  face. — Parotids  swollen,  painful  to  touch  as  if 
pressed  or  bruised. — Swelling  of  the  cheeks. — Swdling  of  the  bones  of  the 
forehead,  of  the  upper  jaw,  and  of  the  nose. — Red  eruption,  which  peels  ofiF, 
oa  the  forehead  and  on  the  nose.— Traction  in  the  jaws,  with  swelling  of  the 
cheeks.— Tensive  pain  in  the  upper  jaw. — Painful  swelling  of  the  submaxillary 

7.  Teeth. — Odontalgia,  with  heat  and  congestion  in  the  head. — Loose- 
ness of  the  teeth. — Ulcers  in  the  gums,  with  swelling  of  the  cheeks.-*Tooth- 
ache  <  at  night,  <  drawing  cold  air  into  mouth. 

8.  Mouth. — Fetid  smell  of  the  mouth,  like  rotten  cheese. — Piercing 
pain  in  the  velum  palati. — ^Tongue  swollen ;  with  scirrhus-like  hardness ;  after 
biting  tongue  in  sleep.— Tongue  coated ;  dry ;  ulcerated. 

^  Throat. — Caries  in  the  palate,  with  ulcers  of  a  bluish  colour, 
esp.  after  the  abuse  of  mercury. — ^Tonsils  swollen  and  ulcerated.— Drinks 
find  a  passage  through  the  nostrils. — Stinging  soreness  in  throat  only  when 
swallowing. — Dull,  pressive  pain,  either  with  or  without  swallowing,  in  a  gland 
betowan^eof  jaw. 

zo.  Appetite.— Milky  or  sweetish  taste. — Loathing  of  food,  and  esp.  of 
neat.— Great  desire  for  cofiFee. — Excessive  hunger  and  thu-st — No  appetite 
for  plain  food  in  pining  boys. 

u.  StonE&ach.->-Pain  in  the  stomach,  as  if  proceeding  from  hunger.-^ 
Immoderate  appetite  and  thirst,  with  qualmishness  in  the  stomach. — Sensation 
of  indescribable  uneasiness  in  the  epigastrium. — Swelling  of  the  epigastrium 
and  of  the  hypochondria,  with  shooting  pains  on  being  touched. — Burning  at 
stomach  and  hot  eructations. — Burning,  drawing,  and  cutting  pain  ;  pressure, — 
Pressure  to  L  of  scrobiculum,  below  cartilages  of  upper  false  ribs ;  <  during 
expiration. 

12.  Abdomen.- Burning  heat  and  cutting  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium. 
— Colic,  with  sensation  of  great  uneasiness  and  inclination  to  evacuate. — 
Tensive  aching  and  fulness  in  the  abdomen. — ^Abdomen  inflated. — Exostosis 
in  the  pelvis.— Tendency  of  hernia  to  protrude,  sometimes  with  cramp-like 
pains  and  incarcerated  flatus.— Swelling  and  suppuration  of  the  inguinal 
glands  from  sjrphilis  or  the  use  of  mercury. — ^Windy  colic  by  night,  with 
pinching,  grumUing,  and  borborygmi. — Frequent  emission  of  very  fetid  wind. 

13.  Stool.  -*  Copious  evacuation.  —  Nocturnal  diarrhoea.  —  Nightly 
diarrhoea,  with  burning  in  the  rectum. — Constipation ;  stool  very  large  in 
size,  or  very  hard  and  knotty. 

I4«  Urinary  Organs. — Painful  retention  of  urine,  vrith  urgent  inclina- 
tion to  make  water,  and  pressure  on  the  bladder. — Frequent  emission  of 
watery  urine. — Urine  turbid,  like  butter-milk,  with  thick  mucus-like  sediment 


228  AURUM   METALLICUM 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organ&— Sexual  desire  greatly  increased.— The 
whole  genital  system  is  strongly  affected. — Nocturnal  erections  and  pollutions. 
— Flow  of  prostatic  fluid,  with  flaccidity  of  the  penis.— Swelling  of  the  (lower 
part)  of  the  testicle  (r). — Swelling  of  the  testes,  with  aching  pain  on  touching 
and  rubbing. — Induration  of  the  testes. — ^Testes  mere  pendant  shreds  (in 
pining  boys). — Hydrocele.— Bubo. — Chancre. 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Pains  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the 
catamenia  were  coming. — Prolapsus  and  induration  of  the  matrix. — Uterine 
affections  with  depression  and  tendency  to  suicide. — Menses  too  late ;  and 
scanty  or  absent. — Drawing  pain  in  pubes ;  r.  inguinal  region  sore  to  touch. 
— Before  menses  :  swelling  of  axillary  glands. — During  menses  :  colic  ; 
prolapse  of  rectum. — Leucorrhoea:  profuse  and  corroding,  yellow;  thick 
white,  not  offensive,  <  by  walking. — During  pregnancy:  suicidal  melan- 
cholia; jaundice. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  trachea  and 
in  the  chest,  which  is  expectorated  with  difficulty  in  the  morning. — ^Voice 
nasal. — Cough  from  want  of  breath  at  night.*— Cough  with  tough  yellow 
sputum  on  awaking  in  morning. 

i8«  Chest. — Great  difficulty  of  respiration  at  night,  and  on  walking  in  the 
open  air,  requiring  deep  inspirations. — Paroxysms  of  suffocation,  with 
constrictive  oppression  of  the  chest,  falling,  loss  of  sense,  and  bluish  colour  of 
the  face. — Pain,  as  if  there  were  a  plug  placed  under  the  ribs. — Continuous 
aching  in  1.  side  of  the  chest. — Incisive  pain,  and  obtuse  shootings,  near  the 
sternum.— Great  weight  on  chest;  esp.  heavy  weight  on  sternum. — ^Much 
congestion  in  the  chest. 

IQ.  Heart. — ^Anxious  palpitation  of  the  heart,  from  congestion  to  the 
chest— 'Beatings  of  the  heart,  irregular,  or  by  fits,  sometimes  with  anguish  and 
oppression  of  the  chest. — Pain  in  heart  region  extending  down  1.  arm  to 
fingers. — Floundering  heart. — ^When  walking,  the  heart  seems  to  shake  as  if 
it  were  loose. — Sensation  as  if  the  heart  stood  still. — Palpitation  compels  him 
to  stop. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Swollen  cervical  glands. — Tension  in  neck  as  if 
muscles  too  short,  even  at  rest ;  <  stooping. — Stinging  pains  in  small  of  back. 
— Oressus  gallinaceous  (in  spine  disease). — Pain  at  lower  part  of  spine. — Pains, 
generally  passive,  or  drawing  and  acute,  in  the  back,  chiefly  in  the  morning, 
and  sometimes  so  violent  as  to  prevent  any  motion  of  the  limbs. 

21.  Limbs. — Limbs  go  to  sleep ;  numb,  insensible  on  waking ;  more 
when  lying  than  moving. — Has  to  seize  hold  of  1.  arm  during  attack  of 
palpitation. — Limbs  swollen,  painful,  almost  anchylosed. 

82.  Upper  Limbs.— Boring  in  1.  shoulder.— Aching  pains  in  the  arms 
and  in  the  forearms.— Cramp-like  and  acute  drawing  pains  in  the  bones  of 
the  carpus  and  of  the  metacarpus. — ^Acute  drawing  pains  and  paral3rtic 
weakness  in  the  bones  and  joints  of  the  fingers. — Palms  itch ;  herpes ;  nails 
turn  blue. 

43.  Lovrer  Limbs. — Coxalgia. — Sharp  pains  in  the  thighs,  esp.  morn- 
ing and  evening. — Paral3rtic  and  painful  weakness  of  the  knees,  as  if  a  ban- 
dage were  tightly  compressed  above  them ;  they  are  feeble  and  give  way. — 
Drawing  pains  and  acute  pullings,  with  paralytic  weakness,  in  the  bones  and 
the  joints  of  the  toes.— Nodes ;  caries. 


AURUM   MURIATICUM  229 

S4.  Qeneralities.-— iPain,  like  that  of  a  bruise^  with  acute  puUings,  and 
paralytic  weakness  in  the  limbs  in  general,  and  chiefly  in  the  joints,  esp. 
on  uncovering  the  part  affected,  in  the  morning,  on  waking  and  during  repose, 
disappearing  on  getting  up. — I^urting  pains  in  the  limbs,  with  great  dejection. 
—Inflammation  of  the  bones,  with  nocturnal  pains. — Exostosis  on  the  head,  on 
the  arms  and  on  the  legs. — Great  acuteness  and  delicacy  of  sensation,  with 
excessive  sensibility  to  the  least  pain. — Over-sensitiveness  to  all  pain,  and  to 
the  cold  air. — Hysterical  spasms,  sometimes  with  alternate  tears  and  laughter 
— Oreat  sensibility  to  cold,  or  strong  desire  to  go  into  the  open  air,  even  in 
bad  weather,  because  it  is  found  to  be  a  relief  .—Great  ebullitions,  with  con- 
gestions to  the  head  and  chest,  and  palpitation  of  the  heart. 

90.  Sleep. — ^Weary,  but  cannot  rest  or  sleep. — Drowsiness  after  meals. — 
Nocturnal  sleep  till  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  only. — ^Awakened  by  bone 
pains;  in  despair. — Fatigue  and  weakness  in  the  morning  on  vfsking, — 
Restless  sleep,  with  anxious  dreams ;  of  thieves. — Nocturnal  mumbling  in 
the  form  of  questions. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse  small,  but  accelerated. — Febrile  shiverings  over  the 
whole  body,  while  in  bed  in  the  evening,  followed  neither  by  heat  nor  thirst. 
— Coki  of  the  entire  body,  with  bluish  colour  of  the  nails,  nauseous  taste,  with 
iodination  to  vomit,  sometimes  followed  by  an  increase  of  heat. — Heat  of  the 
face,  with  cold  in  the  hands  and  feet. — Copious  general  perspiration  early  in 
the  morning;  mostly  about  genitals. 


Anrnm  Mariaticum. 

Chloride  of  Gold.    Na  CI,  Au  CI3,  aH.O. 

^iiiloiil. — ^Albuminuria.  Amaurosis.  Angina  pectoris.  Anus,  fistula  of. 
AsfhnEL  Bubo.  Cancer.  Caries.  Chancre.  Condylomata.  Dropsy.  £czema. 
Fistula.  Gonorrhoea.  Haemorrhage.  Hair  falling  out.  Heart,  affections  of. 
Indurations.  Liver,  affections  of.  Morvan's  disease.  Ophthalmia.  Ozaena. 
Periostitis.  Phthisis.  Pudenda,  over-sensitiveness  of.  Spinal  sclerosis.  Spleen, 
enlarged.  Sterility.  Syphilis.  Uterus,  tumours  of;  haemorrhage  from.  Vagina, 
heat,  Iniming  and  itehing  of.    Voice,  hoarse.    Warts. 

OhanusteristloB. — ^This  salt  has  been  proved.  The  symptoms 
axe  in  the  main  identical  with  those  of  the  metal,  but  some  are 
peculiar  or  more  pronounced  in  the  one  than  in  the  other.  The 
Muriatic  element  is  seen  in  the  heart  symptoms  ;  violent  palpitations, 
sore  aching,  heaviness  and  sensation  of  rigidity  in  heart,  hyper- 
aemia  from  heart  disease.  Catarrhal  and  glandular  affections  are 
marked.  Warts  appear  in  various  parts :  on  the  tongue,  on  the 
genitals.  Digestion  is  slow.  Diarrhoea  after  eating.  Aur.  mur.  is  a 
sycotic  remedy  causing  suppressed  discharges  to  reappear.  Halbert 
has  given  Aur.  mur.  2x  with  much  success  in  cases  of  sclerotic  and 
exudative  degeneration  of  the  nervous  system.  He  narrates  a  case 
of  disseminated  sclerosis,  the  result  of  a  fall ;  one  of  exudative 
localised  meninjgtis ;  and  one  of  Morvan's  disease  greatly  improved 
under  its  use.    Tbis  patient,  a  man  cook,  had  hypertrophy  of  all  the 


230  AURUM   MURIATICUM 

fingers.  In  some  of  them  this  had  progressed  till  painless  whitlows 
appeared  Analgesia  and  anaesthesia  were  present,  and  some  atrophy 
of  the  muscles  of  the  hand  and  arm.  Brachial  neuritis  appeared 
to  be  the  causative  factor  in  the  case.  Remarkable  improvement 
occurred  under  Aur.  mur,  2X.  Aur,  tnur.  is  particularly  valuable  in 
haemorrhages  from  the  womb  at  climacteric  and  after,  which  are 
frequency  of  sycotic  origin.  Violent  chill  and  fever.  Hectic  fever. 
Ascending  stairs  <.  Cold  washing  and  cold  weather  >.  Warmtti 
<  ;  throws  off  bed-covers.  Suited  to :  Lymphatic,  scrofulous  con- 
stitutions. Gold  salts,  like  mercury  salts,  dissolve  organic  tissues ; 
they  stimulate  the  heart  more,  but  act  on  fluid  tissues  less  powerfully 
than  mercury. 

RelationB. — Compare:  Aco.,  Am.  c.,  Arg.,  Arg.  n.,  Ars.,  Bell., 
Cannab.,  Fer.,  Glon.,  HecL,  Lye,  Merc,  Nit.  ac,  Pho.,  Plat,  SiL, 
Sul.  Sulphur  springs  are  incompatible.  Antidoted  by:  Bell.,  Cannab.| 
Merc. 

Cauflatioil* — ^Chagrin.     Fright    Vexation. 

BTMPTOHS. 

8.  Head.— Constant  burning  in  whole  head,  <  1.  side. — Head  hot ; 
limbs  cold. — Pulling  pains  in  forehead  ;  tingling  itching  in  that  part. 

3. — Eyes.  Sudden  blindness  in  childbed. — Neuralgic  pains  in  1.  eye. — 
Scrofulous  phlyctenular  ophthalmia.— Chronic  inflammation  of  margins  of 
lids. — Fistula  lachrymalis. 

4.  Ears. — Music  relieves. — Burning  and  itching  behind  ears  <  night — 
Tinkling  sound  in  ears  followed  by  deafness,  as  if  interior  of  ears  were  large 
and  empty. 

5.  Nose. — Pressing  pain  in  nose.— Ozaena  scrofulosa.— Tingling,  burn- 
ing, and  itching  in  nose  ;  redness  and  inflammation,  with  itching,  followed  by 
desquamation ;  red  swelling  with  ulcerated  nostrils ;  dry  yellow  crusts  and 
sensation  of  stoppage ;  yellow  pus,  sometimes  below. — Deep  crack  in  alae 
nasi ;  lupus. 

6.  Face. — Red  face. — Hair  falling  out  of  eyebrows  and  head. — Exostoas 
of  (r.)  cheek-bone. 

7.  Teeth.— Teeth  loose.— Dental  fistula.— Toothache  with  thrilling 
pains. 

8.  Mouth. — Indurated  tongue ;  warts ;  cancer ;  ulcers. 

Q.  Throat. — Frequent  desire  to  swallow ;  feeling  of  a  plug  in  throat ; 
metallic  taste  ;  increased  saliva. 

11.  Stomach. — Burning,  cutting,  stitching  in  stomach ;  cramps. — Slow 
digestion. 

12.  Abdomen. — Liver  indurated. — Spleen  enlarged. — Swelled  abdomen ; 
ascites. — Stiffness  in  region  of  groins. — Swelling  of  inguinal  glands. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea ;  <  night ;  after  eating ;  with  pain  in 
bowels. — Haemorrhoids,  bleeding  during  stool. — Condylomata. — ^Anal  and 
inter-crural  excoriation. — Fistula. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Diminished  virility.- Increased  desire- 
Exhausting  erections.— Violent  itching  of  glans  penis  wakes  him  at  night. — 
Drawing  along  spermatic  cord.— Painful  drawing  in  L  testis  extends  towards 


AURUM  MURIATICUM  NATRONATUM  231 

ii^gdinal  rinft  recarrmg  by  paroz3rsins.— Chancres. — Condylomata.  —  Excre- 
scences from  glans  up  to  sacrum. — ^Warts  on  prepuce. 

itL  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Constant  running  from  vulva. — Burn- 
ing stitching  of  vulva. — Heat  and  itching  in  vagina. — Haemorrhage  at  and 
subsequent  to  the  climacteric — Leucorrhoea,  light  yellow,  esp.  mornings. — 
Leocorrhoea  acrid,  excoriating  thighs,  with  itching  of  genitals. — Gonorrhceal 
discharge  with  swellings  in  each  groin. 

17*  Respiratory  Organs.— Hoarseness ;  speaking  difficult.— Dyspnoea ; 
sensation  in  larynx  as  if  closed  ;  laryngeal  affections  in  S3rphilis  and  mercurio- 
syphilis. — Pressure  under  sternum. — Loud  cough  with  thick  yellow  expectora 
tion.— Anxious  contraction  of  chest.— Asthma  <  at  night— Pleuritic  pains  1. 
9de  of  chest ;  changing  place. 

ig.    Heart. — Lancinating  pains  above  the  heart. 

92.  Upper  Limbs.— Swelling  of  the  wrists,  with  tension  on  reversing 
the  hand,  and  lancinations  in  grasping  an  object ;  tearing  pains  in  middle 
finger  after  meals. 

43.  Ixywer  Liint>s« — Legs  swollen  and  very  tender  along  inside  of 
tibia.— Exostosis.— Periostitis ;  after  tjrphoid. 

94*  Generalities. — Great  restlessness;  changes  his  position  every 
moment ;  his  friends  call  him  "  the  quicksilver  man." — Laziness,  aversion  to 
all  work. — Indescribable  weariness  in  whole  body. — Drawing  pains  in  various 
parts,  esp.  the  extremities. 


Aornm  Muriaticnm  Kalinatam. 

Double  Chloride  of  Potassium  and  Gold.    K.  CI,  Au  CI3, 2H^0. 
flHri— K    Utems,  haemorrhage  from  ;  induration  of. 

Charaeteiisttes. — ^An  unproved  salt,  recommended  by  Dr.  Bur- 
tord  and  others  as  the  l>est  preparation  of  gold  in  cases  of  uterine 
induration  and  haemorrhage. 

BalatloiiB.— Coifi^ar^ :  Aur.  mur.  nat.,  Hydrastinin.  mur. 


Auram  Muriaticam  Natronatam. 

Double  Chloride  of  Gold  and  Sodium.    Na  CI,  Au  CI3  2H,0. 

QUalesL— Ascites.  Carcinoma.  Haemorrhoids.  Hair,  falling  out.  Headache. 
Heetic  fever.  Jaundice.  Phthisis.  Rhinoscleroma.  Sycosis.  Syphilis.  Tongue, 
affections  of.    Tumours.    Uterus,  indurations  of  ;  scirrhus  of.    Warts. 

Characteristics. — Boring  pains  are  very  marked  in  the  patho- 
genesis of  this  salt ;  over  left  eye,  skull,  chest,  tibias,  and  bones 
generally.    Symptoms  <  cold  wet  weather  ;  from  October  to  spring 


uy. 
Che) 


(headache).    Warts  on  tongue.    White  stools  (jaundice).    Bright's 


232  AURUM  MURIATICUM  NATRONATUM 

disease.  Chancres  ;  ulcers  ;  warts.  Bubo.  Enormous  induration  of 
an  ovary.  Induration  of  one  part,  softening  of  another  part  of  the 
uterus.  Corrosive  leucorrhoea ;  pustules  on  genitals.  Scirrhus  or 
carcinoma  of  breast  or  uterus.  A  case  of  rhinoscleroma  has  been 
reported  cured  by  it  in  5x  by  Kranz-Busch.  Old  cases  of  rheumatism 
or  gouty  pains.  Scrofida.  All  symptoms  are  <  by  rest  According 
to  Hale,  this  is  the  most  active  of  all  the  preparations  of  gold.  In 
toxic  doses  it  causes  'Violent  gastro-enteritis/'  accompanied  by 
cramps,  convulsive  trembling,  insomnia,  priapism  and  insensibility. 
In  pathogenetic  doses  it  causes  ''epigastric  pain,  nausea,  loss  of 
appetite,  and  constipation."  The  constipation  is  like  that  of  Hydrastis^ 
being  accompanied  with  catarrh.  Hale  has  used  it  with  success  in 
nervous  dyspepsia  with  a  tendency  to  diarrhoea  after  eating  ;  in 
gastric  and  duodenal  catarrh,  with  or  without  jaundice.  The  same 
authority  states  that  the  primary  efifect  of  the  salt  is  to  cause  "  con- 
gestion, irritation  of  uterus  and  ovaries,  subacute  metritis,  ovaritis, 
profuse  and  premature  menses,  habitual  abortion,  nymphomania, 
ulceration  of  uterus,  endocervicitis/'  For  these  the  attenuations  are 
suitable.  The  secondary  effects  are  :  "  Atonic  amenorrhoea,  scanty 
and  delaying  menses,  deficient  sexual  desire,  sterility  from  ovarian 
torpor,  ovarian  dropsy;"  for  these  he  recommends  the  lowest 
triturations.  He  suggests  its  use  in  puerperal  mania  with  sexual 
excitement,  ovaritis,  gastro-intestinal  irritation,  and  suicidal  impulses. 
Also  in  corresponding  states  in  men.  Aur.  mur.  nai.  has  been  proved, 
but  it  has  been  chiefly  used  on  general  Aurum  indications.  Burnett 
considers  it  to  have  more  power  over  uterine  tumoiu-s  than  any  other 
gold  preparation. 

RelatioiiB. — Suited  to  :  Carbo-nitrogenoid  and  mercurio-sjnphihtic 
constitutions.  Compare:  Arg.  n.,  Ars.,  Bad.,  Bry.,  Crot.,  Con., Graph., 
Hep.,  lod.,  Kali  bich.,  Kali  iod.  Lye,  Merc,  Nit.  ac,  Pho.,  Sul., 
Thuj. 

Oauflation. — ^Vexation  (jaundice). 

STHPTOHB. 

8.  Mead. — ^Violent  (boring)  pains  on  whole  side  of  head,  mostly  over 
Oye. — Every  morning  pressure  over  eyes,  pains  in  forehead,  dulness  in  head, 
lasting  until  afternoon ;  >  in  evening ;  nasal  discharge  bloody,  fetid,  ichonis. 
— Hair  falls  out. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Amaurosis. — Ophthalmia  :  scrofulous ;  cancerous  ;  at  same 
time  nose  scurfy. 

5.  Nose. — Ulcers;  caries;  ozaena.  —  Nose  swollen,  hard,  shining 
(scrofulous)  ;  if  he  takes  cold,  erysipelas  sets  in. 

7.    Teeth.— Teeth  get  loose,  look  dirty,  gums  recede. 

S.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  white. — ^Warts  on  tongue. — Burning  on  tip  of 
tongue. — Redness  and  swelling  of  palate  behind  upper  incisors. — Saliva- 
tion. 

13.    Abdomen. — Pressure  in  r.  hypochondrium. — Dropsy. 
13.    Stool  and  Anus. — Clay-like  faeces. — ^Appearance  of  haemorfhoid 
which  protrudes  and  is  painful. 


AURUM  SULPHURATUM  233 

25.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Ulcers  on  foreskin ;  warts  around  them ; 
ulcers  on  glans  eating  deeply. 

ift.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Ulcers  with  induration  of  uterus. — 
Enlargement  of  ovary. — Lencorrhoea,  corroding  the  parts. — Pustules  on 
genitals. — ^Abortion  from  uterine  indurations. — (Given  to  syphilitic  mothers,  it 
prevents  the  disease  in  her  off  spring.)— Scirrhus  of  uterus  and  mammae. 

x^  Heart.— Irregular  heart-beats  with  anxiety  and  short  breath;  while 
sleeping. — Severe  violent  beats  of  the  heart,  with  sensation  of  pressure  while 


SO.  Neck  and  Back. — Cracking  in  cervical  vetebrse  on  bending  head. 
— ^Burning  pain  in  skin  of  nape. — Heat  in  nape  rising  into  head  and  cheeks. 
—Burning  and  drawing;  tension  and  pressure  in  muscles  to  1.  of  nape 
extending  to  shoulder,  <  bending  head  to  r. ;  at  times  unbearable  during 
rest — ^Pustular  eruption  on  back. 

ss.  Upper  Limbs.— Burning  in  skin  of  r.  axilla.  —  Pressure  in  r. 
deltoid. — ^Boring  and  pressing  pains  in  arms  and  elbow-joints  ;  boring  in 
bones. — Painful  stitching  in  finger-tips. 

13.  Lo^^er  Limbs. — Boring  in  thighs,  knees,  tibiae  (first  r.  then  1.).— 
Boring  in  both  sides  r.  tendo  Achillis  when  sitting. — Stitches  in  tips  of  toes ; 
in  bunion. 

S5.  Skin. — Intolerable  itching  all  over  body;  sores  followed  by  an 
eruption  of  little  lumps,  several  covered  with  dark-looking  scabs. — ^Jaundice. 

a;.  Fever.— Remarkable  coldness  of  back.— Remarkable  heat  in  skin.— 
Sweats  only  on  r.  side ;  L  (affected)  side  of  head  remains  dry.— Excessive 
per^iration. 


Aonmi  Solphm^atam. 

Anric  sulphide.    Au^  S3. 

Olslssl^ — ^Enuresis.  Goitre.  Head,  nodding  of.  Impotence.  Jaundice. 
Maomiaef  affections  of.  Nightmare.  Nose,  swelling  of.  Paralysis  agitans. 
Praritos  vulvae.    Staggering. 

ChanetavistiOB. — ^This  is  a  valuable  gold  preparation  which  I 
have  used  with  success  in  Aurum  cases  with  some  Sulphur  indications. 
It  has  been  proved,  and  the  most  striking  symptoms  are  the  f ollowng : 
Constant  nodding  of  head  (suggesting  paralysis  agitans).  Lancina- 
tions  in  occiput  Redness  and  swelling  of  nose  ;  crusts  ;  dry  coryza ; 
great  sensitiveness  to  least  contact.  Sensitiveness  to  touch  was 
observed  in  other  parts.  Inclined  to  vomit  after  eating.  Nocturnal 
enureas.  Impotence.  Lancinations  in  penis.  Heaviness  in  genitals. 
Heat,  landnationsy  and  itching  of  vulva.  There  is  swelling  of  the 
breasts  ;  they  are  painful  to  touch  ;  nipples  are  cracked  ;  lancinating 
pain  in  point  of  nipples.  Thick  yellowish  leucorrhoea,  especially  in 
morning.    Staggering  gait    Weariness.    Frightful  dreams  :  thieves, 

&C. 


234  AVENA  SATIVA 

BTHPT0M8. 

X.    Mind. — Desire  for  solitude. — Disgust  for  life. 

s.  Mead.— Constant  nodding  of  head. — Continual  rush  of  blood  to  head. 
"— Lancinations  in  occiput. — Itching  of  scalp,  <  night. — Burning  and  smarting 
of  scalp. — Failing  out  of  hair. 

3.  Eyes. — Redness  of  lids. — ^Morning  agglutination. — Stye  near  outer 
canthus. — Photophobia. 

5.  Nose. — Redness  and  swelling  of  nose. — Crusts  on  nose. — Sensitive- 
ness to  least  contact. 

6.  Face.— Cracked  lips. 

8.  Mouth. — Redness,  swelling  and  bleeding  of  gums.— Aphthae. 

9.  Throat. — Swelling  of  thyroid. 

zz.  Stomach.-— Great  thirst— Watery  eructations  tasting  of  ingesta. — 
Frequent  hiccough. — ^Very  slow  digestion. 

Z4.  Urinary  Organs. — Nocturnal  enuresis.— Thick,  yellow,  red  and 
sandy  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.  —  Frequent  erections  with  desire  for 
embrace,  but  ceasing  immediately. — Impotence. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Thick,  yellowish  leucorrhcea,  esp.  in  the 
morning. — Irregular  menstruation. — Sensitiveness  of  uterus  to  touch. — 
Swelling  of  breasts ;  painful  to  touch. — Cracks  on  nipples. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Nightly  paroxysms  of  loud  cough. — Hard 
cough  with  scanty  eicpectoration  of  pure  blood. — Suffocating  attacks  at  night. 

zg.    Heart. — Palpitation  when  ascending  a  height. 

84.    Generalities.— Staggering  gait. 

sO.    Sleep.— Troublesome  frightful  dreams ;  of  thieves ;  of  assassins. 


Avena  Sativa. 


Oat.    AT.  0.  Gramineae.    Tincture  of  fresh  plant  in  flower. 

GUbIcsI.  -Alcoholism.    Cholera.    Debility.    Influenza.   Neurasthenia,    Opium 
habit.    Palpitation.    Sexual  excess.    Sleeplessness.    Tuberculosis. 

Charaoteristios. — Avena  has  been  used  empirically  in  substantial 
doses  (5  to  IS  drops  of  the  tincture,  preferably  in  hot  water)  in  a  large 
number  of  cases  of  nerve  weakness.  The  leading  indications  are  : 
Irregularities  of  the  male  sexual  system.  Nervous  exhaustion, 
Genersd  debility.  Nervous  palpitation.  Insomnia.  Inability  to  keep 
the  mind  fixed  on  any  one  subiect,  especially  when  due  to  masturba- 
tion or  sexual  irregularities.  It  is  most  valuable  in  enabling  a  patient 
to  overcome  the  morphine  habit.  It  appears  to  exert  the  same  kind 
of  soothing  action,  without  creating  a  habit  of  its  own.  When  not 
more  than  four  grains  of  morphine  have  been  taken  daily  it  may  be 
discontinued  abruptly,  15  drops  of  Avena  in  a  wineglass  of  hot  water 
being  given  four  times  a  day  instead.    The  only  symptom  that  has 


AZADIRACHTA  INDICA  235 

been  observed  to  be  caused  by  it  is  a  pain  at  tbe  base  of  the  brain 
from  20-drop  doses. 

An  alkaloid,  Avenin  (C56  H^  NOxs)}  bas  been  isolated  from  oats. 
It  is  easily  soluble  in  alcohol.  No  clinical  observations  with  this  have 
been  recorded. 


Ayiaire. 

A  preparation  of  chicken-tnberculosis  introduced  by  Dr.  Cartier  and 
other  homoeopaths  of  Paris. 


.-Bronchitis.    Influenza     Measles.    Phthisis. 

Qhanoterlsties. — ^Dr.  Cartier  gave  an  account  of  this  nosode  in 
his  paper  read  at  the  International  Homoeopathic  Congress,  18^ 
(TfansacHanSf  Part  "  Essays  and  Communications/'  p.  187).  Aviatrc 
acts  most  prominently  on  the  apices  of  the  lungs,  and  it  corresponds 
most  dosely  to  the  bronchitis  of  influenza,  which  simulates  tuberculosis, 
having  cured  several  hopeless-looking  cases.  It  has  also  done 
excellently  in  some  cases  of  bronchitis  following  measles.  The 
bactiius  Qt  avian  tuberculosis  has  been  identified  witti  that  of  human 
tuberculosis,  but  the  clinical  properties  of  the  two  nosodes  are  not 
identicaL 

BtlbMiOiOM.— Compare :  Bacil.,  Bacil.  t,  Tuberc,  Ars.  i. 


Azadirachta  Indica. 

Melia  Aaadirachta.    NimorNeem.  Marcosa.  i^.  0.  Meliaceae ;  Tribei 
Melieae.    Tincture  of  the  bark. 

QltarisaL-^Constipation.    Diarrhoea.     Intennittent  fever.    Quinine,  effects  of. 
Spleen,  congested. 

CBttfaotoristlos.— This  is  an  Indian  remedy  of  very  ancient  date. 
All  parts  ol  the  tree  are  intensely  bitter,  and  the  separate  parts  are 
said  to  have  different  effects.  The  bark,  known  as  Margosa  Bark,  is 
tfie  b^-known  medicinal  portion,  and  the  tincture  for  me  provings 
was  made  from  this  by  Dr.  P.  C.  Majumdar,  who  is  our  chief  authority 
for  its  effects.  It  contains  Azadirin,  Margosin  and  Catcchin,  It  is 
popularly  used  in  a  great  variety  of  complaints,  especially  of  the  eyes, 
digestive  derangements,  and  skin  affections.  The  most  peculiar 
feature  of  the  proving  is  the  fever,  which  commences  with  a  very 
sli^t  chill  or  none  at  all,  about  3  to  4.30  p.m.,  and  abates  about 
7.30  p.m.  Glowing  heat  and  burning,  especially  in  face,  eyes,  palms 
of  lumds  and  soles  of  feet  in  open  air ;  sweat  copious,  commencing  on 
forehead,  gradually  extending  towards  trunk  ;  no  sweat  on  lower  part 
(rf  body.  It  is  especially  useful  in  cases  previously  maltreated  with 
quinine.     <  In  open  air  ;  in  afternoon. 


236  AZADIRACHTA   INDICA 

RelatioilB. — Compare :  Cedron^  China,  Ars.,  Nat.  m.    Also  Guarea 
which  belongs  to  the  same  botanical  order. 

BTMPTOHB. 

I.  Mind. — ^The  mind  is  depressed  and  forgetful ;  uneasiness ;  desire  to 
lie  down. 

8.  Mead. — Giddiness  as  if  head  were  moving  to  and  fro,  <  rising  from 
sitting. — Much  throbbing  headache,  <  r.  side,  with  much  pain  in  r.  eyeball ; 
<  in  open  air. — ^The  scalp  is  painful  and  sensitive  to  touch,  even  the  hair  is 
painful. 

3.  Eyes. — Burning  in  eyes  and  coryza. 

4.  Ear8.^-A  buzzing  in  ears  (recalling  the  efiEect  of  Peruvian  bark). — ^A 
peculiar  crackling  sound  in  the  ear  like  tickling  with  a  feather,  <  on  opening 
the  mouth. 

8.  Mouth. — Clammy  mouth,  but  water  tastes  good. — Sensation  as  if 
scalded  on  side  and  surface  of  tongue. — Salty  tasting  saliva. 

Q.    Throat.—Bitter  taste  in  throat. 

ID.  Appetite. — ^Very  keen  appetite. — ^There  may  be  no  thirst,  or  very 
great  thirst  for  large  quantities  of  cold  water. — Great  thirst  at  long  intervals. — 
Craving  for  sweets. 

12.  Abdomen. — In  the  abdomen  there  are  twisting  pains  in  the 
epigastrium,  and  clutching  pains  in  umbilical  region. — Burning  in  the 
bowels. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Insufficient,  constipated,  hard,  small,  and  knotty 
stool. — Diarrhcea  with  no  satisfaction  after  stool. — Passing  of  offensive  flatus. 

15.    Male  Sexual  Organs. — Great  sexual  excitement 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — ^Troublesome  cough  after  bathing.-^puta 
white,  m  small  lumps,  expelled  with  difficulty. 

18.  Chest. — Cramping  pains  in  chest. — Breathing  deep  and  at  long 
intervals ;  or  rapid  and  hot  breath. — Burning  sensation  in  chest. 

81.    Limbs. — Numbness  of  hands  and  feet. 

85.  Skin. — Much  itching  of  body ;  burning  and  prickling ;  sudamina  on 
back. 

36.  Sleep. — Dreams  of  quarrels. 

37.  Fever. — Chill  slight  or  absent ;  fever  continues  from  3  or  4.30  p.m.  to 
7.30  p.m. — Glowing  heat  and  burning,  esp.  in  face,  eyes,  palms  of  hands  and 
soles  of  feet  in  open  air. — Sweat  copious,  commencing  on  forehead,  gradually 
extending  towards  trunk ;  no  sweat  on  lower  part  of  body. 


Bacillinum. 

A  nosode  of  tuberculosis  named  and  first  described  by  Dr.  Burnett, 
for  whom  it  was  prepared  from  tuberculous  sputum  by  Dr. 
Heath.  As  this  preparation  has  been  experimented  with 
separately,  I  think  it,  on  the  whole,  advisable  to  give  its 
symptoms  apart  from  tfie  other  nosodes  of  phthisis. 


'Addison* s  disease.  Alopecia.  Consumptiveness.  Growth,  defective. 
Hydroc^halus,  Idiocy.  Insanity.  Joints,  affections  of.  Phthiriasis.  Pityriasis. 
Ringmorm,    Scrofulous  glands.    Teeth,  defective ;  pitted.    Tuberculosis. 

CShanusteristios. — ^This  remedy  has  been  used  largely  in  in- 
frequent doses  (at  intervals  of  a  week  or  more)  of  the  30th  and 
upwards  chiefly  on  diathetic  indications  in  the  affections  named  above. 
In  acute  a£Eections  it  has  been  found  useful  to  dissolve  a  few  globules 
in  a  wineglassful  of  water  and  administer  a  teaspoonful  every  four 
honrs.  In  the  provings,  a  severe  headache,  deep  in,  <  by  motion,  was 
a  constant  symptom ;  also  a  sUght  cough  with  easy  expectoration  of 
phlegoL  In  cases  of  acute  tuberculosis  it  has  not  done  so  well  as  in 
more  chronic  cases.  Dr.  Cartier  has  found  it  particularly  useful  in 
cases  where  there  was  excessive  muco-purulent  bronchial  secretion 
threatening  to  occlude  the  lungs.  It  must  be  compared  with 
BadlUnum  Uslium,  Tuberculinum  of  Swan,  Aviaire  and  Tuberculinum 
of  Koch.  Dr.  Burnett  has  shown  that  ringworm  of  the  scalp  and 
pityriasis  versicolor  on  the  body  are  indications  of  tubercular  dia- 
thesis, and  they  respond  to  this  remedy.  Also  they  are  leading 
indications  for  it  when  present  in  combination  with  other  afiFections. 
A  case  of  insanity  with  pityriasis  yielded  rapidly  to  the  remedy. 
Phthiriasis  has  been  cured  by  it  when  all  attempts  to  kill  the  body-Uce 
by  parasiticides  were  useless.  Dr.  Young  has  recorded  the  cure  of 
several  cretinous  idiots.  An  inter-current  course  of  Bacillinum  will 
often  make  a  wonderful  change  in  patients  who  have  a  personal  or 
family  history  of  chest  affections.  I  have  found  an  eczematous 
oondition  dF  the  margins  of  the  eyelids  a  strong  indication  for  it 
<  Night  and  early  morning ;  <  cold  air.  It  is  a  diathetic  remedy  of 
vast  importance.  The  symptoms  of  the  schema  are  taken  from  the 
provings  by  Burnett  and  myself  recorded  in  the  last  edition  of 
Buraetf  s  The  Cure  of  Consumption  by  its  own  Virus,  together  with 
some  cured  symptoms,  and  some  from  a  proving  by  R.  Boocock. 

337 


238  BACILLINUM 

Relatioii8.-*Calc.  pbos.  goes  with  this  remedy  very  well.    So  do 
Lach.  and  Kali  c.    I  know  ofno  antidote. 


BTMPTOHB. 

X.  Mind.— Taciturn,  sulky,  snappish,  fretty,  irritable,  morose,  depressed 
and  melancholic  even  to  insanity. — Fretful  ailing,  whines  and  complains; 
mind  given  to  be  frightened,  particularly  by  dogs. 

a.  Mead. — Severe  headache,  deep  in,  recurring  from  time  to  time,  com- 
pelling quiet  fixedness ;  <  shaking  head.— Terrible  paun  in  head  as  if  he  had 
a  tight  hoop  of  iron  round  it ;  trembling  of  hands  ;  sensation  of  damp  clothes 
on  spine  ;  absolute  sleeplessness. — Meningitis. — Ringworm. — ^Alopecia  areata. 

3.    Eyes. — Eczematous  condition  of  eyelids. 

0.  Face. — Indolent,  angry  pimple  on  1.  cheek,  breaking  out  from  time  to 
time  and  persisting  for  many  weeks. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Aching  in  teeth,  esp.  lower  incisors  (ail  sound),  felt  at 
the  roots  esp.  on  raising  or  projecting  lower  lip;  very  sensitive  to  air. — 
Grinds  teeth  in  sleep. — ImperfecOy  developed  teeth. 

9.    Throat. — ^Tickling  in  fauces,  compelling  cough. 

11.  Stomach. — ^Windy  dyspepsia,  with  pinching  pains  under  ribs  of  r. 
side  in  mammary  line. 

12.  Abdomen. — Fever,  emaciation,  abdominal  pains  and  discomfort, 
restless  at  night,  glands  of  both  groins  enlarged  and  indurated ;  cries  out  in 
sleep ;  strawberry  tongue.— Tabes  mesenterica ;  talks  in  sleep ;  grinds  teeth  ; 
appetite  poor ;  hands  blue ;  indurated  and  palpable  glands  everywhere ;  drum 
belly ;  spleen  region  bulging  out. — Inguinal  glands  indurated  and  visible  ; 
excessive  sweats ;  chronic  diarrhoea. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Sudden  diarrhoea  before  breakfast,  with  nausea. — 
Severe  haemorrhages  from  bowels,  cough. — Obstinate  constipation. — Passes 
much  ill-smelling  flatus. — Stitchlike  pain  through  piles. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Increased  quantity  of  urine,  pale,  with  white 
sediment — Has  to  rise  several  times  in  night  to  urinate. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Slight,  tedious,  hacking  cough.— Hard 
cough,  shaking  patient,  more  during  sleep  but  it  did  not  waken  him. — Pricking 
in  lar3mx  with  sudden  cough. — Single  cough  on  rising  from  bed  in  morning. — 
Cough  waking  him  in  night;  easy  expectoration. — Expectoration  of  non- 
viscid  easily  detached,  thick  phlegm  from  air  passages,  followed  after  a  day  or 
two  by  a  very  clear  ring  of  voice. — Sharp  pain  in  precordial  region  arresting 
breathing.— Very  sharp  pain  in  1.  scapula,  <  lying  down  in  bed  at  night,  >  by 
warmth. 

90.    Neck  and  Back.— Glands  of  neck  enlarged  and  tender. 

83.  Lower  Limbs.— Pain  in  1.  knee  whilst  walking;  passed  o£F  after 
persevering  in  walking  for  a  short  distance.— Tubercular  inflammation  of 
knee. 

84.  Generalities.— Great  weakness,  did  not  want  to  be  disturbed. 

86.  Sleep.— Drowsy  during  day ;  restless  at  night ;  many  dreams. 

87.  Fever.— Flush  of  heat  (soon  after  the  dose),  some  perspiration,  severe 
headache  deep  in. 


BADIAGA  239 

Bacillmom  Testimn. 

A  nosode  prepared  from  tuberculous  testicle. 

QIUb&L— Inguinal  glands,  disease  of.  Mesenteric  glands,  disease  of.   Phthisis. 
TeatideSt  tubercle  of. 

Ghancteristios.— -This  preparation  has  been  used  by  Burnett  as 
having  a  more  direct  relation  to  the  lower  half  of  the  body  than  the 
pdmonaiy  BaciUinum.  My  own  experience  confirms  the  correctness 
of  this  inm-ence ;  but  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  Bac,  iesL  does  not 
act  in  pulmonary  cases,  or  viu  vend. 


Badiaga. 

%xiQgi]la  fiuviatilis.    Fresh-water  sponge.    Trituration  of  the  dried 
sponge  gathered  in  autunm. 


-Breast,  cancer  of.  Bruises.  Bubo.  Catarrh.  Chilblains.  Coryza. 
Ejes,  pains  in.  Glands,  a£Fections  of.  Hay-fever.  Haemorrhoids.  Heart,  affections 
of.  luduiations.  Ophthalmia.  Palpitation.  Rheumatism.  Scrofula.  Syphilis. 
Tibia,  pain  in.    Whooping-cough. 

GhanuiteriBtieB.— BoJui^a  is  the  Russian  name  for  the  river 
sponge,  which  is  a  popular  Russian  remedy.  Among  the  peculiar 
symi^ms  and  indications  are :  Headache  with  aching  in  backs  of 
eyeballs,  2  p.m.  to  7  p.m. ;  <  motion.    Severe  headache  in  vertex 

>  night,  returning  severely  after  breakfast.  Headache  with  inflamed 
eyes.  Ffains  in  eyeballs  extending  to  head.  (J.  A.  Biegler  cured  a  case 
with  the  following  symptoms  :  A  lady  had  for  months  off  and  on  a 
severe  pain  in  r.  eyeball,  which  extended  to  forehead  over  this  eye, 
then  to  temple  ;  always  <  in  afternoon.)  Scalp  sore ;  dry ;  itching ; 
scurf ;  tetters.  Soreness  is  one  of  the  key-notes  of  the  remedy  ; 
general  soreness  of  integuments  and  muscles  ;  as  if  beaten ;  very 
sensitive.  Profuse  coryza,  coming  from  nostril  with  a  gush.  L.  cheek 
and  malar  bone  sore  to  touch.  Lancinating  pains  in  stomach  ;  Uver  ; 
below  scapulae  ;  urethra  ;  chest.  Buboes.  Chancres  suppressed  by 
cautery.  Infantile  syphilis.  Carcinoma  of  breast.  There  is  a  cougn 
whicii  causes  sneezing,  profuse  coryza.  Occasional  severe  fit  of 
coughing  ejecting  viscid  mucus  flying  out  of  mouth  ;  caused  by 
tickling  in  larynx  as  if  a  particle  of  sugar  was  dissolving  in  throat ; 

>  in  warm  room.  Tremulous  vibrative  palpitation  <  lying  r.  side. 
Pdpitation  after  pleasurable  emotions.  Soreness  of  anterior  muscles 
of  legs ;  toes  bend  while  walking  as  if  extensors  were  paralysed.  It 
has  lessened  a  hard  cellular  swelling  of  both  legs.  Sharp  stinging  back 
of  r.  heel,  <  least  pressure.  Chronic  rheumatism,  <  by  cold,  especi- 
ally in  cold  air.  <  Stormy  weather.  >  In  warm  room  ;  <  afternoon. 
<  Pressure  and  touch :  there  is  general  soreness,  even  to  touch  of 
dotbes.    Sore  as  if  beaten.    Headache  >  at  night,  after  sleep. 


240  BADIAGA 

RelatioilB.— Cam^ard :  Spongia ;  Seneg.  (cough  caused  by  sneezing, 
opposite  of  Bad.) ;  Grind,  rob.  (respiration  ceases  on  falling  asleep)  ; 
Spo.  (cough  with  much  sneezing) ;  Kali  c.  (phlegm  flies  from  mouth)  ; 
Calc.  s.  (indurations) ;  Carb.  an.  (indurations,  buboes) ;  Cist.  can. 
(scrofula) ;  Clemat,  Hep.,  lod..  Kali  iod.,  Lach.,  Merc,  Merc,  iod.. 
Nit  ac,  Sil.,  Sul.  Followed  well  by  Lach.  Complcmcntaty  to  SuL, 
lod.,  Merc. 

BTMPTOHS. 

X.  Mind. — ^After  pleasurable  emotions,  palpitation. — Mind  generally 
dear,  active  in  spite  of  headache. 

8.  Head. — Headache  from  2  p.m.  to  7  p.m.,  with  slight  aching  pains  in 
the  posterior  portion  of  both  eyeballs,  and  in  the  temples. — During  the  day 
more  or  less  headache,  with  pain  in  the  eyeballs  (worse  1.) ;  more  from  i  p.m. 
to  7  p.m. — Frontal  headache  during  the  forenoon,  worse  in  the  temples,  and 
extending  into  the  posterior  portion  of  the  1.  eyeball ;  <  by  moving  the  eye, 
— Pain  in  the  temples  and  eyeballs ;  from  eyeballs  to  temples. — ^A  very  severe 
headache  on  top  of  the  head ;  remains  the  same  in  all  positions ;  better  at 
night  after  sleeping,  and  better  in  the  morning;  returning  violently  after 
breakfast ;  lasting  several  days. — Headache  with  inflamed  eyes. — Headache 
<  on  moving  eyes. — Excess  of  dandruff,  or  dry,  tetter-like  appearance  of  the 
scalp,  with  slight  itching;  hair  dry. — Scalp  sore  to  touch,  with  tetter-like 
eruption  on  forehead. 

3.  Eyes. — Bluish-purple  margin  of  the  eyelids,  and  blue  under  the  eyes. 
— Scrofulous  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  with  hardening  of  the  Meibomian 
glands. — Severe  pain  from  eyeballs  «  1.)  into  temple ;  <  turning  eyes. — 
Intermittent  neuralgia  of  r.  eyeball,  extending  to  temple,  <  afternoon. — 
Headache  extending  into  the  eyeballs. — L.  eyeball  quite  sore,  even  upon 
closing  it  tightly.— Twitching  of  1.  eyelid. 

4.  Ears. — Slight  shocks  heard  in  the  ear,  as  of  very  distant  artillery  ; 
afternoons. 

5.  Nose. — Profuse  coryza,  mostly  from  the  1.  nostril ;  comes  with  a 
gush ;  worse  in  afternoon  and  evening ;  with  sneezing. — Coryza  and  cough. — 
Itching  of  1.  ala  nasi. 

6.  Face. — On  forehead,  tetter-like  eruption. — Pale,  ashy,  or  leaden 
colour  of  face.^Sti£Fness  in  the  maxillary  joints. — L.  cheek  and  malar  bone 
sore  to  touch. 

8.  Mouth. — Mouth  and  breath  hot  and  feverish,  with  thirst  for  large 
quantities  of  water  at  a  time. — Mouth  and  tongue  feel  scalded. 

9.  Throat.— Hawks  up,  in  morning,  masses  of  gluey  bloody  mucus 
from  throat,  which  is  inflamed  and  sore,  <  swallov^ng  solids. — ^Tonsils 
red,  inflamed,  <  swallowing  solids. 

11.  Stomach.— Pressure  in  epigastrium,  nausea,  and  rumbling. — Lanci- 
nating in  pit  of  stomach  8  a.m. ;  extends  to  vertebrae,  r.  scapula,  at  times  to  r. 
side,  resulting  there  in  pleuritic  pain. 

12.  Abdomen. — Lancinating  pain  with  a  bounding  movement  in  region 
of  liver. — Indurated  inguinal  glands. — Syphilitic  buboes. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Catarrh  of  the  bowels.— Constipation.— 
Haemorrhoids. 


BADIAGA  241 

14*  Urinary  Organs. — Severe,  sharp,  lancinating  pain  in  or  near 
orifice  of  urethra. — ^Urine  high-coloured ;  and  reddish. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Chancres,  after  cautery,  elevated  dis- 
odoured  cicatrices,  rhagades. — Syphilis  of  infants,  whole  convolutes  of  hard 
gHanrinlar  swellings,  buboes. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Carcinoma  mammae. — ^Metrorrhagia 
<  night,  with  feeling  of  enlargement  of  head. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Breath  hot  and  feverish. — Occasional 
severe  paroxysms  of  spasmodic  cough,  ejecting  viscid  mucus  from  the 
bronchial  tubes,  which  at  times  comes  flying  forcibly  out  of  the  mouth,  < 
afternoon  and  evening,  caused  by  tickling  in  the  larynx,  as  if  sugar  was 
dissolving,  >  in  warm  room. — Cough  =  sneezing ;  profuse  coryza. — Pain  in 
upper  part  of  r.  chest. — Pleuritic  pain,  <  on  motion  or  on  full  inspiration ; 
with  scn^ness. — Severe,  sharp,  lancinating  pain  in  r.  supra-davicular  region, 
-itches  in  sides,  esp.  r. — ^While  lying  on  r.  side  in  bed,  and  at 
moment  of  becoming  unconscious  by  sleep,  severe  oppressive  suffocative 
attacks  from  suspended  respiration,  causing  a  quick  efiFort  to  prevent  suffoca- 
tion by  changing  position. — ^Typhoid  pneumonia. 

19.  Heart. — Severe  vibrating,  tremulous  palpitation  of  the  heart,  even 
while  sitting  or  lying  quiet,  upon  any  sudden  elating  or  other  emotion  of 
mind — Lying  on  r.  side,  heart  is  heard  and  felt  to  pulsate  from  chest  up  to 
neck. 

so.  Neck  and  Back.—- Very  stiff  neck. — Soreness  and  lameness,  with 
sdtches  in  nape  of  neck,  <  by  bending  the  head  back  and  forth. — Scrofulous 
swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  1.  side  of  the  face,  throat,  and  neck  ;  nearly  as 
large  as  a  hen's  egg ;  some  hard,  some  suppurating. — Severe  lancinating  pains 
and  stitches  in  the  posterior  r.  side,  below  the  scapula,  much  <  by  throwing 
the  shoulders  back  and  chest  forward,  or  any  contortions  of  the  body ;  pain 
extorting  at  times  a  moan  or  shriek. 

ss.    Upper  Limbs. — Palms  of  hands  hot  and  dry. 

j^  Jjovrer  Limbs. — Several  hard,  small  lumps  along  the  shin-bone. — 
Hard  cellular  swelling  of  the  legs. — ^Anterior  muscles  of  r.  leg  sore,  as  if  beaten. 
— At  night  violent  lancinating  pains  in  the  limbs. — Hard  swellings  of  both  legs 
lessened. — Hurts  of  horses'  hoofs. — Bad  ulcers  of  horses'  feet. — ^Toes  bend 
while  walking  as  if  extensors  paralysed. — Checked  foot-sweat. 

24.  Generalities. — General  soreness  of  the  muscles  and  integuments  of 
the  whole  body  ;  flesh  sore  to  touch,  even  of  the  clothes ;  sore  as  if  beaten. 

95.  Skin. — Skin  sore  to  touch. — Raised  and  discoloured  scars. — Rhagades. 
— ^Brown  and  blue  spots  after  concussions. — Externally  applied  causes  checked 
eruptions  to  reappear. — ^Tetters  on  scalp  and  forehead  ;  itching  on  scalp. 

sS.  Sleep. — Restiess  at  night ;  must  frequently  change  position,  body 
feels  so  sore. — ^Awake  3-4  a.m.  with  frightful  dreams  and  severe  cramping 
pains  in  metatarsal  bones  of  both  feet. — >  After  sleep  (head). 


VOL.  I.  17 


242  BAPTISIA  CONFUSA  ACETICA 

Balsamom  PeniYianam. 

Balsam  of  Peru.    Myroxylon  Pereirae.   N.  0.  Leguminosas.    Tincture 
of  the  balsiam  that  flows  from  the  stems. 

OUniML— Bronchias.   Catarrtu    Cracks.   Epistaxis.   Hectic.    Itdi.    Phthisis. 
Ulcers. 

CEharaoteriBties. — Peruvian  Balsam  has  been  chiefly  used  empiri- 
cally in  catarrhsd  phthisis  or  bronchial  catarrh  with  copious  purulent 
expectoration.  Sputa  thick,  creamy,  yellowish  white ;  loud  rales, 
night  sweats,  hectic.  Hale  has  used  it  with  success  in  ''chronic, 
purulent,  fetid  anterior  or  posterior  nasal  catarrh,  with  or  without 
ulceration.''  He  says  that  a  cerate  of  the  Balsam  is  the  best  appli- 
cation next  to  Glycerole  of  Aloes  for  indolent  ulcers,  cracked  nipples, 
cracks  in  fingers  and  palmer  surfaces  of  hands,  or  fissured  and 
chapped  lips.  The  Balsam  is  also  used  externally  for  killing  the 
acarus  of  itch.  All  parts  affected  are  gently  rubbed  with  it  at  night 
and  a  bath  taken  in  the  morning.  A  single  application  is  sufficient. 
It  has  been  proved  by  Lembke. 

SYMPTOMS. 

5.    Nose. — Bleeding  from  r.  nostril  without  coryza,  or  sneezing,  or 
blowing  nose;   repeated  at  7  p.m.— Profuse  thick  discharge  from  nose, 
whether  chronic  or  otherwise. — Ozaena  with  ulceration. 
g.    Throat. — Continued  scraping  of  fauces. 

XX.  Stomach.-^Vomiting  of  food  and  mucus ;  catarrh  of  stomach. — 
Mucous  diarrhoea,  &c. 

X3.  Stool. — Copious  liquid  stool,  painless. — Passage  of  blood  with  normal 
stool  (does  not  have  piles). 

X4.  Urinary  Organs. — Sticking  and  cutting  in  urethra.— Urination 
more  frequent  and  copious. — Urine  scanty,  with  mucous  sediment ;  catarrh 
of  bladder. 

X7.    Respiratory  Organs. — Scraping  in  larynx  in  f  drenoon ;  dry  cough. 

x8.  Chest. — Cough,  mucous  and  purulent  expectoration. — Phthisis  of 
mucous  type ;  vomica  in  lungs. 

sa.    Upper  Limbs. — Oppressive  pain  in  r.  wrist. 

^    Lower  Limbs. — Severe  pain  in  1.  tibia.7-*Boring  in  r.  tibia. 

94.    Generalities.— Debility ;  rhagades  of  nipples  and  fingers. 

Baptisia  Gonfasa  Acetioa. 

Australian  Baptisia.   N.  0.  Leguminosas.   Acetum  of  stem  and  leaves. 

GUiliesL— Headache.  Oppression.  Spleen  pain.  Typhoid.  Vision,  defec- 
Uve. 

COiaraoteristies.— Mr.  J.  Meredith  C'Agricola")  conununicated 
to  the  Horn.  World   (xxxi.  267)  his   experience  with  this  shrub. 


BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA  243 

Symptoms  produced  on  himself  were :  Congestion  of  fore  part  of 

head.    Vision  weak.    Hectic  flush  after  tea.    Right  molar  felt  too 

k>ng,<  by  pressure,  intermittent ;  right  jaw  (later  both  jaws)  stiff  and 

painful  at  joint    Sciatica  left  side.    Appetite  increased,  more  energy 

for  brain  work.    Sleep  improved.    But  the  most  remarkable  effect 

was  the  relief  of  a  distressing  symptom  which  had  troubled  him  many 

months,  and  which  the  ordinary  Bapt.  tincL  in  any  preparation  had 

failed  to  relieve.     He  describes  it  as  "  a  really  distressing  left  hypo- 

diondrium  oppression,  fulness  and  actual  dyspnoea,  impelling  me  to 

assume  an  erect  position."    This  would  continue  half  the  night.    It 

was  uninfluenced  by  eating.    The  distress  was  located  either  in  the 

^leen  or  splenic  curve  of  the  colon.    The  BapL  c.  oceL  seemed  to 

relieve  the  part  very  rapidly,  causing  something  to  move  to  the  left 

and  downwards,  after  which  he  went  to  sleep.    A  case  simulating 

typhoid  was  rapidly  relieved  by  the  remedy — showing  its  relation  to 

BapL  Una, 


Baptisia  Tinctoria. 

Wild  Indigo  (United  States  of  America.)    N.  0.  Leguminosas; 
Tinctiu-e  of  fresh  root  and  its  bark. 

CUnloaL— Abortion,  threatened.  Apoplexy.  Appendicitis.  Biliousness.  Bndn 
softening.  Cancer,  CcmsumfHon.  Diphtheria.  Dysentery.  Enteric  fever.  Eye, 
affections  of.  Gall-bladder,  affections  of.  Gastric  fever.  Headache,  bilious. 
HecHc  fever.  Hysteria.  Influema,  Mumps.  (Esophagus,  stricture  of.  Plague. 
Rdt^ng  fever.  Sewer  gas-poisoning.  Shivering.  Stomatitis.  Tabes  mesenterica. 
TSnca  capitis.    Tongue  ulcerated,    iTphus.    Variola.    Worms. 

Charftcteristioa. — Baptisia  has  gained  its  greatest  reputation  as  a 
remedy  in  typhoid  fever,  to  the  symptoms  of  which  its  pathogenesis 
strikingly  corresponds.  But  it  is  only  when  it  is  used  strictly  in  accor- 
dance with  its  symptoms  that  it  will  give  successful  results.  When 
given  as  a  matter  of  routine  there  are  sure  to  be  failures.  Another 
disease  in  which  it  has  proved  specific  in  a  large  number  of  cases  is 
epidemic  influenza.  The  besotted  coimtenance,  bleary  eyes,  aching 
head,  sore  throat,  pains  and  soreness  all  over  the  t)ody,  and  profound 
prostration  which  are  present  in  all  typical  cases  indicate  Baptisia 
before  any  other  remedy. 

Among  the  chief  symptoms  of  the  remedy  are  the  following : 
Stupor,  falls  asleep  whilst  being  spoken  to,  confused  as  if  dnmk. 
Cannot  keep  his  mind  together,  a  wild  wandering  feeling.  This 
scattered  feeling  is  further  exemplified  in  the  illusion  that  the  body  is 
double ;  limbs  separated  and  conversing  with  each  other  ;  can't  sleep 
because  body  seems  scattered  about  and  cannot  collect  pieces.  There 
is  a  dull  heavy  sensation  in  head  with  drowsiness  and  heavy  eye- 
lids. The  head  feels  large,  with  a  numb  feeling  of  head  and  face. 
Bruised  headache ;  soreness  as  if  in  brain ;  bruised  feeling  in  occiput ; 
heavy  feeling  at  base  of  brain  with  drawing  in  cervical  muscles. 
Frontal  hea&che  with  pressure  at  root  of  nose.    The  neck  is  tired, 


244  BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA 

cannot  hold  head  easy  in  any  position.  The  eyes  cannot  bear  light ; 
bum ;  are  weak ;  painful  on  reading.  Weight  on  eyes ;  eyeballs 
sore,  lame  on  moving.  Blear-eyed.  Lids  partially  paralysed.  An 
illusion  of  smell  '^  as  of  burnt  feathers''  has  been  caused  and  cured  by 
it.  Pain  in  left  parotid  gland.  Flat,  bitter  taste.  Tongue  swollen  ; 
feels  numb  ;  speech  difficult.  Is  coated  whitish  yellow,  and  feels 
bumt,or  scalded.  Dry,  parched,  brown  centre ;  cracked  and  ulcerated* 
Canker  sores  in  moutti.  Ulcerations.  The  sore-mouth  of  sucklings. 
Painlessness  is  a  feature  in  the  sore  throat ;  putrid,  painless,  dark 
ulcers.  CEsophagus  feels  constricted  down  to  stomach  ;  can  only 
swallow  liquids ;  cases  of  convulsive  contraction  of  oesophagus  and 
cardiac  orifice,  with  regurgitation  of  food,  have  been  cured  by  it  In 
one  case,  that  of  an  old  man,  food  could  be  swallowed  and  retained 
some  days,  but  not  on  others.  He  had  always  liked  very  hot  food. 
The  oesophagus  was  red  and  granular.  BapL  12  cured.  Nausea, 
retching  and  vomiting.  Sinking,  gone  feeling.  Pain  in  liver;  and 
especially  in  gall-bladder  ;  in  spleen ;  in  right  iliac  region ;  in  groins ; 

f  lands  swollen.  Soreness  of  abdominal  muscles  and  right  iliac  region, 
'etid  exhausting  diarrhoea ;  dysentery  in  autumn  or  hot  weather. 
Worms.  The  urine  is  high-coloured,  scanty,  alkaline,  fetid.  Orchitis, 
squeezed  pain  in  testes.  Hale  considers  it  specific  in  threatened  mis- 
carriage from  mental  depression,  shock  of  bad  news,  watching, 
fasting,  or  low  fever.  Patients  in  these  conditions  often  complain  of 
**  dreadful  sinking  at  the  stomach,"  fetid  breath  and  other  symptoms 
of  Baptisia,  Many  cases  of  phthisis  are  relieved  by  this  remedy  when 
the  symptom  and  type  of  fever  correspond.  Lumbar  backache. 
Feels  as  if  lying  on  a  board.  Pain  in  sacrum.  Weakness  of  lower 
limbs.  Left  foot  much  prickling  and  numbness.  Numbness  and 
soreness  are  very  general  in  Baptisia  patients.  It  has  cured  hysteria 
with  prostration,  numbness  and  fear  of  paralysis,  wanted  to  die, 
rubbed  hands  continually,  restlessness.  The  bed  feels  hard.  There 
is  excessive  drowsiness.  <  On  waking ;  <  walking  ;  <  open  air  ; 
<  cold  wind ;  <  autumn  or  hot  weather. 

RelationB. — Compare :  Arn.,  Arsen.,  Bry. ;  Gels,  (malaise,  nervous- 
ness, flushed  face,  drowsiness,  and  muscular  soreness)  ;  Ecchin. 
angust.,  Hyo.,  Kali  mur.,  Lach.,  Mur.  ac.  and  Nit.  ac.  (typhoid) ;  Nux  v.. 
Op.,  Rhus  t.  Follows  well:  Ars.  Is  followed  well  by:  Tereb.,  Nit.  ac, 
Ham.  Silic  has,  like  Bap.,  ability  to  swallow  only  liquids  (like  milk^, 
but  unlike  Bap.,  Silic  has  aversion  to  milk.  Ecchinacea  angustifolia  is 
perhaps  its  nearest  analogue. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Stupor  ;  falls  asleep  while  being  spoken  to,  or  answering ; 
heavy  sleep  till  aroused  ;  awakes  only  to  again  fall  asleep  in  the  midst  of  his 
answer,  which  he  vainly  endeavours  to  finish. — Indisposed  to  think,  want  of 
power  ;  mind  seems  weak,  confused,  as  if  drunk. — Cannot  confine  his  mind  : 
a  sort  of  wild,  wandering  feeling.— Gloomy,  unhappy  state  of  mind. — ^Body 
feels  scattered  about,  tosses  around  to  get  the  pieces  together  ;  cannot  sleep 
because  he  cannot  get  pieces  together. — Mind  wanders  as  soon  as  the  eyes  are 
closed. — Mentally  restless  but  too  lifeless  to  move. — Indisposed  to  think; 


BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA  245 

uia]kulity   to    memorise.— <  When  thinking  of  pains  in  various   parts  of 
body. 

ft.    Head. — ^Vertigo,  and  weak  feeling  of  entire  system,  esp.  lower  limbs 
and  knees. — ^Vertigo,  with  paralysis  of  eyelids. — Peculiar  feeling  in  head,  which 
is  never  felt  except  during  fever,  excitement  of  brain  such  as  precedes  delirium. 
— ^Doll,  heavy  pressive  headache. — Frontal  headache,  with  pressure  at  root  of 
nose  ;  with  feeling  of  fulness  and  tightness  of  whole  head. — Head  feels  large 
and  heavy,  with  numbness  of  head  and  face. — Sharp  darts  of  pain  in  supra- 
orbital nerve  at  foramen. — Frequent  sharp  pains  by  spells  in  r.  and  1.  temple. 
— Soreness  in  the  brain,  worse  on  stooping. — ^Top  of  head  feels  as  if  it  would 
fly  off.— Dull,  bruised  feeling  in  occiput. — Skin  of  forehead  feels  tight. — Scalp 
feels  sore. — Sensation  as  if  head  swelling. — Neck  feels  so  tired  she  cannot  hold 
her  head  easy  in  any  position. 

3.  Eyes. — Cannot  bear  light ;  eyes  burn  but  do  not  water. — Feeling  as 
if  eyes  would  be  pressed  into  head  ;  eyeballs  feel  sore,  with  great  confusion  of 
sight ;  cannot  place  anything  until  after  looking  at  it  a  few  seconds ;  every- 
thing appestrs  to  move. — Severe  pains  in  eyes  on  reading,  compelling  to  stop. 
—Bloated  feeling  of  eyes,  glistening ;  disposition  to  have  them  half  closed. — 
Eyeballs  feel  sore  ;  sore  and  lame  on  moving  them. — Partial  paralysis  of  lids. 

4.  Ears. — Dull  hearing. — Delirium  with  almost  complete  deafness. — 
Sli^t  pain  in  L  parotid  gland. 

5.  Nose. — ^Dull  pain  at  root  of  nose  ;  crampy  sensation. — Sneezing  and 
feeling  as  after  a  severe  cold ;  slight  bleeding  from  r.  nostril  of  bright  red 
bkxxi,  thick. — Epistaxis  of  dark  blood.— Sensation  of  fulness;  oedema  of 
afFected  parts,  esp.  in  choanae. — Illusion  of  smell :  as  of  burnt  feathers. 

6.  Face. — Face  flushed,  dusky,  hot ;  dark-red,  with  a  besotted  expres- 
sion.—Muscles  of  jaw  rigid. 

8.  Mottth. — Sordes  on  the  teeth  and  lips. — ^Tongue  yellow  along  the 
centre  ;  first  white,  with  reddish  papillae,  followed  by  yellow-brown  coating 
in  centre,  edges  dark-red  and  shining ;  dry,  brown  down  the  centre  ;  cracked, 
sore,  ulcerated. — Filthy  taste  with  flow  of  saliva. — Saliva  rather  abundant, 
somewhat  viscid,  tasting  flat — Numb,  pricking  sensation  in  tongue — Putrid 
nkers  of  the  buccal  cavity,  with  salivation. — Mouth  and  tongue  very  dry  in 
fevers. — ^Putrid ;  offensive ;  faecal  breath. — Flat,  bitter  taste  in  mouth. 

9^  Throat. — Pain  and  soreness  of  fauces. — Constrictive  feeling  in  throat, 
causing  frequent  efforts  at  deglutition. — ^Throat  feels  swollen  or  full. — Fauces 
dark-red  ;  dark,  putrid  ulcers  ;  tonsils  and  parotids  swollen  ;  absence  of  pain, 
and  great  prostration. — Difficult  deglutition ;  can  only  swallow  water  ;  ceso- 
phagos  feels  as  if  constricted  from  above  down  to  stomach. 

n.  Stomach. — Sinking,  gone  feeling  at  the  stomach. — Constant  desire 
for  water,  with  nausea  and  want  of  appetite. — Great  thirst. — Loss  of  appetite ; 
averse  to  nourishment  and  stimulants. — All  symptoms  <  from  beer.— At  night, 
frequent  pain  in  the  epig^tric  region ;  <  from  turning  over,  which  he  had 
to  do  all  the  time. — Full  feeling  in  stomach. — Heavy  gnawing  in  stomach. — 
Homing  heat  rising  up  to  throat. — Pains  in  stomach ;  feeling  there  as  of  a 
hard  substance. 

xs.  Abdomen. — Pam  in  liver,  from  r.  lateral  ligament  to  gall-bladder ; 
can  scarcely  walk,  it  so  augments  pain  in  g^-bladder. — Constant  severe  pain 
over  gall-bladder. — Constant  pain  in  stomach  and  liver;  <  walking;  hot 


246  BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA 

sensation ;  heavy  aching  in  liver. — Pain  in  liver  region  on  going  upstairs. — 
Constant  aching  distress  in  stomach  and  umbilical  region. — Pain  in  region  of 
spleen,  with  darts  of  pain  in  body,  esp.  in  carpus,  metacarpus,  and  phalanges. 
— R.  iliac  region  sensitive. — Fulness  and  distension  of  the  abdomen. — ^Abdo- 
minal muscles  sore  on  pressure.— Sharp,  rheumatic  pains  in  groins,  lasting  a 
short  time  but  returning  after  short  interval,  <  from  walking. — Glands  of  L 
groin  swollen  ;  painful  on  walking. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Frequent  small,  thin,  dark,  ofiFensive,  and  acrid 
stools. — ^Very  fetid,  exhausting  diarrhoea ;  excoriating. — Stool  papescent,  with 
large  quantities  of  mucus  ;  no  pain. — Dark-brown  mucous  and  bloody  stools, 
with  tenesmus  and  typhoid  tendency. — D3rsentery  :  rigors,  pains  in  limbs  and 
small  of  back  ;  stools  small,  aU  blood,  not  very  dark  but  thick ;  tenesmus ; 
great  prostration,  brown  tongue,  low  fever ;  in  autumn  or  in  hot  weather, 
constipation;  severe,  with  haemorrhoids;  in  afternoon. — Stricture  from 
piles. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Stitches  in  region  of  r.  kidney ;  shooting  in  1. 
kidney. — Burning  when  urinating. — Urine  rather  scanty,  dark-red  colour ; 
alkaline ;  fetid. — Light-green  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Orchitis.— Pressing  pain  in  1.  testicle; 
cramp,  as  if  squeezed. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.-^Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse. — 
Excites  abortion. — Lochia  acrid,  fetid. — Puerperal  fever. — Stomatitis  materna. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Aphonia. — Larynx  sore  to  touch,  painful 
swallowing  or  speaking. — Fetid  breath. — ^Awakes  with  great  difficulty  of 
breathing ;  the  lungs  feel  tight  and  compressed  ;  must  have  fresh  air. 

i8.  Chest. — Constriction  and  oppression  of  the  chest — ^Weight  and 
oppression  in  precordial  region,  with  a  feeling  of  unsatisfied  breathing ; 
afternoon. — Sharp  pains  in  centre  of  sternum. — Dull  stitches  in  1.  nipple. 

19.  Heart  and  Pulse. — Feeling  of  greatly  increased  compass  and 
frequency  of  heart's  pulsations ;  seem  to  fill  chest. — Pulse  at  first  accelerated, 
afterward  slow  and  faint. 

90.  Neck  and  Back.— Neck  tired;  sore  down  neck.— StifiFness  and 
lameness  of  cervical  muscles ;  <  on  moving  head. — Back  and  hips  very  stifiF, 
ache  severely ;  <  walking. — Feels  as  if  lying  on  a  board  ;  changes  position 
often,  bed  feels  so  hard ;  <  in  region  of  sacrum. — Dull  sacral  pain,  com- 
pounded of  a  feeling  as  from  a  pressure  and  fatigue,  from  long  stooping ; 
soon  extending  round  hips  and  down  r.  leg. 

21.  Limbs. — Wandering  pains  in  all  the  limbs  with  dizziness.— Drawing 
pains  in  arms  and  legs  ;  aching  in  the  limbs. 

32.  Upper  Limbs. — Constant  twitching  in  1.  deltoid. — Pain  in  1.  shoulder, 
extending  down  arm. — Pains  in  bones  of  arms  and  hands. — Numbness  of  I. 
hand  and  forearm,  with  prickling. 

SQ.  Lower  Limbs.— Soreness  in  front  of  thighs,  <  after  sitting.— Limbs 
weak  and  vacillating. — L.  foot  numb,  prickles. — Burning  of  top  of  r.  foot 
from  toes  to  back  of  foot. 

24.  Generalities. — Restiess ;  does  not  sleep  quietiy ;  wants  to  be  on 
the  move. — Great  languor ;  wants  to  lie  down. — ^Tired,  bruised,  sick  feeling 
in  all  parts  of  the  body, — ^Weak  and  tremulous,  as  if  recovering  from  a  severe 
illness.— <2reat  weakness,  esp.  in  lower  limbs.— Prostration,  with  disposition 


BAROSMA  247 

of  fluids  to  decompose. — Indescribable  sick  feeling  all  over. — Numbness 
prickling  and  paralytic  feeling  over  the  whole  body,  esp.  1.  side.— Ulceration 
of  mncous  membranes,  esp.  of  the  mouth,  with  tendency  to  putrescence. — 
Discharges  and  exhalations  fetid. — Sensation  all  over  the  body  as  if  bruised  or 
beaten. — Feds  as  if  lying  on  a  board  ;  changes  position,  bed  feels  so  hard 
makes  him  feel  sore  and  bruised. 

9%,  Skin. — Great  burning  and  heat  in  skin ;  <  in  face. — Livid  spots  over 
body  and  limbs. — ^Eruption  like  measles  or  urticaria. — Confluent  small-pox, 
tardy  emption. — Foul,  gangrenous,  eating  syphilitic  sores. 

afl.  Sleep. — Delirious  stupor ;  falls  asleep  while  answering  a  question  or 
being  talked  to. — Sleeps  well  till  2  or  3  a.m.,  then  restless  till  morning. — 
Drowsy,  stupid,  tired  feeling;  disposition  to  half  dose  the  eyes. — Restless, 
with  frightful  dreams. — ^Wants  to  get  out  of  bed. — Cannot  sleep,  limbs  seem 
scattered  about  so. 

17.  Fever. — Chilly  going  into  the  open  air ;  chills  over  the  back  and 
kiwer  limbs. — Chilly,  with  soreness  of  body. — ^Whole  surface  hot  and  dry , 
with  occasional  chills,  mostly  up  and  down  the  back.-— On  awaking,  3  a.m., 
flashes  of  heat ;  feeling  as  if  sweat  would  break  out. — ^An  uncomfortable 
burning  all  over  surface,  esp.  face ;  moves  to  cool  part  of  bed  ;  finally  rises, 
opens  window  and  washes. — Typhoid  and  cerebral  forms  of  fever. — Begin- 
ning of  typhus  when  the  so-called  nervous  symptoms  predominate;  causes 
sweat  to  break  out  and  relieve ;  typhus ;  critical  sweat  on  forehead  and  face. 
—Fever  originating  from  confinement  on  shipboard,  without  good  care  or 
fbod-^Fetid  sweat 

Barosma. 

B.  betulina,  B.   crenulata,  B.    sanatifolia.     Buchu  (South  Africa). 
N.  O.  Rutaceas  (Genus,  Diosmeas).    Tincture  of  dried  leaves. 

GllakaLr— Bladder,  affections  of.  Calculus.  Catarrh.  Gravel.  Lencorrhoea. 
RnMtale,  disorders  of. 

Charaoteristioa. — ^The  leaves  of  several  species  of  Barosma 
oontsdn  in  vitts  a  volatile  oil,  having  a  warm  camphoraceous  taste 
and  an  odour  something  like  mint.  There  are  no  provings  of 
the  remedy,  and  the  only  uses  made  of  it  have  been  with  the 
tincture.  But  it  has  a  markedly  specific  effect  on  mucous 
membranes  generally,  and  especially  on  the  genito-urinary  system, 
closely  resembling  that  of  Sabal  ser,^  Populus,  Copaiva^  and  Thuja. 
Hale  gives  as  indications  :  chronic  afiFections  of  genito-urinary  organs 
having  mucofuruUnt  discharges^  abundance  of  epithelium  mixed  with 
pus  and  mucous  corpuscles.  Irritable  bladder,  with  vesical  catarrh 
or  gravel ;  with  spasmodic  stricture.  Prostatic  disorders.  Vaginal 
leucorrhoea.  Undue  secretions  from  mucous  follicles  of  urethra, 
vesicniae  seminales,  or  prostate  produced  by  excessive  venery  or 
self-abuse. 

Baryta  Acetica,  see  Baryta  Garbonica. 


«48  BARYTA  CARBONICA 


Baryta  Garbonioa. 

Carbonate  of  Barium  Ba  CO3,  with  which  are  included  symptoms  of 
Baryta  acetica — Barium  acetate  Ba(CaH^Oa)g.  (I  follow  Hering 
and  Hahnemann  in  combining  the  two,  Ss  I  agree  with  Hering 
that  "there  is  hardly  any  difference  between  the  two,  and 
certainly  none  in  the  symptoms  cured.")  Solution  of  acetate  ; 
trituration  of  carbonate. 

Clinical.— i4  neurism.  Apoplexy.  Atrophy.  Baldness.  Brain,  affecHofts  of. 
Cysts.  Foot-sweat  Glandular  swellings.  Haemorrhoids.  Heart,  Sections  of. 
Memory  defective.  (Esophagus,  spasm  of .  Panaris.  Paralysis.  Parotitis.  Prostate, 
enlarged.    Quinsy,    Throat,  sore.    Tonsils,  enlarged.    Tumours.    Warts.    Wens. 

GharaoteristiOfl* — Baryta  corresponds  to  scrofulous  conditions  in 
children  and  old  age  ;  dwarfish  children  and  childish  old  people. 
Old  people  who  are  fat  Those  liable  to  take  cold  easily ;  sore 
throat  from  cold ;  glandular  affections.  Many  cases  of  aneurism  have 
been  cured  with  Baryta,  mostly  in  lower  attenuations.  It  corresponds 
to  the  atheromatous  condition.  A  paralytic  condition  runs  throughout 
the  pathogenesis.  There  is  paralysis  of  mind  and  body.  Mistrust : 
want  of  self-confidence ;  aversion  to  strangers  (the  child  does  not 
want  to  play).  It  has  cured  a  case  of  fetid  foot-sweat  with  spells 
of  despondency,  seeking  solitude,  sobbing  and  crying.  Deficient 
memory  (children  cannot  remember  and  learn).  Sensation  as  if  brain 
loose.  Vertigo  :  with  nausea ;  from  stooping  ;  when  lifting  arms 
up  ;  in  old  people.  Pressure  and  sticking  in  brain,  at  vertex  on 
waking.  It  has  cured  baldness  in  young  people  ;  tinea,  wens. 
The  scalp  is  very  sensitive  to  touch.  Enlarged  glands  in  occiput  and 
neck.  On  the  face  there  are  rough,  dry  and  herpetic  eruptions. 
Dark  redness.  Tension  of  whole  face  as  if  white  of  egg  had  dried  on 
it ;  as  if  a  cobweb  {B.  acet.)  over  face,  temples,  and  scalp.  Painful 
swelling  of  parotid  and  of  submaxillary  glands.  The  sense  of  smell 
is  very  acute.  There  is  an  illusion  of  smell  as  of  pine  smoke. 
Nose-bleed  before  menses.  The  tongue  is  paralysed.  Salivation  ; 
saliva  runs  out  during  sleep.  The  digestion  is  weak ;  after  eating, 
pressing  in  stomach ;  and  pain  in  hard,  swollen  abdomen.  Sen- 
sation of  soreness  of  stomach ;  while  eating  it  feels  as  if  the 
food  had  to  force  its  way  through  some  raw  place.  It  has 
proved  curative  in  the  habitual  colic  of  children  who  do  not 
thrive ;  enlarged  mesenteric  glands  \  hungry,  but  refuse  food ; 
swallowing  painful.  The  anus  is  sore  and  humid.  Piles  pro- 
trude with  urination  as  well  as  stool.  Constipation,  with  hard, 
knotty  stools  ;  haemorrhoids,  burning  and  soreness.  The  paralytic 
condition  appears  in  the  sexual  organs.  Impotence.  Soreness  and 
moistening  between  scrotum  and  thighs.  Enlarged  prostate.  There 
is  also  a  paralytic  condition  of  the  respiratory  organs.  There  is  a 
feeling  in  the  larynx  as  if  inspiring  smoke  or  pitch.  Hoarseness  and 
loss  of  voice  from  cough,  mucus  in  larynx  and  trachea.    Suffocating 


BARYTA  CARBONICA  249 

catarrh  and  paralysis  of  lungs  in  old  people.  Sensation  as  if  lungs 
full  of  smoke.  There  is  a  spasmodic  cough,  like  whooping-cough,  from 
roughness  and  tickling  in  throat  and  pit  of  stomach.  Cough  <  evening 
till  midnight ;  after  getting  feet  cold ;  exercise  ;  lying  left  side  ;  cold 
air ;  thinking  of  it.  Palpitation  with  soreness  of  heart,  <  lying  on 
left  side  ;  <  thinking  of  it.  Violent  long  lasting  palpitation  ;  felt  in 
head.  Palpitation  <  on  exertion.  Slightest  exertion  makes  him  feel 
tired  and  sleepy.  These  heart  symptoms  of  Bar.  c.  are  met  with  in 
many  cases  of  aneurism  and  atheroma,  and  no  remedy  has  a  better 
record  here.  I  cured  an  advanced  case  of  thoracic  aneurism  with  the 
3X.  Batyt.  c.  has  cured  tumours  of  several  kinds.  Induration  in  the 
breasts.  Sarcoma  in  neck  with  burning.  Fatty  tumours,  especially 
about  the  neck  Swelling  and  induration  of  glands.  A  marked 
symptom  is,  pulsation  in  the  back.  Sti£Fness  and  tension  in  small  of 
back,  in  evening,  especially  while  sitting,  allowing  neither  to  rise  nor 
to  bend  backwards.  Painfulness  of  arms  and  swelling  of  axillary 
glands.  Cold  feet.  Fetid  perspiration  of  feet.  Corns  with  burning 
and  stinging.  Burning  and  drawing  pains  are  frequent  in  lower 
Hmbs.  A  case  has  been  recorded  in  which  BaryL  removed  in  an  old 
man  a  pain,  coming  suddenly,  in  hollow  of  knee  and  running  down 
back  of  leg  Uke  a  &in  stream  of  hot  fluid  or  molten  metal,  running 
down  under  the  skin.  Tearing  in  limbs  with  chilliness.  Tension  and 
shortening  of  muscles.  Intolerable  irritation  all  over  like  prickings 
and  tingling,  waking  him  at  night.  Itching,  sore  and  humid  skins. — 
Warts. — ^Burning  pains  are  found  in  many  parts.  General  soreness 
and  sensitiveness.    Small  wounds  ulcerate  and  get  very  sore. 

Chilliness  predominates.  It  has  cold,  clammy  feet  as  notably 
as  (Ailcarea.  <  Cold  air  ;  cold  washing  ;  damp  weather  ;  warm 
food ;  in  sun  (headache) ;  near  warm  stove  (headache).  <  From 
raising  arms,  <  from  mental  emotion.  <  Thinking  of  complaints.  <  In 
company  ;  >  alone.  >  From  cold  food.  Left  side  much  affected. 
Offensive  sweat  of  one  side  (mostly  left).  <  Lying  on  painful  side  ; 
on  left  side.  <  After  eating.  After  eating,  so  wes^  cannot  raise  his 
hands  ;  too  weak  to  masticate. 

Balatioilfl. — Compare :  Alum.,  Ant.  t.  (paralysis  of  lungs) ;  Bell., 
Calc  c.  fscrofulosis,  coryza,  &c) ;  Calc.  iod.  (large  tonsils)  ;  Caust. 
(paralysis)  ;  Cham.,  Chi.,  Con.  (old  people) ;  Dulc.  (catching  cold) ; 
Fluor,  ac.  (old  people)  ;  Iod.  (glands)  ;  Lach.,  Lye.  (tonsils) ;  Mag.  c, 
Merc.  (coldS|  glands,  diarrhoea) ;  Nat  c,  Phos.,  Puis.,  Sep.  (tinea)  ; 
Silic.  (glands,  fetid  foot-sweat,  but  Bar.  c.  lacks  the  head-sweat  of 
Silic,  and  Silic.  has  self-will  instead  of  the  weak-mindedness  of  Bar.  c.) ; 
SuL,  Tell.  Antidoted  by :  Ant.  t..  Bell.,  Camph.,  Dulc,  Merc,  Zn. 
Compatible :  after  Scilla,  Ars.  Before  and  after  Sul.  Incompatible  : 
Calc. 

Gaiiflation. — Checked  foot-sweat. 

SYMPTOMS. 

X.  Mind. — Lachrymose  disposition. — Repugnance  to  strangers  or  to 
society ;  (the  sight  of  them  <  symptoms  or  causes  a  recurrence). — Mistrust ; 
want  of  self-confidence,  the  child  does  not  want  to  play. — ^Anxious  inquietude 


250  BARYTA  CARBON  ICA 

about  domestic  a£Eairs. — Scrupulous,  irresolute,  suspicious  temper,  with  mis- 
trust of  one's  self. — Fear  and  cowardice.— Aversion  to  play  (in  children). — 
Sudden  fits  of  passion  from  trifling  causes — Incessant  activity. — Great  weak- 
ness of  memory. — Inattention  to  studies  in  children. — Deficient  memory 
(children  cannot  remember  and  learn). 

a.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  with  nausea,  and  headache  on  stooping. — ^At  night 
everything  rocks  with  him  as  on  a  ship. — ^Aching  pains  in  the  head, 
principally  in  the  forehead,  over  the  eyes,  and  the  root  of  the  nose,  or  with 
tension  in  the  occiput,  towards  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Pricking,  lancinating 
pains  in  the  head,  esp.  provoked  by  the  heat  of  a  stove. — Pressure  in  brain  under 
vertex,  towards  occiput,  on  waking,  with  sti£Fness  of  neck. — Digging  in  the 
head,  with  a  sensation  of  looseness  of  the  brain. — Painful  sensibility  in  the 
scalp. — ^The  scalp  is  very  sensitive  to  the  touch,  esp.  on  the  side  on  which  he 
lies,  with  the  sensation  of  sugillation,  worse  from  scratching. — Numbness  in 
skin  of  forehead  to  root  of  nose. — Tendency  to  take  cold  through  the  head. — 
Itching  and  gnawing  in  the  scalp  ;  and  external  head,  particularly  behind  the 
ears;  lobe  of  the  ear,  or  lobes  of  the  ears;  upper  lip;  nape  of  neck. — 
Eruptions  and  humid  or  dry  scabs  on  the  head. — Baldness. — Losing  hair  from 
crown  of  head. 

3.  Eyea.— Aching  and  burning  pain  in  the  eyes,  esp.  on  fatiguing  the 
sight. — Inflammation  of  the  ball  of  the  eye  and  of  the  eyelids,  with  pain  as 
of  excoriation,  sensation  of  dryness  with  photophobia. — Swelling  of  the  eyes 
in  the  morning. — Exophthalmos. — Scrofulous  inflammation  with  phlyctenulae 
and  ulcers  on  cornea. — Stye  in  inner  corner  of  1.  eye. — ^Tarsal  tumours. — 
Agglutination  of  the  eyelids. — Confusion  of  sight,  which  prevents  one's 
reading. — Specks  flying  about,  and  black  spots  before  the  eyes.— Sparks 
before  the  eyes  in  the  dark. — ^Dazzling  of  the  eyes  by  the  light 

4.  Ears. — Itching  in  the  ears. — Nocturnal  pulsation  in  the  ears  when 
they  are  lain  upon. — Eruptions  on  the  ears  or  behind  the  ears. — Parotids 
swollen  and  painful. — Hardness  of  hearing. — Tinkling  and  roaring  in  the  ears. 
— Cracking  in  the  ears  on  swallowing,  on  sneezing,  and  on  walking  quickly. — 
Tearing  in  bone  in  front  of  r.  ear. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis,  esp.  after  having  blown  the  nose;  before  cata- 
menia. — Crusts  below  the  nose. — ^Very  acute  sense  of  smell. — Smells  pine 
smoke. — Fluent  ooryza  with  abundant  secretion  of  thick  mucus. — Painful 
dryness  of  the  nose. — Coryza ;  with  upper  lip  swollen,  <  mornings. 

6.  Face. — Face  deep  red,  with  purple  lips,  and  great  ebullition  of  the 
blood. — Sensation  <tf  swelling  and  tension  in  the  face,  as  if  it  were  covered 
with  cobwebs. — Pains  in  the  face  with  tensive  swelling. — Eruption  on  the 
face. — Lips  dry  and  cracked. — Swelling  of  upper  lip ;  with  burning  pain. — 
Acute  pain  in  the  joint  on  closing  the  jaws. — Swelling  of  the  submaxillary 
glands,  with  induration. 

7.  Teeth.— Toothache  only  in  the  evening,  in  bed. — Pullings,  throb- 
bing, and  shocks  in  the  teeth,  extending  even  to  the  ear  and  the  temple. — 
Toothache  <  when  thinking  about  it. — Burning  shootings  in  the  carious 
teeth,  excited  by  contact  with  anything  hot — ^Toothache  before  the  cata- 
menia,  with  pale  red  swelling  of  the  gums  and  of  the  cheek. — Bleeding  of  the 
gums. — Fistula  dentalis. 

8.  Mouth. — Buccal  cavity  feels  numb. — Dryness  of  the  mouth.— Accu- 


BARYTA  CARBONICA  251 

mulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth.— 0£Feiisive  smell  from  the  mouth. — Inflamed 
vesicles  in  the  mouth  and  on  or  under  the  tongue. — Cracks  in  the  tongue,  with 
burning  pain  as  of  excoriation. — Paralysis  of  tongue. — Cold  tongue,  somewhat ' 
black  {Acet.). — ^Tongue  coated  as  if  fuzzy. 

9.  Throat.— Sore  throat,  with  swelling  of  the  palate  and  of  the 
amygdalae,  which  suppurate. — Sensation,  as  if  one  had  a  plug  in  the  throat. — 
SufiFocation  and  contraction  in  the  throat. — Shootings,  and  pain  as  of  excoria* 
tion,  in  the  throat,  esp.  during  the  act  of  deglutition. — Spasm  of  oesophagus  ; 
can  only  swaUow  liquids. — Sensation  in  oesophagus  as  if  a  morsel  of  food  had 
lodged  there. 

ID.  Appetite.— Disagreeable,  or  bitter  taste,  generaUy  in  the  morning, 
with  tongue  much  loaded. — Sour  taste,  esp.  before,  but  not  after  a  meal. — 
Continual  thirst — ^Appetite  weak,  and  soon  satisfied,  although  the  food  pleases 
the  palate. — ^After  dinner,  pains  in  the  stomach,  uneasiness,  indolence,  and 
aversion  to  labour. — Weakness  of  digestion.— -Cough  from  warm  food. — 
>  From  cold  diet 

II.  Stomach.— linking  sensation  in  the  afternoon.— Risings  after  a 
meaL — Frequent  risings,  abortive  or  sour. — Discharge  of  phlegm  from  the 
stomach. — ^Vomiting  of  mucus. — Nausea,  chiefly  in  the  morning,  when 
fasting,  and  sometimes  as  if  in  consequence  of  indigestion. — Pains  in  the 
stomach,  when  fasting,  after  a  meal,  or  on  pressing  upon  tiie  epigastrium. — 
Sensibility  and  pain  in  the  epigastrium  at  every  step  taken. — Heaviness, 
fulness,  and  pressure  in  the  stomach  and  epigastrium,  even  after  having  eaten 
little. — ^Weakness  of  the  digestion  after  eating,  pressing  in  the  stomach  ;  and 
pain  in  the  hard,  swollen  abdomen. — Sensation  as  if  stomach  were  hanging 
relaxed. — Pain,  as  of  excoriation,  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  with  a  sensation 
when  eating  as  if  the  parts  through  which  the  food  passes  were  raw. 

19.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  the  abdomen,  relieved  by  eructation  or  by 
external  heat — Painful  tension  and  inflation  of  the  abdomen. — Colic,  with 
retraction  of  the  navel — Pinchings  and  cuttings  in  the  abdomen,  with 
inclination  to  evacuate,  as  if  diarrhoea  were  coming  on. — ^Accumulation  of 
flatulency  in  the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Evacuations  difficult  and  knotty,  or  hard  and 
insufficient — Frequent  inclination  to  evacuate,  with  a  sensation  of  anxious 
uneasiness  in  the  lumbar  region,  shiverings  passing  over  the  thighs,  and 
evacuations  soft  and  loose. — Sudden  irresistible  urging  to  stool,  with  painful 
soreness  in  the  lumbar  region,  followed  by  frequent  diarrhceic  stool  (AceL), — 
Urgent  desire  to  evacuate,  which  can  scarcely  be  repressed. — Expulsion  of 
ascarides. — Crawling  in  the  rectum  (ascarides). — ^Appearance  of  haemorrhoidal 
excrescences,  with  shooting  pain. — Itching,  sensation  of  burning,  excoriation 
and  oozing  at  the  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs* — Frequent  inclination  to  make  water,  with 
abundant  emission. — Urgent  inclination  to  make  water ;  it  can  hanlly  be 
retained. — During  urination,  burning  in  urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Diminution  of  sexual  desire,  and  weakness 
of  the  genital  functions. — Relaxed  penis,  premature  emissions. — Falling  asleep 
during  coition,  without  the  emission  having  taken  place. — Gleet — Hypertro- 
phied  prostate. — Excoriation  and  oozing  between  the  scrotum  and  the  thighs. 
— Erections  only  in  the  morning  before  rising. 


252  BARYTA  CARBONICA 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Diminution  of  sexual  desire  in  women. 
— Catamenia  too  feeble,  and  of  too  short  duration. — Leucorrhoea  a  little  before 
the  catamenia. — Before  and  during  menses  :  toothache ;  colic  ;  pain  in  back. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Catarrh,  with  cough,  voice  hollow  and 
low,  and  fluent  coryza. — Su£Focative  catarrh  and  paralysis  of  the  lungs  in 
old  people. — Sensation  of  smoke  in  the  larynx. — Spasmodic  cough  (like 
whooping-cough)  from  roughness  and  tickling  in  the  throat  and  pit  of  the 
stomach.— Cough  worse  in  the  evening  till  midnight ;  after  getting  the  feet 
cold  ;  from  exercise ;  when  lying  on  the  1.  side  ;  in  the  cold  air ;  from  thinking 
of  it. — Hoarseness  and  loss  of  voice,  from  an  accumulation  of  viscid  mucus 
in  the  throat  and  on  the  chest,  with  dry  cough,  chiefly  at  night,  in  the  evening, 
or  in  the  morning. 

i8.  Chest. — Difficulty  of  respiration  and  shortness  of  breath,  with  sensa- 
tion of  fulness  in  the  chest — Pains  in  the  chest,  mitigated  partly  by  eructations 
and  partly  by  external  heat. — Sensation  of  soreness  in  the  chest. — Sensation, 
as  if  something  hard  dropped  down  in  the  chest — Fulness  and  pressive 
heaviness  on  the  chest,  esp.  when  ascending,  with  shooting  in  the  act  of 
respiration. 

19.  Heart.— Very  violent  throbbings  of  the  heart. — ^Throbbing  of  the 
heart  excited  by  lying  on  the  1.  side,  or  renewed  by  thinking  of  it — Palpitation 
felt  in  head. — ^Atheroma  and  aneurism. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  at  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Shootings  in 
the  nape  of  the  neck.— Aching  pains  in  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Steatoma  in  the 
nape  of  the  neck,  with  burning  pain  in  the  bottom  of  it — Swelling  and 
induration  of  the  glands  of  the  neck. — Encysted  tumour  under  the  arm-pit. — 
Sacral  pains,  more  violent  when  seated  than  when  in  motion.— Tensive  stiffness 
in  the  loins,  aggravated  in  the  evening  to  such  an  extent  that  one  cannot  get 
up  from  one's  chair,  nor  stand  up  straight — ^Tension  in  the  shoulder-blades, 
the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  esp.  in  a  sharp  and  cold 
air.— Burning  pain  and  throbbing  sensation  in  the  back,  esp.  after  mental 
emotion. — Beating  and  pulsation  in  the  back. — Stiffness  in  the  small  of  the 
back  in  the  evening  esp.  while  sitting  which  allows  neither  to  rise  nor  to 
bend  backwards. 

a2.  Upper  Limbs.— Swellings  of  the  arms,  with  pain  of  the  axillary 
glands. — Pain  in  the  deltoid  muscle  on  raising  the  arm. — ^The  arm  becomes 
numbed  when  one  lies  down. — Hands  cold,  with  bluish  spots. — Swollen  veins 
and  redness  of  the  hands. — Hands  dry,  like  parchment. — ^Trembling  of  the 
hand  when  writing. — ^Violent  tingling  and  gnawing  in  the  palm  of  the  hand, 
with  desire  to  scratch. — Peeling  off  of  the  skin  of  the  back  of  the  hand,  and 
of  the  tops  of  the  fingers. — The  fingers  are  numbed. — Panaris. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Pain,  as  of  dislocation  or  of  stiffness  of  the  coxo- 
femoral  joint — ^Tension  in  the  legs,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short— Drawing 
pain  in  r.  nates  as  if  the  flesh  were  being  torn  off. — ^Violent  stitches ;  burning 
in  nates. — Drawing  pain  down  whole  1.  leg  (AuL). — Burning  pains :  in  nates ; 
in  bend  of  thigh  ;  in  knee-pan  ;  in  soles. — ^Tractive  and  acute  pains  in  legs,  as 
if  in  the  bones. — Itching  in  the  thighs,  even  at  night. — Shootings  in  the  joints 
of  the  knee. — ^Tension  in  the  tibia  and  in  the  calves  and  the  legs. — Cramps  in 
the  calves  of  the  legs  and  in  the  toes  on  stretching  out  the  limbs. — Inquietude 
and  trembling  in  the  legs  and  feet — Pain  in  the  joint  of  the  foot,  as  from  a 


BARYTA   lODATA  253 

sprain. — Fetid  sweat  of  the  feet — Ulcers  in  the  feet. — Lymphatic  and  painful 
swelling  in  the  fleshy  part  of  the  great  toe. — Pain  like  that  of  a  com  in  the 
callous  part  of  the  sole  of  the  foot,  esp.  when  walking. — Corns,  with  burning 
shootings  and  pinchings. 

24.  Generalities. — Pains  in  the  joints  and  in  the  hollow  bones. — Cramp- 
like pressure  or  pulling,  with  paralytic  weakness,  or  tension,  as  if  from 
contraction  of  the  tendons,  in  different  parts. — Paralysis  and  palsy  of  aged 
persons. — ^Acute  drawing  pains  in  the  limbs,  with  shuddering. — ^At  night, 
starting  of  the  muscles. — Shakings  and  startings  of  some  of  the  limbs,  and  of 
the  whole  body  during  the  day. — ^Tearing  in  the  limbs  with  chilliness. — ^The 
symptoms  exhibit  themselves  particularly  on  the  1.  side,  and  when  sitting ; 
they  disappear  on  movement,  or  in  the  open  air. — Swelling  and  induration  of 
the  glands. — Heaviness  in  the  whole  body. — Great  uneasiness  and  over- 
excitability  of  all  the  senses. — Great  weakness,  which  does  not  permit  a  long- 
continued  standing  posture. — Great  weakness  of  mind  and  body  of  old  men. — 
Necessity  to  lie  down,  or  to  be  seated. — Intellectual,  nervous,  and  physical 
weakness. — Emaciation,  or  bloating  of  the  body  and  of  the  face,  with  inflation 
of  the  abdomen. — Great  tendency  to  catch  cold,  which  commonly  occasions 
inflammation  in  the  throat. 

25.  Skin. — Sensation  in  different  parts,  like  the  pricks  of  burning  needles, 
itching  and  crawling  sensations. — Intolerable  itching  and  tingling  over  the 
whole  body  at  night. — Excoriation  and  oozing  in  several  parts  of  the  skin. — 
Injuries  in  the  skin  healing  with  difficulty. — Swelling  and  induration  of  the 
glands. — Warts. — ^Whitlows. 

86.  Sleep. — Somnolency  in  the  daytime. — Eh-owsiness  night  and  day. — 
Nocturnal  sleep,  agitated,  with  frequent  waking  and  anxious  dreams. — At 
night,  ebullition  of  the  blood  ;  strong  pulsations  of  the  heart,  and  sensation  in 
the  heart  as  if  it  were  excoriated,  with  great  anxiety,  and  inability  to  lie  on 
the  1.  side. — Sleep  with  many  unquiet  dreams. 

27.  Fever, — Pulse  accelerated  but  weak. — Strong  disposition  to  chilliness. 
— Shuddering,  with  corrugated  skin,  and  uprising  of  the  hair,  or  with  tension  of 
the  face. — Shuddering,  which  runs  over  the  whole  body,  beginning  at  the  face, 
or  at  the  epigastrium,  followed  by  a  transient  heat  over  the  whole  body. — 
Chilliness  relieved  by  external  heat. — Flushes  of  heat,  more  at  night,  with 
great  restlessness. — Perspiration,  one-sided  (1.)  every  other  evening. 


Baryta  lodata. 


Baric  iodide.    Ba  !«.    Trituration. 

nHiit«Al^ — Breast,  cancer  of.    Cancer.   Glands,  enlargement  of.    Tumours. 

Ohapaoteristios.  —  Batyt.  tod.  has  been  used  empirically, 
especially  in  cases  of  glandular  enlargement  and  new  growths,  on 
indications  suggested  by  its  two  elements. 


252  BARYTA  CARBONICA 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Diminution  of  sexual  desire  in  women* 
— Catamenia  too  feeble,  and  of  too  short  duration. — Leucorrhoea  a  Uttle  before 
the  catamenia. — Before  and  during  menses  :  toothache ;  colic ;  pain  in  back. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Catarrh,  with  cough,  voice  hollow  and 
low,  and  fluent  coryza. — Suffocative  catarrh  and  paralysis  of  the  lungs  in 
old  people. — Sensation  of  smoke  in  the  larynx. — Spasmodic  cough  (like 
whooping-cough)  from  roughness  and  tickling  in  the  throat  and  pit  of  the 
stomach.— Cough  worse  in  the  evening  till  midnight ;  after  getting  the  feet 
cold ;  from  exercise ;  when  lying  on  the  1.  side ;  in  the  cold  air ;  from  thinking 
of  it. — Hoarseness  and  loss  of  voice,  from  an  accumulation  of  viscid  mucus 
in  the  throat  and  on  the  chest,  with  dry  cough,  chiefly  at  night,  in  the  evening, 
or  in  the  morning. 

18.  Chest. — Difficulty  of  respiration  and  shortness  of  breath,  with  sensa- 
tion of  fulness  in  the  chest— Pains  in  the  chest,  mitigated  partiy  by  eructations 
and  partiy  by  external  heat. — Sensation  of  soreness  in  the  chest — Sensation, 
as  if  something  hard  dropped  down  in  the  chest — Fulness  and  pressive 
heaviness  on  the  chest,  esp.  when  ascending,  with  shooting  in  the  act  of 
respiration. 

19.  Heart.— Very  violent  throbbings  of  the  heart— Throbbing  of  the 
heart  excited  by  lying  on  the  1.  side,  or  renewed  by  thinking  of  it — Palpitation 
felt  in  head. — ^Atheroma  and  aneurism. 

20.  Neck  and  Back.— Stiffness  at  the  nape  of  the  neck.— Shootings  in 
the  nape  of  the  neck. — ^Aching  pains  in  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Steatoma  in  the 
nape  of  the  neck,  with  burning  pain  in  the  bottom  of  it — Swelling  and 
induration  of  the  glands  of  the  neck. — Encysted  tumour  under  the  arm-pit. — 
Sacral  pains,  more  violent  when  seated  than  when  in  motion.— Tensive  stiffness 
in  the  loins,  aggravated  in  the  evening  to  such  an  extent  that  one  cannot  get 
up  from  one's  chair,  nor  stand  up  straight— Tension  in  the  shoulder-blades, 
the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  esp.  in  a  sharp  and  cold 
air. — Burning  pain  and  throbbing  sensation  in  the  back,  esp.  after  mental 
emotion. — Beating  and  pulsation  in  the  back. — Stiffness  in  the  small  of  the 
back  in  the  evening  esp.  while  sitting  which  allows  neither  to  rise  nor  to 
bend  backwards. 

aa.  Upper  Limbs.— Swellings  of  the  arms,  with  pain  of  the  axillary 
glands. — Pain  in  the  deltoid  muscle  on  raising  the  arm. — ^The  arm  becomes 
numbed  when  one  lies  down. — Hands  cold,  with  bluish  spots. — Swollen  veins 
and  redness  of  the  hands. — Hands  dry,  like  parchment — ^Trembling  of  the 
hand  when  writing.— Violent  tingling  and  gnawing  in  the  palm  of  the  hand, 
with  desire  to  scratch. — Peeling  off  of  the  skin  of  the  back  of  the  hand,  and 
of  the  tops  of  the  fingers. — The  fingers  are  numbed. — Panaris. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Pain,  as  of  dislocation  or  of  stiffness  of  the  coxo- 
f  emoral  joint — ^Tension  in  the  legs,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short — Drawing 
pain  in  r.  nates  as  if  the  flesh  were  being  torn  off. — ^Violent  stitches ;  burning 
in  nates. — Drawing  pain  down  whole  1.  leg  (AceL). — Burning  pains :  in  nates ; 
in  bend  of  thigh  ;  in  knee-pan  ;  in  soles. — ^Tractive  and  acute  pains  in  legs,  as 
if  in  the  bones. — Itching  in  the  thighs,  even  at  night — Shootings  in  the  joints 
of  the  knee. — ^Tension  in  the  tibia  and  in  the  calves  and  the  legs. — Cramps  in 
the  calves  of  the  legs  and  in  the  toes  on  stretching  out  the  limbs. — Inquietude 
and  trembling  in  the  legs  and  feet — Pain  in  the  joint  of  the  foot,  as  from  a 


BARYTA  MURIATICA  255 

6*  Face. — ^Tractive  pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  face. — Painful  nodosity 
at  the  point  of  the  nose,  with  slight  pricking. 

'^    7*    Teeth. — Shooting,  throbbing  pains  in  the  teeth,  esp.  on  waking,  after 
midnight. — Looseness  of  the  teeth. 

8.  Mouth — Swellmg  of  the  salivary  glands  and  of  the  palate.-— Tongue 
loaded.— Tongue  and  mouth  dry. — Fetor  of  the  mouth,  as  if  from  mercury. — 
Putrid  taste  in  the  mouth,  also  of  food. 

9*  Throat. — Uvula  elongated.— Varicose  veins  of  throat — Suppuration 
of  tonsils  after  every  cold. — Swallowing  difficult. 

11.  Stomach. — Loss  of  appetite. — ^Thirst-^Inclination  to  vomit. — Retch- 
ing.— ^Vomiting  in  the  morning,  with  anxiety. — ^Vomiting  of  a  small  quantity 
of  water,  with  nausea. — Sickness. — Pressure  on  the  stomach,  with  spasm. — 
Sensation  of  heat,  ascending  from  the  stomach  to  the  chest  and  head. — Burn- 
ing pain  in  the  stomach,  with  vomiting. — ^The  membranes  of  the  stomach  are 
of  a  blue  red,  with  red  spots  on  the  muscular  part. — ^The  pit  of  the  stomach 
is  inflamed,  with  isolated  ecchymoses. — Uneasiness,  as  if  from  worms. 

12.  Abdomen. — Burning  pains  in  the  abdomen. — ^Tumefaction  of  the 
liver. — ^Throbbing  of  tumour  in  abdomen. — Inguinal  glands  swollen  ;  painful ; 
ulcerating. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Faeces  slimy. — Easy  evacuation. — Chronic,  pain- 
less diarrhcea,  or  diarrhoea  with  violent  colic. — Stools  jelly-like,  with  blood, 
no  pain ;  discharges  every  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes.— -Stools  white,  hard  as 
stones. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  frequent,  involuntary,  and  painful. — Urine 
yellowish,  very  offensive. — Flow  of  urine. — ^Whitish  sediment  in  the  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Frequent  emission  of  semen. — Swelling  of 
the  testes. — Buboes  after  suppressed  gonorrhoea. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Catamenia  too  early.— Pains,  as  from  a 
bruise,  in  the  cavity  of  the  pelvis. — Sterility. — Leucorrhcea. — Induration, 
tumour  or  atrophy  of  ovaries. — Nymphomania. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Weak  voice.— Dry  cough.— Chronic  cough 
of  scrofulous  children. 

18.  Chest. — Catarrh,  with  heat. — Heat  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest. — 
Oppression. 

19.  Heart.^ — ^Throbbing  of  the  heart  accelerated. — Palpitation  of  the 
heart— Heart-beats  irregular,  pulse  scarcely  perceptible. 

so.  Neck  and  Back — Enlargement  and  induration  of  cervical  glands. 
— Pains  in  the  back. 

31.  Limbs.— ^Trembling  of  limbs. — Convulsive  jerkings  of  hands  and 
feet. — Paralysis  of  upper  and  lower  limbs. — Swelling  of  hands  and  feet 

32.  Upper  Limbs. — Painless  twitching  in  arm  esp.  at  night. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Drawing  pains  in  thighs. — Haemorrhagic  extravasa- 
tions in  knee-joint. — Feet  swollen. — Effects  of  checked  foot-sweat 

34.  Generalities. — Great  weakness,  which  necessitates  lying  down. — 
Weakness  and  prostration,  amounting  almost  to  paralysis. — Syncope. — Stiff- 
ness and  insensibility  of  the  body,  with  periodical  convulsions.— General 
heaviness. — ^Trembling  of  the  limbs. — Convulsive  trembling. — Twitching  in 
the  face  or  in  some  of  the  limbs,  or  in  the  whole  body. — Periodical  convulsive 
fitSy  with  starting  and  excessive  tossing  about 


256  BELLADONNA 

25.  Skin. — Pricking  in  the  skin. — Burning  and  pricking  in  excoriated 
places. — Small  itchy  eruptions  on  the  head,  nape  of  the  neck,  abdomen,  and 
thighs. — Glands  inflamed  and  ulcerated. — Haemorrhage. 

27.  Fever. — General  dry  heat,  night  and  day. — Redness  and  heat  of  the 
face.— Pulse  frequent  and  full.— Tertian  fever.— Increased  perspiration.— Cold 
sweat. 


Belladonna. 

Atropa  Belladonna.  Deadly  Nightshade.  (Greece,  Italy,  Britain.) 
N.  O.  Solanaceae.  Tincture  of  whole  plant  when  beginning  to 
flower. 

Wsdeal*— Abscess.  Acne.  Amaurosis,  Apoplexy.  Bladder  weakness.  Bails. 
Btain^  affections  of.  Bronchial  glands,  disease  of.  Carbuncle.  Colic.  Constipation. 
Convulsions.  Cough.  Croup.  Delirium  tremens.  Depression.  Diarrhoea.  Dysentery. 
Ear,  affections  y.  Enteric  fever.  Epile^.  Erysipelas.  Erythema.  Excitement. 
Eye,  affections  of.  Fear,  effects  of.  Glandular  swdltngs.  Goitre.  Gout  Haemor- 
rhoids. Headache.  Heart,  affutions  of.  Hydrocephalus.  Hydrophobia.  Hyperannia. 
Influenza,  Kidney,  affections  of.  Lung,  affections  of.  Malignant  pustule.  Mania. 
Measles.  Meningitis.  Menstruation.  Mouth  affutions.  Mumfs.  Neuralgia.  Nose, 
affections  of.  Nyctalopia.  Nymphomania.  Paralysis.  Parametritis.  Perichondritis. 
Perimetrics,  Peritonitis.  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.  Pleurisy.  Pneumogastric 
paralysis.  Pneumonia.  Pregnancy,  disorders  of.  Puerperal  mania.  RheumatisoL 
Roseola.    Scarlatina.    Sensitiveness.    Sleep,  disorders  of.    Smell,  disordered,    Stran- 

fury.    Taste,  disordered.    Tenesmus.    Testicles,  affections  of.    Thirst.    Throat,  sore, 
ongue,  affections  of.    Tuberculosis.    Ulcers.    Uterine  affections.    Vaccinia.     Vertigo. 
Whooping-cough.    Worm  fever. 

CharaoterUtios. — Belladonna  acts  primarily  on  the  brain,  and 
Teste  very  acutely  explains  the  diversity  of  its  action  on  men  and 
animals  by  suggesting  that  it  acts  with  an  intensity  proportionate  to 
the  brain  development.  On  goats  and  rabbits  it  has  no  poisonous 
action  whatever.  On  carnivorous  animals  it  acts  with  moderate  ipten- 
sity.  On  man  it  acts  with  highest  intensity.  But  on  idiots,  as 
Huf eland  mentions,  it  has  no  more  action  than  it  has  on  some  of  the 
carnivora.  An  enormous  number  of  the  symptoms  of  BcU,  are 
developed  in  and  from  the  head  and  sensorium.  Conformably  with 
this,  the  pains  of  Bell,  run  downwards,  i.^.,  away  from  the  head. 
{Silic.  and  Gels,  have  a  pain  running  up  the  back).  To  understand 
aright  the  action  and  uses  of  this  great  medicine  it  is  necessary  to  bear 
in  mind  some  leading  features  which  characterise  its  action  in  all 
parts  of  the  organism.  But  before  alluding  to  these  I  will  briefly 
refer  to  its  correspondence  to  scarlatina.  Cases  of  Belladonna  poison- 
ing have  frequently  been  mistaken  for  cases  of  scarlatina.  But  it  is 
the  smooth  form  only,  these  presenting  a  smooth,  even,  red  surface  that 
come  under  its  controlling  action  and  prophylaxis.  When  such  an 
epidemic  is  about,  any  one  who  may  be  exposed  to  infection  may 
obtain  almost  certain  immunity  by  taking  Belladonna  two  or  three 
times  a  day. 

The  several  points  to  be  remembered  about  Belladonna  are  that  it 


BELLADONNA  257 

is  a  medicine  which  has  great  general  sensitiveness  and  also  sensitive- 
ness of  the  special  senses — sensitive  to  light ;  to  slightest  noise  ;  to 
motion  or  jar  as  when  some  one  touches  the  bed.  This  is  one  feature 
which  renders  Bell,  so  appropriate  in  hydrophobia.  It  is  a  chilly 
medicine  ;  sensitive  to  changes  from  warm  to  cold,  to  draught  of  air, 
to  damp  weather,  to  chilling  from  having  the  head  uncovered,  or 
having  the  hair  cut ;  better  from  being  wrapped  up  warmly  in  a  room. 
Under  this  drug  there  is  a  remarkable  quickness  of  sensation,  or  of 
motion  ;  the  eyes  snap  and  move  quickly.  The  pains  come  and  go 
suddenly  no  matter  how  long  they  may  last.  They  are  in  great  variety, 
but  throbbing,  burning,  and  stabbing  axG  very  characteristic :  "  stabbing 
from  one  temple  to  the  other." 

The  great  intensity  and  variety  of  the  head  pains  has  caused  Bell. 
to  be  regarded  as  the  headache  medicine  par  excellence.  Congestion 
of  blood  to  the  head.  Vertigo,  mosUy  at  night  on  turning  over  in  bed, 
or  when  getting  up  in  the  morning,  also  when  walking  and  on  every 
change  of  position.  Headache  with  flushed  face  and  brilliant  eyes, 
dilated  pupils.  Feeling  in  brain  like  swashing  of  water.  Throbbing, 
pulsating  headache,  with  beating  arteries  and  violent  palpitation  of  the 
heart.  It  has  cured  a  very  severe  headache  in  a  nervous  man  occur- 
ring whenever  he  was  exposed  to  tobacco  smoke.  In  the  mental 
sphere  are  mania  ;  rage  ;  disposition  to  bite,  scratch  and  tear  things. 
Fantastic  illusions  when  closing  eyes.  Dull  and  sleepy  ;  half  asleep 
and  half  awake.  Spasms  and  twitchings  are  very  marked.  Many 
disorders  of  vision.  Heat,  redness  and  burning  are  three  great 
characteristic  notes  of  Bell.^  and  are  constantly  cropping  out  in  the 
pathogenesis.  The  face  is  purple,  red,  and  hot,  or  yellow.  Redness 
and  pallor  alternate.  The  mouth  is  exceedingly  dry  without  thirst 
Stinging  in  oesophagus,  <  swallowing  or  talking.  Esophagus  feels 
contracted.  Sensation  of  a  hand  clutching  intestines.  Stool  in  lumps 
like  chalk.  Spasmodic  contraction  of  anus  ;  obstinate  constipation. 
Bleeding  piles  ;  back  pains  as  if  breaking.  The  menstrual  now  is 
hot ;  of  light  colour  ;  or  bad  smell.  Cough  short,  dry,  tickling,  similar 
to  cough  of  Rutnex  and  Phos.  Whooping-cough  ;  with  crying  or  pains 
before  the  attack  ;  flushed  face  ;  nose-bleed  and  bloody  expectoration ; 
sparks  before  eyes  ;  stitches  in  spleen  ;  involuntary  stool  and  urine. 
Paralysis  of  lungs  and  heart  (vagus  nerve).  Violent  palpitation  of 
heart.  Stitches  in  chest  Swelling  of  breast  with  bright  red  streaks 
radiating  from  centre  of  inflammation.  Rheumatism  <  by  motion. 
Sweat  on  covered  parts  only. 

A  striking  picture  of  Bellad.  is  sometimes  seen  in  cases  of  worm- 
fever.  A  case  (aet.  3,  pale,  feeble  child)  reported  by  Lutze  had  the 
following  symptoms  :  Awakened,  or  at  least  sits  up  at  night  in  bed 
screaming,  cannot  be  pacified  ;  wets  bed  at  night ;  passes  worms  now 
and  then ;  cheeks  and  ear-tips  brilliant  scarlet,  other  parts  of  face, 
especially  round  mouth,  white  as  snow  ;  eyes  brilliant,  staring ;  pupils 
dilated.  Skin  dry  and  hot  like  fire.  On  being  spoken  to  coaxingly 
flew  into  a  violent  rage.  Cina  200  had  ameliorated.  Bell.  cm.  and  m. 
cured  permanently. 

Bell,  is  a  great  children's  remedy,  not  less  important  than  Cham. 
Complaints  come  suddenly ;  hot,  red  face,  semi-stupor,  every  littie 
VOL.  I.  18 


258  BELLADONNA 

while  starting  or  jumping  in  sleep  as  if  it  might  go  into  convulsions. 
A  very  general  characteristic  of  Bell,  is  <  on  lying  down.  It 
refers  to  headache  and  all  kinds  of  inflammatory  affections.  Some 
characteristic  symptoms  are  :  **  Tenderness  of  abdomen,  <  by  least 
jar.*'  "  Pressing  downward  as  if  contents  of  abdomen  would  issue 
through  vulva,  <  mornings  ;  often  associated  with  pain  in  back  as  if  it 
would  break."  Starting,  twitching,  or  jumping  in  sleep.  Moaning  in 
sleep.  "  Sleepy,  but  cannot  sleep."  The  characteristic  skin  of  BelL 
is  :  "  Uniform,  smooth,  shining,  scarlet  redness,  so  hot  that  it  imparts 
a  burning  sensation  to  the  hand  of  one  who  feels  it."  "Sweat  on 
covered  parts  only  "  is  also  a  marked  symptom  of  Bell. 

A  number  of  cases  of  poisoning  have  been  reported  from  applica- 
tion of  Belladonna  plasters  to  the  skin,  classical  symptoms  of  the  drug 
being  produced  and  no  little  danger  to  life.  One  practitioner  was 
warned  by  his  patient  that  she  could  not  tolerate  a  Belladonna  pVaLster^ 
but  he,  thinking  there  must  have  been  a  mistake,  and  that  cantharides 
must  have  been  in  the  plaster  she  had  formerly  used,  had  one  made 
up  under  his  own  eyes  and  applied  it  himself.  In  less  than  one  hour 
there  was  an  unbearable  pain  and  when  the  plaster  was  removed  the 
surface  was  found  to  be  blistered. 

A  case  of  poisoning  reported  in  the  Medical  Press  (September  9, 
1 891)  brings  out  the  profound  and  long-lasting  effects  of  the  drug. 
Three  children,  aged  7, 5,  and  3J,  ate  a  number  of  the  berries.  Three 
days  after,  a  doctor  saw  them.  The  condition  of  the  eldest  was  as 
follows  :  pupils  dilated  to  maximum  and  insensitive  to  light ;  pulse 
frequent ;  breathing  feeble  and  hurried  ;  skin  dry,  bright  red  ;  tem- 
perature lowered ;  extremities  and  face  cold ;  urination  and  defeca- 
tion suspended.  Co-ordination  was  lost;  the  patient  staggered  as  if 
drunk  and  acted  like  a  mad  person.  When  asked  his  name  he  would 
shout  as  loud  as  he  could, /a//m^  backwards  with  his  hands  in  the  air, 
his  legs  slightly  bent  as  if  about  to  sit  down  on  a  low  stool,  and  then 
tumble  on  the  floor.  When  raised  from  the  ground  and  seeing  his 
friends  again  he  began  to  talk  without  ceasing,  laughing,  and  singing 
local  melodies  in  a  boisterous  manner.  Suddenly  his  whole  demeanour 
would  change  into  a  melancholic  depression  of  agony  ;  he  would  look 
blank  and  wild  on  all  around.  He  would  instantly  jump  up,  run  at 
the  wall,  and  endeavour  to  spring  on  the  highest  articles  in  the  room 
with  the  strength  of  a  wild  animal,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  that  his 
movements  could  be  controlled. 

The  youngest  of  the  three  lay  depressed,  in  a  soporific  condition, 
eyes  closed,  skin  cold,  limbs  powerless.  Pupillary  reaction,  tendon 
and  muscular  reflex  were  almost  gone,  whilst  the  sense  of  heat  and 
cold  still  remained.  On  shouting  loud  in  his  ear,  he  slowly  tried  to 
open  his  eyes  in  wonder ;  when  shaken  and  put  on  his  feet  he  mad^ 
two  or  three  steps  backward  as  his  elder  brother  and  fell  senseless  on  the 
floor.  The  second  eldest  lay  in  a  deep  sleep,  face  cyanotic  ;  skin  of 
extremities  and  part  of  body  dry  and  cold  ;  breathing  feeble,  pulse 
scarcely  perceptible.  Loudest  crying,  or  shaking  could  not  rouse  him  ; 
feeUng  and  reaction  lost.  Washmg  out  the  stomach  was  effected  in 
the  eldest,  but  no  evidence  of  the  berries  was  obtained  in  that  way. 
A  long  injection  tube  was  inserted  into  the  rectum  and  irrigation  with 


BELLADONNA  259 

hot  and  cold  water  alternately  was  carried  out,  with  the  object  of 
exciting  peristalsis.  This  was  successful.  Besides  a  great  quantity  of 
Uack-brown  masticated  fruit  with  skins  and  seeds,  broken  berries  were 
found  to  the  number  of  28  in  the  case  of  the  eldest,  39  in  the  second, 
and  37  in  the  youngest.  Pilocarpin  and  morphia  were  injected  in 
the  case  of  the  eldest,  and  camphor  subcutaneously  in  the  other  two. 
The  skin  was  rubbed,  warm  apphcations  administered  and  rectal  injec- 
tions of  milk,  egg  and  brandy. 

Nothing  was  heard  of  the  children  till  '^  June  of  the  present  year '' 
(1891),  [the  date  of  the  poisoning  is  not  stated,  but  it  was  probably 
the  previous  autumn]  when  the  children  were  brought  to  the  doctor 
by  tibeir  father.  They  all  looked  pale  and  feeble ;  the  pupils  con- 
tracted slowly,  and  all  were  sensitive  to  light.  The  eldest  was  irritable 
and  desponding.  In  the  other  two  hearing  and  speech  were  almost 
gone.  The  almost  absolute  deafness  in  these  cases  is  noteworthy  in 
connection  with  Dr.  Cooper's  cure  of  a  very  chronic  case  of  deafness 
with  single  drop  doses  of  Bell  ^. 

BelL  is  predominantly  (but  by  no  means  exclusively)  a  right-side 
medicine  :   all  affections  of  internal  head,  right  side ;   right  eye ; 
right  ear  ;  right  face  ;  right  teeth  ;  right  hypochondrium  ;  right  chest ; 
right  upper  extremity  ;  right  lower  extremity  ;  mouth  and  fauces  Uft 
side.    It  is  suited  to  plethoric  persons  with  red  face  ;   and  to  condi- 
tions where  there  is  local  plethora,  that  is,  inflammatory  states  with 
pain,  throbbing,  shiny  redness  as  in  acute  gout.    Symptoms  are  < 
afternoon  ;   3  p.m. ;    11  p.m. ;  after  midnight ;   during  the  night  and 
not  at  all  in  the  day ;  morning.     By  touch  ;   draught  of  air ;  cold 
applications ;  having  hair  cut ;   looking  at  shiny  things ;  drinking  ; 
sleeping  ;  lying  down  ;  lying  on  affected  side.     >  Bending  affected 
part  backwards  or  inwards ;  leaning  head  against  something ;  standing ; 
by  warmth.    EM.  is  suited  to  the  bilious,  lymphatic  temperament. 
Light  hair  and  complexion,  blue  eyes.     It  grows  in  dry  limestone 
soils  and  is  the  acute  correlative  of  Calc.  c, 

BalatioiUk — Bell,  must  be  compared  with  the  other  Solanaceas  : 
Caps.,  Dulc,  Lycopers.,  Hyos.,  Stramonium  and  the  alkaloids  Atropia 
and  Solania.  Antidotes :  To  effects  of  large  doses.  Vegetable  acids, 
infusion  of  galls,  or  green  tea,  Coffea.,  Hyoscy ;  to  effects  of  small  doses, 
Camph.,  Coff.,  Hep.,  Hyo.,  Op.,  Puis.,  Sabad.  (saUvation),  Vinum. 
HanUdotes:  Aco.,  Arum  t,  Atrop.,  Chi.,  Cup.,  Fer.,  Hyo.,  Jaborandi, 
Merc,  Op.,  Plat,  Plumb.,  sausage  poisoning  ;  oil  of  turpentine.  // 
follows  well :  Ars.,  Cham.,  Hep.,  Lach.,  Merc,  Phos.,  Nit.  ac,  Cup. 
Is  followed  well  by :  Chi.,  Cham.,  Con.,  Dulc.,  Hep.,  Hyo.,  Lach.,  Rhus, 
Soieg.,  Stram.,  Valer.,  Verat  Similar  to:  Aeon.,  Alcohol  (merry 
craziness) ;  Ars.  (pains  of  cancer) ;  Bry.  (rheumatism  <  by  motion. 
In  pleurisy  and  pneumonia  it  is  distinguished  from  Bry.  in  that  it  has 
<  lying  on  affected  side  whilst  Bry.  has  the  opposite) ;  Calc.  c, 
Qiam.,  Cicut.,  Coff.,  Cup.,  Bupat.  purp.  (diuresis  and  vesical  irritation, 
but  Eupat.  has  more  hyperaemia  and  vesical  inflammation)  ;  Gels., 
Hep.,  Hvo.,  Lach.,  Lil.  tig.  (Lil.  has  >  by  motion  ;  Bell.  <  by 
motion),  Merc.,  Nux  v.,  Op.,  Puis.,  Rhus,  Stram.  (rage),  Tereb.,  Verat. ; 
AriL  (whooping  cough).  Complementary :  Calc.  c.  Incompatible : 
Vinegar. 


26o  BELLADONNA 

Causatioii. — Hair-cutting.  Head,  getting  wet.  Sausages.  Sun. 
Windy  walking  in. 

8TMPTOH8. 

1.  Mind. — Melancholy,  with  grief,  hypochondriacal  humour,  moral 
dejection,  and  discouragement. — Great  agitation,  with  continual  tossing  about, 
inquietude,  and  anguish,  chiefly  at  night,  and  in  the  afternoon,  sometimes 
with  headache  and  redness  of  face. — Desire  to  die,  and  inclination  for  suicide. 
— Lamentations,  groans,  cries,  and  tears. — Perversity,  with  tears  (in  children). 
— ^Timidity,  disposition  fearful,  mistrustful,  and  suspicious ;  apprehension  and 
inclination  to  run  away. — Fear  of  approaching  death. — Mentsil  ejcdtation,  with 
too  great  sensibility  to  every  impression,  immoderate  gaiety,  and  disposition 
to  be  easily  frightened. — Nervous  anxiety,  restlessness,  desire  to  escape. — 
Dotage,  delirium,  and  mania,  with  groaning,  disposition  to  dance,  to  laugh,  to 
sing,  and  to  whistle ;  mania,  with  groans,  or  with  involuntary  laughter ; 
nocturnal  delirium ;  delirium  with  murmuring ;  delirium,  during  which  are 
seen  wolves,  dogs,  fires,  &c. ;  delirium  by  fits,  and  sometimes  with  fixedness 
of  look. — Stupefaction,  with  congestion  to  the  head;  pupils  enlarged. — 
Delirium. — Great  apathy  and  indifference,  desire  for  solitude,  dread  of  society 
and  of  all  noise. — Repugnance  to  conversation. — Disinclination  to  talk,  or  very 
fast  talking. — Ill-humour,  disposition  irritable  and  sensitive,  with  an  inclination 
to  be  angry  and  to  give  offence. — Folly,  with  ridiculous  jesting,  gesticulations, 
acts  of  insanity,  impudent  manners. — Fury  and  rage,  with  desire  to  strike,  to 
spit,  to  bite,  and  to  tear  everything,  and  sometimes  with  growling  and  barking 
like  a  dog. — Dejection  and  weakness  of  mind  and  body. — Dread  of  all  exertion 
and  motion. — Lx)ss  of  consciousness. — Fantastic  illusions  (when  closing  the 
eyes). — Dementia,  to  such  an  extent  as  no  longer  to  know  one's  friends, 
illusions  of  the  senses  and  frightful  visions. — Complete  loss  of  reason,  stupidity, 
inadvertence,  and  distraction,  inaptitude  for  thought,  and  great  weakness  of 
memory. — Memory:  quick;  weak;  lost. 

2.  Head. — Confusion  of  the  head,  cloudiness,  and  apparent  intoxication, 
chiefly  after  eating  or  drinking,  or  else  in  the  morning. — ^Apoplexy. — Fits  of 
vertigo,  with  tottering,  swimming  in  the  head,  dulness,  giddiness,  nausea, 
trembling  of  the  hands,  anxiety;  sparks  before  the  eyes,  chiefly  in  the 
morning  on  getting  up,  on  standing  upright,  or  on  stooping. — ^Vertigo  with 
anguish,  and  falling  with  loss  of  consciousness,  or  with  weariness  and  fatigue 
before  and  after  the  attack. — ^Vertigo,  with  stupefaction,  vanishing  of  sight  and 
great  debility. — ^Vertigo,  with  anguish  and  falling  insensibly  on  the  1.  side,  or 
backwards,  with  flickering  before  the  eyes,  esp.  when  stooping,  and  when 
rising  from  a  stooping  posture. — Stupor  and  loss  of  consciousness,  so  as  to 
know  one's  friends  only  at  most  by  the  hearing,  sometimes  with  pupils  dilated 
and  mouth  and  eyes  half  open. — Fulness,  heaviness,  and  violent  pressure  on 
the  head,  chiefly  on  the  forehead,  above  the  eyes,  and  nose,  or  on  one  side  of 
the  head,  and  sometimes  with  giddiness,  stupor,  and  sensation  as  if  the  cranium 
were  going  to  burst,  or  with  ill-humour  and  groans,  drawing  up  of  the  eyelids 
and  desire  to  lie  down. — Sensation  of  inflation  and  pressive  expansion  in  the 
brain. — Sharp,  tractive,  and  shooting  pains  in  the  head. — Dartings  into  the 
head,  as  if  from  knives. — ^Violent  throbbings  in  the  head. — Strong  pulsation  of 
the  arteries  of  the  head. — Ebullition  and  congestion  of  blood  in  the  head. 


BELLADONNA  261 

chiefly  on  stooping.— Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  external  and 
internal  heat ;  distended  and  pulsating  arteries,  stupefaction  in  the  forehead. 
burning,  red  face ;  <  in  the  evening,  when  leaning  the  head  forward,  from 
the  slightest  noise,  and  from  motion. — Stupefying,  stunning  headache,  extend- 
ing from  the  neck  into  the  head,  with  heat  and  pulsation  in  it ;  <  in  the 
evening  and   from   motion;    >  when  laying  the  hand  on  the  head,  and 
when  bending  the  head  t>ackward. — Sensation  of  cold  or  of  heat  in  the  head. 
— Headache,  from  taking  cold  in  the  head,  and  from  having  the  hair  cut. — 
Sensation  of  fluctuation  in  the  brain,  as  if  there  were  water  in  it. — Sensation, 
during  the  pains,  as  if  the  cranium  were  too  thin. — Sensation  of  a  dull  balancing 
in  the  brain,  and  shocks  in  the  head,  chiefly  on  walking  quickly  or  ascending. 
—Daily  pains  in  the  head,  from  about  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  till  towards 
three  o'clock  the  following  morning,  <  by  the  heat  of  the  bed  and  by 
a  recumt>ent  posture. — ^The  pains  in  the  head  are  generally  aggravated  by 
movement,  especially  of  the  eyes,  by  shaking,  by  contact,  by  free  air  and  a 
current  of  air ;  they  are  mitigated  by  holding  the  head  t>ack  and  by  supporting 
it— Cramp-like  pain  in  the  scalp. — Copious  sweat  in  the  hair. — ^Affections  of 
the  hair,  which  may  spUt,  or  come  out,  or  be  hard  and  dry,  &c. — Profuse 
poqgent-smelling  perspiration,  esp.  on  the  covered  parts,  while  the  body  is 
burning. — Shaking  or  turning  of  the  head  backwards. — Hydrocephalus,  with 
boring  with  the  head  in  the  pillows ;  sensation  as  if  water  were  moving  in  the 
head;  <  in  the  evening  and  when  lying;  >  from  external  pressure,  and 
when  bending  the  head  backwards. — Boring  with  the  head  on  the  pillow 
while  sleeping. — Boring  headache  in  the  r.  side  of  the  head;  changing  to 
stitches  in  the  evening. — Pressing  headache,  as  if  the  head  would  split,  pupils 
contracted,  voice  faint. — Swelling  of  the  head  and  of  the  face. — Smooth, 
ezystpelatous,  hot  swelling,  first  of  the  face,  then  extending  over  the  whole 
head,  with  stupefaction  or  delirium,  violent  headache,  red,  fiery  eyes. 

3.  £yes. — Heat  and  burning  in  the  eyes,  or  pressure  as  from  sand. — 
Aching  in  the  eyes  and  the  sockets,  extending  into  the  head. — Sensation  of 
weight  in  the  eyelids,  which  close  involuntarily.— Quivering  in  the  eyelids. — 
Ectropinm. — Paralysis  of  the  optic  nerve. — Falling  down  of  the  eyelids,  as  if 
from  paralysis. — Shooting  in  the  eyes  and  in  the  comers,  with  itching. — Eyes 
red,  brilliant,  and  convulsed,  or  fixed,  sparkling,  and  prominent,  or  dull  and 
torbid. — Congestion  of  blood  to  the  eyes,  and  redness  of  the  veins. — Look 
fixed,  furious,  and  wavering. — Look  wild,  unsteady,  wavering. — Spasms  and 
convulsive  movements  of  the  eyes. — Eyelids  wide  open. — Inflammation  of  the 
eyes,  with  injection  of  the  veins  and  redness  of  the  conjuctiva  and  of  the 
sclerotica. — Heat  in  the  eyes. — Distension  of  the  sclerotica. — Inflammatory 
swelling  and  suppuration  of  the  lachrymal  aperture, — Softening  of  the  sclero- 
tica.— Spots  and  ulcers  on  the  cornea, — Medullary  fungus  in  the  eye. — Swelling 
and  inversion  of  the  eyelids.— Yellowish  colour  of  the  sclerotica. — Eyes  as  if 
affected  by  ecchymosis,  with  haemorrhage.— Sensation  of  burning  dryness  in 
the  eyes;  or  flow  of  acrid  and  (salt)  corrosive  tears. — Pupils  immovable  and 
generally  dilated,  but  sometimes  also  contracted.— Agglutination  (nocturnal) 
cf  the  eyelids, — Desire  for  light,  or  photophobia,  with  convulsive  movements 
of  the  eyes  when  the  light  strikes  them. — Distortion,  spasms,  and  convulsions 
cftbe  eyes, — Momentary  blindness. — Confused  and  weak  sight,  or  obscuration 
and  entire  loss  of  sight — Blindness  at  night  (moon-blindness). — Presbyopia.-- 


264  BELLADONNA 

burning. — Pyrosis. — Obstructed  and  abortive  risings. — ^Nausea  and  inclination 
to  vomit,  chiefly  on  beginning  to  eat,  or  in  the  open  air,  or  after  breakfast, 
sometimes  with  burning  thirst — Retching  and  violent  vomiting,  principally  in 
the  evening  or  at  night ;  retching,  with  entire  inability  to  vomit ;  vomiting  of 
food,  or  of  mucous  or  bilious  matter,  of  blood ;  or  acid  and  serous  matter  ; 
vomiting  with  diarrhoea,  or  with  vertigo,  heat,  and  sweat. — Spasmodic 
hiccough,  sometimes  with  sweats  and  convulsions. — Pressure,  cramp-like  and 
contractive  pains,  sensation  of  fulness  and  inflation  in  the  stomach  and  in  the 
epigastrium,  principally  after  having  eaten  or  while  eating. — Shootings,  beat- 
ings, pulsations,  and  burning  in  the  stomach  and  in  the  precordial  region. — 
Inflammation  of  the  stomach  and  of  the  duodenum. 

la.  Abdomen. — Colic  with  constipation,  abundant  flow  of  urine,  risings 
and  nausea. — ^Violent  pain  in  the  abdomen,  which  allows  no  rest  whatever. — 
Shootings  in  1.  side  of  the  abdomen,  on  coughing,  on  sneezing,  and  on  being 
touched. — Pains  and  burning  in  the  hypochondria. — Pressure  in  the  abdomen, 
as  if  by  a  stone,  chiefly  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen  and  in  the  groin. — 
Painful  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  stomach,  esp.  after  eating. — 
Painfully  distended  abdomen,  very  sensitive  to  the  touch. — Inflation  and 
tension  of  the  abdomen,  chiefly  in  the  hypochondria. — Colic,  with  restlessness, 
below  the  umbilicus,  as  from  clutching  and  griping  with  the  nails,  <  from 
external  pressure. — Cramp-like,  contractive,  and  constrictive  pains  and 
pinching  in  the  abdomen,  and  esp.  round  the  navel  or  in  the  h3rpogastrium, 
with  a  sensation  as  if  one  or  other  of  the  parts  were  squeezed,  or  seized  with 
the  nails ;  the  pains  necessitate  a  bending  of  the  body,  and  are  sometimes 
accompanied  by  vomiting,  or  by  inflation  and  protrusion  of  the  colon  in  the 
form  of  a  pad. — Digging  in  the  abdomen. — Cuttings  and  shootings  in  the 
abdomen,  as  from  knives. — Heat  and  great  anguish  in  the  abdomen. — 
Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with  frequent  escape  of  flatus  without  smell. — 
Soreness  of  the  whole  abdomen,  as  if  everything  in  it  were  excoriated  and 
raw,  and  painful  sensibility  to  the  touch  of  the  teguments  of  the  abdomen. — 
Shootings  in  the  groins. — Itching  in  the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Suppressed  evacuations  and  constipation,  some- 
times with  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  heat  of  the  head,  and  copious  sweats. — 
Hard  and  scanty  evacuations. — Frequent  inclination  to  evacuate,  with  tenesmus, 
but  without  result. — Frequent  small  evacuations,  often  with  tenesmus. — 
Frequent  small  diarrhceic  stools  of  mucus. — Evacuations  whitish  like  chalk, 
or  greenish  ;  evacuations  watery  or  slimy. — ^Thin,  green  stools,  with  frequent 
micturition  and  perspiration. — Dysenteric  stools. — Before  stool,  perspiration. 
— During  stool,  shuddering. — Spasmodic  stricture  of  the  rectum. — Stinging 
pain  in  the  rectum. — Loose  evacuations,  with  nausea  and  aching  pains  in  the 
stomach. — Involuntary  evacuations,  from  paralysis  of  the  sphincter  of  the 
anus. — Bleeding  piles ;  back  pains  as  if  breaking. — ^Mucous  membrane  of  anus 
seems  swollen  as  if  pressed  out. — Prolapsus  ani. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  desire  to  make  water. — Retention  of 
urine. — Difficult  discharge  of  urine  (and  then  discharge  of  a  few  drops  of 
bloody  urine  only). — Continual  dribbling  of  urine. — ^When  passing  water, 
faeces  escape. — Frequent  emission  of  urine,  copious,  pale,  and  watery,  some- 
times with  profuse  perspiration,  thirst,  increased  appetite,  diarrhoea,  and 
obscuration  of  sight. — Incontinence  and  involuntary  emission  of  urine,  even 


BELLADONNA  265 

in  the  night  and  during  sleep. — Paralysis  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder. — 
Strictures  of  the  urethra. — Urine  turbid,  of  a  yellow  colour,  or  clear,  the  colour 
of  gold  or  citron ;  or  scanty  and  of  a  brownish-red  colour,  or  the  colour  of 
blood,  or  a  bright  red  colour. — Red,  or  whitish  and  thick  sediment  in  the 
urine.--Sensation  of  motion  in  the  bladder,  as  of  a  worm. — Noctuma 
piessure  in  the  bladder. — Shooting,  burning  pains  in  the  renal  region. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sharp  and  drawing  pain  in  the  spermatic 
CQixls,  chiefly  while  making  water. — Retraction  of  the  prepuce. — Soft  and 
painless  nodosity  in  the  glans. — Shootings  in  the  testes,  which  are  drawn  up. 
— Inflammation  of  the  testicles,  great  hardness  in  the  drawn-up  testicles. — 
Pollutions,  with  flaccidity  of  the  penis. — Nocturnal  sweat  of  the  genital  parts. 
— Flow  of  prostatic  fluid. — Sexual  desire  diminished,  with  perfect  indifference 
to  all  voluptuous  excitement. 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — ^Violent  pressure  towards  the  genital 
parts,  as  if  all  were  going  to  protrude,  principally  when  walking,  or  when  in 
a  croaching  posture. — Shooting  in  the  internal  genital  parts. — Great  dryness  of 
the  vagina. — Prolapsus  and  induration  of  the  matrix. — Catamenia  too  copious, 
and  too  early,  or  too  tardy. — Catamenia  too  pale. — Before  the  catamenia, 
fatigue,  colic,  loss  of  appetite,  and  confused  sight. — During  the  catamenia, 
nocturnal  sweat  on  the  chest,  with  yawning  and  transient  shiverings,  colic, 
or  anguish  of  heart,  burning  thirst,  sharp  and  cramp-like  pains  in  the  back 
and  in  the  arms. — Flow  of  blood  beyond  the  period  of  the  catamenia. — Flow 
of  blood  between  the  periods. — Menstrual  discharge  bright  red,  feeUng  very 
hot  like  hot  sealing-wax. — Metrorrhagia  of  clear  red  blood,  with  a  discharge 
of  fetid  clots ;  with  violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  bearing-down. — 
Menstrual  blood  of  bright  colour,  or  of  a  bad  smell. — Leucorrhoea  with  colic. 
— Diminished  lochia. — Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  uterus. — Labour  pains 
too  distressing,  spasmodic ;  too  weak,  or  ceasing. — ^After-pains. — Congestion 
and  inflammation  of  the  uterus  and  labia. — Stitches  in  the  organs. — Puerperal 
fever,  nymphomania. — Flow  of  milk  from  the  breast. — Mammae  swelled, 
inflamed,  or  indurated. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Oatarrh  with  cough,  coryza,  hoarseness  with 
tenacious  mucus  in  the  chest. — ^Voice  weak,  hoarse,  and  whistling;  nasal- 
toned  voice. — Loss  of  the  voice. — Great  soreness  of  the  larynx,  with  danger 
of  sufiFocation  on  pressing  the  gullet,  as  well  as  on  coughing,  on  speaking,  and 
on  breathing. — Spasmodic  constriction  of  the  larnyx. — Lar3mx  very  painful, 
with  anxious  starts  when  touching  it. — Constriction  of  the  trachea.— Short, 
dry  cough,  from  tickling  in  the  larynx,  with  headache,  redness,  and  heat  in 
the  face. — Cough  with  stitches  in  the  chest,  in  the  lumbar  region,  in  the  hip, 
in  the  uterus ;  pain  in  the  sternum,  with  tightness  of  the  chest ;  with  rattling 
of  mucus  on  the  chest. — Dry  spasmodic  cough,  with  vomiturition,  esp.  after 
nudnight — ^Whooping-cough,  with  crying,  or  pain  in  the  stomach  before  the 
attack,  with  expectoration  of  blood  (pale  or  coagulated),  congestion  of  blood 
to  the  head,  sparks  before  the  eyes,  spasms  in  the  throat,  bleeding  from  the 
nose,  stitches  in  the  spleen,  involuntary  stool  and  urine,  oppressed  breathing, 
sttfness  of  the  limbs,  shaking  of  the  whole  body,  and  dry  general  heat. — 
Cough,  as  if  one  had  swallowed  dust,  or  as  if  there  were  some  foreign  body 
in  the  larynx,  or  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  which  excites  the  cotigh ;  chiefly 
at  night,  or  in  the  afternoon,  in  the  evening  in  bed,  and  even  during  sleep ; 


268  BELLADONNA 

the  nose,  and  dilated  pupils. — Red  spots,  the  colour  of  blood,  over  the  whole 
body,  principally  on  the  face,  neck,  and  chest. — Eruption  resembling  morbOli. 
— Eruption  of  petechias,  with  itching  and  redness  of  the  whole  body. — ^Miliary 
eruptions. — ^Vesicles  which  discharge  a  great  deal  of  serum,  and  are  so  painful 
as  to  extort  cries  and  groans. — Bleeding  soreness  of  the  bends  of  the  joints. — 
Eruption  of  pustules  with  whitish  edges,  with  black  slough,  and  cedematous 
swelling  of  the  diseased  part. — Boils  (returning  every  spring). — Red  scaly 
eruption  on  the  lower  part  of  the  body.--Scrofulous  tumours  and  nodes,  which 
are  painful. — Pain,  as  of  excoriation,  burning  and  pulling  in  ulcers,  principally 
on  being  touched,  during  motion,  and  in  the  night. — Dry,  burning-hot  skin. — 
Burning  of  the  skin,  particularly  when  the  hand  continues  to  burn  after 
touching  the  skin,  as  though  a  hot  stove  had  been  touched,  very  characteristic. 
— Red,  hot,  and  shining  swelling  of  the  diseased  parts. — Smooth,  even  shining 
(not  circumscribed)  redness  of  the  skin,  with  bloatedness,  dr3mess,  heat, 
burning  itching  and  swelling  of  the  parts  (esp.  face,  neck,  chest,  abdo- 
men and  hands). — The  ulcers  secrete  a  purulent  and  sanguineous  matter. — 
Chilblains. — Painful  swelling  of  the  glands  (inflamed,  stinging). 

26.  Sleep. — Constant  drowsiness,  sometimes  with  cloudiness,  and 
yawning,  and  chiefly  towards  the  evening. — Fits  of  somnolence  and  of 
lethargy,  with  profound  sleep,  immobility  of  the  body,  jerking  of  the  tendons, 
pale  and  cold  face,  hands  cold,  and  pulse  small,  hard,  and  quick. — Somnolence, 
stupor,  lethargy  (with  snoring). — Coma,  interrupted  by  momentary  wakings, 
with  furious  looks.~After  the  fit  of  coma,  great  hunger,  burning  heat,  and 
dryness  of  the  mouth. — Pulsations  of  the  blood-vessels ;  may  hear  the  pulsa- 
tions of  the  blood-vessels  so  loud  when  trying  to  sleep  as  to  be  kept  zwzke  by 
it. — Comatose  sleep  at  night,  with  frequent  waking  and  convulsive  movements. 
— Sleep,  with  moaning  and  tossing  about. — Nocturnal  sleeplessness,  sometimes 
with  desire  to  sleep  and  useless  efforts  to  go  to  sleep,  mostly  in  consequence 
of  excessive  anguish  or  great  agitation. — On  sleeping,  frequent  starts  with 
fright,  groans,  cries,  starting  of  the  limbs,  carphology,  aggravation  of  pains, 
singing,  talking,  delirium,  and  continual  dreams. — Nightmare. — Dreams  : 
anxious,  terrible,  frightful,  vivid,  dreams  of  fires,  of  robbers,  and  assassins; 
meditative  dreams. — On  closing  the  eyes  in  order  to  go  to  sleep,  frightful 
visions  and  jerking  in  the  limbs. — On  waking,  headache  and  aggravation  of 
sufferings. 

27.  Fever.— <^ldness  over  the  entire  body,  with  paleness  of  face,  or 
coldness  of  the  extremities,  with  bloatedness  and  redness  of  the  face. — 
Shiverings  and  partial  shuddering,  chiefly  in  the  back  or  the  pit  oi  the 
stomach,  or  in  one  arm,  and  sometimes  with  heat  in  other  parts,  chiefly  in 
the  head,  or  followed  by  universal  shivering. — Cold  limbs,  with  hot  head. — 
Chilliness  not  relieved  by  the  heat  of  the  stove. — Continuous  dry,  burning 
heat,  with  perspiration  only  on  the  head. — Internal  heat  with  restlessness ; 
hot  forehead  and  cold  cheeks. — Dry  heat  and  thirst,  and  perspiration  only  on 
the  head  and  neck  (sour-smelling). — ^The  shiverings  appear  mostly  in  the 
evening,  sometimes  with  nausea ;  bruise-like  sensation,  and  pulling  in  the 
back  and  in  the  limbs,  pricking  in  the  chest  and  obscuration  of  the  eyes. — 
Febrile  attacks,  in  which  shiverings  alternate  with  heat,  or  of  shiverings 
followed  by  heat,  with  aggravation  at  night  or  in  the  evening,  resembling 
quotidian,  or  double  quotidian,  or  tertian,  with  complete  adypsia,  or  burning 


BELLIS   PERENNIS  269 

and  ineztingaishable  thirst. — Dry,  burning  heat,  often  vnth  swelling  of  the 
veins,  pulsation  of  the  carotids,  heat,  redness  and  bloatedness  of  the  face, 
buniiAg  thirst,  a^tation,  f urions  delirium,  and  shiverings  on  being  even  slightly 
uncovered. — Pidse  strong  and  quick,  or  full  and  slow,  or  small  and  quick,  or 
hard  and  wiry. — ^If  slow,  the  pulse  is  full. — Pulse  full ;  hard ;  strong,  bounding, 
double. — Sweat  with  or  after  the  heat ;  copious  sweat  during  the  night,  or  in 
the  moming^;  sweat  of  the  parts  that  are  covered  only ;  ascending  from  the 
feet  to  the  head ;  sweat  when  asleep ;  sweat  of  an  empyreumatic  smell,  or 
whidi  imparts  a  yellow  colour  to  the  sheets. 


Bellis  Perennis. 

The  Daisy.    N.  O.  Compositae.    Tincture  of  whole  fresh  plant. 

GHnlnlri — ^Acne.  Arteries,  diseases  of.  Boils.  Brain,  softening  of.  Change 
of  Life.  Exudations.  Fatigue.  Giddiness.  Gout.  Headache.  Indigestion. 
Masbubation.  Mydriasis.  Overwork.  Pregnancy,  complaints  of.  Psoriasis. 
Railway  spine.  Rheumatism.  Sleeplessness.  Spleen  affections.  Stasis.  Trau- 
matisin.    Tumours.    Uterus,  fatigued.    Varicosis. 

CSharaoteristiocu — ^The  old  name  of  "  Wound-worty"  or  "  Bruise- 
wort,"  shows  one  of  the  main  spheres  of  the  action  of  Bellis^  and 
allies  it  in  action  with  its  fellow  Compositae,  Arnica  and  Calendula. 
The  daisy  is  a  flower  which  is  repeatedly  trodden  upon  and  always 
comes  up  smiling  afterwards ;  and  being  the  ''  day's  eye  "  may  be  the 
sign  of  its  too  early  waking  propensities.  Dr.  Burnett  is  the  chief 
authority  for  its  homoeopathic  uses.  ''  It  acts  very  much  like  Arnica, 
even  to  the  production  of  erysipelas."  He  has  cured  with  its  aid 
several  cases  of  tumours  originating  in  a  blow.  **  Stasis  "  and  "  fag  " 
are  the  principal  notes  of  its  action.  Exudations  and  swellings  of 
many  kinds.  Fagged  womb.  Varicose  veins.  The  giddinesses  of 
elderly  people  (cerebral  stasis).  It  has  marked  action  on  female 
sexual  organs,  especially  on  engorged  uterus  and  breasts.  It  re- 
lieves troubles  of  pregnancy :  inabihty  to  walk ;  varicose  veins. 
Fag  from  masturbation.  Overworked  old  labourers  and  work- 
men ;  head  su£Ferings  of  elderly  working  gardeners ;  commercial 
travellers  ;  railway  spine.  Burnett  has  generally  given  it  in  the 
f  tincture.  It  is  a  pre-eminently  left-side  medicine  ;  causes  stitches 
m  spleen.  It  has  produced  acne ;  boils ;  rheumatic  pains  ;  giddi- 
ness. Headache  from  occiput  to  sinciput ;  contracted  feeUng  in 
front  brain.  A  pain  in  inner  side  of  right  arm  as  if  a  boil  were 
developing.  A  leading  indication  is  found  in  its  causation  :  111- 
e£Fects  of  sudden  wet  chill  to  heated  stomach  or  body  surface.  This 
may  be  taken  as  a  keynote :  ''  e£Fects  of  cold  or  iced  drinks  when 
heated" ;  dyspepsia,  amenorrhoea,  skin  affections  (including  a  striking 
case  of  psoriasis),  rheumatism  from  this  cause.  Near  and  remote 
effects  of  blows,  falls,  accidents  (trauma).  It  causes  a  tired  feeling 
with  desire  to  lie  down.  As  a  remedy  for  debility  following  acute 
attacks  of  gout  Burnett  gives  it  a  very  high  place,  classing  it  with 


270  BENZINUM 

Vanadium^  of  which  it  is  a  complement  in  degenerative  states,  as 
brain  softening  and  atheroma  of  arteries.  It  has  been  observed  to 
cause  dilatation  of  the  pupil  when  used  locally.  It  is  well  not  to  give 
it  near  bed  time,  as  it  is  apt  to  cause  sleeplessness,  waking  at  3  a.m. 
and  conversely  "  waking  up  too  early  in  the  morning  and  cannot  get 
to  sleep  a^n ''  is  a  leading  indication  for  its  use. 

EibimiOiaM.— Compare:  Am.,  Calend.,  Hyperic,  Con., Ars.,  Hamam., 
Vanad.    In  effects  of  fag,  Pic.  ac. 

Cauatloii.— Injuries.  Effects  of  cold  drinks  when  overheated. 
Wetting  when  overheated. 

BTMPTOMB. 

a.  Head.— A  little  giddiness  in  the  head  at  times  (after  two  weeks). — 
Headache  from  occiput  to  sinciput  j  of  a  cold,  s^:hing  character. — Brain  feels 
as  though  contracted  in  frontal  region  (after  two  weeks). 

zz.  Stomach.— Want  of  appetite.-^Slight  nausea.— Effect  of  cold  or 
iced  drinks  when  heated. 

12.    Atidomen. — Stitches  in  spleen. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  inner  side  r.  (also  L)  forearm,  as  if  a  boil 
developing. — Pain  in  middle  finger  of  1.  hand,  as  of  a  gathering  ;  for  a  short 
time  only. 

25.  Skin.— Small  boil  (after  five  hours,  from  application  of  tincture). — 
Small  boil  at  angle  of  1.  lower  jaw  (after  chewing  flowers). — Painful  pimple  a 
littie  behind  angle  of  1.  lower  jaw  (after  two  weeks,  from  tincture). — Large 
boil  on  back  of  neck,  commencing  with  a  dull,  aching  pain  ;  some  difficulty 
and  bruised  pain  in  keeping  head  erect ;  began  as  a  slight  pimple  with  burn- 
ing pain  in  skin,  increasing  until  in  six  days  it  was  very  large,  of  a  dark  fiery 
purple  colour,  and  very  sore,  burning  and  aching  pain  in  it ;  accompanied 
with  headache,  extending  from  occiput  to  sinciput,  of  a  cold,  aching 
character ;  brain  as  though  contracted  in  frontal  region ;  dizziness,  &c. 

26.  Sleep. — Wakes  at  3  a.m.  and  cannot  get  to  sleep  again. 


Benzinum. 

Benzol,  Benzoline,  Benzene.    A  product  of  distillation  from  coal  tar. 
C6  He.    Tincture  with  alcohol. 

GUnicaL— Dsrsentery.    Fever.    Headache.    Insomnia.   Sweat.   Typhoid  fever. 
Vision,  disorders  of. 

Charaoteristlos. — Our  knowledge  of  this  medicine  is  derived 
from  observations  on  a  worker  in  a  rubber  factory,  who  for  weeks 
had  his  hands  and  arms  daily  bathed  in  benzine,  and  drank  water 
impregnated  with  it  It  caused  profound  disturbance  of  mind  and 
body ;    weeping  at  trifles ;    irritability ;    pain   darting   upwards  in 


BENZINUM  271 

occiput  Could  not  turn  eyes  upward  without  severe  aching  and 
throbbing.  A  sort  of  clairvoyant  state,  in  which  a  great  white  hand 
appeared  to  him  in  the  darkness,  coming  outspread  towards  his  face, 
caasing  him  in  terror  to  scream  for  the  watcher.  A  sense  of  falling 
throa^  the  bed  and  floor.  Insomnia  and  photopsic  illusions.  Pains 
travel  from  below  upward  (headache,  pain  in  anus) ;  also  chills. 

Bulatlona. — Compare :  Bry.  (<  motion  ;  moving  eves) ;  Benz. 
nit. ;  Benz.  dinit  (amblyopia  and  disorders  of  vision).  SuL  (symptoms 
go  from  below  upward). 

BTMPTOMGL 

z.  Mind. — ^Weeping  at  trifles  and  despairing  of  recovery. — Extremely 
irritable  and  fault-finding. 

9.  Head. — Severe  darting  pains  in  occiput,  from  below  upward,  recur- 
ring in  paroxysms,  <  by  motion,  and  esp.  by  rising  after  sitting. 

3.  Eyes. — Could  not  turn  eyes  upward,  or  to  one  side  without  severe 
aching  and  throbbing. — A  great  white  hand  seemed  to  appear  to  him  in  the 
darkness,  coming  outspread  towards  his  face,  causing  him  in  terror  to  scream 
for  the  watcher. — Photopsic  illusions  with  wide-open  eyes. 

6.  Face. — Occasional  sudden  puffing  up  of  1.  cheek  and  calf  of  1.  leg, 
as  though  filled  with  air,  going  off  in  a  few  hours  and  returning  again. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Teeth  covered  with  sordes. — Soreness  and  sensation  of 
looseness  in  upper  incisors. — ^Tongue  parched  and  brown. — Painful  round 
white  ulcers  in  the  mouth,  esp.  on  inside  of  cheeks. — Hot  and  very  offensive 
breath. 

ID.  Appetite. — ^Appetite  lost. — Craving  for  lemons  and  cider. — Extreme 
thirst ;  for  ice-water,  satisfied  with  a  sip,  but  wanting  it  again  directly. 

IS.  Abdomen. — Continual  soreness  to  pressure  in  abdominal  walls. — 
Heat  and  grinding  wearing  pains  in  lower  part  of  bowels,  <  just  before 
stool. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Several  times  an  hour,  a  stool,  smelling  of 
benzine,  of  lead-coloured  mucus,  mixed  with  bright  blood,  accompanied  with 
some  tenesmus,  and  followed  by  throbbing  in  anus  and  rectum  and  lancinating 
pains  from  below  upward,  continuing  about  five  minutes. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Pressing  pain  in  bladder,  after  passing  urine, 
throbbing  and  smarting  in  neck  of  bladder  and  urethra  for  several  minutes. — 
Urine  :  dark,  offensive ;  sediment  like  red  sand. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Every  few  days  continual,  dry,  hacking 
cough. — Continual  soreness  and  aching  in  clavicular  region. 

so.  Back. — Continual  aching  and  throbbing  in  lumbar  region,  <  by  a 
full  in^iration. — Extreme  irritation  of  the  kidneys. 

as.  Upper  Limbs.— Continual  soreness  and  aching  in  muscles  of  upper 
arm. 

84.  Generalities.— Wasted,  pallid,  exhausted  ;  general  prostration.— At 
one  time  he  sank  very  low,  approaching  a  typhoid  condition. — Complained  of 
sensation  of  falling  through  bed  and  floor. 

s6.  Sleep. — For  three  nights,  before  the  sweating  began,  complete 
insomnia,  with  unpleasant  thoughts  crowding  the  mind,  and  wide-open  eyes, 
before  which  photopsic  illusions  floated  continually. 


272  BENZINUM   DINITRICUM 

27.  Fever. — Chills  seized  remote  parts  and  passed  toward  the  head,  from 
the  thumbs  to  the  elbows,  and  thence  to  shoulders ;  from  small  of  bock  to 
shoulders  and  vertex. — Cold  cx>mpresses  came  off  steaming  in  a  few  minutes, 
smelling  of  benzine  and  stained  a  deep  yellow,  which  could  only  be  removed 
by  long  exposure  to  the  sun. — For  several  nights  copious,  general,  warm 
sweat  toward  morning,  very  exhausting,  followed  on  several  succeeding 
mornings  by  sweat  only  on  breast,  on  side  not  lain  upon,  and  in  axillae. 


Benziniim  Dinitrioom. 

Di-Nitrobenzol.  €5  H4  (NO,),.  A  crystalline  substance  obtained 
from  the  further  action  of  Nitric  Acid  on  Nitrobenzol  at 
higher  temperatures.    Solution  in  alcohol. 

Clinloal.—Amblyopia.  Anasmia.  Colour-blindness.  Impotence.  Peripheral 
neuritis.    Retinitis.    Spastic  paralysis.    Urine,  black. 

Charaoteristios. — Bern,  dinit.  is  used  in  the  manufacture  of  the 
higher  explosives.  The  effects  on  workpeople  have  been  recorded 
by  Simeon  Snell  in  the  British  Medical  journal  of  March  3,  1894. 
The  symptoms  observed  strongly  resemble  those  of  Bern.  niL^  viz.  : 
Headache,  giddiness,  staggering  ;  numbness  and  paralytic  sensations. 
But  the  following  : — Anaemia,  with  a  murmur  in  the  pulmonary 
artery.  Impotence  observed  in  men  (in  women  there  was  no  altera- 
tion m  menstrual  functions)  ;  distaste  for  tobacco— are  not  mentioned 
under  Bern,  niL^  but  were  marked  in  those  under  the  influence  of  Benz, 
dinit,  :  The  knee-jerks  were,  if  anything,  somewhat  exaggerated. 
Dyspnoea  was  marked  in  all,  accounting  partly  for  the  inability  to 
smoke.  In  the  eyes  the  symptoms  were  very  marked,  and  were  very 
carefully  observed.  Ordinary  vision  was  greatly  impaired  ;  the  field 
of  vision  contracted,  and  partial  colour-blindness,  "a  small  central 
scotoma  for  red  and  green."  The  retinal  veins  were  found  much 
engorged ;  probably  part  of  the  general  venous  engorgement  and 
cyanosis.  The  blood  is  altered  and  turned  black,  and  the  urine  is 
black  without  containing  blood. 

Relations. — Compare:  Benz.,  Benz.  nit.,  Hydrocy.  ac.,  Ars. 
Antidoted  by :  Strychnine. 

STHPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — Raving  and  unconscious  from  5  ^.m.  to  10  p.m. ;  the 
doctor  gave  him  up,  but  he  recovered. — Delirious,  complaining  of  great  pain 
in  head. 

2.  Head. — Giddiness,  compelling  to  sit  down. — Reels  like  one  drunk  ; 
even  fell  off  a  stool  when  sitting ;  stumbled  getting  into  a  trap. — Could  not 
walk  many  yards  without  falling. — Occipital  headache ;  unable  to  work  on 
account  of  headache. — Frontal  headache  with  delirium. — Colour  of  hair 
altered  from  golden  to  a  sort  of  red. 


BENZINUM   NITRICUM  273 

3.  Eyes. — Blindness. — Colour-blindness,  "central  scotoma  for  red  and 
^reen." — Disc  pale ;  greyish  ;  edges  defined  ;  retinal  vessels  full,  esp.  the 
veinsw — Retinal  hyperaesthesia. — ^Veins  much  larger  than  the  arteries. — Con- 
jonctiTae  jaundiced. 

6.    Face. — Face  pale,  lips  blue. — Face  bluish,  asphyxiated  look. 

11.  Stomach. — Occasional  nausea  and  vomiting. — Intolerance  of  alcohol, 
**  it  made  him  feel  so  bad." 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  dark,  like  ink ;  sp.  gr.  1,029. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sexual  desire  lost,  power  diminished 
(restored  when  taking  liq.  strychnise  after  leaving  off  the  work). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Breath  very  short;  rendering  smoking 
very  difficult. — Short  breath  with  giddiness. — Asphyxia. 

IQ.  Heart. — Engorgement  of  venous  system. — Bruit  in  pulmonary 
artery. — Pulse  very  frequent  (115),  small,  and  compressible. — ^Anaemia. — 
Bk)od  black. 

SI.  Limbs. — ^Want  of  sensation  in  arms  and  legs ;  prickly  feeling. — 
L^  nomb  to  knees  and  arms  to  elbows. — Stiffness  about  hands  and  feet,  but 
esp.  the  fingers. — Hands  and  feet  cold ;  feet  numb  and  also  sore. — Finger- 
tips feel  cold  to  the  touch,  though  she  herself  is  not  aware  of  it. 


Benzinum  Nitricum. 

"  Essence  of  Morbane."  "  Artificial  OU  of  Bitter  Almonds."  Ce  H, 
NOa.  (Prepared  by  heating  Benzol  with  Nitric  Acid  ;  the 
oily  fluid  formed  is  washed  and  rectified ;  it  is  miscible  with 
alcohol,  and  has  an  odour  of  bitter  almonds.)  Solution  in 
alcohol. 

flWi»w^i- — ^Amaurosis.     Convulsions.     Cyanosis.     Diuresis.     Epilepsy.     Nys- 
Respiration,  slow.    Strabismus.    Tetanus.    Trismus. 


Gharaoteristios. — Nitro-benzene  is  a  very  poisonous  substance, 
and  our  knowledge  of  its  action  is  due  to  numerous  cases  of  poisoning 
that  have  occurred.  It  produces  faintness,  sinking,  convulsions, 
twitchings,  stupor.  It  slows  the  respiration  until  death  occurs. 
Rolling  of  the  eyeballs  in  their  vertical  axis  is  a  prominent  feature, 
and  the  pupils  are  dilated.  Blueness  of  lips,  face,  and  finger-nails. 
Flapping  of  alae  nasi.  Head  drawn  backward  and  to  the  left  side  in 
spasms.  Involuntary  evacuations.  Paralysis  of  all  limbs.  Punctif orm 
ecchymoses.    The  odour  of  bitter  almonds  is  strong  in  the  secretions. 

BalationB. — Compare:  Benzin.,  Amygd.  am.,  Camph.  Hydrocy., ac. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.    Mind. — Extreme  mental  excitement. — Loquacity,  followed  by  drowsi- 
ness, soon  passing  into  stupor. — Soon  became  unconscious  with  inarticulate 
confused  speech. 
VOL.  I.  19 


274  BENZOICUM  ACIDUM 

9.  Head.— Vertigo ;  and  headache.— Trembles ;  staggers ;  falls  uncon- 
scious.— Sensation  of  formication  under  scalp,  or  as  if  the  hair  was  brist* 
ling  np. 

3.  Eyes.—Rolling  of  eyeballs. — Constant  slow  movement  of  eyeballs 
from  L  to  r.  under  closed  lids. — ^The  eyeballs  showed  a  constant  turning 
inward  and  outward  in  a  slow,  regular  motion,  with  the  visual  axes  perfectly 
parallel. — Constantly  rolling  in  vertical  axes. — Strabismus. — Eyes  staring. — 
Great  injection  of  conjunctiva  of  bulbs. — Eyeballs  seemed  enlarged. — Pupils 
dilated ;  insensible  to  light. — Distorted  vision  and  flashes  of  strange  light  and 
colours. 

4.  Ears. — ^Violent  roaring  in  ears,  and  sounds. 

6.  Face. — Stupid  expression. — Cyanosis. — (Edema. — Covered  with  cold 
sweat. — ^Trismus. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  white  and  swollen;  thick  and  soft. — Burning 
taste,  followed  by  numbness  and  tingling  of  tongue  and  lips. — Stammering 
speech. — ^Tenacious  saliva  flowed  from  the  mouth. 

II,  ifl,  13.  Stomach,  Abdomen,  Stool. — Burning  in  throat  and 
stomach. — Nausea,  vomiting,  of  food  eaten. — Pains  in  abdomen. — Involuntary 
evacuations. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Diuresis ;  urine  brownish  red  ;  odour  of  bitter 
almonds.— Urine  and  faeces  passed  involuntarily. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Sighing  respiration. — Respiration  frequently 
interrupted. — Dyspnoea. — Respiration  exceedingly  slow ;  shsdlow. — Snoring. — 
Respiration  difficult,  catching,  accelerated. 

ig.  Heart. — Pulse  rapid,  weak,  irregular. — Pulse  full  and  slow. — Pulse 
scarcely  perceptible. 

90.  Neck. — Stiff-neck ;  trismus  and  fibrillary  twitchings  in  masseter 
muscles. 

ai.  Limbs.— Twitchings  in  hands  and  feet.— Arms  spasmodically 
flexed,  sometimes  extended. — ^Arms  spasmodically  flexed  at  first,  afterwards 
relaxed. 

S4.  Greneralities. — Gait  as  if  intoxicated ;  staggering  here  and  there. — 
Violent  convulsions;  with  unconsciousness. — Fell  unconscious;  extremities 
paralysed ;  evacuations  involuntary. — Fainted  from  inhaling  vapours. — Over- 
powering odour  of  bitter  almonds. 

25.  Skin. — Punctiform  ecchymoses. — Skin  livid  ;  bluish-grey. — Ecchy- 
mosed  spots,  bluish-black,  beneath  scalp  and  on  gluteal  muscles. 

97.  Fever. — Skin  cold, — Sweat  on  forehead  and  face.— Whole  body 
covered  with  profuse  cold  sweat. 

Benzoioom  Acidom. 

Benzoic  Acid.  C^  H5  CO.  OH.  Obtained,  by  sublimation,  from 
Gum  benzoin ;  or  artificially  from  several  aromatic  hydro- 
carbons.   Tincture  or  trituration. 

OUnieaL — Asthma.  Bladder^  affections  of.  Bunion.  Cracks.  Diarrhcea, 
Enuresis.  Eye^  tumours  of.  Ganglion.  Gonorrhcea.  Gout  Joints^  affections  of. 
Knee,  pain  in.  Rheumatism,  Svcosis.  Throat,  sore.  Tongue,  sore.  Tonsils, 
enlarged.    Ulcers.    Urine,  disorders  of.    Wens. 


BENZOICUM   ACIDUM  275 

GhanMsterlBtios* — The  leading  note  of  Benzoic  acid  is  the  occur- 
rence, as  a  concomitant  of  any  morbid  condition,  of  strong-smelling 
urine,  generally  also  dark.  Benzoic  acid  is  a  chilly  medicine,  the 
symptoms  being  <  in  open  air  ;  by  uncovering ;  >  by  heat.  Pains 
suddenly  change  their  locality,  but  are  mostly  felt  in  region  of  heart. 
Joints  crack  when  moving.  Symptoms  appear  left  side  first,  then 
right.  Asthma  has  been  cured  by  it,  especially  in  rheumatic  persons. 
Inflammation  of  bronchi  and  lungs,  with  great  tenderness  of  chest, 
cough  <  night,  lying  on  right  side.  Some  of  the  chief  symptoms 
are :  Inclined  to  dwell  on  unpleasant  subjects ;  if  he  saw  any  one 
deformed  it  made  him  shudder.  Tongue  spongy  on  surface  with 
deep  cracks  and  spreading  ulcers.  Sensation  of  lump  (as  of  food)  in 
pit  of  throat ;  of  swelling  and  constriction.  Throat  symptoms  are  > 
by  eating.  Watery,  light,  very  offensive  stools  (in  children),  stools 
like  soapsuds,  with  usually  strong-smelling  urine.  Enuresis  nocturna  ; 
urine  dark,  strong-smelling ;  heavy,  hot ;  smelling  like  horse's  urine. 
Shivering  before  stool.  Long-continued,  dry  cough  after  suppressed 
gonorrhoea.  Ganglion  of  wrist  and  bunion  of  great  toe  I  have 
frequently  cured  with  Bern,  ac.  In  these  cases  an  ointment  (5j  of 
the  3X  to  cetacean  ointment  Jj)  is  a  useful  external  adjunct.  Tearing 
and  stitches  in  great  toe,  especially  right  (gout).  Swelling  and  pain 
of  right  knee.  Gouty  concretions.  "  Most  of  the  symptoms  appear 
on  the  left  side,  but  may  subsequently  come  on  the  right"  (Guernsey). 
Motion  <  most  symptoms,  but  headache  is  <  at  rest,  and  toothache 
is  <  lying  down. 

Relations.— Com^ar^ ;  Copaiv.,  Per.,  Zn.,  Nit.  ac.  (urine  smelling 
like  horse's) ;  Tropaeolum.  Useful  in  gout  after  Colch. ;  after  abuse  of 
Copaiv.  in  suppression  of  gonorrhoea ;  in  enuresis  after  failure  of 
Nitrum.  Incompatible :  Wine,  which  <  pains  in  kidneys,  drawing  in 
knees,  &c. 

STMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Inclination  to  dwell  on  unpleasant  subjects ;  if  he  saw  any 
one  deformed  it  made  him  shudder. — ^While  writing  he  often  omits  words. 

2.  Head. — Giddiness,  esp.  in  the  afternoon,  as  if  he  would  fall 
sideways. — Pressure  on  the  vertex,  extending  to  the  spine ;  without  pain,  but 
with  anxiety. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  head. — Headache  from  a  draught  of  air  ; 
from  taking  cold  in  it ;  from  uncovering  the  head ;  in  the  morning,  when 
awaking  ;  <  when  at  rest ;  returning  periodically,  and  accompanied  by  pain 
in  the  stomach,  nausea,  and  cold  hands. — Fearful  pain  in  occiput  or  cere- 
bellum.— Cold  perspiration  on  the  head. 

3.  Eyes. — Distress  in  eyes  as  from  want  of  sleep. — Throbbing  in 
eyeballs. — Burning  heat  in  lids. 

4.  Ears. — Swelling  behind  ears,  which  seems  to  reach  periosteum. — 
Sound  as  of  confused  voices  in  ears,  <  when  swallowing,  or  walking  in  open 
air. 

5.  Nose. — Seems  to  smell  cabbage,  dust,  or  something  stinking. — Sense 
of  smell  diminished. — Epistaxis. — Sneezing  with  hoarseness. — Cold  easily 
caught. — Pressure  at  root  of  nose. — Pain  in  bones  of  nose. — Itching  of 
septum. 


276  BENZOICUM   ACIDUM 

6.  Face. — Burning  heat  of  one  side  of  the  face. — Circumscribed  red- 
ness on  the  cheeks. — Copper-coloured  spots  on  the  face. — Cold  perspiration 
of  the  face. — ^Trembling  of  lips. — Involuntary  biting  of  lower  lip  at  dinner. — 
Itching  on  chin. 

8.  Mouth. — ^The  tongue  is  spongy  on*  the  surface,  with  deep  cracks, 
and  with  spreading  ulcers. — Toothache  (the  oil  or  gum  is  a  popular  local 
application). — After-taste  of  food. — ^Acid  mucus  in  mouth. — ^Taste  of  blood  ; 
bitter ;  flat ;  soapy  (water) ;  smoky  (bread). — Ulcerated  tumour  1.  side  of 
mouth,  on  soft  commissure  of  jaws,  behind  last  molar. — Heat  around 
mouth. 

g.  Throat. — Sensation  as  of  a  lump  in  the  pit  of  the  throat,  as  if  some 
food  had  lodged  there. — Sensation  of  swelling  or  constriction  in  the  throat. — 
The  throat  symptoms  are  relieved  by  eating. — Swallowing  difficult,  incom- 
plete ;  with  noise  in  ear ;  with  soreness  on  b^ck  of  tongue. — Heat  in  oesopha- 
gus.— ^Th3rroid  gland  feels  swollen. — Angina  faucium  and  tonsillaris,  with 
characteristic  urine. 

11.  Stomach. — Sweat  while  eating. — Hiccough. — Pressure  in  stomach 
and  eructations. — Burning  or  warmth ;  pressure  on  stomach. — ^Weak  digestion. 
— Sensation  of  lump  in  pit  of  throat,  as  if  food  had  lodged  there. 

12.  Abdomen. — Sense  of  weakness  in  precordia. — Obstruction  of  the 
liver. — In  liver  region  constant,  fine,  but  violent  stitching,  midway  in  upper 
portion  thereof. — Cutting  about  navel ;  >  by  stool. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Watery,  light-coloured ;  copious ;  very  offensive 
stools  (in  children),  with  unusually  strong-smelling  urine. — Frothy  stool. — 
Stitching  in  rectum. — Sense  of  constriction  at  lower  end  of  rectum. — ^Wart- 
like elevations  round  anus;  with  smarting  soreness;  strong-scented,  high- 
coloured  urine  (after  previous  use  of  Copaiva  for  chancre). — Formication  at 
anus. — Diarrhoea  of  children  during  dentition. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  highly  coloured ;  urinous  odour  exceed- 
ingly strong ;  offensive,  pungent  smell. — Soreness  or  hot,  burning  pain  in  the 
(1.)  kidney. — ^A  granular  kind  of  mucus  mixed  with  phosphates  in  the  sediment ; 
urine  dark-reddish  brown ;  sheets  usually  stained  brown ;  acid  reaction,  or 
very  offensive  ;  heavy  hot ;  fleeting  pains  in  bladder,  not  when  urinating,  but 
at  other  times ;  vesical  catarrh  from  suppressed  gonorrhoea,  calculi,  or  gout. 
— Urinous  odour  highly  intensified ;  like  horse's  urine. — Nocturnal  enuresis ; 
with  strong,  dark  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Suppressed  gonorrhoea;  gleet;  with 
offensive  urine. — Painf ulness  of  genitals ;  pressure ;  raw  pain. — Smarting  of 
frenum. — ^Thrilling  1.  side  of  glans,  extending  into  urethra,  causing  starting. — 
Itching  on  glans  ;  on  sulcus  behind  corona. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Menses  too  early;  or  retarded. — 
Amenorrhoea. — Prolapsus  uteri  with  fetid  urine. — ^Weakness  after  menses. — 
Gastric  derangements  when  ascending  a  height  (in  a  pregnant  woman). — 
Too  long-lasting  lochia. 

17.  Repiratory  Organs. — Long-continued  dry  cough,  after  suppressed 
gonorrhcea. — Cough  followed  by  expectoration  of  green  mucus.~--Cough : 
after  slight  cold ;  excited  by  inspiration ;  produced  by  something  acrid  or 
dry  in  chest. — ^Asthma  with  inflammatory  rheumatism. 

18.  Chest. — Burning  in  nipples. — Sensation  of  swelling  in  breasts  and 


BENZOIN  277 

thyroid  gland.— Stitches  in  chest ;  <  breathing  deeply ;  in  evening. — Asthenic 
pneumonia. — ^Mucous  oppression  of  lungs. 

19.  Heart  and  Pulse.— Pains  in  the  region  of  the  heart.— Most  of  the 
symptoms  appear  on  the  1.  side,  but  may  subsequently  come  on  the  r.  side. — 
Awakens  every  morning  at  two  o'clock,  with  violent  internal  heat,  and  hard, 
beating  pulse,  compelling  him  to  lie  on  the  back,  because  the  beating  of  the 
temporal  arteries  causes  a  humming  in  the  ears,  and  prevents  him  from  going 
to  sleep. — Pains  about  heart  mostly,  but  suddenly  change  locality. — ^Awakens 
after  midnight  with  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  hard  beating  of  the 
temporal  arteries. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  of  neck,  only  on  one  side. — Nape : 
pressure;  itching. — Dull  pain  in  back,  in  region  of  kidneys;  stiffness  in 
loins. — Coldness  in  sacrum. 

Stt.  Limbs. — Nodes  on  joints  of  upper  and  lower  extremities,  cracking 
on  motion. — Gouty  concretions. — Syphilitic  rheumatism. 

92.  Upper  Limbs. — Gouty  deposits  in  both  wrists  between  metacarpal 
bones ;  swelling  of  elbow-joints. — Paralytic  pains  of  fingers. — Eruption  of  red 
spots  on  fingers. — Fingers  swollen,  tearing  and  fine  stitching  pains  in  various 
parts  of  the  limbs. — Ganglion. — Panaritium. 

^  L.O'wer  Limbs. — Swelling  in  r.  knee  ;  ulcerative  pain  in  whole  leg, 
with  pains  in  kidneys. — Cracking  or  sense  of  dr3mess  in  knee-joint. — Pain  in 
both  knees;  after  drinking  wine. — Pain  in  gastrocnemii. — Sharp  pain  in  1. 
ankle,  when  weight  is  on  1.  foot  on  walking. — Severe  pain  in  1.  tendo  Achillis 
dose  to  OS  calcis  when  weight  on  that  foot. — Pain  in  r.  tendo  Achillis  and  in 
heart  region  at  same  time. — ^Tearing  and  stitches,  esp.  in  the  metatarsal  joints 
of  the  r.  great  toe. — Gouty  concretions  and  nodosities. 

34.  Greneralities.— Great  weakness,  perspiration,  and  comatose  con- 
dition.— ^Trembling  with  palpitation  of  the  heart. — ^Weariness  and  lassitude. 
—Pains  suddenly  change  their  locality. — Symptoms  in  sick  go  from  1.  to  r. 
and  from  below  upward,  esp.  in  rheumatism  and  gout. 

95.  Skin. — Itching  on  various  parts ;  agreeable  sensation  on  being 
scratched,  but  leaving  a  burning. — Red  spots  on  fingers. — Syphilitic  spots 
and  marks. 

90.  Sleep.— Awakens  with  oppression  of  breathing,  with  palpitation  of 
the  heart  (after  midnight),  with  heat  and  hard  pulse. 

97.  Fever. — Cold  hands;  feet;  back;  knees,  as  from  cold  wind. — 
Chilliness  before  the  stool. — Great  internal  heat  when  awaking. — Perspira- 
tion :  while  eating ;  when  walking ;  morning  in  bed,  esp.  on  face ;  with 
amdety. — Cold  sweat :  on  head  ;  on  face  ;  on  feet. — Sweat  with  aromatic 
odour. 

Benzoin. 

Lindera  Benzoin.     Laurus  Benzoin.     Benzoin  oderiferum.     Spice- 
bush.    Fever-bush.    N.  0.  Lauracese.    Tincture  of  twigs. 

GSioloftL— Fever.    Hair,  oiliness  of.    Vertigo. 

ChafaoteristioB. — ^The  symptoms  of  Benzoin  as  shown  in  a  short 
proving  somewhat  resemble  those  of  Laurocerasus.     Empty  sensa- 


278  BERBERIS   AQUIFOLIUM 

tion  at  the  stomach  and  lower  part  of  bowels.  <  On  lying  down  : 
head  swims,  with  sinking  sensation  which  makes  lying  down  in  bed 
unpleasant.  The  hair  is  oUy.  Feverish.  <  After  sleep.  Sense  of 
touch  fine,  quick  and  pleasant. 

BtintioBM.— Compare  :  Lach  «  after  sleep). 

STHFTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Unpleasant,  fearful  feeling. 

2.  Head. — Hair  oily. 

1I9  12.  Stomach  and  Abdomen.— Wakes  from  sleep  with  a  sick 
feeling  in  stomach  and  bowels ;  tired  feeling  ;  turns  often  in  bed  at  night — 
Empty  feeling  in  stomach  and  lower  part  of  bowels. 

13.  Stool. — Soft  stool,  with  pain  before  stool  in  lower  bowel. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  more  frequent,  small  quantity,  dark 
colour;  had  to  rise  twice  in  night  to  urinate. 

23.  Lower  Limbs.— Hips  feel  crushed.— Pains  in  knees.— Feet  and 
legs  cold  up  to  knees ;  remained  cold  in  bed. 


Berbems  Aquifoliam. 

Oregon  Grape.     N.  0.  Berberidaceas.     Fluid   extract   or   tincture 

of  root. 

Ollfiti^V — ^Biliousness.  Bronchorrhoea.  Eczema.  Face,  roughness  of .  Head- 
ache. Herpes.  Leucorrhoea.  Pityriasis.  Psoriasis.  Spleen,  affections  of .  Stoma- 
titis.   Syphilis.    Typhoid.    Voice,  affections  of. 

OharaoteristioB.— £^r6.  aqui,  belongs  to  the  Mahonia  group  of 
the  Barberry  family.  It  has  been  used  by  eclectics  in  chronic 
syphiUs,  chronic  skin  diseases,  in  scrofulous  cachexia,  and  for  re- 
moving pimples  from  the  faces  of  girls.  Hale  reports  a  case  of 
very  advanced  secondary  syphilis  cured  with  it,  and  some  character- 
istic cases  of  psoriasis.  In  all  these  conditions  it  has  been  given 
in  the  ^  tincture  5  to  10  drops.  J.  D.  W.  C,  in  Recorder,  1896,  gives 
personal  experiences  with  doses  of  10  to  15  drops  a  day.  On  the 
third  day  felt  "nausea  and  thick-headedness."  Later  there  was 
"  straining  to  vomit  without  vomiting."  Then  a  peculiar  headache, 
strong  compression,  as  if  a  band  of  iron  two  inches  wide  passed 
entirely  round  head  just  above  ears.  It  kept  growing  tighter  and 
tighter.  Strong  black  coffee  relieved  this  after  a  time,  but  left  him 
tremulous  in  nerves  and  unsteady  in  gait.  Ever  after  that  a  single 
drop  of  Berb,  aq,  on  the  tongue  was  sufficient  to  avert  an  attack  of 
biliousness  when  threatening,  and  saved  him  much  trouble  of  the  kind 
to  which  he  had  formerly  been  liable.  Berb.  aq.  has  a  reputation  for 
making  "  a  new  man  of  an  old  one."  A  tea  made  of  the  leaves  of 
Berb,  mahon,  has  a  local  reputation  in  the  mountain  typhoid  of  the 
Rockies,  and  the  provings  of  Berb.  aq.  show  febrile  symptoms  and 


BERBERIS   AQUIFOLIUM  279 

a  marked  action  on  the  spleen.  A  systematic  proving  was  made 
tinder  Winterbum's  direction.  I  have  verified  its  i»efulnes8  in 
secondary  syphilis. 

Balattoofl.— Com^afv ;  Berb.  v.,  Euonym,  &c. 

STMPTOMB. 

X.  Mind. — Unhappiness  and  depression ;  sometimes  coming  bn  sud- 
denly.—Hysterical  crying  at  frequent  intervals. — Nervous,  restless. — Dis- 
inclined to  move  or  do  anything;  dull,  stupidity. — Drowsy  in  daytime. — 
Nausea  and  thick-headedness. 

a.  Head. — Dizzy  sensation  <  sleeping  or  moving. — Pain  r.  side  press- 
ing like  a  weight — Pain  r.  temple  running  down  into  teeth  ;  pains  transitory 
and  recurring. — Pain  like  iron  band  completely  surrounding  head  above  ears, 
with  gradually  increasing  compression. 

3.  Eyes. — Conjunctiva  injected. — Sensation  of  film  before  eyes. — Eyes 
look  hollow  and  weak  as  if  tired ;  burning  feeling  and  aching  as  from  strain. 
—Weak  feeling  in  eyes  lasting  a  long  time. 

5.  Mo9e. — Stn£fy  feeling,  with  discharge  of  greenish-yellow  mucus. — 
Itching  within  nose  with  desire  to  sneeze. 

6l  Face. — Blotches  and  pimples  on  face. — ^Yellow  skin. — ^Waxy, 
yeUowish  white. — Flashes  of  heat  to  cheeks. — Pinched  expression. 

8.    Mouth. — Bilious  taste  after  eating. — ^Tongue  thickly  coated,  yellow- 
hrown  or  pasty  white. — ^Tongue  feels  as  if ,  or  actually  is  blistered. — Soreness 
in  kywer  teeth  and  salivary  glands. 
^    Throat. — Dry  throat 

II.  Stomach. — Hunger,  even  soon  after  eating,  without  desire  for  food. 
—Sodden  nausea  after  eating. — Burning  in  stomach  and  borborygmi. — 
Cramps^  and  no  appetite  (2nd  week). — Nausea  and  severe  straining  to  vomit 
(occurred  when  fasting). 

13.  Abdomen. — Uneasy  feeling  without  desire  for  stool. — Pain  in 
hypogastriom. — Bitionsness  and  waxy  jaundiced  hue. — Intense  burning  in 
spleen  and  feeling  as  if  pounded. — Distressing  soreness  in  spleen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Large,  free,  dark  stools. — Hot  bilious  diarrhoea. 
—After  looseness,  light-coloured,  varnished,  constipated  stools. — Stools  too 
large  and  expelled  with  difficulty. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  increased  or  decreased  in  quantity. 

15.  Male  Seyual  Organs. — Drawing  and  pressure  in  testicles. 

16.  Female  Sescual  Organs.— Slight  burning  in  vagina,  bearing-down 
pains  and  aching  as  if  menses  about  to  come  on. 

17.  Hesfyiratory  Organs. — Bilious  cold :  throat  choked  with  mucus, 
voice  rough  and  somewhat  hoarse,  expectoration  yellow  and  then  greenish. — 
Voice  seemed  cut  off  as  if  a  damper  had  closed. — Lack  of  timbre  in  voice. — 
Dcy,  irritative  coo^ — Scanty,  tenacious,  blood-streaked  expectoration. 

tL  Cheats — Oppression  and  weakness  of  upper  part  of  chest — Burning 
heat  in  lower  1.  hing.^Aocelerated  pulse  and  heightened  temperature  vividly 
suggest  phthisis  pnlmonalis.) 

n.  UmtM.— Sense  of  numbness  and  feeling  as  if  there  was  no  strength 
d  win  to  lift  the  part— When  perfectly  still,  no  pain ;  on  movement,  cramp 
^  ^cgs),  trembling  and  uncertainty  of  motion  and  pain. — Pain  severe  as  after 


28o  BERBERIS  VULGARIS 

a  heavy  blow. — Peculiar  prickling  as  from  electricity  back  of  hand  and  outside 
forearm,  momentary  but  frequently  returning  and  independent  of  conditions, — 
Rheumatic  tension  and  stiffness  of  legs. 

H*  Generalities.— Weak,  tired  feeling,  better  for  exercise.— Tremulous 
in  nerves,  unsteady  in  gait. 

27.  Fever.— Diurnal  rise  of  temperature  and  pulse.— Flashes  of  heat  and 
burning  of  palms.— Flashes  of  heat  to  cheeks. 


Berberis  Vulgaris. 


Barberry.     (Britain.)     N.  0.  Berberidaceae.     Tincture  of  the  bark 

of  the  root. 

Clinleal. — Biliary  colic.  Bilious  attack.  Bladder  affections.  Calculus.  Duo- 
denum, catarrh  of.  Dysmenorrhcea.  Fevers.  Fistula.  Gall-stones.  Gravel, 
Herpes.  Irritation.  Jaundice.  Joint  affecHofis.  Knee^  pain  in.  Leuoorrhoea. 
Liver  disorder.  Lumbago.  Ophthalmia.  Oxaluria.  Renal  colic.  Polypus. 
Rheumatism.  Sacrum^  pain  in.  Side  pain.  Sperma^c  cords,  neuralgia  of.  Spleen, 
affections  of.    Tumours.    I7r/>i€,  disorders  of.  .Vaginismus. 

OharaotevistioB. — The  usual  preparations  of  Berberis  are  made 
from  the  root  bark.  Berberis  mahonia  has  a  great  local  repute  in  the 
popular  treatment  of  the  low  fever  (typhoid)  of  the  Rocky  mountains, 
an  infusion  of  the  fresh  plant  being  used.  Chills  and  fever  are  among 
the  prominent  effects  of  Berb.  vulg. :  "  Coldness  of  body  with  hot 
face,  commencing  11  a.m.  ;  burning  heat  in  afternoon,  <  during 
night."  Ague  with  enlargement  of  spleen,  or  spleen  pains.  Affec- 
tions of  liver  and  kidneys  are  strongly  marked ;  but  Berb.  is  a  medicine 
of  wide  range.  Movement  <  its  complaints.  Stitches  are  frequent, 
and  a  '*  bubbling  sensation  "  or  "  bubbling  stitche$  "  are  characteristic. 
A  bubbling  feeling  as  if  water  were  coming  up  through  the  skin. 
Tearing,  burning  pains  or  bubbling  sensation  in  joints.  The  mental 
condition  is  one  of  indifference,  apathy.  Melancholy,  with  inclina- 
tion to  weep.  There  is  aversion  to  darkness,  terrifying  apparitions 
in  the  twilight.  In  the  bead  there  is  vertigo  and  heaviness.  Darting 
and  shooting  pains  often  changing  their  localities  ;  <  movement, 
>  open  air.  Heat  of  head  after  dinner  or  in  afternoon.  Puffy 
feeling  in  head  ;  as  if  it  were  becoming  larger.  Scalp  tense.  The 
face  is  pale,  with  din^  grey  tinge,  sunken  cheeks,  deep-set  eyes, 
surrounded  with  bluish  and  blacMsh  grey  border.  Mouth  dry  and 
sticky ;  painful  white  blisters  on  tip  of  tongue.  The  pit  of  the 
stomach  is  puffed  up.  Sticking  pain  in  region  of  liver  and  gall- 
bladder shooting  up  to  left  shoulder,  <  by  pressure.  Gall-stone 
colic,  followed  by  jaundice.  Gnawing  pain  in  right  hypochondrium, 
shooting  up  to  l^t  scapula.  Pains  shoot  down  from  tenth  rib  to 
navel.  Burning  in  either  inguinal  region  (espedaUy  right).  Berberis 
produces  both  constipation  (sheep-dung  stools)  and  diarrhcea,  and  a 
number  of  symptoms  about  the  anus.  Haemorrhoids,  with  itching  or 
burning,  particularly  after  stool,  which  frequently  is  hard  and  covered 


/ 


BERBERIS   VULGARIS  281 

with  blood.      Fistula  in   ano  with  painful  pressure  in  perinaeum, 

extending  deep  into    pelvis  (left  side).     The  urinary  organs  are 

markedly  a£Fected.    The  emission  of  urine  is  frequently  accompanied 

by  pains  in  thighs  and  loins.    Lancinating,  or  tearing,  bubbUng  pains 

in  region  of  kidneys  ;  <  stooping  and  rising  again,  sitting  or  lying  ; 

>  standing.     Violent  sticking  pains  in   bladder,  extending   from 

kidneys   into    urethra,    with    urging    to    urinate.      Many  cases    of 

(especially  right)  renal  colic  have  been  cured  by  it.     Frequent  urging 

to  urinate.    Urine    dark    yellow,  red,    becoming    turbid,  copious ; 

mocoos  sediment,    or  transparent,  jelly-like   or  reddish,  bran-like 

sediment     Urine   slimy   when   passed,   depositing  copious   loamy 

yellowish   sediment.      Greenish   urine    depositing   mucus.     During 

nnnation  burning  in  urethra,  or  bladder,  pressure  in  bladder,  cutting, 

burning,  or  stitches  in  urethra.    Dragging  or  lancinating  pains  in 

spermatic  cord,  extending  into  testes.      Cold  feeling  in  prepuce, 

glans,  testes,  and  scrotum.    In  the  female  a  marked  symptom  is 

absence  of  pleasurable  sensation  during  coition.    Uterine  symptoms 

and  leucorrhcea  associated  with  painful  urinary  sjonptoms.     Dvs- 

menorrhoea,  pains    radiating   in  all    directions    down    thighs,   &c. 

Vagina  intensely  painful ;    reddened.     Violent  pain  in  back,  with 

menses  which  are  too  scanty. .  It  is  a  leading  remedy  in  lumbago  ; 

pains  extend  from  t>ack,  round  body,  down  leg ;  with  red  sediment 

in  urine.     Numbness,  st^ness,  and  lameness  in  kidney  region.     Many 

old  troubles   in  the  back.     Sufferings  <  by   fatigue.     Aching  in 

small  of  back ;  <  sitting ;  or  lying ;  in  the  morning  on  awakening. 

Neuralgia  under  finger-nails.    B.  Simmons  has  verified  a  symptom 

of  Btrb.  which  may  be  regarded  as  characteristic.    A  gentleman  of 

52  complained  of  rheumatic  pains  in  his  legs  and  loss  of  walking 

power.    After  he  had  walked  a  short  distance  he  was  compelled  to  stop 

from  a  feeling  of  intense  weariness^  heaviness^  lameness^  and  stiffness  of 

the  legSj  which  felt  sore  as  if  bruised.    A  single  dose  effected  a  complete 

cure,  improvement  commencing  on  the  fourth  day.     Stuart  Close 

(H.  P.  xix.  318)  records  the  cure  with  Berb.  200  of  a  woman  who 

had  cutting,  burning  pains  in  the  balls  of  the  feet  on  stepping.    On 

standing  with  most  of  the  weight  on  the  heels  she  had  no  pain. 

On  rising  in  morning  sensation  in  soles  as  if  stepping  on  needles. 

There  is  great  weakness,  like  fainting,  after  a  walk,  with  perspiration 

and  heat  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body  ;  cold,  pale,  sunken  face  and 

oppression  of  breathing.    Great  relaxation,  with  disinclination  to  do 

anything.     On  the  indication  "  tumours  and  sessile  growths,''  Ozanam 

cored  a  case  of  polypus  of  vocal  cords,  red,  with  a  sessile  base. 

Tkuja  had  failed.    Berb.  200  was  given  at  first  with  good  effect. 

the  attenuation  being  gradually  reduced  vnth  increasingly  good  effect 

until  the  growth   disappeared  entirely  under. the   i  x.      Guernsey 

admirably  sums  up  the  remedy  as  follows  :  "  Affects  particularly  the 

lambar  region  ;  ladneys  ;  uterus.    The  patient  is  sometimes  unable 

to  tell  the  exact  locality,  but  the  pain  is  somewhere  in  the  back  and 

shoots  up   the  back ;  or  into  the  spermatic  cord,  or  testes,  bladder, 

buttocks,  or  legs.    The  pain  may  shoot  up  or  down,  or  both  ways. 

Pi^  may  be  felt  all  >3ver  the  body,  emanating  from  the  back ;  the 

pains  are  of  a  sticking,  pricking,  lancinating,  or  jerking  character. 


282  BERBERIS  VULGARIS 

flying  about  now  here  and  now  there.  There  is  often  a  bubbling 
sensation  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys;  this  sensation  may  occur 
elsewhere,  but  it  is  usually  found  here/'  Great  sleepiness  during  day 
and  after  dinner.  After  riding  much,  great  sense  of  weakness  in 
kidney  region.  Suited  to:  Bilious  diathesis.  Cases  where  renal  or 
vesical  symptoms  are  prominent 

Ralations. — Compare  :  Alo.,  Ant.  t,  Arsen.,  Calc,  Calc.  ph.  (fistula 
in  ano  ;  chest  symptoms,  especially  after  surgical  operation)  ;  Canth., 
Carb.  v.,  Cham.,  Chi.,  Lye,  Nat.  m.,  Nit.  ac,  Nux  v.,  Pul.,  Rheum. 
In  burning  and  pricking  pains  in  anus :  Lye,  Thuj.  In  duodenal 
catarrh  :  Chi.,  Lye,  Hydrast.,  Pod.,  Ric.  com.,  Merc.  In  aversion  to 
darkness  :  Stram.,  Am.  m.,  Calc,  Carb.  an.,  Stro.,  Val.  In  pains  in 
feet  on  stepping :  Cycl.  Botanical  relations :  Podo.,  Caulo.,  Berb.  aq. 
Antidoted  by  :  Camph.,  Bell.  Antidote  to :  Aco.  An  occasional  dose 
of  Lye.  helped  action  of  Berb.    Follows  well :  Bry.,  Kdi  bi.,  Rhus,  Sul. 

STHPTOHS. 

z.  Mind.— Careless,  calm,  apathetic  humour.  —  Ill*humoar,  disgust 
to  life. — Melancholy,  inclination  to  weep,  with  dislike  to  conversation. — 
Anxiety,  great  fear  and  disposition  to  take  fright*-In  the  twili^t,  all  objects 
seem  larger  than  they  really  are. — Intellectual  labours  are  performed  with 
difficulty  and  prove  fatiguing,  esp.  in  the  morning. 

8.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  with  sensation  as  in  fainting,  and  great  weakness. — 
Vertigo  on  stooping  and  on  making  use  of  the  arms. — Feeling  of  intoxication 
and  giddiness. — Confusion  and  heaviness  of  the  head,  often  with  pressure, 
dejection,  ill-humour  and  shiverings,  commencing  in  the  morning,  after 
waking. — Head  confused,  as  before  a  coryza. — Sensation,  as  if  the  size  of  the 
head  were  increased. — Sensation  of  swelling  in  the  head. — ^Aching,  tensive 
pains  in  the  forehead,  in  the  temples,  and  in  the  eyes. — Cephalalgia  in  the 
forehead  and  in  the  temples,  as  if  from  pressure  from  the  inside  outwards. — 
Headache  <  by  movement,  >  in  open  air. — ^Acute,  shooting  pains  in  the  fore- 
head and  in  the  temples. — Darting  and  shooting  pains  in  the  head  after 
changing  the  locality. — ^Teguments  of  the  head  as  if  they  were  stretched  and 
swollen. — Head  feels  full  and  heavy,  as  if  a  cap  were  pulled  hard  down  on 
head. — Heat  in  the  head  after  dinner  (or  in  afternoon)  and  in  the  morning. 
— Sweat  after  exertion,  on  stooping,  and  on  standing  for  any  time. — Small  red 
spots  in  the  forehead  and  in  the  cheeks. — Itching  or  gnawing  shootings  in  the 
teguments  of  the  head  and  of  the  face. — Pustules  in  the  teguments  of  the 
head  and  in  the  face. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  sunk,  with  a  blue  or  dirty  grey  circle. — ^Aching  and 
sensation  of  burning  in  the  eyes. — Painful  sensibility  of  the  eyes  on  reading 
by  candle-light. — Sensation  of  stifFness,  with  pressure  in  the  eyes. — Shootings 
in  the  eyes,  originating  in  other  parts  (for  instance,  the  forehead),  and  extend- 
ing towards  the  eyes,  and  thence  to  the  forehead. — Burning  and  dryness  in 
the  eyes,  which  are  dull — Dryness  of,  or  biting-burning,  or  itching  sensation 
in  the  eyes. — Itching  in  the  canthi,  eyebrows,  and  ^elids. — Redness  of  the 
conjunctiva,  with  confused  sight,  as  if  there  were  a  veil  before  the  eyes,  in  the 
morning  after  rising. — Ophthalmia,  with  the  characteristic  flying  pains  from 
the  back ;  sensation  as  if  sand  were  between  lids  and  eyes. — Bubbling  in  eyes. 


BERBERIS  VULGARIS  283 

— ^Indistinct  a^t,  better  near  than  at  a  distance.~Sensibility  of  the  eyes  to  the 
bn^tness  of  the  sun. — Sharp  pains  in  the  ball  of  the  eye,  and  in  the  eyelids. 
— ^Hea^iness  in  the  eyelids  daring  motion. — Burning  or  gnawing  pains  in  the 
cye&ls.— Convulsive  movement  of  the  eyelids  when  reading  by  candle-light. 

4.  Bars. — ^Itching,  sometimes  gnawing,  sometimes  burning,  sometimes 
shooting,  sometimes  with  small  pustules  in  the  exterior  parts  of  the  ears. — 
SmaU  tumour,  size  of  hazel-nut,  under  and  behind  ear,  apparently  enlarged 
^and.— Acute  and  shooting  pains  in  the  interior  of  the  ear  and  in  other 
partSw— Stitches  in  the  ear. — Sensation  of  coldness  in ;  bubbling  in. 

5.  Nose. — ^Dryness  in  the  nose. — Coryza,  with  secretion,  at  first  of 
yeOowish  serum,  s^terwards  of  purulent,  whitish,  yellowish,  or  greenish 
mncos^  esp.  in  the  morning. — Crawling  or  gnawing  pains  in  the  nostrils. 

6.  Face. — Heat,  and  bluish  colour  of  the  interior  of  the  lower  lip. — 
Dryness  of  the  lips,  and  exfoliation  of  the  epidermis,  with  a  flat,  brownish 
crust  upon  the  edges. — Sensation  of  burning  on  the  exterior  of  the  lips. — 
Sensation  of  tingling  on  the  lips. — Small  pustules  in  the  lips. — ^Acute  aching 
or  acute  shooting  pains  in  the  cheek-bone  and  in  the  jaw.---Great  paleness  of 
face,  dirty  grey  complexion,  with  hollow  cheeks  and  sunk  eyes,  surrounded  by 
a  bluish  or  dark  grey  circle.— Aspect,  one  of  great  and  prolonged  dejection. — 
Feeling  as  if  cold  drops  spurted  into  face  on  going  into  open  air. 

7.  Teeth. — Acute  drawing  pains  and  shootings  in  the  teeth,  with  a 
sensation  as  if  the  teeth  were  set  on  edge,  or  too  long  or  too  large  ;  also  with 
great  sensibility  of  the  teeth  to  the  fresh  air,  esp.  in  the  afternoon  and  at 
■ight — ^Ulcer  in  the  gums. — Small  white  painless  nodes  in  the  gums. — Dirty 
red  colour  of  the  edges  of  the  gums.— Bleedmg  of  the  gums. 

8.  Moath. — Painful  sensibility  of  the  tongue  to  the  touch  and  to  motion. 
— Stiffness  and  sensation  of  swelling  at  the  end  of  the  tongue. — Painful,  whitish 
vesicles  at  the  end  of  the  tongue. — Sensation  of  dryness,  clammy  taste  in  the 
mouth,  more  disagreeable  in  the  morning  after  rising,  with  harshness  of  the 
mucous  membranes,  and  white  tongue. — Diminution  of  the  secretion  of  saliva, 
or  viscid,  frothy  saliva. 

^  Throat. — Inflammation  of  the  tonsils  and  phar3mx,  with  swelling  and 
fiery  redness,  and  a  sensation  as  if  a  lump  were  lodged  in  the  side  of  the 
throat ;  expectoration  of  a  quantity  of  thick,  yellow,  jelly-like  mucus.— White, 
sticky  tongue,  viscid  saliva  resembling  soap-suds. — ^Tonsillitis,  with  sensation 
of  something  rough  there ;  stiff-neck ;  feeling  of  a  plug  in  the  throat 

10.  Appetite.— Taste  bitter.— Acid,  bitter  taste,  esp.  after  a  meal.— Thirst 
and  dryness  of  the  mouth. — Burning  and  acrid  taste  in  the  mouth  and  in  the 
throat,  as  if  from  pyrosis. — Excessive  appetite,  almost  like  bulimy,— Want  of 
appetite,  with  bitter,  bilious  taste.— Food  appears  insipid. 

11.  Stomach. — Nausea  before  breakfast,  better  after. — Nausea  and  in- 
clination to  vomit  before  dinner. — Risings  alternately  with  yawning. — Bilious 
risings. — Shiverings  in  the  epigastrium. — ^Aching,  with  shooting  pains  in  the 
epigastrium. — Burning,  shooting  pains  in  the  stomach,  sometimes  extending 
to  the  pharynx. — Sticking  pain  in  gastric  region ;  whirling  pain  in. 

la.  Abdomen. — Cramp-like  pains  under  the  navel. — Shooting,  aching 
joins  in  the  hepatic  region,  increased  by  pressure. — Pressure  in  the  region  of 
the  iiver. — Burning  under  the  skin,  in  the  1.  side  of  the  abdomen. — Bubbling 
otemally. — ^Violent  burning,  under  the  skin ;  in  1.  side  of  atxiomen. — Draw- 


284  BERBERIS  VULGARIS 

ing,  acute,  and  shooting  pains  in  the  region  of  the  1.  hypochondrium. — 
Sensation  of  tension  in  the  groins,  as  if  hernia  were  about  to  protrude,  esp. 
when  walking  or  standing. — ^Aching  pains  in  the  region  of  the  inguinal  glands, 
which  are  painful  on  being  touched,  as  if  they  were  going  to  swell. — Pain, 
with  throbbing  shootings  in  the  groins,  esp.  when  walking  and  standing, 
extending  to  the  testes,  the  thighs,  and  the  loins. — Varicose  veins  in  the 
groins. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Hard  stools  like  sheep  dung ;  or  soft,  easy  stools, 
with  burning  in  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Bubbling  sensation  in  region  of  kidneys. — 
Lancinating  or  tearing  pulsative  pain  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys;  worse 
when  stooping  and  rising  again,  sitting  or  lying;  better  when  standing. — 
Violent  sticking  pains  in  the  bladder,  extending  from  the  kidneys  into  the 
urethra,  with  urging  to  urinate. — Frequently  recurring,  crampy,  contractive 
pain,  or  aching  pain,  in  the  bladder,  when  the  bladder  is  full  or  empfy. — 
Incisive  pains  in  the  urethra,  even  when  not  in  the  act  of  making  water. — 
Smarting  pain  in  the  urethra,  with  sensation  of  excoriation,  even  during  the 
emission  of  semen  in  coition. — Motion  excites  and  aggravates  the  pains  in  the 
urethra. — Burning  pains  in  the  urethra  when  making  water,  and  afterwards, 
but  esp.  at  other  times. — Stitches  and  burning  in  the  urethra. — Shooting  pains 
in  the  urethra,  extending  to  the  bladder. — ^Aching  pains  in  the  region  cf  the 
bladder,  even  when  it  is  empty,  and  after  making  water. — Contractive,  draw- 
ing, acute,  incisive,  and  cramp-like  pains  in  the  bladder. — Shooting,  violent 
paips  in  the  loins,  extending  to  the  bladder. — Sensation  of  burning  in  the 
bladder. — Pressure  on  making  water. — Urgent  inclination  to  make  water,  esp. 
in  the  morning  after  rising. — Increased  secretion  of  urine,  which  is  as  clear  as 
water. — Urine  pale  yellowish,  with  slimy,  gelatinous,  mealy  sediment,  white, 
greyish  white,  or  reddish. — Urine  thick,  yellowish,  like  whey,  or  clay-coloured 
water. — Urine  of  a  deep  yellow,  with  abundant  sediment. — Urine  dark  yellow, 
red,  becoming  turbid,  copious;  mucous  sediment,  or  transparent,  jelly-like 
reddish,  bran-like  sediment  (which  is  easily  crushed  and  dissolved  between 
the  fingers). — Greenish  urine,  depositing  mucus. — Urine  reddish,  as  if  inflamed, 
with  abundant  sediment. — Urine  reddish,  sanguineous,  with  slimy,  mealy,  and 
abundant  sediment,  of  a  bright  red  colour. — ^The  emission  of  urine  is  often 
accompanied  by  pains  in  the  thighs  and  in  the  loins. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Burning,  smarting  pains  in  the  glans. — 
Sensation  of  cold  in  the  glans  and  In  the  prepuce,  sometimes  with  sensation 
of  torpor. — Cold  feeling  in  the  prepuce  and  scrotum. — Sensation  of  weakness 
and  insensibility  in  the  external  genital  parts. — ^The  penis  seems  to  be  shrivelled 
and  retracted. — Burning  pain  in  penis. — ^Aching,  drawing,  contractive  pains 
in  the  testes  and  in  the  spermatic  cords,  with  contraction  of  the  scrotum, 
which  appears  cold  and  shrivelled. — Pains,  as  from  excoriation  in  the  scrotum. 
— Movement  excites  or  aggravates  the  majority  of  the  symptoms  in  the  genital 
parts. — Smarting,  burning,  shooting,  drawing,  or  squeezing  pains  in  the 
spermatic  cords,  extending  to  the  testes. — Swelling  of  the  spermatic  cord, 
with  pains  verging  towards  the  testes. — Sensation  of  great  weakness  of  the 
genital  parts  after  coition. — Diminution  of  sexual  desire. — Premature  emission 
in  coition. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Tardy  enjoyment  in  women,  during 


BERBERIS   VULGARIS  285 

coition,  and  often  accompanied  with  incisive  or  shooting  pains. — Sensation  of 

borning  and  excoriation  in  the  vagina,  extending  to  the  labia. — Pale  catamenia, 

composed  of  serous  blood. — Menses,  consisting  of  grey  mucus  or  brown 

Uood.— Oppressed  menstruation. — During  the  catamenia,  pains  in  the  genital 

parts  and  in  the  loins,  or  violent  pains  in  the  head,  with  sensation  of  fainting. 

— Catamenia  insufficient,  with  acute  drawing  pains  in  the  whole  body,  painful 

inflation  of  tiie  alxlomen,  pain  in  the  loins,  shootings  in  the  chest,  dejected 

aspect,  witii  violent  pains  in  the  head ;  or  with  ill-humour,  disgust  of  life, 

direction,  smarting  pains  in  the  vagina,  sensation  of  burning  and  excoriation 

in  the  anus,  and  pains  in  the  arms,  as  far  as  the  shoulders  and  the  nape  of  the 

neck. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.--{Sessile  polypus  of  vocal  cord.) — Hoarse- 
ness, with  soreness  or  inflammation  of  the  glands  of  the  neck. 

18.  Chest. — Sensation  of  excoriation  in  the  chest. — Oppression  of  the 
chest,  esp.  at  night,  with  violent  flowing  of  the  coryza. — Shooting  pains  in  the 
centre  of  the  chest,  increased  deep  breathing,  with  dry,  short  cough. — Painful 
sboodngs  in  the  1.  side  of  the  chest. 

19.  Heart. — Squeezing,  with  shootings,  in  the  region  of  the  heart. — 
Palpitation  of  the  heart. 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — Drawing,  acute  rheumatic  pains  in  the  nape  of 
the  neck. — Pustules  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  in  groups,  esp.  near  the  scalp. — 
Shooting  pains  between  the  shoulder-blades,  increased  by  breathing. — ^Acute 
drawixig  pains  in  the  dorsal  spine. — Bubbling  sensation  in  l>ack. — Stitches 
in  the  spine. — Pustules  in  the  back. — Sensation  of  tension,  of  stiffness,  and  of 
torpor  in  the  loins»  as  if  they  were  swollen  or  benumbed. — ^Aching,  tensive, 
acnte,  drawing,  or  shooting  pains  in  the  loins. — Sensation  of  tensive  pressure 
in  the  k>ins,  often  with  heaviness,  heat,  or  torpor  of  these  parts,  esp.  in  the 
morning  on  waking,  aggravated  by  sitting  or  lying,  sometimes  diminished 
by  evacuations,  or  by  the  emission  of  wind. — ^Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  ; 
worse  when  sitting  and  lying,  in  the  morning  when  awaking  (during 
menstruation). 

S8.  Upper  Limbs. — Sensation  of  lassitude,  of  paralysis,  and  of  bruising 
in  the  arms,  esp.  during  motion,  provoked  or  aggravated  by  pressure. — ^Acute 
pains  in  the  arms, — Pains  in  the  shoulder,  as  of  subcutaneous  ulceration. — 
Marbled  spots  on  the  arms,  with  burning  itching. — Cramp-like  pains  in  the 
forearm. — Tractive,  acute  pains  in  the  forearm  and  in  the  bones,  extending  to 
the  hand  and  the  joints  of  the  fingers,  with  heaviness  and  weakness  of  the  arm. 
— Borning  or  smarting  pains  in  the  forearm,  aggravated  by  friction  or  scratch- 
ing, and  sometimes  followed  by  a  red  spot.*— Small  itching  spots,  like  petechias, 
on  the  forearm  and  on  the  back  of  the  hand  near  the  wrist. — Lymphatic 
swelling  of  the  forearm,  with  spots  like  petechias  and  burning  pains  in  the 
skin. — ^Drawing,  acute  pains  in  the  joints  of  the  hand  and  of  the  fingers. — 
Aching,  digging,  violent  pains  in  the  back  of  the  hand,  with  sensation  of 
heaviness. — Urticarial  spot  on  the  back  of  the  hand. — Small  warts  in  the 
fleshy  part  of  the  hand,  under  the  thumb. — Sensation  in  the  extremity  of  the 
finger,  as  if  caused  by  sul>cutaneous  ulceration. — Flat  wart  on  the  finger. — 
Redness  of  the  hands,  with  itching,  as  if  from  chilblains. — Neuralgic  pain 
under  nails  ;  tender  to  touch. 
^     Lower  Limbs. — Sensation  of  weariness  and  pain,  as  of  fatigue,  in 


288  BISMUTHUM 

case  of  sub-acute  cystitis,  with  irregular  paroxysms  of  crampy  pains 
in  the  bladder ;  also  a  case  of  phlegmasia  alba  dolens  (left) ;  Petroz 
having  cured  another. 

mlatioiiB.— Bismuth  is  aniidoted  by:  Calc,  Caps.,  Coffee,  Nux. 
Is  isomorphic  with:  Ant.  c,  Ars.,  Phos.  Similar  to:  Ant.  c.  (vomiting, 
white  tongue,  gastritis) ;  Ars.  (anxiety,  gastritis,  cancer,  gangrene, 
vomiting)  ;  Bell,  (gastral^a,  cancer,  flatus  in  ridges)  ;  Bry.  (toothache, 
gastritis);  Calc,  Caps.,  Chi.,  Ign.,  Kali  c,  Kre.,  Lach.  (sore  throat, 
deep,  ulcers^  ;  Lye,  Merc,  Nux  (gastralgia,  urging  to  stool) ;  Phos. 
(vomiting :  Bism.  vomits  immediately  ;  Pho.  vomits  water  as  soon  as 
it  becomes  warm  in  stomach) ;  Plumb,  (abdomen  in  ridges,  gastralgia ; 
>  bending  backward ;  heart  disease) ;  Puis.,  Rhus  (>  by  motion)  ; 
Sep.,  Sil.,  Staph.     Useful  after:  Euonymus  (headache). 

Gausatioii. — ^Abdominal  operations. 

STMPTOMS. 

X.  Mind. — Discontented,  morose,  and  complaining  humour. — Incon- 
stancy.— ^Aversion  to  solitude. — Delirium. — Delirium  tremens. — Loss  of  con- 
sciousness.— Moral  apathy  and  insensibility. 

2,  3.  Head  and  Eyes. — Giddiness  in  the  morning. — ^Vertigo,  as  if  the 
brain  were  turning  in  a  circle. — Stupor,  with  mist  before  the  eyes. — Head- 
ache, chiefly  in  the  sinciput,  and  extending  even  to  the  eyes. — Cutting  pain  in 
brain,  beginning  above  r.  orbit,  extending  to  occiput. — Pressive  heaviness  on 
the  head,  esp.  on  the  forehead,  above  the  root  of  the  nose  and  in  the  temples. 
— Constant  digging  and  piercing  in  the  forehead,  which  extends  to  the  eyes 
and  point  of  the  nose. — Headache  attended  by,  or  alternating  with,  gastralgia. 
Burning  contraction  in  the  head,  esp.  in  the  forehead  and  in  the  eyes. — 
Aching  of  the  eyeballs. — Secretibn  of  humour  in  the  comer  of  the  eyes. 

5.  Nose. — Nose-bleed,  dark  blood. 

6.  Face. — Earth-coloured,  sickly,  and  wan  (with  distorted  features),  with 
livid  circle  round  the  eyes. — Aching  pain  in  the  cheek-bones;  >  running 
about  and  holding  cold  water  in  the  mouth. — Face  pale  and  cold. 

7,  8.  Teeth  and  Mouth. — Pressive,  tractive  odontalgia.— Toothache  > 
taking  cold  water  into  the  mouth,  <  when  the  water  becomes  warm. — Gums 
swollen^  with  pain  like  excoriation. — Painful  sensibility  of  the  interior  of  the 
mouth,  as  if  from  excoriation. — Constant  secretion  of  a  brownish,  thick  saliva, 
of  a  metallic  taste. — In  the  mornmg,  taste  of  blood  in  the  mouth,  with  spitting 
of  sanguineous  mucus. — In  the  evening,  tongue  white  and  loaded  (without 
heat  or  thirst). — In  the  evening,  great  thirst,  with  preference  for  cold  drinks. 

9.  Throat. — Inflammation  of  the  whole  throat — Burning  pain  in  the 
throat,  sometimes  insupportable. — Phagedenic  ulceration  of  uvula,  with  burn- 
ing and  tearing ;  difficult  swallowing  of  fluids,  which  return  through  nose. 

II,  12.  Stomach  and  Abdomen. — Nausea  after  every  meal. — >  By 
cold  water  (drink). — ^Water  is  vomited  as  soon  as  it  reaches  the  stomach. — 
Vomiting,  convulsive  gagging  and  inexpressible  pain  in  stomach  (after  opera- 
tions on  abdomen). — Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  esp.  after  having  eaten. 
— ^Violent  risings  of  a  putrid  smell. — Strong  inclination  to  vomit,  with  violent 
retching. — Cancer  of  stomach. — ^Vomiting  of  brownish  matter. — ^Vomiting  (of 
bile)  with  oppressive  anxiety,  small  pulse,  vertigo  and  prostration.— Vomiting 


BISMUTHUM  289 

and  diarrhoea.— Vomiting  of  all  fluids  (children). — Cramp-like  and  pressive 
pains  in  the  stomach,  esp.  after  having  eaten. — Pressure  like  a  load  in  the 
stomach,  esp.  after  a  meal. — Burning  in  the  stomach. — (Inflammation  of  the 
stoDiach.)-'Borborygiiii  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.~-Colic  with  pinching, 
pressure,  and  an  inclination  to  go  to  stool. — Great  inflation  of  the  abdomen. — 
Abdomen  bloated  in  ridges ;  rumbling  of  wind  along  colon,  passes  rarely,  but 
then  relieves.— Painful  sensibility  of  the  abdomen  to  the  touch. 

13.  Stool  and  Amis. — In  the  evening,  ineffectual  efforts  to  go  to  stool. 
—Aqueous  diarrhoea  of  a  putrid  smell. — Stools :  cadaverous  smell. — Cholera ; 
diolerine ;  fluids  vomited  as  soon  as  taken. 

14.  Urinary  Or^^ans.  —  Frequent  and  copious  emission  of  aqueous 
urine— Emission  of  urine  entirely  suppressed. 

15.  Male  Sextial  Origans.  —  Aching  pains  in  the  testes. — Nocturnal 
pollutions  without  dreams. — Pressing,  aching  in  the  (r.)  testicle. 

18.  Chest. — Cough,  day  and  night,  with  copious  expectoration. — Aching 

in  r.  half  of  chest,  near  sternum,  in  a  small  spot. — Pressure  and  squeezing 

icross  the  chest,  in  the  region  of  the  diaphragm. — Hot,  burning  constriction  of 

the  chest,  with  difficulty  of  respiration  and  of  speech. — Burning  and  piercing 

in  the  chest  and  in  the  back. 

19.    Heart. — Beating  of  the  heart. 

ZL.    Limbs. — ^Pressive  and  drawing  pain,  with  paralytic  weakness  in  the 

forearms  and  in  the  bones  of  the  wrist. — ^Trembling  of  the  hands  after  eating. 

—Tearing  in  r.  index  finger,  also  in  tips  and  joints  of  fingers. — ^Acute  drawing 

pains  under  the  nails  of  the  fingers. — Excessive  dryness  of  the  palms  of  the 

hands  and  of  the  soles  of  the  feet. — Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  hands  and 

of  the  feet — Sharp  and  pressive  pains  in  the  bones  of  the  foot — Itching  and 

gnawing  in  the  tibia  and  in  the  back  of  the  foot,  increased  by  scratching. — 

Tearing  in  maleolus  of  r.  foot.,  in  paroxysms,  terminating  in  tendo-Achillis. — 

Ttu^  and  feet  bluish. 

24.  Generalities. — Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  inner  parts. — Screwing 
pains.— Pressing  pains  (eyes,  head,  abdomen,  testicles). — Pressing-tearing 
(bones  of  the  hands  and  of  the  feet). — Cramp-like  contractions  in  all  the 
mosdes.— Aching  pains,  or  aching  and  pulling  pains  together. 

2^  Skin. — Ulcers,  gangrenous  bluish. — Dry  gangrene  ;  parchment-like, 
— Boming  smarting  in  the  skin. 

26.  Sleep. — Languor  and  weakness. — Frequent  waking,  as  if  in  a  fright. 
—Night  sleep  disturbed  by  lascivious  dreams,  with  or  without  emissions. — 
Great  sleepiness  in  the  morning  after  rising. — ^Awaking  from  sleep  with  a 
start,  and  in  a  fright — ^Voluptuous  dreams. — Lassitude  on  awaking  in  the 
night 

27.  Fever. — Coldness  of  the  whole  body,  externally. — Great  heat — 
Flushes  of  heat,  esp.  on  head  and  chest. — Intermittent,  small  pulse. 


VOL  I.  20 


290  ,   BOLETUS   LARICIS 

Blatta  Amerioana. 

The  great  American  cockroach,  probably  Kakerlac  insignis.    N.  O. 
Orthoptera.    Trituration  of  live  insect  with  sacch.  lact. 

GlinloaL-— Asthma.    Dropsy.    Jaundice. 

GharaoteristloB. — BlatL  Amer,  has  been  used  as  a  remedy  for 
dropsy,  and  has  a  popular  reputation  in  jaundice.  It  was  proved  by 
Mure,  and  developed  symptoms  of  jaundice ;  yellow  sclerotics. 
Heat  in  urethra  when  urinating  (showing  a  relation  to  Cantharis). 
Pain  shifting  from  back  (r.)  to  shoulder-blade.  Acute  pain  in  chest 
with  want  of  breath  (B.  orient.).  General  prostration  and  weariness  on 
going  upstairs. 

Blatta  Orientalis. 

Indian  cockroach,    AT.  O.  Orthoptera.    Trituration  of  live  insect. 

OUnioal^— Asthma.    Bronchitis.    Phthisis. 

Oharaoteristios.— Found  accidentally  to  relieve  asthma  in  a 
patient  who  took  tea  in  which  a  beetle  had  been  infused  ;  it  has  since 
proved  to  have  a  wide  range  in  asthmatic  cases  (Ray,  Horn.  Recorder, 
1890,  p.  254 ;  1801,  p.  193).  In  the  acute  attack  it  acts  better  in 
low  potencies  ;  the  higher  being  given  in  the  more  chronic  stages.  It 
is  especially  suited  to  corpulent  people  ;  and  to  malarial  cases  ;  cases 
<  in  rainy  weather.  Has  saved  cases  in  which  suffocation  was 
threatened  by  great  accumulation  of  mucus.  Useful  in  cases  of 
bronchitis  and  phthisis  where  there  is  much  d]r8pnoea. 


Boletus  Laricis. 

B.  purgans.    AT.  0.  Fungi.    Trituration. 

OlinieaL— Diarrhcea.  Dysentery.  Fever.  Gall-bladder,  affections  of .  Headache. 
Liver,  diseases  of. 

Oharaoteristios. — Burt  proved  the  crude  substance  and  the  3rd 
trituration.  The  gastro-enteric  irritation  common  to  the  Fungi  was 
very  well  marked.    Motion  <  headache. 

Eelations. — Compare .-  Agaric,  &c.  Coccul.  (head  hollow). 

STMPTOMB. 

X.  Mind.— Very  gloomy  and  despondent.— Irritated  at  the  least  trifle- 
Absent-minded. 

2.  Head.— Head  feeling  very  light  and  hollow,  with  deep  frontal  head- 
ache  and  great  f  aintness. 


BOLETUS  SATANAS  291 

3.  Eyes. — Agglutination  of  eyelids  every  morning,  with  doll,  aching  pains 
in  eyeballs. 

8.  Mottth. — ^Teeth  and  gums  very  sore.— Tongue :  white  coat ;  thick 
yellow  coat  showing  marks  of  teeth. — ^Taste  :  flat ;  coppery  ;  unnatural,  of  all 
food;  k>st 

II.  Stomacb. — Feeling  in  fauces  as  if  would  vomit. — Nausea  and 
vomiting. — Great  faintness  at  epigastrium. 

n.  Abdomen. — Severe  cutting  pains  in  stomach  every  few  minutes,  with 
doD,  aching  distress  in  umbilicus,  and  loud  rumbling  in  bowels  all  night. — Heavy 
drag^ng  pains  in  liver,  more  in  r.  lobe. — Dull,  burning  distress ;  drawing ; 
aching  in  r.  lobe  of  liver  with  frontal  headache.— Sharp  cutting  pains  in  r. 
k>be  of  liver  and  whole  dorsal  region  on  full  inspiration. — Sharp  cutting  pains 
near  gall-bladder. — Burning  distress  in  region  of  gall-bladder  all  afternoon, 
with  sharp  pains  in  stomach  and  heavy  aching  in  whole  liver,  esp.  r.  lobe. — 
Severe,  dull,  aching  distress  just  below  stomach,  causing  great  faintness. 

13.  Stool. — Straining  after  stooL — Stool :  Thin,  yellow  papescent ;  mixed 
with  something  looking  like  oil  in  large  and  small  drops ;  followed  by  aching  in 
Uver  and  umbilicus. — Black,  lumpy,  dry  stools  mixed  with  bile  and  mucus. — 
Stools  of  bile,  mucus,  and  blood,  with  high  fever. — Lienteria. 

20.    Back. — Dull,  aching  distress  in  back  and  legs. 

94.  (Generalities.— Great  restlessness  after  midnight.— Faintness  after 
iitooL— Aching  distress  in  all  joints. 

27.  Fever. — Chilliness  along  spine  with  frequent  hot  flashes  of  fever.— 
Disposition  to  yawn  and  stretch  when  chilly. — Face  hot  and  flushed  with 
severe  frontal  headache.— Hands  hot  and  dry.— Waking  at  midnight  two 
difFerent  nights  in  a  profuse  perspiration. 


Boletas  Loridns. 

B.  nigrescens.    N.  0.  Fungi.    Trituration. 

. — Urticaria  toberosa. 

Charaoteristlcs.  —  Poisoning  effects  show  delirium  ;  sunken 
features  ;  violet  colour  of  nose  and  lips  ;  intense  thirst ;  violent  pain 
in  epigastrium ;  meteorism ;  subsultus  tendinum ;  urticaria  tuberosa 
(^)eedily  followed  by  death)  ;  cold  sweat. 

Boletas  Satanas. 

AT.  0.  Fungi.    Trituration. 

flH^Uai^ — ^Diarrhoea  membranooa.    Dysentery. 

Chmrmoteristics. — There  are  two  fragmentary  provings  of  this 
fungus,  and  observations  on  six  persons  poisoned.  It  produces  gastro- 
enteric disturbances  very  similar  to  that  of  its  two  relatives. 


292  BORACICUM   ACIDUM 

STHPT0M8. 

I.    Mind. — Fear  and  restlessness. 

3.    Eyes. — Sparks  before  eyes  alternating  with  obscuration  of  vision. 
8,  9.    Mouth  and  Throat. — Troublesome  dryness    in   mouth   and 
throat. — ^\^iolent  burning  and  scraping  in  throat. 

11.  Stomach* — Unquenchable  thirst. — Sudden  desire  to  vomit ;  no 
nausea  between  attacks. — ^Vomited  twenty  times  in  three  hours. — Fri^tful 
pain  in  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Abdomen  sunken  and  frightfully  painful. — Obstinate 
tension  of  abdomen. 

13.  Stool. — A  profuse  diarrhoea  of  blood,  and  of  the  mucous  lining  of  the 
intestines. — ^Watery  evacuations. 

34.  Generalities. — Sudden  sensation  through  all  his  limbs  as  if  he  would 
be  attacked  with  apoplexy. — ^Violent  and  extremely  painful  cramps  in  the 
muscles  of  the  limbs  and  face. — Faintness  while  vomiting. — Limbs  cold  ;  cold 
sweat  over  whole  body. 


Bombyx  Processionea. 

Procession  Moth.    N,  0.  Lepidoptera.    Tincture  of  live  caterpillars. 
Clinieal* — Urticaria. 

CharacteriBtios. — Contact  with  the  caterpillars  or  the  emanations 
from  a  nest  of  them  causes  intense  irritation,  and  hard,  large,  areola- 
formed  tubercles,  with  a  red  areola,  so  thick  as  to  leave  hardly  any 
space  between.  Sometimes  they  are  linear-formed  ;  most  marked 
near  joints.  Sensation  as  if  a  foreign  body  were  under  the  skin.  Itching 
of  whole  body.  Itching,  evenings  ;  not  relieved  by  anything.  In  one 
victim  it  caused  frequent  waking  at  night,  and  dreams  that  his  arms 
were  being  cauterised,  and  arrows  thrust  into  the  muscles.  Burning 
heat  of  skin.  In  one  case,  that  of  a  boy  who  shook  a  large  number 
of  the  caterpillars  from  a  tree  into  his  naked  breast,  it  caused  an 
itching  so  severe  that  the  boy  had  to  run  home  for  assistance  ;  then 
fever,  somnolency,  delirium,  and  finally  death  ensued. 

Relations.— ^oiM^^r^  :  Apis,  Ast.  fl.,  Rhus,  &c. 


Boracicom  Acidom. 

Boric  Acid.    H3  BO3.    Solution  of  crystals  in  alcohol. 

Clinieal. — ^Antlseptic.    Climacteric  flushings.    Erythema.    Eyes,  afFections  of. 
Headache.    Impetigo.    CEdema.    Renal  colic.    Vomiting.    Whitlow.    Wounds. 

Charaoteristio&u  —  Poisonings  and  provings  with  Bor.  ac,  have 
caused:  headache ;  vertigo ;  noises  in  the  ears ;  prostration ;  cold  saliva ; 


BORACICUM  ACIDUM  293 

vomiting  of  tough,  greenish  stu£F ;  uncontrollable  vomiting  ;  sweat  on 
scrobiculus  cordis  ;  hiccough  ;  pasty  stool ;  pain  in  region  of  ureters 
or  increased  urine  and  increased  call  to  urinate  ;  albuminuria  ; 
erythematous  eruption  on  face,  body,  and  thighs  followed  by  pearly 
▼esides  on  face  and  neck.  Three  cases  of  poisoning  have  been 
reported  from  packing  the  vagina  with  the  dry  acid,  kept  in  by 
tampons  till  hquefaction  took  place.  Symptoms  were  :  Formication 
ci  hands  and  feet,  later  of  face.  Sad  spirits,  great  nervous  depression. 
Baming  skin ;  it  became  swelled  and  charred,  and  all  motion  was 
painful  One  case  went  into  collapse ;  temperature  subnormal  ; 
agfaing  and  weeping  by  turns.  The  patients  were  cold  ;  vagina  felt 
"cold  as  if  packed  with  ice.*'  Coldness  is  a  prominent  feature,  as  cold 
saliva.  In  the  3X  Cooper  has  found  it  give  great  relief  in  climacteric 
flashings.  In  connection  with  the  skin  effects  may  be  mentioned  the 
case  of  a  woman  who  took  gr.  xxx  per  diem  of  the  acid  for  a  month, 
when  there  app>eared  a  multiform  erythema  of  trunk  extending  to 
upper  limbs  ;  at  the  same  time  there  appeared  a  painful  swelling  of 
upper  lids  with  conjunctivitis  and  photophobia.  Finally  the  cedema 
was  so  intense  as  to  close  the  eyes  and  give  the  appearance  of 
sdenxsed  tissue.  The  symptoms  began  to  abate  when  the  Bar.  ac. 
was  discontinued,  and  disappeared  in  a  week.  Bor.  ac.  has  been 
largely  used  as  an  antiseptic  dressing  for  wounds,  as  a  lotion  for  the 
eyes  and  for  whitlow,  and  as  a  wash  in  catarrh  of  the  bladder.  It  is 
much  less  irritating  than  Carbolic  acid.  But  it  also  has  produced  skin 
eruptions.    Symptoms  >  after  walking  in  open  air. 

Belatioiiai — Compare:    Borax,    CarboUc   acid,    KaU  bi.   (tough 
macos). 

STHPTOMS. 

I.    Mind. — Low  spirits,  nervous  depression. — Sighing  and  weeping  by 
turns.— Apathetic. 

8.    Head. — ^A  gastric  headache. — Headache,  vertigo,  noise  in  ears. 

3.    Eyes. — Intense  oedema  closing  eyes,  conjunctivitis  and  photophobia. 

8.    Mouth. — Much  cold  saliva,— Tongue  dry,  furred,  difficulty  in  moving 
it ;  dryness  in  throat 

n.  Stomach. — Nausea  and  heaviness  in  stomach  >  after  walking  in 
open  air. — Vomiting  of  tough  mucus,  strongly  alkaline. — Vomits  greenish 
stuff. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pain  in  region  of  ureters. — Frequent  and  urgent 
desire  to  urinate. — Quantity  of  urine  doubled. — ^Albumen  in  urine. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Vagina  packed  with  it  felt  cold  as  if 
ice  had  been  used. — Climacteric  flushings. 

14.  Generalities. — Collapse. — Formication  of  hands  and  feet ;  later 
office. 

15.  Skin. — Impetigo  figurata  first  on  r.  thigh  then  on  left. — Burning 
skis. — Multiform  erythema  and  hard  oedema. 

27.    Fever. — Coldness  ;  temperature  subnormal. 


294  BORAX 

Borax. 

Borax  veneta.    Natrum  biboracicum.    Sodium  biborate.    Na,  B^  O, 
loHaO.    Trituration  and  Solution. 

CUni99L^Aphth€e,  Corns.  Dentition.  Diarrhcea.  Ear-discharge.  Entropion. 
Erysipelas.  Eyes,  affections  of.  Finger  joints,  ulcers  on.  Herpes.  Menstruation, 
painful  {membranous).  Nipple,  sore.  Noset  affections  of.  Pleurisy.  Plica-polonica. 
Psoriasis.  Screaming.  Sea-sickness.  Sterility.  Syphilitic  sore-throat  Taste^ 
ditordered.    Trichiasis.    Ulcers.    Urifie,  strong'Smelling.    Vertigo,    Zoster. 

Oharaoteristios. — Borax  has  some  very  peculiar  symptoms  which 
will  serve  as  keynotes  to  many  cases.  Chief  among  them  are  : 
(x)  Sensitiveness  to  sudden  noises,  as  a  distant  shot,  which  causes 
violent  starting.  (It  has  cured  "shot-shyness"  in  sporting  dogs.) 
(3)  Intolerance  of  downward  motions  ;  a  child  screams  when  nurse 
puts  it  into  cot,  or  when  she  rocks  it ;  symptoms  are  worse  going 
downstairs ;  sea-sickness  (when  the  downward  motion  is  felt  most : 
'*  Every  time  the  ship  goes  down,  everything  in  me  comes  up  ").  Rest- 
lessness with  ebullitions,  especially  after  talking,  with  nausea.  Laughter 
alternating  with  weeping.  Cobweb  sensations  ;  sore  mouth  ;  infant 
pale,  earthy,  flesh  flabby  ;  screams  out  in  sleep,  wakes  frightened  and 
clings  to  nurse  ;  excessively  nervous,  a  slight  noise  arouses.  Starts 
with  pain.  Muco-cutaneous  surfaces  are  sore  ;  in  the  eyelids  there  is 
ingrowing  of  lashes.  Otorrhcea  and  inflammation  of  auricle  :  '*  starts 
with  the  pains."  Nostrils  ulcerated  ;  soreness,  p^in  and  swelling  of 
tip  of  nose.  Aphthae  ;  mouth  of  child  feels  hot  to  mother's  nipple  ; 
child  lets  go  nipple  and  cries  with  pain  and  vexation,  or  else  refuses 
breast  altogether.  Diarrhoea  with  pain  or  soft  yellow  stools  accom- 
panying aphthae.  Child  screams  before  urinating  (from  inflammation 
of  mucous  membrane).  Leucorrhcea  clear,  copious,  albuminous, 
unnaturally  hot.  Painful  nursing ;  pain  after  nursing  ;  empty  feeling 
in  breasts ;  they  ache  because  they  are  empty,  >  by  pressure  :  this  is 
characteristic.  Dysmenorrhoea  (may  be  membranous),  pain  excessive 
during  flow.  Leucorrhcea  preceding  and  following  menses,  albuminous, 
acrid.  Herpetic  eruptions ;  pleuritic  symptoms  (upper  right  chest)  and 
cough,  with  expectoration  of  a  mushy,  moulay  odour.  A  notable 
symptom  is  :  Before  the  easy  stool  in  siternoon,  fretful,  ill-humoured, 
indolent,  and  discontented  ;  after  it,  lively,  contented,  and  cheerful. 
Another  mental  symptom  is  :  Idles  through  the  afternoon  ;  does  not 
really  get  to  work  ;  changes  from  one  business  to  another  ;  from  one 
room  to  another.  It  is  suited  to  the  period  of  dentition  ;  to  persons 
with  light  hair  ;  lax  skins  and  muscles  ;  wrinkled  skin  ;  consequences 
of  getting  cold  in  cold  and  wet  weather;  riding;  eating  fruit. 
Symptoms  are  <  in  warm  weather,  <  after  menstruation.  Parts 
usually  red  turn  white.  Many  Natrum  symptoms  appear  in  the 
proving.    Stitching  pains  predominate. 

BelatioilB.— Com^ar^ ;  Calc,  Nux,  Bry.,  Lye,  Merc,  Puis.,  Rhus, 
All.  c,  Sil.,  Sul.,  Ars.,  Bell.,  Graph.,  Ign.,  Kali  bi.,  Phos.  Antidoied  by 
Cham.,  CofiF.    Similar  to :  Am.  c.  and  Mag.  m.  (right  nostril  stopped) 


/ 


BORAX  295 

Caic.  (indinatioD  to  breathe  deeply) ;  Kali  bi.  (tough  mucus) ;  Aur. 
and  Pals,  (laughter  alternately  wit£  weeping)  ;  Sars.,  Lye,  Benz.  ac. 
(strong  urine,  crying  before  urination ;  but  these  three  have  gravel : 
with  Boiax  it  is  from  inflammation  of  mucous  membrane) ;  Arum  tri. 
(sore  mouth) ;  Graph,  (trichiasis) ;  Bell,  (hot  leucorrhcea) ;  Sep.  (small 
ulcers  about  joints)  ;  Bar.  c.  (cobweb-sensation) ;  Nat.  sul.  (cheerful 
after  stool).    Incompatible  :  Acet.  ac.,  Vinegar,  Wine. 

STHPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Great  anxiety,  esp.  when  riding  in  a  carriage  or  descending 
a  mountain. — Dread  of  downward  motion ;  child  has  anxious  countenance 
when  laid  in  cot,  or  carried  downstairs. — Easily  frightened  and  startled 
with  least  noise. — Before  stool  irritable,  cheerful  and  happy  after. — Fear 
of  being  infected  by  some  contagious  disease. — Strong  tendency  to  be 
fri^tened. — ^Irritability. — Disposition  to  be  angry,  with  ill-humour  and  passion. 
--Becomes  vehement  and  swears. — Does  not  wish  to  do  anything. — Dread  of 
labour. 

9.    Head. — Fits  of  vertigo,  with  fainting. — ^Vertigo,  with  fulness  in  the 
head,  esp.  when  going  upstairs,  or  to  any  elevation  whatever. — Headache, 
with  shootings  in    the  ears. — Headache  (all  over,  with  trembling  c^  the 
body)»  with  nansea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  mostly  at  ten  o'clock  in  the 
morning. — ^Fulness  in  the  head,  and  pressure  above  the  eyes. — ^Aching  and 
drxwii^  pains  in  the  forehead,  and  as  far  as  the  root  of  the  nose  and  the 
nape  of  the   neck,  increased  by  writing,  by  reading,  and  by  stooping. — 
Successive  drawing  pains  in  the  forehead,  with  nausea,  and  acute  draw- 
ing pains  in  the  eyes. — Shootings  in  the  head,  esp.  above  the  eyes  and 
the  temples. — Congestion  in  the  head,  esp.  in  the  occiput,  with  pulsative 
pains. — Sensibility  of  the  teguments  of  the  head  to  cold  and  to  bad  weather. 
—Hair  entangled,  as  in  plica  polonica ;  is  rough  and  frowsy,  splits ;  sticks 
together. 

3.  Eye&i — Pressure  on  the  eyes. — Itching  in  the  eyes. — ^The  eyes  burn 
and  are  contracted  on  putting  on  spectacles. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes, 
esp.  in  the  canthi,  with  excoriation  of  the  edges  of  the  eyelids,  trichiasis, 
and  nocturnal  agglutination. — Granular  eyelids. — Sparkling  before  the  eyes 
when  writing. — ^Too  great  sensibility  of  the  eyes  to  candle-light. 

4.  Sars. — Shootings  in  the  ears,  with  pain  as  of  excoriation. — Inflam- 
mation and  swelling  of  the  ears,  with  discharge  of  pus  and  shooting 
cephalalgia. — Fits  of  stoppage  of  the  ears  and  of  deafness. — Buzzing  and 
murmuring  in  the  ears,  with  acute,  drawing  pains  in  the  top  of  the  head. — 
Affections  of  the  1.  ear  particularly.^Itching ;  stitches. 

5.  Nose. — Itching  in  the  nose,  with  tingling.—Nostrils  ulcerated,  with 
swelling  and  pain,  as  of  excoriation  at  the  point  of  the  nose. — Dry  scabs  in 
the  nose. — Blood  follows  on  blowing  the  nose. — Red  shining  tip  of  nose ;  red 
noses  of  young  women. — Nasal  haemorrhage,  with  pulsative  pains  in  the  head. 
—Sneezing,  with  violent  shootings  in  r.  side  of  the  chest— Accumulation  of 
thick  and  greenish  mucus  in  the  nose. 

d.  Face. — Complexion  (in  a  suckling  woman)  wan,  pale,  and  earth- 
odoored. — Sensation  in  the  r.  side  of  the  face  as  if  it  were  covered  with 


296  BORAX 

cobweb. — Muscular  palpitation  in  the  comers  of  the  mouth. — Erysipelatous 
inflammation  and-  swelling  of  the  cheeks,  with  acute,  drawing  pains  in  the 
cheek-bone,  aggravated  by  laughter.— Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  face,  the 
nose,  and  the  lips. — Smarting  in  the  lips. — ^Tettery  spots  round  the  mouth, 
and  scabs  on  the  upper  lip. — Swelling  of  the  lower  lip,  with  burning  and  pain 
as  of  excoriation. — Red  papulous  eruption  on  cheeks  and  around  chin. 

7.  Teeth. — Pressive  and  cramp-like  pain  in  teeth  which  are  carious, 
esp.  in  damp  weather,  sometimes  with  inflammatory  swelling  of  the  cheek,  or 
swelling  of  the  gums.— Acute  drawing  pains  in  the  teeth  which  are  carious, 
spreading  over  the  head,  when  they  are  touched  with  the  tongue,  or  when 
cold  water  is  applied  to  them. — Pressive  tingling  in  the  teeth,  immediately 
after  supper,  or  breakfast,  >  by  smoking  tobacco.  —  Shooting  pains  in 
teeth  which  are  carious,  with  shootings  in  the  ears,  and  headache. — Ulcers  in 
the  gums,  with  inflammatory  swelling  of  the  cheek. — Bleeding  of  the  gums. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Aphthae  in  the  mouth  and  on  the  tongue,  which  bleed 
easily. — Spasmodic  stifEness  and  torpor  of  the  tongue. — Skin  of  the  palate 
hard  and  wrinkled. 

9.  Throat. — Dryness  in  the  throat. — ^Tenacious  mucus  in  the  throat, 
with  difficult  expectoration. 

10.  Appetite.— Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  on  eating,  or  on  swallowing 
the  saliva. — Loss  of  taste. — Thirst  in  the  morning. — Desire  for  acid  drinks. — 
Appetite  moderate,  esp.  at  supper. — Nausea  and  uneasiness  during  a  meal. 
— ^After  every  meal  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  with  diarrhoea  and  colic. — 
Fulness  and  pressure  in  the  stomach,  with  uneasiness  and  ill-humour,  after 
having  eaten  fruit  (pears  and  apples). — Colic,  with  tendency  to  diarrhoea  after 
smoking  tobacco. 

11.  Stomach. — Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  when  riding  in  a 
carriage. — ^Vomiting  of  sour  mucus,  when  fasting  in  the  morning  or  after 
breakfast. — Pressure  in  the  stomach  after  every  meal. — Contractive  pains  in 
the  stomach,  or  a  sensation  such  as  would  follow  a  strain  in  the  loins,  with 
shootings  in  the  vertebral  column  and  loins. — Pain  in  region  of  stomach, 
after  lifting  heavy  weights,  extending  into  the  small  of  back,  quite  incapa- 
citating one. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  the  hypochondria,  mostly  pressive  and  in  the 
1.  side,  and  esp.  when  riding  in  a  carriage. — Pressure  and  shootings  in  the 
lumbar  region. — Pains  in  the  hypochondria  and  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
abdomen,  as  if  hard  and  cutting  bodies  were  moving  in  them. — Pinching  in 
the  abdomen,  with  diarrhoea. — ^Accumulation  of  flatus  in  the  abdomen,  and 
frequent  escape  of  wind. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Evacuations  frequent,  soft,  or  loose,  with  pinch- 
ing and  borborygmi  in  the  abdomen. — Greenish  evacuations  (in  children). — 
Slimy  diarrhoea. — ^Abundant  flow  of  pale,  yellowish,  or  brownish  slime,  and 
of  blood  from  the  anus,  with  pains  in  the  loins. — Itching,  contraction,  and 
shootings,  in  the  anus  and  in  the  rectum. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Ineffectual  urgency  to  urinate,  with  incisive 
pains  in  the  urethra,  and  swelling  in  the  lumbar  region. — Urgent  inclination 
to  urinate. — Frequent  emission  of  urine  even  in  the  night. — Hot  urine. — ^Acrid 
fetor  of  urine. — Soreness  in  the  urethra  after  micturition,  and  esp.  on  being 
touched,  even  when  not  making  water. 


BORAX  297 

15.  Male  Seztial  Organs. — ^Absence  ci  sexual  desire. — Erectiops,  with 
paunfnl  tension,  on  waking  in  the  morning.— Gonorrhoea.— Chancres  studding 
prepuce.— Stitches. — Sticking,  sore  pain,  <  when  touched. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Catamenia  premature  and  too  copious, 
o£  a  pale  red  colour. — During  the  catamenia,  pulsative  pains  in  the  head, 
buzzing  in  the  ears,  nausea,  with  pains  in  the  stomach  and  in  the  loins,  or 
shootings  and  aching  in  the  groin. — Leucorrhcea,  corrosive,  and  thick,  like 
starch. — Sterility. — ^Acrid  leucorrhoca,  appearing  for  two  weeks  between 
catamenia,  with  swelling  of  labia  and  inflamed  and  discharging  Duverneys 
glands. — Stinging  and  distended  feeling  in  clitoris. — During  pregnancy, 
swelling,  itching,  and  burning  of  vagina,  with  a  discharge  like  gonorrhcea. — 
False  pains. — Labour  pains:  spasmodic;  more  in  stomach  than  in  uterus; 
dart  upwards,  head  of  child  goes  back. — Griping  and  sometimes  stitches  in 
L  mamma,  and  when  child  has  nursed  she  is  obliged  to  compress  the  breast 
with  the  hand  because  it  aches  from  being  empiy,^^P3.m  in  the  breasts  when 
suckling. — Flow  of  milk,  which  curdles  spe^iily.— ^Aphthas  so  tender  they 
prevent  child  nursing. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — ^Acute,  drawing  pains  in  the  larynx,  ex- 
tending to  the  chest,  with  inclination  to  cough. — Hoarseness  in  the  throat, 
with  drawing  shootings  on  coughing  and  sneezing. — Dry  cough,  caused  by  a 
tickling  and  scraping  in  the  throat,  with  pressure  on  the  chest. — Dry,  hectic 
coogh,  with  shootings  in  the  r.  side  of  the  chest,  and  the  groins,  relieved  by 
washing  with  cold  water,  increased  by  drinking  wine. — Nocturnal  cough. — 
Cough,  with  expectoration  of  the  smeU  and  taste  of  mould. — On  coughing, 
e]q>ectoration  of  mucus  with  streaks  of  blood. 

18.  Chest.— Difficult  respiration,  with  urgent  want  to  inspire  deeply,  and 
shootings  in  the  r.  side  of  the  chest. — Constrictive  oppression  of  the  chest, 
csp.  on  going  upstairs.— Shortness  of  breath  after  having  ascended  the  stairs, 
with  shootings  in  the  chest  on  speaking.-^Feeling  of  congestion,  with  heavi- 
ness in  the  chest. — Shootings  in  the  chest,  esp.  on  the  r.  side,  and  principally 
on  yawning,  on  coughing,  on  breathing  deeply,  on  running,  and  during 
every  physical  effort. — Drawing  shootings  in  the  intercostal  muscles  of  the 
r.  side,  extending  to  the  groins,  augmented  by  the  least  movement  of  the 
diest  or  arms,  with  inability  to  remain  lying  on  the  side  affected.— Pains  in 
the  chest  >,  esp.  when  lying  quietly  on  the  back,  or  on  walking  slowly, 
and  pressing  the  part  affected  with  the  hand. 

ig.  Heart. — Sensation  as  if  the  heart  were  on  the  r.  side,  and  were 
going  to  be  crushed. — Infants  cyanotic  from  birth. 

so.  Neck  and  Back.— Sharp  and  drawing  pains  between  the  shoulder- 
blades,  on  the  shoulder,  and  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  with  inability  to  stoop. 
— Furunculus  in  the  arm-pit. — Itching  and  crawling  in  the  sacrum. — ^Aching 
and  burning  pains  in  the  sacrum,  esp.  when  seated  and  when  stooping. 

22,  Upper  Limbs. — Sensation  in  the  hands,  as  if  they  were  covered 
with  cobweb. — Pulsative  pains  in  the  extremity  of  the  thumb,  day  and  night, 
(veventing  sleep. — Burning  pains,  heat  and  redness  of  the  fingers,  like  chil- 
blains.— Pustules  on  the  fingers,  with  swelling  and  suppuration  of  the  affected 
limb. 

f3.  LoiMrer  Umbs.— Ulcerating  vesicles  on  the  buttocks.— Burning 
pain  in  the  thi^s. — Sensation  as  if  warm  water  were  running  down  thighs. — 


298  BOTHROPS   LANCEOLATUS 

Erysipelatous  inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  leg  and  of  the  foot,  principally 
after  having  danced  a  long  time,  and  sometimes  with  drawing  pains,  burning 
and  tensive,  esp.  when  touched. — Great  weakness  and  debility  of  the  lower 
extremities. — Shootings  in  the  soles  of  the  feet. — Pain,  as  of  excoriation,  in  the 
heel. — Suppuration  of  a  spot  in  the  heel,  where  the  rubbing  of  the  shoe  had 
occasioned  a  wound. — Burning  pains,  heat  and  redness  of  the  toes,  as  if  from 
chilblains. — Shooting  piercing  in  the  corns,  esp.  in  rainy  weather. 

24.  Generalities. — Parts  which  are  usually  white,  turn  red. — Shooting 
and  drawing  pains. — Commencement  and  aggravation  of  sufferings  from 
damp  and  unsettled  weather,  or  during  and  subsequent  to  a  meal. — Sufferings 
from  riding  in  a  carriage  or  from  eating  fruit. — Uneasiness  in  the  whole  body, 
which  does  not  permit  one  to  remain  long  in  the  same  place. — Restlessness 
and  ebullitions,  esp.  after  talking,  with  nausea.--Uneasiness,  trembling 
nausea,  giddiness,  and  vertigo,  after  an  animated  conversation,  or  when* 
thinking.— Want  of  strength,  esp.  in  the  joints.— Attacks  of  syncope,  with 
tingling,  trembling  of  the  feet,  and  nausea. 

25.  Skin.— -Skin  difficult  to  heal ;  dingy,  unhealthy-looking  skin ;  every 
injury  tends  to  ulceration. — Erysipelatous  inflammations,  with  swelling  and 
tension  of  the  part  affected,  and  fever. — Erysipelatous  inflammation  on  the 
lower  leg,  with  chilliness,  followed  by  heaviness  and  pulsation  in  the  head ; 
later,  bleeding  of  the  nose. — ^Tendency  of  old  wounds  to  suppurate. — ^Whitish 
pimples,  with  red  areola. — Herpetic  eruptions. — Purulent  and  phagedaenic 
vesicles, 

26.  Sleep. — Sleepiness  during  the  day,  and  sleeplessness  at  ni^t — 
Inclination  to  sleep  long  before  the  usual  hour,  and  too  long  sleep  in  the 
morning. — Restless  sleep,  in  consequence  of  ebullition  of  the  blood,  of  colic, 
and  of  diarrhoea.—- Waking  too  early,  with  difficulty  in  going  to  sleep  again, 
from  heat  and  too  great  a  flow  of  ideas. — ^Anxious  cries  of  children,  during 
sleep,  with  convulsive  movements  of  the  hands. 

27.  Fever.— Shivering,  shuddering,  or  cold  with  trembling,  heaviness 
and  weakness,  or  with  cephalalgia  and  pains  in  the  periosteum  of  femur, 
followed  by  heat. — Chilliness,  esp.  during  sleep. — Flushes  of  heat  (morning 
and  evening).— Perspiration  during  the  morning  sleep.— Coldness,  most  fre- 
quently in  the  afternoon;  afterwards  heat,  with  headache  or  pain  in  the 
hypochondria,  sometimes  followed  by  sweat.— Thirst  before  or  during  the 
cold,  or  else  after  the  sweat. — Heat  in  the  evening  in  t>ed,  with  shivering  on 
being  on  the  least  uncovered. — Moisture  of  the  body  during  the  night. 

Bothrops  Lanceolatns. 

Yellow  viper.  Vipera  jaune.  Fer-de-lance  of  the  island  of  Martinique. 
N.  0.  Crotalidae.  Solution  of  the  poison  in  glycerine  ;  attenua- 
tions in  rectified  spirit 

OlinioaL— Blindness.    Bones,  necrosis  of.  Day-blindness.   Gangrene.   Haemor- 
rhages.   Lungs,  congestion  of.    Tongue,  paralysis  of. 

ChanoteristieB. — ^The  most  peculiar  symptoms  of  Bothrops,  for 
for  which  Ozanam  is  the  authority,  are  these  :  Amaurosis.    Day- 


BOVISTA  299 

blindness — ^''can  scarcely  see  her  way  after  sunrise."  Inability  to 
articulate  without  any  affection  of  the  tongue.  Haemorrhages,  the 
blood  being  fluid  and  black.  All  the  symptoms  of  pulmonary 
congestion,  expressed  breathing  and  bloody  expectoration,  more 
or  less  profuse.  Paralysis  of  one  arm  or  one  leg  only.  After  being 
bitten  in  the  little  finger  of  one  hand,  paralysis  began  in  the  finger- 
tips of  the  other  hand  and  extended  over  the  whole  of  that  side. 
Eieep  gangrene,  bones  laid  bare  and  necrotic.  Intolerable  pain  in 
ri^t  great  toe  (patient  bitten  in  left  thumb).  The  diagonal  course 
of  symptoms  is  marked.  Hemiplegia.  Dissecting  gangrene.  Slight 
shivering  followed  by  very  profuse  cold  sweat. 

Bfilations.— Comj^ar^:   Other  serpent  poisons.     Bell  has  night- 
blindness. 


Bovista. 

Lycoperdon  bovista.    Warted  puff-ball.    N.  0.  FungL    Trituration. 

GUnlAaL— Coccyx,  itching  of.  Corns.  Cysts.  Diabetes.  Diarrhoea.  Ear^ 
eaema  of.  Eczema.  Ganglion.  Gleet.  Hsemorrhages.  HaemoiThagic  diathesis. 
Headache.  Heart,  affections  of.  Jaundice.  Joints,  affections  of.  Menstruation, 
disordered.  Metrorrhagia.  Ovaries,  affections  of.  Rheumatic  affections.  Stam- 
mering.   Tongue,  ulcerated.    Tumours.    Urticaria.    Warts.    Whitlow.   Wounds. 

ChanoteristiOB. — '*This  globular  fungus,  which,  according  to 
report,  is  eaten  in  Italy  before  it  is  ripe,  becomes  filled,  while 
ripening,  with  a  blackish  dust  that  breaks  the  husk  which  contains 
it,  with  a  slight  noise."  Corresponding  to  this  signature, ''  bloated- 
ness,"  puffy  condition  of  body  surface,"  and  a  sense  of  "enlargement," 
flatulent  distension  and  noisy  passage  of  flatus,  are  leading  features  of 
the  Bovista  pathogenesis.  Bovista  has  cured  cases  of  ovarian  cyst ; 
and  also  warts  and  corns,  with  shooting  pains.  There  are  ebullitions 
with  great  thirst  The  comers  of  the  mouth  are  broken  out.  Numb, 
pithy  feeling  in  mouth.  There  is  stuttering  and  stammering  speech. 
Awkwardness,  misapplies  words  in  speaking  and  writing.  Relaxation 
of  entire  capillary  system  ;  hsemorrhagic  diathesis  ;  haemorrhage  from 
menstrual  irregularities  ;  from  traumatism.  Menstrual  flow  occurring 
only  or  chiefly  at  night.  Haemorrhage  between  the  periods.  The 
puffy,  expanding  properties  of  the  remedy  are  shown  in  a  puffy 
condition  of  the  body  surface ;  instruments  (e.g.,  scissors)  indent  the 
fingers  in  an  unusual  degree.  The  heart  feels  enormously  large. 
Bovista  has  colic  like  Coloc,  causing  the  patient  to  bend  double,  but  it 
differs  from  Coloc.  in  that  the  colic  is  >  by  eating  and  is  sometimes 
accompanied  by  voiding  of  red  urine.  M.  L.  Sircar  has  recorded  a 
striking  cure  of  such  a  case  with  Bov,  3X,  the  pain  being  griping- 
twisting,  intermittent,  starting  below  umbilicus  and  diffusing  itsdiE 
towards  epigastrium  ;  some  constipation  ;  urine  scanty  and  reddish. 
Nothing  gave  relief  except  eating.  "  Itching  at  top  of  coccyx "  is 
another  characteristic  symptom.  A  case  of  cyst  in  broad  ligament 
was    cored,  presenting  these  symptoms :  —  Metrorrhagia,  flow  at 


300  BOVISTA 

night  or  early  morning,  easily  provoked  from  slight  over-exertion 
during  menses  ;  can  bear  nothing  tight  round  body  ;  menses  preceded 
and  followed  by  diarrhoea;  acrid  corrosive  leucorrhoea,  flowing  at 
night  only,  follows  menses. — "  We  may  always  think  of  Bovista  when 
we  see  a  very  *  tettery '  person,  one  who  has  tetters  here  and  there, 
all  over  the  body.  These  tetters  may  be  either  moist  or  dry" 
(Guernsey).  Teste  observed  psoric  eruptions  appear  on  the  hands 
and  feet  of  a  patient  to  whom  he  gave  Bov.  for  headache.  He  cured 
with  it  a  ''red,  crusty  eruption  on  thighs  and  bends  of  knees  of 
eighteen  years'  duration.  It  disappeared  for  weeks,  reappearing  in 
hot  weather  and  at  the  full  moon.  W.  S.  Gee  cured  with  BovisU  4, 
after  the  failure  of  Rhus,  the  following  case.  A  widow,  55,  had  an 
eruption,  which  she  thought  to  be  erysipelas,  on  right  foot.  Some  years 
before  she  had  had  an  eruption  on  left  foot,  which  discharged  much 
water,  and  was  "  cured  "  by  the  use  of  a  salve.  A  few  months  later 
the  left  knee  became  affected  and  the  limb  was  amputated  above  the 
joint.  The  present  eruption  was  fiery  red,  covered  with  yellowish- 
brown  scales,  thick  as  an  old-fashioned  wafer.  There  were  also 
rheumatic  pains  in  the  leg.  After  Rhus  had  been  given  without 
benefit,  Dr.  Gee  elicited  these  additional  symptoms:  ** Occasional 
spells  of  short  breathing,  especially  from  working  with  the  hands. 
Sleep  disturbed  by  burning  and  itching,  and  also  by  anxious,  frightful 
dreams  ;  headache  when  waking  from  sleep.  Frequent  desire  to 
urinate,  even  immediately  after  urinating."  These  symptoms  being 
found  under  BovisL  in  addition  to  "  moist  vesicular  eruptions,  with 
formation  of  thick  crusts,"  the  latter  put  in  heavy  type  by  Lilienthal, 
this  medicine  was  given  with  steady  improvement  and  eventual  cure. 
Great  weakness  of  the  joints.  Sensitive  to  touch,  cannot  bear  clothing. 
Sensitive  to  draught,  chilliness  predominates.     Early  morning  sweat 

<  on  chest.  Many  symptoms  are  <  in  early  morning  ;  the  diarrhoea 
occurs  then.  Sweat  of  axilla  smells  like  onions.  Symptoms  gene- 
rally are  <  morning  ;  <  cold  food*;  >  hot  food.     <  Hot  weather  ; 

<  at  full  moon.  Effects  of  over-exertion.  Bending  double  >  colic ; 
straightening  up  >  shooting  pains  between  shoulders.  Bovista 
antidotes  effects  of  charcoal  fumes.  Easily  intoxicated ;  <  from 
wine.     <  From  coffee. 

Belatioiis. — Compare:  Calc,  Rhus,  Sep.,  Pho.,  Puis., Staph.,  Sul., 
Ver.,  Bell.,  Bry.,  Carbo  v.,  Caust,  Kali  c,  Lvc,  Merc,  Nat.  m,,  Sil., 
Spi.,  Stront.,  Valer. — ^Aur.,  Pul.,  Lye,  Stram.  (laughter  alternately  with 
weeping) ;  Ars.,  Lye,  Sul.  (sinking  immediately  after  eating) ;  Bufo 
(sensation  as  if  heart  in  water)  ;  Zn.  «  from  wine)  ;  Coloc.  (colic  > 
bending  double) ;  Am.  c.  (poisoning  by  charcoal  fumes) ;  Stram. 
(stammering) ;  Ambra  (haemorrhage  between  periods) ;  Sec,  Ust.  It 
has  cured  where  Rhus  seemed  indicated  ana  failed.  Antidoted  by : 
Camph.  //  antidotes:  Effects  of  Tar  apphed  locally.  Followed  well 
by:  Alum.,  Calc,  Rhus,  Sep.  Teste  puts  Bovist.  in  his  Sulphur 
group. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Dejection  and  sadness,  when  alone. — Placid  melancholy, 
with  inquietude  and  sombre  thoughts. — Sad,  depressed,  and  desponding. — 


BOVISTA  301 

Great  sensitiveness ;  irritable,  takes  everything  amiss. — Great  loquacity  and 
unreserved  conversation.  —  Weakness  of  memory.  —  Absence  of  mind. — 
Avirkwardness ;  allowing  everything  that  is  taken  hold  of  to  fall. — Misap- 
plication of  words  in  speaking  and  writing. — Laughs  and  cries  alternately. 

8.  Head. — Intoxication  after  having  drunk  but  very  little  wine. — Vertigo 
as  if  everything  turned  round  in  a  circle. — Stunning  dizziness,  with  loss  of 
sense. — Sudden  attacks  of  vertigo  and  feeling  of  stupidity  in  bed  ;  on  rising, 
loses  consciousness  for  a  moment  preceding  and  following  a  headache  in 
morning. — Pains  in  the  centre  of  the  brain,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  head 
were  enlarged. — Pains  in  the  head  pressing  inward  ;  pains  from  side  to  side 
pressing  outward ;  as  if  both  sides  were  pressed  towards  each  other. — Head- 
ache on  waking,  as  after  too  long  a  sleep. — Stunning  headache  with  heat  in 
the  eyes« — Nocturnal  cephalalgia,  with  insupportable  pain  on  raising  the  head. 
— Aching  pains  in  the  head,  with  throbbing,  as  in  an  abscess. — Compressive 
cephalalgia, — Sharp  pains  in  the  head,  with  heaviness  and  a  bruise-like  sensa- 
tion.— ^Excessive  sensibility  in  the  scalp  to  the  touch. — Falling  off  of  the  hair. — 
Exconated  spots  on  the  scalp. 

3.  £yes.^Painful  twisting  in  the  eyes,  with  pressure  in  the  sockets ; 
bone  sensitive  to  pressure,  during  menstruation. — Nocturnal  agglutination  of 
the  eyelids. — Eyes  dull,  without  brightness,  and  without  fire. — Objects  seem 
to  be  nearer  than  they  really  are. 

4«  Bars — Ulcer  in  the  r.  ear. — Ulcers  in  the  ears,  with  pain  on 
swallowing. — Scabby  and  humid  eruption  in  the  ears. — Oozing  of  fetid  pus 
ht>m  the  ears. — Itching  in  the  ears. — Diminution  and  hardness  of  hearing, 
with  frequent  mistakes. 

5.  Nose. — Excoriation  in  the  nostrils. — Nostrils  scabby,  with  burning 
pain. — Scurfs  and  crusts  about  nostrils. — Stoppage  of  the  nose,  which  impedes 
reqnration. — Fluent  coryza,  with  secretion  of  serous  mucus  and  confusion  in 
the  head. — Bleeding  of  the  nose  early  in  the  morning  (during  sleep). 

6.  Face. — Heat  in  the  cheeks,  as  if  they  were  going  to  burst. — Face 
alternately  pale  and  red. — Extreme  paleness  on  getting  up  in  the  morning. — 
Piercing  and  digging  in  the  cheek-t>ones. — ^Verypaie  swelling  of  the  upper 
lip,  of  the  nose,  and  of  the  cheeks. — Swelling  of  the  upper  lip  (and  cheek,  after 
toothache)  in  scrofulous  subjects. — Sensation  of  a  splinter,  or  of  something 
sticking  in  lips. — Lips  cracked. — Corners  of  the  mouth  ulcerated. — Rheumatic 
pains  in  the  lower  jaw,  with  swelling  and  pulsative  pains  in  the  sub-maxillary 
gland. 

7.  Teeth.— Pains  in  the  upper  incisor  teeth,  followed  by  swelling  of 
the  upper  lip. — Drawing  odontalgia,  esp.  in  the  hollow  teeth,  in  the  evening 
and  at  ni^t,  mitigated  by  heat  and  wsdking  in  the  open  air. — Piercing  and 
digging  in  the  teeth.— The  gums  bleed  easily  at  night,  or  on  sucking  them. 

8.  Mouth.— Accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth. — Sensation  of  torpor 
in  the  buccal  cavity.— Stuttering. — Incisive  pains  in  the  tongue. — Ulcers  on 
the  edges  of  the  tongue,  with  pain  like  excoriation. — Putrid  smell  from  the 
mouth. — Sore  throat,  with  scraping  and  burning  pains. 

10.  Appetite.  —  No  appetite  for  breakfast.i — Nausea  in  the  morning, 
generally  vomiting  a  watery  fluid  and  relieved  by  eating  breakfast. — Putrid 
taste  in  the  mouth. — ^Taste  of  blood.— Desire  for  cold  drinks,  esp.  in  the  after- 
noon and  evening. — Eager  and  continual  hunger,  even  after  a  meal. — Great 


302  BOVISTA 

sleepiness  after  having  eaten,  esp.  after  dinner  and  in  the  evening. — Hiccough 
before  and  after  a  meal. 

II.  Stomach. — Nausea,  with  chilly  disposition  from  morning  till  noon. 
— Sensation  of  cold  in  the  stomach,  as  if  a  piece  of  ice  were  there. — Pressure 
and  fulness  in  the  precordial  region,  with  tension  in  the  temples  and  anxiety. 

13.  Abdomen. — Pains  in  the  umbilical  region  after  having  eaten,  as  if 
the  abdomen  were  cut  by  knives. — Colic  >  by  eating. — ^Twisting  colic  causing 
patient  to  bend  over ;  sometimes  voiding  red  urine  ;  >  by  eating. — Cutting 
in  fore  part  of  abdomen,  >  by  eating. — Colic  <  by  rest. — ^Violent  cutting, 
aggravated  by  repose. — Painful  sensibihty  of  the  exterior  and  interior  of  the 
abdomen. — ^Violent  colic,  with  coldness,  to  such  an  extent  as  to  cause 
shuddering  and  chattering  of  the  teeth,  esp.  after  going  to  stool. — Pains  of 
ulceration  and  shooting  in  the  abdomen. — Frequent  escape  of  fetid  wind. — 
Colic,  which  causes  the  patient  to  double  over,  and  accompanied  by  the 
voiding  of  red  urine,  >  by  eating. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Ineffectual  urging  to  stool.— Stool  hard  and 
dif&cult. — ^After  stool,  tenesmus  and  burning  at  the  anus. — Constipation. — 
Hard  and  compact  faeces — In  the  rectum,  itching  as  from  worms. — Darting 
from  the  perinaeum  to  the  rectum  and  the  genital  organs. — Diarrhoea  with  colic, 
cuttings,  and  pain  of  ulceration  in  the  abdomen. — ^The  first  portion  of  the 
stool  is  hard,  and  the  latter  part  thin  and  watery. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Frequent  inclination  to  make  water. — Frequent 
desire  to  urinate,  even  inunediately  after  urination  (diabetes  mellitus). — In  the 
urethra,  stinging,  itching,  burning ;  the  orifice  is  inflamed,  and  feels  as  if  glued 
up. — Pain  of  ulceration  in  the  urethra  on  making  water. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Increase  of  sexual  desire. — Frequent  pollu- 
tions.— ^Af ter  coition,  staggering,  confusion,  and  numbness  in  the  head. — Hard, 
painful  and  suppurating  node  in  the  penis. — Burning  pains  in  the  genital  parts. 
—Gleet. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Catamenia  premature  and  too  copious. 
— Catamenia  flow  only  in  the  night. — ^Catamenia,  too  early  and  two  profuse,  or 
too  late,  too  scanty,  too  short ;  flowing  only  at  night. — Before  the  catamenia, 
diarrhoea. — Flow  of  blood  during  the  intervals. — Leucorrhcea :  a  few  days 
before  or  a  few  days  after  menses;  while  walking;  like  white  of  egg ;  yellow- 
green,  acrid,  corrosive,  leaving  green  spots  on  clothes ;  thick,  slimy,  tough. 
— Excoriation  in  the  inguinal  fold  during  the  catamenia. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.  — Spasmodic  laughing  and  crying,  with 
asthma. — Hoarseness  in  the  morning,  and  speaking  through  the  nose  as 
from  coryza.— Scraping  and  excoriation  in  the  throat,  with  accumulation  of 
tenacious  mucus. — Cough,  with  so  viscid  an  expectoration  that  it  can  scarcely 
be  discharged.— Dry  cough,  produced  by  a  tickling  in  the  throat  and  in  the 
chest. 

18.  Chest. — ^Diflicult  and  short  respiration  during  manual  labour. — 
Constrictive  oppression  of  the  chest ;  everything  seems  to  be  too  tight — 
Stitches  in  the  chest. 

xg.  Heart. — Beating  of  the  heart,  with  inquietude,  trembling,  vertigo, 
nausea,  and  headache. — Palpitation  as  if  heart  working  in  water. — Palpitation 
accompanies  many  symptoms. — ^Visible  palpitation  of  heart. 

20.    Neck  and  Back. — Sweat  of  a  strong  smell  under  the  arm-pits. — 


BRACHYGLOTTIS  REPENS  303 

SweOnig  of  the  glands  of  the  neck,  with  tensive  and  drawing  pains. — Pain  in 
the  back,  with  heaviness  after  stooping. — Itching  of  tip  of  coccyx. 

sa.  Upper  Umbs. — Paralytic  weakness  and  pains  of  dislocation  in  the 
joints  of  the  arms  and  hands. — Sensation  in  the  wrist-joint,  as  if  sprained. — 
Affections  ci  wrists. — Ganglion. — ^Tension  in  the  shoulder-joints,  as  if  the 
tendons  were  too  short — Sensation  of  paralysis,  as  from  excessive  fatigue. — 
Tremor  of  the  hands,  with  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  oppressive  anxiety. — 
Blunt  instruments  (scissors)  make  deep  impressions  in  the  skin  of  the  fingers. — 
Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  joints  of  the  hands. — Shooting  pains  in  the  joints 
of  the  hands  on  laying  hold  of  anything. — ^Want  of  strength  in  the  hands,  so 
that  they  allow  the  lightest  objects  to  fall  from  them. — Humid  tetters  on  the 
back  of  the  hand. — Perspiration  in  the  arm-pits,  smelling  like  onions. 

83.  LoiMrer  Limbs. — ^Tingling  and  numbness  in  the  legs,  with  inability 
to  stand  upright — Shootings  in  the  joints  of  the  knees  and  of  the  feet — Strong 
tension  in  the  calves  of  the  legs,  and  in  the  legs,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too 
short — Cramps  in  the  calves  of  the  legs,  in  t>ed,  in  the  morning. — Miliary 
eruption  in  the  legs. 

14.  Generalities. — Great  lassitude  and  want  of  strength,  esp.  in  the 
joints. — Ebullition  of  the  blood,  with  much  thirst. 

SS.  Skin. — Skin  flabby ;  blunt  instruments  leave  a  deep  impression  in  it. 
— ^Itching,  esp.  when  the  body  is  warm,  and  of  that  kind  which  receives  no 
relief  from  scratching. — Urticaria,  covering  whole  body. — Pimples  and  miliary 
eruption,  with  burning  itching.-^Oozing  eruptions  and  with  a  thick  crust ;  in 
bends  of  elbows  and  knees. — Humid  tetters. — Whitlows. — ^Warts. — ^Violent 
shootings  in  corns. 

sS.  Sleep. — Great  sleepiness  in  the  morning,  and  early  in  the  evening. — 
Sleepiness  after  dinner  and  early  in  the  evening. — Nocturnal  sleep,  agitated 
by  anxious  and  frightful  dreams.  - 

97.  Fever. — Chill  after  going  to  bed  at  night.— Shivering,  with  thirst, 
even  near  a  fire,  and  at  night  in  bed. — Chilliness  and  heat,  with  thirst. — Heat 
with  thirst,  anguish,  agitation,  and  oppression  of  the  chest. — Sweat  in  the 
morning,  esp.  on  the  chest — In  the  evening,  fever  with  shivering  and 
shuddering  in  the  t>ack,  with  drav^ing  pains  in  the  abdomen. 


Braohyglottis  Repens. 

New  Zealand  "  Puka  Puka."    Tincture  of  green  leaves  and  flowers. 

N,  0.  Eupatoriaceae. 

OIWmI*— Bright's  disease.    Dysmenorrhoea. 

Characteristios.— ^mcAy^/o^/i5  was  proved  by  C.  L.  Fischer. 
The  Maories  use  the  leaves  to  apply  to  old  sores  and  ulcers. 
Horses  eating  young  shrubs  lose  sdl  power  over  hind  legs  and 
spine.  It  causes  lassitude  ;  weakness  ;  loss  of  flesh.  A  large  number 
of  symptoms  were  produced  in  all  regions  of  body,  but  few  have  been 


304  BRACHYGLOTTIS   REPENS 

tested  clinically.  This  appears  to  be  the  most  marked :  Urgency 
in  passing  urine ;  pain  in  neck  of  bladder ;  pain  in  bladder  after 
urinating,  and  in  urethra  and  stinging  in  penis  ;  a  large  quantity  of 
pale-coloured  urine  voided,  of  low  specihc  ffravity  and  containing 
albumen.  Throbbing  pains  are  very  prominent  in  the  proving. 
Dysmenorrhoea  with  fluttering  in  abdomen  and  right  ovary  has  been 
cured  with  it.  Pains  in  the  back  and  limbs.  Chilliness  predominates. 
RdAtionB.'— Compare :  Eupatoriaceae,  Apis  (soreness,  stinging  in 
urethra) ;  Arn.  (bruised,  sore  feeling)  ;  Bovist.  (albuminuria)  ;  Helon. 
(albuminuria) ;  Merc.  cor.  (albuminuria,  urging  to  urinate  and  defe- 
cate) ;  Nux  (urging  to  urinate  and  defecate) ;  Op.  (constipation) ; 
Plumb,  (faeces  l2:e  balls,  painful  micturition,  albuminuria). 

SYMPTOMS. 

2.  Head. — Confusion  in  head  and  pain  in  forehead;  giddiness  and 
flushed  face. — Throbbing :  1,  side ;  forehead ;  around  r.  ear,  and  passing  from 
ear  to  eyes  and  then  to  neck. — Headache  and  f  aceache  very  severe,  preventing 
sleep  at  night. — Cold  sensation  and  tightness  about  scalp. — Soreness  all  over 
head  and  stifiFness  in  neck. 

4.  Ears. — ^Tingling,  itching,  pricking  in  ears. — ^Throbbing  about  r.  ear, 
from  ear  to  eyes,  and  throat  to  neck. 

5.  Nose. — Nostrils,  sore  ;  itching  and  irritation  in  nose. 

6.  Face. — ^Twitching  in  1.  side  of  face  (evening). — Soreness  r.  zygomatic, 
process. — Flushed  face. — Faccache  1.  side,  submaxilliary  glands  affected. 

8.  Mouth. — Pain,  numbness,  pricking,  soreness  of  tongue. — Heat  in 
mouth. 

9.  Throat. — Soreness,  rawness,  scraping  in  throat  <  by  swallowing. 

11.  Stomach. —  Nausea  in  stomach. —  Fluttering. —  Evening  after  tea 
soreness,  throbbing  in  stomach,  r.  side. 

12.  Abdomen. —  Isolated  throbbing  1.  groin. — Fluttering  sensation  in 
abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Ineffectual  urging. — Stool  dry;  like  balls; 
evacuated  with  sore  constrictive  pain  in  anus;   evening. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pressure  and  soreness  in  neck  of  bladder. — By 
passing  urine,  pain  in  bladder  and  soreness  in  urethra ;  feeling  as  if  urine 
could  not  be  retained. — Passing  urine  preceded  by  pains  in  bowels. — Urine 
abundant,  contains  mucus  and  albumen. — ^Throbbing  in  penis  and  desire  to 
pass  urine ;  pressure  in  bladder. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Oppression  of  breathing ;  >  by  sighing. 

18.  Chest. — Pains  flying  about  chest  and  precordial  region. — ^Throbbing 
in  sternum. 

20.  Back. — First  dorsal  vertebra  sore  to  touch. — Cutting  under  1.  shoulder. 
— ^Aching  in  lumbar  region. — Isolated  throbbing  r.  side  of  back. — Feeling  as  if 
whole  back  would  contract  backward,  and  muscles  of  neck  were  afiFected. 

21.  Limbs. — Great  weakness  in  limbs ;  weariness  and  prostration. 


BROMIUM  305 

Brassioa  Napns. 

Cole  Seed,  Rape  Seed,  Wild  Corn  Kale.    N.O.  Cruciferae.    Tincture 

of  whole  fresh  plant. 


L — Bulimia.    Dropsy.   Gangrene.    Nails,  shedding  of.   Scurvy.    Ulcers 

Charaoteristios. — Our  knowledge  of  the  pathogenetic  effects  of 
Brassica  napus  is  derived  from  the  experience  of  the  Irish  famine, 
during  which  the  people  ate  it  freely.  Dropsical  swellings,  scorbutic 
mouth,  voracious  appetite,  tympanitic  abdomen,  blotches  like  burns, 
dropping  off  of  nails,  and  gangrene.  All  the  symptoms  of  impoverished 
blood  appear,  such  as  growth  of  downy,  colourless  hair. 

BtllaiiaD!B4--Cotnparc :  Raphanus,  Armoracea,  Sinapis,  Secale. 

SYMPTOMS. 

9.    Head. — ^Very  distressing  frontal  headache  and  tension. 

6.  Face. — Swollen  to  an  enormous  extent,  the  distended  state  of  eyelids 
and  upper  lip  producing  great  deformity. — Burn-like  blotches  on  nose  and 
fonheaid  (also  hands  and  feet),  var3ang  from  discoloration  to  ulceration. 

8»  9.  Mouth  and  Throat. — Mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  throat 
inflamed,  ulcerated  in  parts,  gums  spongy. 

11.  Stomach. — ^Appetite  increased,  sometimes  voracious. 

12.  Abdomen. — Abdomen  tympanitic. 

13.  Stool. — Bowels  torpid. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  deficient  and  irritating. 

21.  Limbs. — Hands  and  feet  dry  and  shrunken,  with  blotches  of  a  deep 
red,  like  bums,  on  backs  of  hands  and  dorsa  of  feet,  the  fingers  and  toes  being 
frequently  cold  and  livid ;  ulceration  ;  loss  of  nails. 

25.  Skin. — Sallow  and  muddy-looking;  covered  with  downy  hair. — 
General  oedema. — Blotches,  deep  red,  like  burns,  on  backs  of  hands  and  feet 
and  nose  and  forehead,  varying  from  simple  discoloration  to  most  troublesome 
ulceration,  causing  destruction  of  cuticle  and  dropping  off  of  nails,  with  a 
marked  disposition  in  the  aggravated  cases  to  gangrene. 


Bromium. 

Bromine.    Br.  (A.  W,  79*9).    Solution  in  distilled  water. 

^niii^f^l- — Apoplexy.  Asthma.  Breast,  cancer  of.  Cancer.  Cough.  Croup 
Diphtheria.  Dysmenorrhoea.  Emphysema.  Fcet^  pain  in.  Fistula  lachrymalis 
Glands,  enlargement  of.  Goitre.  Heart,  disease  of ;  hypertrophy  of.  Laryngismus. 
Migraine.  Parotid  gland,  induration  of.  Respiration^  affections  of.  Scrofula.  Sea- 
side, effects  of.  Testicles,  induration  of.  Throat,  sore.  Tonsils,  enlarged ;  inflamed. 
Trachea,  irritation  of.  Tuberculosis.  Tumour  of  breast.  Ulcers.  Uterus,  air  in 
Vagina^  air  in.    Vertigo. 

Chanoteristlos* — Bromine  forms  a  leading  constituent  in  the 
mineral  waters  of  Kreutzach  and  Woodhall.    It  is  a  predominantly 

VOL.    L  21 


3o6  BROMIUM 

left-side  medicine.  It  affects  particularly  the  internal  head,  left  side. 
It  is  suited  to  blue-eyed,  fair  people  (opp.  lod.)^  especially  children 
with  thin,  white,  deucate  skins,  and  very  light  hair  and  eyebro^rs 
(patients  with  dark  hair  are  not  excluded) ,-  to  scrofulous  constitutions. 
The  glands  (thyroid,  testes,  maxillary,  parotid)  are  swollen  and 
indurated.  There  is  much  anxiety  of  mind  ;  a  fear  of  ghosts  or  visions 
when  in  the  dark.  Like  the  other  Halogens,  Bromine  is  a  strong  anti- 
scorbutic. It  has  >  at  the  sea-side  (opp.  Nat.  mur,) ;  but  <  in  sailors 
when  coming  ashore.  Migraine  chiefly  left  side,  <  from  stooping, 
especially  after  drinking  milk.  It  has  a  peculiar  vertigo  :  sensation 
deep  in  brain  as  if  vertigo  would  come  on  ;  tendency  to  fall  backward  ; 

<  at  the  sight  of  running  water ;  or  if  he  put  his  foot  on  a  bridge  ; 

<  in  damp  weather.  Vertigo  with  nose-bleed.  Soreness  and  crusts 
inside  nose.  Nose-bleed  accompanies  many  affections,  especially  of 
chest.  There  is  a  peculiar  headache  with  coryza.  In  ttie  cases  of 
diphtheria  indicating  it  the  disease  begins  in  the  larynx  and  runs  up. 
In  croup,  with  all  the  croupy  sound,  there  is  much  loose  rattling  in 
larynx  with  the  breathing  and  coughing,  but  no  choking  in  the  cough,  as 
there  is  in  Hepar  (Guernsey).  Tuberculosis,  especially  of  right  lung. 
Hypertrophy  of  the  heart  and  palpitation.  Pain  in  heart  going  up  to 
axilla.  A  very  peculiar  symptom  is  :  loud  emissions  of  air  from  the 
vagina.  Symptoms  are  <  by  cold  air  ;  cold  water  ;  cold  diet ;  cold 
damp  weather  ;  heat  of  sun.  The  cough  is  <  entering  warm  room. 
Headache  <  from  drinking  milk;  from  stooping.  Complaints  are 
better  at  sea-side  ;  sailors  coming  ashore  suffer  from  asthma,  which  is 
relieved  when  they  go  to  sea  again.  Symptoms  <  evening  till  mid- 
night ;  when  at  rest ;  >  riding  on  horseback.  After  dinner  feels  he 
will  have  an  attack  of  apoplexv.    Exertion  =  oppression  at  heart. 

BelationfiU — Compare :  lod.  (but  lod.  has  <  morning ;  dark  hair  and 
eyes);  Chlorum,  Lach.,  Spong.,  Fluor,  ac.  Hep.,  Apis,  Arg.  n.,  Chi.,  Con., 
Coff.,  Cin.,  Cup.,  Lye,  Merc,  Pho.,  Rhus  (cardiac  hypertrophy,  also 
Spo.  ;  Arn. — ^from  over-exertion) ;  Sep.,  Sul.,  Ant.  t.  ;  Pul.  (blondes. 
Fear  of  ghosts  or  visions;  also,  Aco.,  Ars.,  Carb.  v.,  Pho.,  Sul.). 
Antidoted  by  :  Camph.,  Am.  c,  Mag.  c,  Op.  Useful  after :  lod.,  Pho., 
Spo.    Compatible  :  Arg.  n.  (generally  after  Bro.) ;  Kali  c.  (emphysema). 

STHPTOMS. 

X.  Mind.~-Cheerful,  desire  for  mental  labour. — Low-spirited  and  out  of 
humour. — Crying  and  lamentation,  with  hoarse  voice.— Anxiety ;  originating 
in  body  (heart,  lungs),  patients  expect  to  see  things  jump  around  the  floor. — 
In  evening,  when  alone,  feels  as  if  he  should  see  something  if  he  should  turn 
round ;  as  if  some  one  were  behind  him. 

2.  Head. — Sensation  deep  in  brain  (after  dinner)  as  if  vertigo  or  fit  of 
apoplexy  would  come  on. — ^Vertigo  with  tendency  to  fall  backward;  < 
stepping  on  bridge ;  from  running  water ;  from  rapid  motion  in  front  of  him ; 
with  anxiety. — Peculiar  headache  and  coryza :  pressure  in  forehead  which 
seems  to  be  pushing  brain  down  and  out  at  root  of  nose. — Headache  :  deep  in 
crown,  with  palpitation ;  over  1.  eye ;  <  from  stooping ;  from  drinking  milk. 
— Scalp  tender ;  malignant  scald-head. 


BROMIUM  307 

>  Eyes. — ^Lachrymation  (r.)  with  swelling  of  tear-gland.-— Darting 
throng  eye  (L). — Dilated  pnpils. — Flashes  before  eyes. — Protruded  eyes. 

4.  Ears. — Noise  in  ears. — Swelling  and  hardness  of  (1.)  parotid  gland ; 
feeling  warm  to  the  touch. — Suppuration  of  1.  parotid,  edges  of  the  opening 
smooth;  discharge  watery  and  excoriating;  swelling  remaining  hard  and 
unyielding ;  after  scarlatina. 

5.  Nose. — Soreness  in  (swollen)  nose  with  scurfs ;  pain  and  bleeding  on 
wiping. — Bleeding  of  nose  relieving  chest. — Severe  coryza,  r.  nostril  stopped 
up  and  sore  throughout,  later  1. — Coryza,  with  sneezing ;  margins  of  nose  and 
parts  under  nose  corroded,  with  stoppage  (occurring  annually). 

6.  Face. — Greyish,  earthy  complexion;  old  appearance. — Pale. — Heat 
ia  cheek,  first  r.,  later  1. — Sensation  of  cobweb. — Strong,  hard  swelling  of 
glands,  esp.  on  lower  jaw  and  throat. 

8.  Mouth. — Ptyalism ;  much  frothy  mucus  in  mouth. — Burning  from 
mouth  to  stomach. — Heat  in  mouth  andoesophagus.— Stinging  in  tip  of  tongue. 

9.  Throat. — ^With  all  the  croupy  sound  there  is  a  good  deal  of  loose 
rattling  in  larynx  with  the  breathing  and  coughing,  but  no  choking  in  the 
cough  as  there  is  in  Hcpar, — Inflammation  of  throat  with  net-like  redness  and 
corroded  places. — Scraping  in  throat. — Swelling  of  mucous  membranes  of 
fauces  and  pharynx. — ^The  diphtheria  begins  in  the  larynx  and  runs  up. 

10.  Appetite. — Desire  for  acids,  which  <  and  cause  diarrhoea. — ^Water 
tastes  saltish. 

11.  Stomach.— Vomiting  bloody  mucus. — Nausea,  retching,  and  pains  in 
stomach  ;  >  after  eating. — Feeling  of  emptiness  in  stomach  >  after  eating. — 
Heavy  feeling  in  stomach. — Inflammation  of  stomach. 

IS.  Abdomen. — ^Tympanitic  distension  of  abdomen,  and  passage  of 
much  wind. — Enlargement  and  induration  of  spleen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Diarrhoea,  stools  yellow,  green,  black ;  <  after 
every  meaL — Haemorrhoids,  blind,  painful,  during  and  after  stool  <  from 
^yphcation  of  cold  or  warm  water ;  >  wetting  with  saliva ;  (with  black 
dnrrhceic  stools). — Intensely  painful  haemorrhoids. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— ^wellmg  and  induration  of  (1.)  testis,  with 
sore  pain  or  sensation  of  coldness. — Swelling  of  scrotum  (with  chronic 
goaerrhcea). 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Loud  emission  of  flatulency  from 
va^na. — During  menses  pain  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back. — Menses  too 
early  and  too  profuse;  of  bright  red  blood;  flow  passive,  with  much 
exhaustion ;  or  membranous  shreds  may  pass  off. — ^Violent  contractive  spasm 
before  or  during  menses,  lasting  hours,  leaving  the  abdomen  sore. — Mem- 
branous dysmenorrhcea. — Dull  pain  in  ovary  (1.). — Stitching  pains  from 
breast  to  axillae,  cannot  bear  pressure  (scirrhus). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness  and  aphonia  <  evening. — Sore- 
ness and  roughness  in  throat. — Cold  sensation  in  larynx,  with  cold  feeling 
when  inspiring,  after  breakfast ;  >  after  shaving. — Constriction  in  the  larynx ; 
tickling,  causing  cough.— Tickling  in  trachea  during  inspiration  causing 
cough. — Stitch  in  posterior  portion  of  larynx,  with  feeling  of  constriction  when 
swallowing  saliva. — Scraping  and  rawness  in  larynx,  provoking  cough,  as  if  pit 
of  throat  were  pressed  against  trachea. — Diphtheria. — ^When  the  diphtheria 
begins  in  the  larynx  and  runs  t^. — Croup. — ^When  with  all  the  croupy  sound 


3o8  BRUCEA  ANTIDYSENTERICA 

there  is  a  good  deal  loose  rattling  in  the  larynx  with  the  breathing  and  cough- 
ing, but  no  choking  in  the  cough. — Dry,  spasmodic,  wheezing  cough,  with 
rattling  breathing. — Cough  rough,  barking,  from  tickling  in  throat. — Inspira- 
tion very  difficult  ;  cannot  inspire  deep  enough. — Cough  with  sudden 
paroxysms  of  sufiFocation  on  swallowing ;  respiration  very  short ;  obliged  to 
catch  for  breath. — Sensation  as  if  the  air  passages  were  full  of  smoke. — 
Spasmodic  closure  of  the  glottis. 

i8.  Chest. — Stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest. — R.  lung  most  afiFected. — 
Stitch  (inflammation  of  lungs  r.  side). — Sensation  of  weakness  in  chest. — 
Tightness  (asthma) ;  <  at  night ;  in  sailors  when  they  come  ashore. 

ig.    Heart.— Violent  palpitation  <  lying  1.  side ;  (hypertrophy). 

do.  Neck  and  Back. — Neck  stiff. — Glands  of  neck  much  swollen. — 
Goitre.— Two  encysted  tumours  on  both  sides  of  the  neck. — ^Aching  at  inner 
border  1.  scapula  up  to  neck,  on  moving  1.  arm,  or  sitting  leaning  tol. — Boring 
in  spinous  processes  of  difiFerent  vertebras. 

21.  Limbs. — Stiffness  in  all  limbs,  ii  a.m.,  >  in  afternoon. — Pains  in 
limbs  alternating  with  chilliness  and  heat. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — L.  arm  feels  paralysed. — Eruptions  on  1.  elbow. — 
Icy-cold  forearms. — Hands  cold  and  moist. 

23.  Lovrer  Limbs. — Paralytic  sensation  in  one  or  other  leg. — Pains  in 
one  or  both  tibiae. 

24.  Generalities. — Excessive  languor  and  debility  (worse  after  break- 
fast).— Great  weakness  and  lassitude  after  all  the  symptoms  passed  ofiF;  in 
diphtheria. — Shivering  with  yawning  and  stretching;  repeated  every  other 
day,  as  a  chilliness  and  cold  feet. — Tremulousness  all  over. 

25.  Skin. — Pimples  and  pustules  (acne). — Boils  on  the  arms  and  face. 

26.  Sleep. — Irresistible  drowsiness  while  reading. — Continued  yawning 
and  drowsiness  with  the  respiratory  troubles. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse  much  accelerated. — Chill  every  other  day  with  shaking, 
yawning,  and  stretching;  with  cold  feet. — Skin  cool,  covered  with  viscous 
sweat — Sweat  on  palms. — Perspiration  from  the  least  exertion. 


Brucea  Antidysenterica. 

Angustura  falsa.    Nucis  vomicas  cortex.    N.  0.  Loganiaceae. 
Tincture  or  trituration. 

CUnieaL — ^Abdomen,  throbbing  in.    Headache. 

Under  the  name  of  Brucea  antidysenterica  a  quantity  of  Nux 
vomica  bark  got  upon  the  drug  market,  and  was  at  first  supposed  to 
be  Angustura  bark.  Many  poisonings  ensued  before  the  mistake  was 
discovered,  and  the  bark  received  the  name  Angustura  falsa,  in  con- 
tradistinction to  the  true  Angustura.  It  contains  strychnine,  and  the 
symptoms  are  included  in  the  pathogenesis  of  Nux  vomica  and 
Strychninum.  The  homoeopathic  preparation  of  Nux  vom.  is,  how- 
ever, prepared  from  the  seed.    One  characteristic  symptom  of  Brucea 


BRUCEA  ANTIDYSENTERICA  309 

amtidysaUmca  (i,e^  the  bark  preparation)  is :  '^  Headache  with  extreme 
drowsiness  ;  disappearing  in  evening."  Another  is  :  "  Sensation  of 
throbbing  in  pit  of  stomach  and  in  entire  abdomen."  (Although  the 
symptoms  are  included  in  the  pathogenesis  of  Nux  vomica^  as  the 
bark  has  been  experimented  with  independently,  1  subjoin  the 
Schema.) 

Relatioiis. — ^The  following  also  have  drowsiness  with  headache  : 
Gins.,  Herac,  Gels,  (difficult  to  keep  the  eyes  open),  Nux  m.,  Nat.  s., 
Sul. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Dejection,  with  want  of  sleep. — ^Taciturnity  and  hypochon- 
driasis.—Gloomy,  melancholy  humour,  with  indolence  and  lassitude. — Sad 
and  gloomy  humour  on  waking  in  the  morning. 

2,  ^  Head  and  Eyes.— Heaviness  and  confusion  in  the  head,  with 
sleepiness,  disappearing  in  the  evening.— Vertigo,  which  occasions  falling,  in 
the  evening. — Digging  crawling  in  the  top  of  the  head.— Headache  in  the 
evening,  after  having  walked  long  in  the  sunshine. — Cephalalgia  behind  the 
eyebrows,  which  seem  to  be  swollen.— Shootings  in  the  head,  aggravated  by 
walking,  csp.  in  the  sun. — Headache  aggravated  by  sitting,  as  well  as  after 
eating. — Eyes  dull  and  swollen. — Eyes  red  in  the  corners  in  the  evening. — 
Itching  in  the  eyelids. — Eyes  red  and  burning  in  the  morning. — Painful 
sensation  in  the  eyes,  as  from  sand,  rendering  it  necessary  to  rub  them. 

6y  8.  Face  and  Mouth. — Mealy,  itching  tetters  on  the  face,  followed 
by  peeling  off  of  the  skin. — Paleness  in  the  face. — Slight  convulsive,  rapid 
movements  in  the  lips. — ^Acute  pains  in  the  teeth  and  in  the  gums,  esp.  on 
drinking  cold  water. — ^Accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  month,  forcing  one  to 
spit  continually. — Dryness  and  burning  pain  in  the  gullet,  as  if  from  rancid 
fat. 

II.  Stomach. — ^Weak  appetite ;  food  at  dinner  and  breakfast  appears 
insipid. — Clammy  taste. — Empty  risings.— Sensation  in  the  stomach,  as  if 
nothing  had  been  eaten  for  a  long  time. — Sensation  of  burning  and  of  heat 
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Sensation  of  throbbing  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach, 
and  in  the  entire  abdomen. — Pressure  in  the  stomach,  immediately  after 
eating  or  drinking. — After  a  meal,  violent  beating  of  the  heart,  aggravation  of 
headache,  fermentation  in  the  intestines,  and  inclination  to  evacuate. — In  the 
evening,  attack  of  nausea,  with  cramp-like  pains  in  the  abdomen,  vomiting  of 
food,  and  loose  evacuations,  with  great  prostration. 

IS.  Abdomen. — Painful  pinching  in  the  abdomen. — Squeezing,  as  from 
claws,  in  the  abdomen,  followed  by  frequent,  small,  slimy  evacuations. — 
Borbocygmi  in  the  abdomen. — ^The  pains  in  the  abdomen  cease  after  the  first 
evacuation. — Evacuations  too  soft,  in  too  small  quantity,  and  of  too  light  a 
ookMir. — Shootings  in  the  umbilicus  after  the  evacuations. — Loose  evacuations, 
followed  by  fainting  which  enforces  lying  down. — Strong  disposition  to  loose 
evacuations,  with  colic  and  flatulency. — Loose  evacuations  in  the  morning  and 
in  the  evening. — Itching  in  the  anus  in  the  evening. 

18.  Chest. — On  breathing,  sensation  of  great  weight  on  the  whole  chest 
—Oppression  of  the  chest,  with  chilly  disposition  and  great  sensibility  in  the 
open  air. — In  the  morning,  on  waking  pain  as  from  a  bruise  on  the  outside  of 
the  chesty  with  tensive  pains  on  breathing  deeply. — Pains,  like  excoriation,  in 


310  BRYONIA 

the  interior  of  the  chest,  esp.  in  bed  at  night,  which  are  most  violent  when 
lying  on  the  side. 

90.    Back. — Sensation  of  squeezing  in  the  back. 

21.  Limbs. — Pains,  as  of  fatigue,  in  the  thighs  and  in  the  loins. — Cramp- 
like  pain  in  the  back  of  the  hand. — Miliary  eruption,  red,  raised,  and  itching, 
on  the  back  of  the  hand  and  on  the  body. — In  the  evening,  sensation  of 
paralysis  in  the  thigh. — ^Weariness  in  the  knees.— Curvature  of  the  joint  of  the 
foot,  so  that  one  walks  almost  on  the  ankle-bone. — Sensation  of  burning  in 
corns. 

24.  Generalities. — Painful  sensation  of  fatigue  in  the  extremities. — 
Pinching  in  several  parts  of  the  limbs. — In  the  evening,  sti£Eness  in  the  joints, 
and  acute  drawing  pains  in  the  limbs,  with  shootings  in  the  head,  in  the  ears, 
and  in  the  chest. — Dejection. — Disposition  to  stretch  the  limbs  and  to  yawn. 
— Great  weariness  when  walking. — In  the  evening,  nervous  excitement, 
trembling  and  tottering  when  walking. — Irritability,  augmented  in  the 
evening. 

s6.  Sleep. — Sleepiness  during  the  entire  day,  esp.  when  seated,  in  the 
morning,  after  dinner,  and  in  the  highest  degree  in  the  afternoon. — Sleepiness 
early  in  the  evening. — Sleep  full  of  dreams,  with  ebullition  of  the  blood.— 
Sleep  troubled,  with  confused  or  frightful,  terrifying  dreams. — Sleepiness 
alternately  with  want  of  appetite. 

27*  Fever. — Chilly  disposition  and  aversion  to  the  open  air. — Shivering 
and  excessive  coldness. — Sweat  on  walking,  notwithstanding  the  shiverings, 
which  appear  chiefly  during  rest. 

Bracinom. 

Brucine.    An  alkaloid  obtained  from  the  bark  and  seeds  of  Strychnos 
nux  vomica.    €,3  H^  Na04. 

OiillleaL— Headache.    Paralysis. 

ChsnuiterlstlCB* — Lepelletier  has  recorded  the  following  effects 
of  0*03  to  0*90  of  a  gramme  of  Brucinum.  Sudden  jerking,  especially 
of  lower  extremities,  spreading  generally  but  not  accompanied  by 
trismus  and  tetanus,  and  not  extending  to  oesophagus  and  pharynx 
as  with  Strychnia.  Twitching  in  the  paralysed  as  well  as  healthy 
muscles.  A  fever  of  short  duration  ends  the  attacks ;  after  which 
deep  sleep  comes  on. 


Bryonia. 


Bryonia  alba.    White  Bryony.    N.  O.  Cucurbitaceae.   Tincture  of  root 
procured  before  flowering. 

GUaieaL— Alcoholism.  Amenorrhcea.  Axiger,  e£Fects  of.  Aphthae.  Apoplexy. 
Asthma.  Bilious  attack.  Brain,  affections  of.  Breast^  inflamed.  Bronchitis,  Cancer, 
Chill,  effects  of.  Chlorosis.  Constipation,  Consumption.  Coryza.  Cough,  Den- 
tition.   Dia^agmt  rheumatism  of.     Diarrhoea.    iDropsy.     Dyspepsia.     Eczema. 


BRYONIA  311 

Enteric  fever.  Eruptions.  Gastro-enteritis.  HaBmorrhages.  Hands^  swollen.  Head- 
ache. Hearty  inflammation  of.  Hernia.  Hiccough.  Hydrocele.  Hydrocephalus. 
Influenza.  Intermittent  fevers.  Jaundice.  Joints^  pain  in.  Lactation^  disorder  of. 
Ltver,  disorders  of  Lumbago.  Measles.  Meningitis.  Menstruation^  vicarious. 
Miliaria.  Milk  fever.  Myalgia.  Nephritis.  Nose-Bleed.  Peritonitis.  Phlegmasia 
alhsi  dolens.  Pleurisy.  Pleurodynia.  Pneumonia.  Pregnancy^  morning  cough  of; 
sickness  of.  Puerperal  fever.  Pyuria.  Relapsing  fever.  Remittent  fever. 
Rheumatism.  Scarlatina.  Screaming.  Side^  pain  in.  SleePt  anxious  dreams  in. 
Spina  bifida.  Stiff-neck.  Suppressed  eruptions,  bad  effects  of.  Thirst.  Tongue, 
coated.  Toothache.  Trachea,  pain  in.  Vertigo.  Waking,  starts  and  screams  on» 
Water-brash.    Whooping-coagh.    Yellow  fever. 

GharmoteristiOB. — Bryonia  alba  is  one  of  the  polychrest  reme- 
dies of  the  homceopathic  materia  medica.  The  common  Bryony  of 
this  comitry  is  the  Bryonia  dioica,  which  has  been  substituted  for 
the  B.  albaf  and  has  probably  identical  properties ;  but  the  Alba  alone 
has  been  proved,  and  consequently  this  should  always  be  dispensed. 
Less  rapid  in  its  action  than  Aconite^  it  goes  deeper  in  its  effects,  and 
often  taikes  up  the  work  where  Aeon,  leaves  off.  It  not  only  disorders 
the  circulation,  but  alters  the  blood  itself.  It  corresponds  to  fevers 
of  almost  all  kinds, (especially  rheumatic,  typhoid,  bilious  and  remitting. 
In  these,  as  in  all  other  complaints,  the  exquisite  sensitiveness  of  the 
drug  to  movement  of  all  kinds  is  a  leading  characteristic  The  patient 
avoids  even  the  movement  of  the  eyes;  raising  head  from  pillow 
causes  faintness,  nausea,  and  vomiting.  Allied  to  this  is  >  from 
pressiure ;  from  lying  on  painful  side.  (This  distinguishes  Bty.  from 
Bell,  in  pulmonary  complaints.  A  case  of  intense  pleurisy  with  high 
fever  grew  steadily  worse  under  Bry.  until  I  noticed  that  the  patient 
lay  on  the  unaffected  side.  BelU  was  then  given,  and  cured  rapidly. 
Lying  on  the  painful  part  keeps  the  pari  at  rest.)  There  is  also  an 
intense  headache,  dull  throbbing  or  sharp  stabbing  pains ;  sharp  pain 
in  or  over  eyes.  ''  Headache  or  neuralgia  in  (left)  side  of  head  and 
face ;  >  from  hard  pressure  and  cold  applications ;  <  moving.  Head 
greasy,  scalp  tender ;  eyeballs  tender."  Mouth  very  dry ;  tongue 
coated  white  down  the  middle,  the  edges  may  be  quite  clean  ;  later 
it  becomes  yellow  with  bitter  taste  ;  later,  very  dry,  but  still  coated. 
If  the  fever  is  intermitting  there  is  chill  mixed  with  heat :  during 
chill,  head  hot,  cheeks  deep  red,  decided  thirst,  generally  for  large 
quantities  at  long  intervals ;  sweat  <  by  least  motion,  sour  or  oily. 
The  lips  are  dry  and  cracked.  Facial  eczema  has  been  cured 
with  it  in  an  infant  five  months  old,  presenting  these  additional 
symptoms :  Constipation,  peevish,  fretful,  thirsty,  face  and  lips 
cracked  and  sore,  child  scratched  continually.  The  mother  had 
had  a  similar  eruption  for  some  years,  and  it  disappeared  suddenly 
at  the  sixth  month  of  her  pregnancy.  The  mucous  membranes  are 
^,  especially  those  of  the  mouth  and  stomach  ;  deficient  secretion. 
Tne  serous  membranes  are  inflamed,  the  seat  of  sharp,  stitching  pains, 
<  from  motion  ;  later  on,  exudation  occurs.  The  muscles,  Ukewise, 
are  inflamed  and  sore.  Irritability  of  mind  and  tissues  runs  through 
the  remedy.  Haemorrhages  are  fre(|uent.  In  this  connection  it  may 
be  remembered  that  Bryonia  dioica  is  a  popular  remedy  for  **  black- 
eye  "  as  a  local  application.  I  have  often  known  nose-bleed  occur  in 
patients  to  whom  I  have  been  giving  Bryonia^  especially  in  the  night, 


312  BRYONIA 

3  to  4  a.ni.,  which  is  characteristic.  This  may  or  may  not  be  preceded 
by  a  sense  of  fulness  in  the  head.  Nose-bleed  occurring  consequent 
on  suppression  of  the  menses  is  characteristic.  The  characteristic 
mental  state  of  Bty.  is  irritability.  Easily  angered  (with  biliousness, 
headache,  dyspepsia,  &c.),  and  it  corresponds  to  the  effects  of  anger, 
fright,  chagrin.  The  patient  desires  things  to  eat  which  cannot  be 
had  ;  or  are  refused  if  offered.  In  fever  cases  there  is  often  a  stupid, 
drowsy  condition ;  or  mild  delirium,  in  which  the  patient  has  the 
delusion  that  he  is  somewhere  else  and  "  wants  to  go  home."  The 
headache  is  dull,  frontal ;  or  bursting,  splitting  ;  <  by  any  motion  or 
by  the  concussion  of  cough  ;  goes  from  before  backward.  The  head- 
ache of  drunkards ;  of  over-feeding.  Nausea  and  faintness  when 
rising  up,  >  when  lying  still.  Bry»  is  a  gourmand  {Nux  an  epicure) ; 
dirty  wash-leather,  foul  tongue,  congested  eyes,  bitter  nausea.  Bry. 
is  a  coarse  feeder.  Food  lies  at  the  epigastrium  like  a  stone ; 
>  bringing  up  wind.  The  digestion  is  <  in  summer.  Symptoms 
<  after  a  meal.  There  is  intolerance  of  vegetable  food.  Everything 
tastes  bitter.    Thirst  for  large  quantities.     "  Eructations  of  tasteless 

fas"  is  characteristic.  Sour  stomach.  Van  den  Berghe  has  found 
^iy,  signally  curative  in  chlorosis.  There  is  diarrhoea  and  constipa- 
tion. Diarrhoea  occurs :  in  the  morning  "  as  soqn  as  he  moves "  ; 
from  cold  drinks  in  warm  weather ;  on  every  spell  of  hot  weather. 
The  usual  Bry.  state  is  one  of  constipation  ;  there  is  the  usual  dryness 
of  mucous  membranes  ;  atony  of  the  bowels ;  stool  large,  dry,  hard, 
brown  or  black  ;  as  if  burnt  or  charred  ;  crumbling.  {PlaU  has  sticky, 
tenacious  stool ;  sticks  to  rectum.)  Stools  smell  of  old  cheese.  The 
liver  is  tender  and  inflamed.  The  kidneys  also  are  inflamed,  the  urine 
being  dark  red  without  deposit  (from  excess  of  colouring  matter). 
Mastitis,  hard,  tender.  Left  ovarian  pain,  >  lying  on  painful  side. 
The  respiratory  organs  and  heart  are  profoundly  affected.  Dropsical 
swellings,  swellings  of  the  legs,  sensitive  to  touch.  "Joints  red, 
swollen,  stiff,  with  stitching  pain  from  slightest  motion."  Synovial 
swellings.  1  have  cured  a  case  of  congenital  hydrocele  with  Bry. 
The  Bry,  patient  dreams  of  the  occupations  of  the  day.  The  child 
kicks  the  covers  off.  Speech  is  hasty.  "  Frequent  desire  to  take  a 
long  breath  ;  must  expand  the  lungs  "  is  a  characteristic. 

The  typical  Bryonia  patient  is  of  dark  complexion  and  hair, 
choleric,  bilious  tendency  with  firm  fleshy  fibre ;  tendency  to  great 
irritability  and  bad  temper ;  but  Bryonia  has  a  wide  range,  and  no 
great  stress  must  be  laid  on  the  absence  of  these  features.  Teste 
takes  Bryonia  as  the  type  of  a  group  which  includes  All.  saLj  Lye., 
Digit.f  Nux  V.J  Coloc,  and  Ignai.  All  these  act  with  much  more  power 
on  carnivorous  than  on  herbivorous  animals.  They  are  thus  appro- 
priate to  persons  who  over-eat  or  eat  excessively  of  meat,  and  have 
strong  constitutions ;  "  persons  accustomed  to  rich  living,  vdth  rich 
blood,  firm  resisting  flesh."  Teste  regards  the  digestive  canal,  and 
more  particularly  the  stomach,  as  the  principal  seat  of  the  action  of 
Bry.  With  regard  to  the  burning  thirst  of  Bry.,  which  is  <  by  drinking 
beer,  he  says,  the  gastric  derangement  of  Bry.  "  absolutely  requires 
water  as  a  dissolvent."  The  constipation  of  the  remedy  is  not  aue  to 
inertia  merely  ;  it  depends  on  "  a  more  or  less  marked  antiperistaltic 


BRYONIA  313 

movement  of  the  rectum  :  hence  the  pains  and  the  ataxic  phenomena 
tiiat  accompany  it  sometimes,  as  is  the  case,  for  example,  in  the  period 
of  constipation  of  lo>v  typhoid  fevers,  &c."  A  peculiar  and  character- 
istic symptom  of  Bryonia  in  brain  affections  is  :  Constant  motion  of 
the  mouth  as  if  chewing.  Complaints  from  taking  cold  or  getting  hot 
in  summer ;  from  cold  drinks  in  hot  weather.  Complaints  when  warm 
weather  sets  in  after  cold  days.  Most  symptoms  are  <  by  warmth 
and  in  warm  room  (cough,  chilliness).  <  From  warm  food ;  but  there 
is  thirst  for  large  draughts  of  cold  water,  which  >.  Rash  >  getting 
warm  in  bed.  Pains  in  joints  and  limbs  >  by  warmth.  Toothache 
is  >  by  pressing  head  into  pillow  ;  by  cold  applications.  Chilliness 
predominates.  Dry,  burning  heat  as  if  blood  burning  in  veins.  Sweat 
profuse  night  and  morning ;  sour  or  oily.  Cough,  headache,  diarrhoea 
<  in  morning.  Nose-bleed  <  3-4  a.m.  Symptoms  generally  <  evening 
(9p.m.).  <  \Vliile  coughing;  after  eating  ;  while  swallowing  ;  from 
motion  of  all  kinds  ;  exertion  ;  ascending  ;  sitting  up  in  bed  (can't  sit  a 
moment  gets  faint,  or  sick,  or  both  on  sitting  up).  <  After  suppres- 
sion of  eruption  or  discharge.  Headache  following  checked  coryza. 
>  Descending  ;  lying,  especially  on  painful  side  ;  sitting.  >  From 
pressure. 

^Alatfons* — Bryonia    is    antidoied  by:   Aeon.,  Alum.,   Camph., 
Cham.,  Chel.,  Clem.,  Ign.,  Mur.  ac,  Nux,  Puis.,  Rhus,  Seneg.    Teste 
/oand,  by  accident,  Fer.  mur.  the  best  antidote  in  his  experience.    // 
antidotes  :  Alum.,  Chlorum,  ChL,  Frag,  vesc,  Merc,  Rhus.    Compare: 
The  Cucurbitaceae  (all  have  belching,  with  unaltered  taste  of  food)  ; 
Aco.  (pallor   on   rising  up.    Aco.  has  more  restlessness  and  tossing 
about ;  is  full  of  fears  ;  Bry.  must  keep  still)  ;  Amm.,  Ant  c.  (nausea, 
vomiting,    and    diarrhcea ;   aversion  to  milk) ;   Am.   (hemorrhages, 
wounds,  soreness  all  over  ;  also  Bap.) ;  Ars.  (unlike  Bry.,  drinks  often 
and  little,  and  eats  seldom  but  much)  ;  Asclep.  tub.  (pleurisy)  ;  Bell, 
(delirium,  hasty  speech,  hasty  drinking.    Bell,  has  headache  <  lying 
down,  Bry.  must  lie  down  ;  Bell,  has  <  lying  on  painful  side,  Bry.  > 
lying  on  painful  side  ;  Bell,  has  "  chewing  motion  of  jaws  "  but  with- 
out the  dry,  cracked  lips  of  Bry.).    Calc.  c.  (very  like  Bry.,  but  the 
resemblance  is  too  close  for  compatibility.    They  should  never  be 
given  one  after  the  other  without  an  intercurrent  remedy  between. 
Gale,  like  Bry.,  Chi.,  and  Bell.,  has  "  as  soon  as  he  closes  his  eyes 
sees  aU  sorts  of  objects  ")  ;  Carb.  v.  (miliaria) ;  Caust.,  Cham.,  Ign., 
Ipec.  (miliaria)  ;  Kali  c.  (miliaria,  bilious  affections,  chest  affections  ; 
sharp  plains  in  right  hypochondrium  shooting  up  into  chest ;  sharp 
pain  coming  from  lower  lobe  right  lung,  but  Kali  c.  has  not  necessarily 
<  by  motion)  ;  Kre.,  Lach.,  Lye,  Merc,  Nat.  s.  (morning  diarrhoea)  ; 
Nat  m,  (headache  in  morning,  oily,  sour  sweat  on  face  ;  Bry.  on 
head  generally  ;  cracked  lips ;  Bry.  and  Nat.  m.  go  well  together, 
and  are   often  complementary)  ;   Nit.   ac,  Nux  (digestive  organs  ; 
corresponds  to  epicures,  Bry.  to  gourmands)  ;  Op.,  Pet.,  Pho.,  Pod., 
Puis,  (morning  diarrhcea)  ;  Kan.  b.  (pleurisy,  rheumatic  affections)  ; 
Rhus  (rheumatism  ;  headache  ;  typhoid.     Rhus  is  restless  and  >  by 
movement  and  by  warmth) ;  Rumex  (morning  diarrhcea) ;  Sep.,  Sil., 
Spi.  (pleura)  ;  Sul.,  Squil.  (pleura).    Pul.  and  Chi.  have  nausea  <  on 
sitting  up.     Ais.  has  gagging  at  the  end  of  a  cough  Uke  Bry.,  Cimex, 


314  BRYONIA 

gagging  and  belching  after  cough.  Aco.  is  like  Bry.  in  e£Fecis  of 
cold,  dry  winds  (cold,  moist  winds,  Nx.  m.,  Calc,  Ars.,  Dulc.) ;  Ham. 
and  MiUefol.  (haemorrhages).  Bry.  follows  well :  Aco.,  Amm.  Nux, 
Op.,  Rhus.  Is  followed  well  by:  Alum.,  Ars.,  Kali  c,  Nux,  Phc,  Puis., 
Rhus,  Sul.  Complementary :  Alum.,  Rhus.  Alumina  is  the  ''  chronic  " 
of  Bry. ;  and  Kali  c.  and  Nat  m.,  hold  a  similar  but  less  pronounced 
relation  to  it 

CSaoBatUm. — ^Anger  ;  fright ;  chagrin.  Suppressed  eruptions  and 
discharges.    Alcohol.    Gluttony.    Wounds.    Cold  winds. 

BTHPTOMB. 

z.  Mind. — ^Anxiety  and  inquietude,  with  fear  of  the  future.— Frequent 
tears. — Despair  of  being  cured,  with  fear  of  death. — Restlessness,  with  fear  of 
the  future ;  fear  of  death,  which  he  thinks  is  near. — Fear,  with  desire  to  run 
away. — Discouragement — ^Aversion  to  conversation. — Exceedingly  irritable 
and  inclined  to  be  angry. — ^Af ter  having  been  angry  he  is  chilly ;  has  a  red 
face  and  heat  in  the  head. — Irascibility  and  passion. — ^Want  of  memory. — 
Momentary  absence  of  mind. — Giddiness. — Desire  for  things  which  are 
rejected  when  obtained. — Delirium  (at  night)  and  ravings  about  the  trans- 
actions of  the  day. — Unconsciousness. 

3.  Head. — Confusion,  giddiness,  and  cloudiness  of  the  head. — Giddiness, 
with  sensation  of  looseness  in  the  brain  when  stooping,  and  when  raising  up 
the  head. — Staggering  and  drunkenness,  as  if  from  congestion  of  the  head. — 
Staggering  backward. — ^Tendency  to  run  backward. — ^Vertigo  only  when 
stooping. — Swimming  in  the  head,  esp.  on  rising  from  a  seat,  or  on 
getting  up  after  lying  down. — Cephalalgia,  as  after  a  nocturnal  debauch. — 
Headache  after  every  meal. — ^Attack  of  headache,  with  vomiting,  nausea,  and 
urgent  inclination  to  lie  down. — Headache  in  the  morning  as  soon  as  the  eyes 
are  open. — Great  fulness  and  heaviness  of  the  head,  and  digging  with  pressure 
towards  the  forehead,  and,  when  stooping,  a  sensation  as  if  everything  were 
going  to  fall  out  through  the  forehead. — Expansive  pressure,  or  compression 
of  the  brain. — Shootings  in  the  head,  sometimes  on  one  side  only. — Pulsative 
starting  pains,  increased  by  movement,  with  aching  in  the  eyes. — Congestion 
in  the  head,  with  heat  in  the  brain. — Burning  pain  in  the  forehead.— Head- 
ache aggravated  by  movement,  or  rapid  walking,  or  when  the  e3^es  are 
opened. — Painful  sensibility  of  the  scalp,  as  if  from  excoriation. — Drawing 
and  starting  pains  in  the  head,  from  the  cheek-bone  to  the  temple,  increased 
by  contact. — ^Tearing  in  one  (r.)  side  of  the  head,  extending  into  the  cheek 
and  jaw-bones  ;  worse  from  motion,  touch,  and  heat ;  better  during  rest  and 
external  pressure. — Burning  heat  of  the  head,  externally. — Heat  of  the  head 
with  dark-red  face  ;  with  coldness  of  the  rest  of  the  body  ;  with  much  thirst 
and  pain  in  the  limbs  when  moving  them. — Cold  sweat  on  the  forehead. — 
Hair  very  greasy. — Oily,  greasy,  sour-smelling  perspiration  on  the  head  (and 
the  whole  body)  during  sleep  ;  at  night,  esp.  towards  morning. 

3.  Eyes. — Pains  in  the  eyes  on  moving  them. — ^Aching  of  the  eyes,  as  if 
they  were  going  to  start  out  of  the  head. — Pressure  on  the  eyes,  as  if  from 
sand,  esp.  morning  and  evening — Stitches  in  the  eyes.— -Shooting  and 
drawing  pains  in  the  eyes. — Burning  pain  in  the  eyes. — Inflammation  of  the 


BRYONIA  315 

eyes  and  of  the  eyelids,  with  redness. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  <  by  heat. 
— Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  esp.  in  gouty  subjects. — ^The  eyes  feel  very 
sore  to  the  touch,  and  when  moving  them. — Painful  swelling  of  the  eyes, 
with  suppuration,  and  the  conjunctiva  swollen  and  red. — Red  swelling  of  the 
eyelids,  esp.  of  the  upper  hds,  with  aching  pains. — Furfuraceous  tetters 
OD  the  eyelids,  with  burning  itching. — Stye  on  the  eyehd. — ^Abscess  in  the 
internal  an^e  of  the  eye. — Nocturnal  agglutination  of  the  eyelids,  with 
bchrymation  during  the  day,  esp.  in  the  sun,  and  with  confused  sight. — 
Eyes  dull,  ^assy,  turbid,  or  sparkling,  and,  as  it  were,  drowned  in  tears. — 
Presbyopia. — Confusion  of  the  letters  when  reading. — Blackness  or  flames 
before  the  eyes.— Photophobia. 

4.  Ears. — Contractive  pains  in  the  ears,  with  diminution  of  hearing. — 
Shootings  in  the  ears,  while  walking  in  the  open  air,  and  afterwards. — 
Swelling,  like  a  knob,  before  and  behind  the  ear  (parotitis). — Bleeding  from 
the  ears. — Sensation  in  the  ears,  as  if  they  were  stopped. — Buzzing  in  the 
ears.— All  noise  is  insupportable  to  the  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Swelling  of  the  nose,  with  painful  sensibility  to  the  touch,  and 
obstruction  of  the  nose. — Inflammation  and  ulceration  of  the  nostrils. — Ulcer 
in  the  nostrils,  with  gnawing  pain. — ^Frequent  bleeding  of  the  nose,  some- 
times in  the  morning,  or  when  the  catamenia  are  suppressed,  or  even  when 
sleeping. — ^Epistaxis,  esp.  just  before  the  beginning  of  the  menses,  or  in 
pr^aant  women,  just  before  the  time  for  the  menses  to  appear. — Dryness 
and  obstruction  dP  the  nose,  sometimes  obstinate. — Fluent  coryza,  with  shoot- 
ing and  aching  in  the  forehead. — Dry  coryza,  sometimes  obstinate. — Catarrh 
with  dryness,  sudden  suppression  of  discharge  and  headache. — Hard  mucus, 
drying  in  crosts. 

6.  Face. — ^Face  of  a  pale,  yellow,  earth-coloured  hue.— Face  red  and 
baming. — Red  spots  on  the  face. — Hot,  bluish,  and  brownish  swelling  of  the 
iace. — Fains  in  the  face,  mostly  aching,  mitigated  by  external  pressure.— 
Swelling  of  the  face,  sometimes  on  one  side  only,  or  under  the  eyes  and  at 
the  root  of  the  nose.— Swelling  of  the  cheek,  close  to  the  ear.— Small  nodosi- 
ties and  indurations  in  the  face,  like  subcutaneous  glands. — Lips  swollen  and 
cracked,  with  bleeding,  and  sensation  of  burning  on  being  touched. — Lips 
dry. — Exanthema  on  the  under  lip;  parched,  dry,  and  cracked  lips  (very 
characteristic). — Eruption  on  the  hps,  with  burning  smarting. 

7.  Teeth.— Toothache ;  shooting  from  one  tooth  to  another,  or  into  the 
head  and  cheeks  ;  from  an  exposed  nerve  (sensitiveness  of  the  decayed  teeth 
to  contact  of  the  air) ;  pain  <  from  smoking  or  chewing  tobacco ;  from 
introducing  anjrthing  warm  into  the  mouth ;  >  momentarily  by  cold  water, 
and  when  lying  on  the  painful  side.— Toothache,  with  urgent  incUnation  to 
lie  down,  <  at  night  by  hot  things.— Jerking,  pulling  odontalgia,  with  a 
sensation  as  if  the  teeth  were  too  long,  or  as  if  they  were  loose,  esp.  during 
a  meal  and  afterwards. — Pains,  as  of  excoriation  in  the  gums,  with  loosening 
of  the  teeth. — Gums  spongy. 

8.  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth,  with  burning  thirst.— Dryness  of  the 
xnonth,  tongue,  and  throat— Accumulation  of  a  soapy  and  frothy  saliva  in  the 
month. — Salivation. — Putrid  smell  of  the  mouth  —Tongue  dry,  loaded  with  a 
white  coating,  or  dirty,  or  yellow ;  esp.  in  the  middle.— Tongue  furred,  usually 
dry  and  hard  with  deep  cracks.-^I^k  coloured  and  wrinkled  state  of  the 


3i6  BYRON  I A 

tongue. — Burning  blisters  on  the  edge  of  the  tongue. — Speech  indistinct,  from 
dryness  of  the  throat. 

9.  Throat. — Sore  throat,  with  hoarseness  and  difficult  deglutition — Pain, 
as  of  excoriation  in  the  throat,  during  empty  deglutition. — Sensation  of  swell- 
ing and  constriction  in  the  oesophagus. — Sensation  of  dryness,  and  great  dry- 
ness, in  the  throat. — Pressure  in  the  pharynx,  as  from  a  hard  and  pointed 
body. — Shootings  in  the  throat  on  contact,  also  on  turning  the  head  and  on 
swallowing. — ^Tenacious  mucus  in  the  throat,  which  is  not  detached  without 
effort. 

10.  Appetite. — Loss  of  appetite. — ^Taste  insipid,  clammy,  putrid. — 
Insipidity  of  food. — Sweetish  taste. — Bitter  taste  of  all  food,  or  only  after 
meal-time,  or  at  other  times,  as  well  as  in  the  morning. — Burning  thirst,  some- 
times after  a  meal,  increased  by  taking  beer. — Infrequent,  but  copious,  drink- 
ing.— Bitter  taste  and  thirst. — ^Great  desire  for  wine,  for  acid  drinks,  for 
coffee,  and  even  for  things  which  are  not  eaten. — ^Abnormal  hunger  ;  he  must 
often  eat  something. — Morbid  hunger,  which  forces  frequent  eating,  and  little 
at  a  time. — Bulimy,  often  with  absence  of  appetite,  or  with  thirst  and 
transient  heat,  sometimes  even  in  the  night. — Loss  of  appetite  after  the  first 
morsel  has  been  eaten. — Repugnance  and  disgust  for  food. — ^Af ter  every  meal, 
risings,  with  pressure  on  the  stomach  and  on  the  epigastrium,  colic  or 
vomiting,  principally  after  having  eaten  bread. 

11.  Stomach. — Risings,  especially  after  having  eaten,  mostly  bitter  or 
sour,  with  a  taste  of  the  food. — Empty  risings. — Regurgitation  of  the  food 
after  every  meal. — Hiccough. — Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  esp. 
after  eating  food  which  has  pleased  the  palate,  or  on  rising  after  lying  down. 
— Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit  and  anxiety,  when  sitting,  or  on  forcing 
one's  self  to  drink. — Nausea  in  the  morning. — Retching,  with  water-brash. — 
Vomiting  soon  after  drinking,  and  esp.  on  drinking  after  a  meal. — Bitter 
vomiting,  when  drinking  immediately  after  a  meal. — In  the  evening,  vomiting 
of  viscid  mucus. — ^Vomiting  in  general  of  what  has  been  eaten,  which  comes 
up  very  soon  after  eating,  of  food  in  mouthfuls  at  a  time  (vomiting  very  often 
excited  by  motion) ;  of  a  watery  fluid ;  bitter  and  flat  taste ;  belching  or 
eructations;  collection  of  water  in  the  mouth. — ^Vomiting  of  food,  with 
hiccough  and  retching,  or  vomiting  of  bitter  water,  or  of  bile,  even  at  night. — 
Vomiting  of  solids,  and  not  of  fluids. — ^Vomiting  of  blood. — Shootings  in  the 
left  side  of  the  abdomen,  during  the  vomitings. — Pressure  in  the  stomach 
after  eating,  esp.  after  eating  bread. — Pressure,  as  if  from  a  stone  in  the 
stomach,  esp.  after  a  meal,  or  on  walking,  sometimes  accompanied  by 
ill-humour. — Incisive  pains  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  from  knives. — Con- 
tractive pains  in  the  stomach,  sometimes  with  vomiting  of  food. — Squeezing 
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  painful  tension  on  being  touched,  with 
sensation  of  heat. — Shootings  in  the  stomach,  when  lying  on  the  side,  as  well 
as  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  during  movement  and  walking,  or  making  a  false 
step. — Pain,  as  of  excoriation,  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  sensible  to  the  touch, 
or  on  coughing. — ^The  least  pressure  on  the  pit  of  the  stomach  is  insupport- 
able.— Sensation  of  burning  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  in  the  stomach, 
esp.  when  moving. — Inflammation  of  the  stomach. — Sensation  of  swelling  in 
the  pit  of  the  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pains  in  the  liver,  mostly  shooting,  tensive,  or  burning. 


BRYONIA  317 

esp.  OQ  being  touched,  on  breathing,  or  on  coughing.— Tractive  pains  in 
the  hypochondrium,  extending  to  the  stomach  and  the  back,  in  the  morning 
and  after  dinner,  sometimes  with  vomiting. — Hard  swelling  in  the  hypo- 
chondriac and  umbilical  regions. — Shootings  in  the  region  of  the  spleen. — 
Cdic  with  tendon  of  the  abdomen,  and  water-brash. — Inflation  of  the  abdo- 
men, with  pressure  in  the  epigastrium,  esp.  after  dinner. — Inflammation  of 
the  liver. — ^Tearing  in  the  stomach,  from  the  hips  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — 
Cramp-like  pains,  pinching,  or  cuttings  and  shootings  in  the  abdomen,  chiefly 
after  eating  or  drinking  (esp.  hot  milk),  sometimes  with  loose  evacuations. — 
Hard  swelling  round  the  navel. — Dropsical  swelling  of  the  abdomen. — 
Gurgling  and  borborygmi  in  the  abdomen,  with  escape  of  flatus ;  sometimes 
only  in  the  evening,  in  bed. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation. — Faeces  too  large,  with  difficult 
evacuation. — Stools  too  large  in  size  ;  too  hard  and  dry. — Faeces  scanty,  but 
hard,  and  as  if  burnt — Diarrhoea,  with  colic,  sometimes  alternating  with 
constipation  and  gastralgia. — Loose  evacuations,  of  a  putrid  smell,  as  of 
rotten  cheese;  (worse  (or  only)  in  the  morning;  during  hot  weather). — 
Involuntary  stools  while  asleep. — Evacuations  of  undigested  substances  — 
Diarrhoea  in  the  morning ;  on  beginning  to  move  about.— Diarrhcea  preceded 
by  pain  in  the  abdomen. — Nocturnal  diarrhoea,  with  burning  pain  in  the  anus. 
--Colliquative  diarrhcea. — Constrictive  colic,  during  an  evacuation. — Loose 
and  frequent  evacuations,  of  a  brownish  colour  (in  the  case  of  infants  at  the 
breast). 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  scanty,  reddish,  brownish,  and  hot.— • 
White,  turbid  urine. — Urine  is  dark ;  becomes  turbid ;  often  casts  a  pinkish  stain 
all  over  the  bottom  of  the  chamber. — Urgent  inclination  to  make  water,  without 
power  of  retention. — Frequent  emission  of  aqueous  urine. — Inclination  to  make 
water,  with  suspended  respiration,  on  lifting  loads.— Inclination  to  make 
water  at  night. — Involuntary  emission  of  hot  urine,  when  moving. — Sensation 
of  burning,  and  incisive  pains  in  the  urethra,  before  making  water. — Cutting 
in  the  urethra,  or  sensation  of  constriction  while  urinating. — Sensation  of 
contraction. — Shooting  and  burning  pains  in  the  urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Red,  itching,  miliary  eruption  on  the  glans 
penis. — Shootings  in  the  testes. — Stitches  in  the  testicles  while  sitting. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Catamenia  suppressed. — Suppressed 
menses,  with  bleeding  of  the  nose. — Catamenia  premature. — Menstruation 
too  early  and  too  profuse,  with  dark,  red  blood. — Menses  with  bad  smell. — 
Acute,  tractive  pains  in  the  limbs,  during  the  catamenia.— Flow  of  blood 
between  the  periods. — Metrorrhagia  of  a  deep  red  blood,  with  pain  in  the 
loins  and  in  the  head. — Burning  pains  in  the  fundus  uteri,  during  pregnancy, 
increased  by  movement,  diminished  by  pressure  and  repose. — Swelling  and 
inflammation  of  the  labia  majora  «  1.). — Swelling  of  one  of  the  labia,  with 
a  black  and  hard  pustule. — Lumps,  indurations,  and  inflammations  of  the 
m^mimg*^  with  diminished  or  retarded  secretion  of  milk. — (Puerperal  fever.) 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness,  with  tendency  to  perspiration, 
cough  and  rattling  in  the  chest. — (Acute  bronchitis). — Deep,  slow  breathing. 
—Difficult  breathing  only  possible  with  the  assistance  of  the  abdominal 
muscles. — Frequent  sighing,  breathing. — Continued  inclination  to  draw  a 
Jong  breath. — Breathing  quick,  difficult,  and  anxious;  caused  by  stitches 


3i8  BRYONIA 

principally  in  the  chest,  compelling  him  to  sit  up. — Stitches  in  the  chest, 
when  breathing  or  coughing. — Inclination  to  cough,  as  if  from  viscid  mucoSy 
afterwards  pains,  as  of  excoriation,  in  the  larynx,  aggravated  by  speaking,  or 
by  smoking  tobacco. — Cough,  mostly  dry,  excited  by  a  tickling  in  the  throat, 
or  as  if  caused  by  smoke  in  the  larynx,  with  a  necessity  for  breathing  often. — 
Cough,  from  tickling  in  the  throat  and  pit  of  the  stomach ;  in  the  evening 
and  at  night  without  expectoration ;  during  the  day  the  expectoration  is 
yellow,  or  consists  of  coagulated  brown  blood,  or  of  cold  mucus  of  a  dis- 
agreeable flat  taste. — Cough  and  stitches  in  the  head  and  chest ;  or  pain  as  if 
the  head  and  chest  would  burst. — Cough  :  with  involuntary  secretion  of  urine  ; 
hoarseness ;  thirst ;  sneezing ;  stitches  in  the  chest  and  small  of  the  back  ; 
red  face;  aggravated  by  motion,  talking,  laughing,  eating,  and  drinking. — 
Cough,  as  if  from  irritation  of  the  stomach. — Cramp-like,  su£Focating  cough, 
esp.  after  midnight,  or  after  having  eaten  or  drunk,  and  often  with  vomiting 
of  food. — Cough  in  the  morning,  with  water-brash. — Cough  which  seems  to 
bruise  the  chest. — Cough,  with  shootings  in  the  sides  of  the  chest,  or  with 
aching  pains  in  the  head,  as  if  it  were  going  to  split,  as  well  as  with  shooting 
pains  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  or  with  pains  in  the  hypochondria. — Cough, 
with  expectoration  of  mucus  of  a  dirty  reddish  colour.— <^ough,  with  yellowish 
expectoration. — Cough,  with  expectoration  of  pure  blood,  or  of  slimy  matter 
with  streaks  of  blood.— On  coughing,  pain,  as  of  excoriation,  in  the  pit  of  the 
stomach. — Fit  of  choking  before  the  paroxysm  of  nocttirnal  cough. 

18.  Chest. — Respiration  difficult,  or  short,  rapid,  and  anxious,  or  sighing. 
— ^Oppression,  with  fits  of  choking. — Respiration  impeded  by  shootings  in  the 
chest. — Respiration  deep  and  slow,  esp.  while  making  any  exertion. — Constant 
occasion  to  make  a  deep  inspiration. — Fit  of  dyspnoea,  even  at  night,  some- 
times with  shooting  colic  and  inclination  to  evacuate. — Pressure  on  the  chest, 
as  if  from  a  weight,  with  oppression. — Contractive  pain  in  the  chest,  excited 
by  the  cold  air. — ^Tension  in  the  chest,  on  walking. — Shootings  in  the  chest 
and  in  the  sides,  as  from  an  ulcer,  esp.  when  coughing  or  breathing  deeply, 
obliging  the  patient  to  remain  seated,  and  when  lying  down  to  rest  only  on 
the  back;  aggravated  by  every  movement — Heat  in  the  chest  (pleurisy, 
pneumonia). — Heat  and  burning  pain  in  the  chest,  with  anxiety  and  tightness. 
— Sensation  in  the  chest  as  if  all  there  were  detached,  and  were  falling  into 
the  abdomen. 

19.  Heart. — Beatings  of  the  heart ;  frequently  very  strong,  and  attended 
by  oppression  (carditis). — Frequent  sharp  pain,  stitching  in  cardiac  region. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Painful  stiffness  of  the  neck. — Rheumatic  sti£F- 
ness  and  tension  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  in  the  neck. — Red  spots  on  the 
sides  of  the  neck. — Red  miUary  eruption  on  the  neck,  with  violent  itching. — 
Sweat  in  the  arm-pits. — Sacral  pains,  with  rigidity,  which  does  not  allow  of 
walking  upright. — During  rest,  pain,  as  if  caused  by  a  bruise  in  the  loins. — 
Contractive,  cramp-like  pain  all  over  the  back. — Shootings  in  the  loins  and  in 
the  back.— Painful  stifiFness  in  the  small  of  the  back,  compelling  him  to  walk 
and  sit  crookedly. — Shootings  under  the  left  shoulder-blade,  extending  to  the 
heart,  greatly  aggravated  by  cough  and  respiration. — Pressure  on  the  shoulder, 
with  shootings  on  breathing  deeply. 

83.  Upper  Limbs. — Rheumatic  swelling  of  the  r.  shoulder  and  upper 
arm,  with  stitches. — ^Tractive  pains  in  the  joints  of  the  shoulders  and  of  the 


BRYONIA  319 

anns»  with  tension,  shootings,  and  shining  red  swelling. — ^Tractive  pains  in 
the  whole  arm,  and  to  the  ends  of  the  fingers.— Convulsive  movements,  start- 
togs,  and  trembling  of   the  arms. — Burning  pains   and  weariness  in  the 
arms.— Constant  trembling  of  the  arms,  and  of  the  fingers. — Swelling  of  the 
arm,  round  the  elbow. — Swelling  of  the  elbow  and  hand  joints,  and  upper 
parts  of  the  hands. — ^The  wrist  feels  as  if  dislocated  when  moving  it. — Shoot- 
ings in  the  joints  of  the  elbow,  and  of  the  hand,  with  heaviness  of  the  hands. 
—Red  miliary  eruption  on  the  forearm. — Pain  of  dislocation  in  the  joints  of 
tilie  hands,  on  moving  them. — ^At  night,  inflammation  in  the  back  of  the  hand, 
with  burning  pain. — Swelling  of  the  hands. — Sensation  of  torpor  in  the  palms 
of  the  hands. — Shooting  pains  in  the  fingers  when  writing. — Hot  and  pale 
swelling  of  the  joints  of  the  fingers. — Starting  of  the  fingers  on  moving  the 
hands. 

f).    Lower  Limbs. — Cracking  and  dislocation  of  the  hip-joint,  when 

walking.— Stitches  in  the  hip-joint,  extending  to  the  knee. — Drawing  pains  in 

die  thighs. — Shootings  in  the  thigh,  from  the  buttock  to  the  ankle,  with 

insupportable  pain  on  being  touched,  and  during  movement,  as  well  as  with 

fft2i  sweat  over  the  whole  body. — ^Weariness  and  instability  of  the  legs,  esp. 

on  going  up  stairs. — Paralysis  of  the  legs. — ^Tensive  and  painful  stiffness  of 

the  knees. — Red  and  shining  swelling  of  the  knees,  with  violent  shootings, 

e^.  on  walking. — Painful  stiffness  of  the  knees,  with  stitches,  esp.  when 

moving  them. — Staggering  and  yielding  of  the  knees,  while  walking. — ^Tensive 

shootings  and  cramp-like  pains  in  the  knees,  with  tension  extending  to  the 

calves  of  the  legs. — Sharp  pains  in  the  knees,  extending  to  the  tibia. — ^Tensive 

and  drawing  shootings  from  the  calves  of  the  legs  to  the  ankles,  with  red, 

shining  swelling  of  the  parts  affected. — ^The  ankle  feels  as  if  dislocated,  esp. 

when  walking. — Putrid  ulcers  on  the  lower  extremities. — Cramp  in  the  calves 

oi  the  legs,  night  and  morning. — Lassitude  of  the  legs  when  walking  and 

standing  for  any  time. — ^Swelling  of  the  legs,  extending  to  the  feet — Pain,  as 

of  dislocation,  in  the  foot  when  walking. — Swelling  of  the  feet,  with  redness 

and  heat ;  pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  on  stretching  the  feet,  tension  on  moving 

them ;  and  pains,  as  from  ulceration,  on  being  touched. — Shootings  in  the 

feet,  tiie  soles  of  the  feet,  and  the  toes,  esp.  when  resting  on  the  foot. — Corns, 

with  pressure,  or  with  burning  shootings,  or  with  pain  of  excoriation  on  being 

touched. 

24.    Generalities. — Over-sensitiveness   of   the  senses  to  external   im- 
pressions.— ^Rheumatic  and  gouty  pains  in  the  limbs,  with  tension;  worse 
from  motion  and  contact. — ^Tension,  drawing  pains,  acute  pullings  and  shoot- 
ings^ esp.  in  the  limbs,  and  chiefly  during  movement,  with  insupportable 
pains  on  being  touched,  sweat  of  the  part  affected,  and  trembling  of  that  part 
when  the  pains  diminish. — Stiffness  and  shootings  in  the  joints,  on  being 
touched  and  when  moved. — In  the  evening,  pain,  as  from  fatigue,  in  the 
limbs,  with  paral3rtic  weakness. — ^Torpor  and  numbness  of  the  Umbs,  with 
sti£EDess  and  pain  of  fatigue. — Pale,  tense,  hot,  swelling. — Red,  shining  swell- 
ing of  some  parts  of  the  body,  with  shooting  during  movement. — Pain,  as 
fn»n  a  bruise,  or  of  subcutaneous  ulceration,  or  as  if  the  flesh  were  detached 
from  the  bones. — Dragging,  with  pressure,  on  the  periosteum. — Swelling  and 
ibdaration  of  the  glands. — Hard  nodosities,  in  several  parts  of  the  skin,  like 
small  indurated  glands. — Pain,  with  shivering  and  cold  in  the  body. — Dis- 


v-^V    .■»-«.~^««~ 


320  BRYONIA 

position  to  catch  cold;  inflammation  of  the  inner  parts. — Startings  of  the 
muscles  and  of  the  limbs.-— Convulsions.— Aggravation  of  the  pains  and 
sufferings  at  night,  or  in  the  evening  towards  nine  o'clock,  as  well  as  after 
having  eaten,  and  from  movement;  amelioration  during  repose. — Affections 
of  the  r.  hypochondrium ;  inner  lower  belly ;  inner  region  of  the  liver  ;  inner 
navel  region ;  of  r.  upper  and  r.  lower  extremity. — General  uneasiness,  sensa- 
tion of  squeezing,  with  shiverings,  caused  by  the  pressure  of  the  clothing. — 
Sensation  of  pulling  throughout  the  whole  body. — ^Trembling  of  the  limbs  on 
rising  after  lying  down. — ^Want  of  strength  in  the  limbs  on  walking,  after 
having  been  seated. — Great  weariness  and  weakness,  esp.  in  the  morning,  or 
on  walking  in  the  open  air. — Necessity  to  remain  in  a  recumbent  posture. — 
S3mcope. — Sensation  of  weakness,  esp.  on  walking  in  the  open  air. 

25.  Skin. — ^Yellow  colour  of  the  skin. — Skin  moist  and  clammy. — Burning 
and  pricking  over  the  whole  body,  as  if  from  nettles,  after  slight  emotioAs. 
— Erysipelatous  inflammation,  esp.  in  the  joints. — Nettle-rash. — Miliary 
eruption,  esp.  in  children,  and  lying-in  women. — Phlyctasnoid  eruptions,  with 
gnawing  or  burning  itching. — Hard  knots  and  blotches. — Furfuraceous  tetters, 
with  burning  itching. — Petechiae. — Putrid  ulcers,  feeling  cold. — Ulcers,  with 
sensation  of  cold  or  with  pulsative  or  smarting  pains. — Chilblains. — Corns, 
with  pressure,  or  burning  shootings,  or  pains  of  excoriation  on  being  touched. 

26.  Sleep. — Constant  inclination  to  yawn. — Great  sleepiness  during  the 
day,  esp.  after  dinner. — Drowsiness,  with  half-closed  eyes. — Falling  asleep 
late ;  not  refreshing ;  complaints  causing  sleeplessness ;  lying  on  the  back 
during  sleep. — Comatose  sleepiness,  interrupted  by  anxious  delirium. — Sleep- 
lessness, esp.  before  midnight,  caused  by  heat. — Sleeplessness  t)efore 
midnight,  with  thirst,  heat,  and  ebullitions. — Ebullition  of  the  blood,  and 
anxiety,  esp.  in  the  chest. — Sleep  disturbed  by  thirst ;  with  bitter  taste  in  the 
mouth  on  waking. — Inability  to  remain  lying  on  the  r.  side. — Starts,  with 
fright,  on  going  to  sleep  and  during  sleep. — Unquiet  sleep,  with  confused 
dreams,  and  great  flow  of  ideas. — On  going  to  sleep,  cries  and  delirium,  as 
soon  as  the  eyes  are  closed. — Delirium  as  soon  as  he  awakes. — Disagreeable, 
vexatious  dreams. — ^Vivid  dreams  of  the  transactions  of  the  day. — Nocturnal 
delirium,  and  visions  with  the  eyes  open. — Groans,  esp.  towards  midnight — 
Somnambulism. — Nightmare. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse  full  and  hard,  tense,  and  quick ;  seldom  intermitting. — 
Chill,  with  external  coldness  of  the  body. — ^Coldness  and  chilliness,  mostly  in 
the  evening,  and  often  only  on  one  (r.)  side. — More  chilliness  in  the  room 
than  in  the  open  air. — Cold  and  shivering  in  the  body,  even  in  bed,  in  the 
evening,  or  accompanied  by  pains  in  all  the  limbs  and  cold  sweat  on  the  fore- 
head.— Shiverings,  with  trembling,  often  with  heat  in  the  head,  redness  of  the 
face,  and  thirst;  or  followed  by  heat,  with  sweat  and  thirst. — Before  the 
shiverings,  vertigo  and  cephalalgia  ;  then  shivering,  with  tension  and  drawing 
in  the  limbs. — Fever,  with  bitter  taste  and  thirst. — Dry,  burning  heat,  mostly 
internal,  as  if  the  blood  were  burning  in  the  veins. — Dislike  to  food  and  drink 
during  the  shiverings. — Heat,  at  first  alternately  with  shiverings,  then  burning 
heat  and  thirst,  afterwards  copious  sweat. — Universal  dry  heat,  external  and 
internal,  almost  always  with  a  strong  desire  for  cold  drinks. — ^Want  of  per- 
spiration.— Wants  to  drink  much  water  during  chill  and  fever. — Heat  on  one 
side  only. — During  the  heat,  vertigo  and  cephalalgia. — Febrile  attack,  with 


BUFO  321 

cokl,  and  shivering  predominating ;  type,  tertian ;  nausea,  and  necessity  to 

remain  in  a  recumbent  posture,  or  with  shooting  pains  in  the  side  and  in  the 

abdomen,  and  thirst  during  the  shiverings  and  the  heat. — At  the  termination 

oC  the  fever,  dry  cough,  with  vomiting,  shootings  and  oppression  in  the  chest. — 

Cold  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  on  the  head. — Copious  sweat  while  walking 

slowly  in  the  open,  cold  air. — Greasy  sweat,  day  and  night. — Sweat,  with 

amdety  and  inquietude. — Sighing-like  breathing,  short  cough,  and  pressure  on 

the  chest — Profuse  sweats,  night  and  morning,  sometimes  of  a  sour  smell. — 

Compomid  fevers    in  general ;    chilliness  and  heat  alternately ;    heat  and 

shuddering  alternately. 

Bnchn,  see  Barosma. 


Bofo. 

The  Toad.  (Including  the  common  variety,  Bufo  rana,  and  the 
Brazilian  toad,  Bufo  Sahytiensis,  proved  by  Mure.)  AT.O. 
Bufonidae,  Batrachidae.  Solution  in  rectified  spirit  of  the 
poison  expressed  from  the  cutaneous  glands. 

Caifllcftl* — Brain,  softening  of.  Buboes.  Cancer.  Carbuncles.  Caries. 
Chorea.  Dropsy.  Epilepsy.  Heart,  affections  of.  Impotence.  Intermittents. 
Maiignant  pustule.  Meningitis.  Panaritium.  Pemphigus.  Phlegmasia  alba 
dolens.  Plague.  Podagra.  Self-abuse.  Skin,  affections  of.  Stammering.  Sup- 
paration.    Whitlow. 

CSharacteriBtioB. — In  spite  of  modern  scepticism  regarding  the 
poisonous  properties  of  the  toad,  Shakspere,  who  seems  to  have 
known  everything,  was  absolutely  correct  in  speaking  of  the  toad  as 
having  ** sweltered  venom."  The  poison  is  excreted  by  glands  in  the 
skin  of  the  back.  L.  Guthrie  {H.W.j  xxviii.  484)  tells  a  story  of  an 
Italian  peasant,  apparently  dying  of  dropsy,  whose  wife,  weary  of  the 
interminable  length  of  his  illness,  thought  to  hasten  his  end  by  putting 
a  toad  into  his  wine.  The  result  was  the  man  was  completely  cured. 
"  Quintessence  of  toads  '*  figured  largely  in  the  therapy  of  Salmon's 
Down  Medicon  (1583),  where  it  is  commended  as  a  "Specifick  in  the 
Dropsy."  Homoeopathic  experiments  and  poisonings  have  shown 
that  this  reputation  is  founded  on  fact.  But  the  chief  laurels  of  Bufo 
have  been  won  in  the  treatment  of  epilepsy.  Bojanus  has  cured 
many  cases;  and  no  medicine  has  served  me  better  in  the  treat- 
ment of  this  disease.  Few  people  who  have  witnessed  a  charac- 
teristic epileptic  seizure  can  have  failed  to  notice  the  curiously 
toad-like  aspect  assumed  by  the  subject.  The  epileptic  seizure  and 
the  siatus-epilepiicus  give  the  clearest  correspondence  to  the  Bufo 
range  of  action.  Again,  epilepsy  is  often  found  among  the  effects 
of  self-abuse  in  the  young,  and  Bufo  provokes  the  tendency  to  the 
practice,  and  even  causes  impotence.  The  Indian  women  of  Brazil 
are  aware  of  this  last  property,  and  administer  the  venom  to  their 
you  I.  22 


322  BUFO 

husbands  in  food  or  drink  when  they  wish  to  free  themselves  from 
their  marital  attentions.  Bufo  causes  low  grades  of  inflammatory 
action,  fetid  exhalations  and  discharges.  (I  have  removed  the  fetor  in 
hopeless  cases  of  cancer  with  this  remedy.)  Guernsey  commends  it  in 
panaritium  where  the  pain  runs  in  streaks,  all  the  way  up  the  arm. 
Also  when  the  fingers  have  been  injured  and  look  black,  with  pains 
running  in  streaks  up  the  arm.  £.  £.  Case  has  reported  a  cure  with 
Bufo  cinercus  of  '^  epistaxis  daily  for  several  weeks  with  flushed  face, 
heat  and  pain  in  forehead  >  by  the  bleeding ;  there  was  also  easy 
perspiration  in  general,  apt  to  be  offensive,  especially  on  the  feet." 
According  to  Lippe  Bufo  is  especially  indicated  in  epilepsy  when  the 
attacks  occur  during  sleep  at  night.  The  patient  may  or  may  not  be 
awakened  by  the  attack ;  if  not,  when  he  does  awaken  he  will  have 
violent  headache.  Epileptic  symptoms  are  <  in  warm  room  ;  but 
there  is  also  great  sensitiveness  to  cold  air  and  wind.  Marked 
periodicity  :  quartan  fevers.     Haemorrhages. 

Relations. — Heloderma,  Amphisboena.  Salamandra  is  comple- 
mentary in  epilepsy  and  brain-softening  (Hering).  Antidoted  by  : 
Lach.,  Seneg.  Similar :  Cubeb.  In  convulsions  from  low  grades  of 
suppuration,  Arsen.,  Canth.,  Lach.,  and  Tarent.  ;  in  epilepsy  aura 
starting  in  solar  plexus,  Artem.,  Calc,  Nux,  Sil. ;  aura  starting  in  arm, 
Lach.,  Sul.  ;  in  chorea,  patient  cannot  walk,  must  run  or  jump.  Kali 
bro.,  Nat  m. ;  asif  heart  in  water,  Bovist.  ;  in  masturbation,  impotence, 
&c.,  Hyo.,  Merc,  Sul. ;  in  malignant  pustule,  Anthrax.,  Ant.  c,  Lach. 
in  bullas,  panaritium,  &c..  Hep.,  Lach.,  Ph.  ac,  Sil.,  Diosc.  Head 
drawn  to  either  side,  Camph. 

BTMPTOHB. 

1.  Mind. — ^Weak  memory;  idiotic. — Desire  for  solitude. — Inclination 
to  be  angry ;  to  bite. 

2.  Head.— Numbness  of  brain  before  attack. — Pressure  like  two  iron 
hands  holding  temples. — Headache  :  after  breakfast ;  one-sided  (r.)  >  by 
nose-bleed ;  congestive  ;  <  by  light  and  noise ;  with  cold  feet  and  palpitation. 
— Head  at  first  drawn  to  one  side  (r.  or  1.),  then  backwards  before  an  attack. 
— Sensation  as  if  hot  vapour  rose  to  top  of  head. 

3.  Eyc8.—R.  eye  open,  1.  nearly  closed ;  eyeballs  rolled  upward  and  to 
1.  before  attack. — L.  lid  paralysed. 

4.  Ears. — Least  noise  disagreeable  ;  music  intolerable.  —  Purulent 
otorrhcea ;  ulceration  and  bleeding  of  external  ears. 

6.  Face. — Face  bloated  and  distorted ;  mouth  and  eyes  convulsed. — 
Hot  flushes. — Face  bathed  in  sweat  (during  spasms). 

8.  Mouth. — Paralysis  of  tongue;  lapping  motion  before  attacks. — 
Stuttering  and  stammering;  angry  when  not  understood. — Bloody  saliva; 
fetid  breath. — Desire  for  sweet  drinks. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Involuntary  emissions ;  too  quick  ejacula- 
tion ;  impotence. — Masturbation. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse; 
epileptic  attacks  with  menses. — Headache  with  or  before  menses— Cancer 
of  breast — Cord-like  swelling  from  groin  to  knee  (milk-leg). 


CACTUS   GRANDIFLORUS  323 

17, 19.  Respiratory  Organs  and  Heart.— Burning  like  fire  in  lungs. 
— ^Heart  feds  as  if  too  large ;  as  if  drowned  in  a  basin  of  water. — Palpitation 
with  h^dache ;  during  menses. — Constriction  about  heart. 

to.  Neck  and  Back.— Attacks  ushered  in  by  a  jerk  in  nape  of  neck. — 
SwelUng  of  bone  size  of  fist  (caries  of  dorsal  vertebrae). 

81.  Limto. — Bruised  pains;  trembling;  cramps;  arthritic  swellings. — 
Swdfing  of  hands  and  arms ;  burning  pains. 

sa.  Upper  Limbs. — Great  desire  to  exercise  the  arms— Burning  lancina- 
ting in  bones. — ^Arms  become  stiffened  before  an  attack. — Numbness  of  1. 
ann.— Anns  go  to  sleep  easily. — Blister  in  hand  recurring  annually. — ^After 
sli^t  contusion  inflammation  of  lymphatics. — Panaritium,  swelling  blue- 
Mack  around  nail ;  pain  in  streaks  up  arm. — Contraction  of  fingers  of  r.  hand, 
tiien  L,  followed  by  lapping  movement  of  tongue  with  thumbs  drawn  into 
pelvis ;  t>efore  an  attack  (epilepsy). 

Q.  Lower  Limbs. — Sciatica. — Lower  limbs  more  in  motion  than 
upper.— Cramp  awakens  him  from  sleep. — Lower  limbs  get  weak  (brain* 
softening. — Lower  limbs  straight  and  stiff  before  attack. — Swelling  of  knees 
with  pulsative  and  distending  pains. — Podagra. 

84.  Generalities. — Epileptic  attacks,  ushered  in  by  a  cry ;  face  livid ; 
followed  by  sleep;  occur  at  midnight;  at  time  of  menses;  at  change  of 
moon ;  result  of  sexual  excitement — Swelling  of  whole  body  which  turns  a 
deep  yellow. — Lividity, 

25.  Skin. — Dirty  greenish  oily. — Large  yellow  bullas,  which  open, 
leaving  a  raw  surface  exuding  an  ichorous  fluid.— Burning  blisters— Sweat 
profuse ;  oily. — Carbuncles. — Chilblains. 

a6.    Sleep. — Sleepy ;  after  meals. — ^All  symptoms  <  on  awaking. 


Bursa  Pastoris,  see  Thlaspi  Bursa 
Pastoris. 

Cactus  Grandifloras. 

Cerens  grandiflorus.  Night-blooming  Cereus.  (Mexico  and  the 
West  Indies.)  N.O.  Cactaceae.  Tincture  of  youngest  and 
tenderest  stems  and  flowers  collected  in  summer. 

GSialoaL — ^Aneurism.  Angina  pectoris.  Apoplexy.  Arteries,  atheroma  of. 
Asthma.  Bladder,  paralysis  of.  Brain^  congestion  of.  Bronchitis.  Diaphragm^ 
fkeumatism  of.  Dropsies.  Ear,  inflammation  of.  Fistula.  Goitre,  exophthalmic. 
Haematoria.  Hcemorrhages.  Headache.  Heart,  affutions  of;  hypertrophy  of. 
Indi^stion.  Intermittent  fevers.  Lungs^  hasmorrhage  from.  Melancholy.  Mens- 
truation, painful.  Miliaria.  Neuralgia.  Otitis.  Ovaritis.  Pneumonia.  Pros- 
tate, afiecdons  of.  Rhetunatism.  Sun,  effects  of.  Sunstroke.  Traumatic  fever. 
Vaginismus* 

GharaeteristhMU — ^We  are  indebted  to  Rubini  of  Naples  and 
his  devoted  wife  for   the   first   provings   of   this   great    remedy. 


324  CACTUS   GRANDIFLORUS 

Cactus   affects    powerfully  the  entire   organism,   but   its   intensest 
operation  is  on  the  heart  and  circulation.     In  congestive  violence 
it  rivals  Aeon,,  which  is  one  of  its  antidotes.    As  with  Aeon,,  too, 
the  pains  are  unendurable ;  they  extort  screams.    Sadness,  appre- 
hension, fear  of   death  and  a  tendency  to    be    easily   frightened 
characterise  the  Cactus  mental  state,  as  they  do  many  conditions  of 
heart  disease.     Given  as  an  organ-remedy  it  will  benefit  a  large 
number  of  cases  of  weakened  and  painful  heart ;  and  if  its  keynote 
symptom  of  constriction — "  as  if  an  iron  band  prevented  its  normal 
movements,"  or  "heart  as  if  compressed  violently  and  as  violently 
struggled  to  burst  its  bonds " — ^is  present,  it  will  cure.      Pain  and 
numbness  in  left  arm  accompanying  heart  disease.    Sharp  pains  in 
diaphragm  and  girdle  pain  round  its  attachment.     Indigestion  with 
these  symptoms.    Snader  considers  Cactus  specially  indicated  where 
the  heart  is  weak  and  the  arteries  atheromatous.    This  is  confirmed 
by  a  venerable  correspondent  of  the  Horn.  World  (July,  1898),  who, 
finding  his  temporal  arteries  much  swollen  and  hard  to  touch,  took 
several  doses  of  Cact.  1  x,  with  the  result  that  in  a  few  dajrs  they 
became  normal.    Snader  uses  the  lower  attenuations  in  this  condition. 
A  case  of  angina  pectoris  was  cured  by  the  30th,  with  the  following 
characteristic  :  sensation  as  though  a  swarm  of  hornets  were  going 
from  pectoral  region  to  heart.    Cactus  has  the  weakness  and  coldness 
of  the  extremities  which  characterise  many  heart  cases,  and  render 
it  an  appropriate  remedy.      Constricting    pains    run    through  the 
pathogenesis    (throat  ;    chest  ;  heart  ;   bladder  ;   rectum  ;    vagina). 
Twitching  of  muscles,  and  sensation  of  constriction  produced  by 
touching  the  affected  part.     Haemorrhages  (nose  ;  lungs  ;  rectum  ; 
stomach).    Sanguineous  congestions,  which  are  in  a  way  a  counter- 
part of  the  constrictive  sensations.    Prostration.    Among  the  other 
prominent  symptoms  of  Cactus  are :  "  Heavy  pain  in  vertex,  like  a 
weight."      "  Periodical  attacks   of  suffocation,    with    fainting,  cold 
sweat  on  face,  and  loss  of  pulse."     "  Fluttering  and  palpitation  of 
heai-t,  <  when  walking  or  lying  on  left  side."    "  Heart  disease  with 
swelling  of  left  hand  only."    "  Numbness  of  left  arm."    "  Rheumatism 
of  all  joints,  beginning  in  upper  extremities."    The  pains  are  very 
sharp,  causing  the  patient  to  cry  out.    Many  symptoms  are  <  at 
night  {*^  Night-hlooming  Cereus").    Menses  cease  at  night     Many 
symptoms  <  lying  down,  or  come  on  when  lying  down.     Periodicity 
is  well  marked  (quotidian  fever,  11  a.m.).    Cnill  at  same  hour  every 
day,  II  a.m.  or  11  p.m.    Choudhury  has  reported  a  case  cured,  the 
characteristics  being  :  "Chill  severe,  11  a.m.,  thirsty,  headache,  body 
hot ;  no  separate  heat."    When  there  is  heat  there  is  thirst  and  short 
breath.    At  times  there  is  entire  absence  of  sweat.    There  is  <  after 
eating  (weight  at  stomach)  ;  and  also  <  from  missing  a  meal  or 
fasting  (prosopalgia  and  other  neuralgias) ;   <  from  lying  on  left 
side  ;   from  noise    and  light  ;  from  heat ;  from  sun's  rays  ;  from 
exertion ;  from  damp. 

Relations. — Botanical  relatives:  Cereus  bonplandii,  C.  serpen- 
tinus,  Opuntia,  and,  in  a  sense,  Coccus  cacti.  Antidote  by :  Aco., 
Camph.,  Chi.,  Eup.  perfol.  Compatible :  Dig.  (tumultuous  action  of 
heart ;  slow,  irregular  pulse ;  scanty  urine  ;  dropsy)  ;   Eup.  perf.. 


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS  325 

Lach.,  Nux,  Sul.  (pleurisy).  Follows  well :  Aco.,  Am.,  Ars.,  Bell., 
Bry.,  Cham.,  Gels.,  Ip.,  K.  bro.  (diaphragmitis),  Lach.,  Nux,  Rhus. 
Compare :  In  mental  symptoms.  Dig.,  Lach.  In  congestions  to  head. 
Bell.,  Glo.  In  pain  and  pressure  in  head,  Arn.,  Carb.  v.,  Coral.,  lod., 
Nux,  Op.,  Spi.  Weight  in  vertex,  Alo.,  Alum.  In  heart  affections. 
Acq.,  Act.  r.,  Amyl.  n.,  Arn.,  Bell.,  Bov.,  Crotal.,  Dig.,  Eup.  perf., 
Kalm.,  Lach.,  Lil.  t.,  Naja,  Puis.,  Spi.,  Zn.  (as  if  a  cap  over  heart) ; 
irritable  heart,  Cer.  b.,  Hep.,  Pho.  In  constrictions  (of  chest)  Zn., 
K-  chlo.,  Cad.  s..  Alum.,  Bell.,  Bov.,  Arn.,  Cain.,  K.  nit.,  Lach.,  Stram., 
(uterus)  Murex,  (vagina)  Kali  c.  In  menses  ceasing  at  night,  Caust. 
in  leucorrhoea,  Am.  mur.  In  intermittents,  Ars.,  Bry.,  Calc,  Eup. 
perf.,  Nat.  m.,  Rhus,  Sul.  In  dropsies,  Dig.,  Kalm.  In  sleeplessness, 
Sol.  Neuralgia  and  other  forms  of  pain  which  are  sure  to  appear 
when  an  accustomed  meal  is  missed,  Ars.  Haemoptysis,  strong 
throbbing  at  heart,  Aco.  (Aco.  has  more  anxiety  and  fever).  Pain  in 
diaphragm,  Ran.  b.  (Ran.  b.  has  pains  shoot  from  front  to  back ;  Cact. 
has  sharp  pains  in  diaphragm  and  girdle  pain  round  attachment). 
Reptile  sensation.  Crocus. 

CaOBation.— Sun.    Damp.    Love  disappointment. 


BTMPTOMB. 

1.  Mind. — ^Sadness  and  bad  humour ;  taciturnity ;  melancholy ;  hypo- 
chondriasis.— Cries,  knows  not  why;  <  by  consolation. — Screaming  with 
pain. — During  menses,  hysteria. — Fear  of  death,  belief  that  his  disease  is 
incixrable. — Love  of  solitude. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  from  sanguineous  congestions  to  head. — Heavy 
pressing  in  the  head  as  if  a  great  weight  lay  on  the  vertex ;  >  from  pressure ; 
<from  noise  (even  talking)  and  light. — ^Throbbing  pain  with  sensation  of 
wei^t  and  violent  neuralgias  in  r.  side  of  head ;  periodic. — Feeling  as  if  head 
compiessed  in  a  vice,  and  would  burst  from  severity  of  pain. 

3.  £yes. — Dimness  of  sight;  cannot  see  at  a  distance;  objects  seem 
obscored. 

4.  Ears. — Hearing  diminished  by  the  buzzing  in  the  ears. — Pulsations 
in  the  ears  (otitis). 

5.  Nose. — Profuse  epistaxis ;  soon  ceasing. 

6.  Face. — Paleness  of  the  face. — Bloated  and  red;  with  pulsations  in 
head, — Prosopalgia,  r.-sided,  chronic ;  <  from  slightest  exertion ;  bearable 
only  when  lying  still  in  bed ;  brought  on  by  wine,  music,  strong  light,  missing 
dinner  at  usual  hour. 

8.  Mouth. — Loss  of  taste  for  food  with  nausea. — Tongue  purple,  thick 
brown  sordes  on  teeth. — Prickling  on  point  of  tongue. — Breath  very  ofiFensive. 

9.  Throat. — Feeling  of  warmth  about  throat  and  chest. — Constriction  of 
(esophagus,  which  prevents  swallowing. — Constriction  of  throat  exciting  a 
OQQ^nt  desire  to  swallow. — Suffocative  constriction  at  throat  with  full, 
throbbing  carotids. — Scraping  sensation  at  soft  palate. 

II.  Stomach. — ^Appetite  good  ;  digestion  weak.  —  Complete  loss  of 
appetite,  stomach  rejects  everything. — ^After  eating,  weight  and  distress  in 
stomach. — Nausea  in  the  morning,  lasting  all  day  .—Acrid,  sour  fluid  in  stomach 


326  CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS 

which  rises  in  throat  and  mouth. — Frequent  vomiting. — Copious  hsematemesis. 
— Burning  pulsation  or  heaviness  in  stomach. — Constriction  or  pulsation  in 
scrobiculus. — Gastro-enteritis. 

13.  Abdomen. — Pulsation  in  the  coeliac  artery  (after  dinner),  burning 
extends  down  from  it  in  flashes. — Sharp  pains  shooting  through  diaphragm 
and  up  into  chest. — Colic  with  loose  stool. — Insupportable  heat  in  abdomen. — 
Pain  and  bearing-down  in  lower  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation ;  stool  hard  and  black.-— Diarrhoea, 
watery,  mucous,  bilious  (in  forenoon). — Sensation  of  great  weight  (in  anus), 
and  urging  to  evacuate  a  great  quantity,  but  nothing  passes. — Copious 
haemorrhage  from  the  bowels  (from  the  anus). — Itching  in  the  anus. — Fluent 
haemorrhoids. — Fistula  in  ano  with  violent  palpitation  of  heart 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Constriction  of  neck  of  bladder. — Irritation  in 
urethra,  as  if  he  would  pass  water  constantly. — Urine  passes  by  drops,  with 
much  burning. — Profuse  urine,  of  a  straw  colour. — Urine,  on  cooling,  deposits 
a  red  sand. — Hsematuria ;  urination  prevented  by  clots.— Frequent  urging ;  at 
night,  with  a  copious  flow  each  time. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Prostatic  affections ;  weight  in  anus. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Pulsating  pain  in  uterus  and  ovaries. — 
Constriction  in  uterine  region;  round  pelvis. — Constriction  of  vagina  pre- 
venting coition  (vaginismus). — ^Very  painful  menstruation;  extorting  loud 
cries. — Menses  too  early ;  scanty  menstruation,  ceasing  while  lying. — Labour 
suppressed. — Breast,  tumour  in ;  inflammation  of. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Difficulty  of  breathing ;  attacks  of  suffoca- 
tion with  fainting. — Chronic  bronchitis,  with  rattling  of  mucus. — Spasmodic 
cough  and  copious  mucous  expectoration. — Pricking  pains  in  chest  with 
oppressed  respiration  (pneumonia). — Oppression  of  breathing  in  going  up- 
stairs.— ^Catarrhal  cough  with  much  viscid  expectoration.— Much  rattling  of 
mucus. — Cannot  lie  in  a  horizontal  position. — Periodical  suffocation,  with 
fainting,  and  sweat  on  face  and  loss  of  pulse. — Haemoptysis,  with  convulsive 
cough. — Sharp  pains  shooting  from  body  to  back  and  up  into  chest,  with 
sensation  of  rush  of  blood  to  chest  (rheumatism  of  diaphragm). 

18.  Chest. — Difficulty  of  breathing ;  continued  oppression  and  uneasiness 
as  if  the  chest  were  constricted  with  a  (hot)  iron  band,  hindering  respiration. 
— ^Whirling  sensation  from  chest  to  brain;  arterial  throbbing. — Oppressed 
breathing  from  a  weight  on  chest. — Congestion  of  the  chest  which  prevents 
lying  down ;  palpitation ;  constriction  as  from  a  tight  cord  around  false  ribs. — 
Sensation  of  a  great  constriction  in  middle  of  sternum,  as  if  the  parts  were 
compressed  by  iron  pincers,  with  oppression  of  breathing ;  worse  on  motion. 

19.  Heart  and  Pulse. — Pain  deep  in  heart  like  a  jerking  body« 
frequently  repeated. — Something  seemed  to  be  whirling  up  from  chest  to 
brain. — Sensation  as  if  heart  turned  over ;  as  if  it  whirled  round ;  as  if  some 
one  was  grasping  heart  firmly,  with  sensation  as  if  it  whirled  round ;  as  if 
heart  was  bound  down  and  had  not  room  enough  to  beat ;  as  if  bolts  were 
holding  it ;  as  if  compressed  or  squeezed  by  a  band. — Lancinating  pain  in 
heart  when  perspiration  fails. — Deathlike  feeling  at  heart  and  round  to 
1.  back. — ^Acute  pains,  pricking  and  stitches  in  the  heart. — Palpitation  of 
the  heart,  day  and  night ;  <  when  walking,  and  at  night,  when  lying  on  1. 
side. — Palpitation  in  small  irregular  beats  (at  times  frequent,  at  others  slow). 


CADMIUM   BROMATUM  327 

from  sli^test  excitement  or  deep  thought,  with  necessity  for  deep  inspira- 
tion.—Pains  in  apex  of  heart,  shooting  dovm  1.  arm  to  ends  of  fingers; 
feeble  pulse ;  dyspncea. — Endocardial  murmurs ;  excessive  impulse ;  increased 
precordial  dulness ;  enlarged  ventricle. — Heart  disease  with  oedema  of  1.  hand 
only.—Aneurism. — ^Atheromatous  arteries. 

so.  Neck  and  Back.— Exophthalmic  goitre. — Cold  in  back  and  icy  cold 
hands.— Rheumatism  of  shoulder. — Pain  under  1.  shoulder-blade  (with  palpi- 
tation).—Lumbar  muscles  tender  on  pressure  and  stiff,  esp.  on  first  moving 
after  repose. 

81.  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pains,  in  shoulders,  upper  and  lower  arms,  in 
hips  down  to  feet ;  <  in  rest  and  in  motion,  and  in  all  positions. 

sa.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  in  shoulders  and  arms. — Sore  aching  in  1.  arm 
down  to  elbow ;  down  tto  fingers. — Numbness  of  1.  arm. — Formicatioa  and 
weight  in  arms. — (Edema  of  the  hands ;  worse  in  the  1. 

^  Lower  Limbs. — Restlessness  of  legs;  cannot  keep  them  still. — 
(Edema  of  the  feet,  extending  to  the  knees ;  the  skin  is  shining ;  pressure 
with  the  fingers  leaves  an  indentation. 

94.    (Generalities. — (General  weakness  and  prostration   of   strength. — 

Sensation  of   constriction:   in   throat;  chest;  heart;   bladder;   rectum. — 

Haemorrhages :  from  nose ;  lungs ;  rectum ;  bladder ;  stomach. — (ingestions. 

25.    Skin. — Dry,  scaly  herpes  on  the  outside  of  the  elbow,  and  on  the 

r.  internal  malleolus. 

flfi.  Sleep. — Sleeplessness  without  cause ;  or  from  arterial  pulsations  in 
the  scrobiculus,  and  in  the  r.  ear. — Dreams  :  frightful ;  lascivious. 

27.  Fever. — Slight  chilliness  towards  10  a.m. — Chilliness,  with  chattering 
of  the  teeth. — Chilliness  not  relieved  by  covering;  11  a.m.  and  11  p.m. — 
Burning  beat,  with  shortness  of  breath. — Scorching  heat  at  night,  with 
headache,  following  a  chill  and  terminating  in  perspiration. — 0)ldness  in  back 
and  icy  cold  hands.-^Intermittent  fever  (quotidian)  recurring  every  day  at 
the  same  hour  (for  many  successive  days). — One  o'clock  in  the  afternoon 
slight  chill,  then  burning  heat,  with  dyspnoea,  pulsating  pain  in  the  uterine 
region,  terminating  in  slight  perspiration. — Quotidian,  11  a.m.,  great  coldness 
for  two  hoars;  then  burning  heat,  with  great  dyspnoea,  violent  pain  in 
the  head,  coma,  stupefaction,  insensibility  till  midnight,  and  unquenchable 
tliirst  and  perspiration. 


Gadmiom  Bromatom. 

Cadmium  bromide.    Cd  Br,.    Trituration  or  solution. 

^ii^i^Ai^ — ^Apoplexy.    Heartburn.    Indigestion. 

Charaoteristios. — Cad.  br.  must  be  compared  with  Cad.  s.  Three 
persons  have  experimented  with  it.  It  produced  a  burning  sensation 
in  mouth,  gullet,  and  stomach.  In  two  ladies  there  was  extreme 
pain  and  burning  in  stomach,  and  vomiting  and  (in  one  case)  purging 
also,  for  five  hours,  pulse  imperceptible.    After  this  the  symptoms 


328  CADMIUM   SULPHURATUM 

were  better  and  sleep  followed,  but  both  were  confined  to  bed  for 
several  days,  and  one  of  them  (the  one  who  had  the  diarrhoea)  was 
afterwards  subject  to  cerebral  symptoms  threatening  apoplexy. 


Cadmium  Sulphnratum. 

Sulphide  of  Cadmium.    Cd  S.    Trituration. 

Ollnlol. — ^Apoplexy.  Boils.  Chilblains.  Cholera  infantum.  Corneal  opacity. 
Eyes,  afifections  of.  Facial  paralysis.  Indigestion.  Meningitis.  Nasal  polypus. 
Ozctna,    Yellow  fever. 

(JhoraoteristiOB.— CoJmium  is  found  in  nature  in  intimate  asso- 
ciation with  Zincj  which  it  nearly  resembles  in  action,  but  Cadmium 
acts  more  powerfully.  The  profound  action  of  Cad.  s,  on  the  stomach 
— ^burning  and  cutting  pain,  intense  retching,  gagging,  bringing  up 
tough  mucus,  intense  nausea  and  vomiting— led  to  its  being  given  in 
yellow  fever  with  brilliant  success.  Black  vomit  is  very  characteristic. 
The  least  thing  touching  the  lips  will  excite  vomiting.  Pitchy  taste  ; 
food  tastes  like  salt.  Cadm.  is  a  cross  between  Bry,  and  Ars. :  it  has 
the  desire  to  keep  quiet  of  Bry.,  with  the  exhaustion  and  stomach 
irritability  of  Ars,  (Kent).  Cadmium  is  a  chilly  medicine.  There  is 
icy  coldness— coldness  even  when  near  a  fire.  Horripilation  :  after 
drinking ;  with  hot  hands.  Sweat  in  axillas.  Effect  of  a  draught  of 
cold  air  in  checking  sweat.  <  Prom  cold  air  ;  itching  of  skin  when 
cold.  <  Sunshine.  <  In  morning  and  after  sleep.  <  Walking  ; 
<  ascending  stairs.  <  When  swallowing.  <  After  grief.  <  After 
intoxication.  >  By  eating.  Effects  of  :  anxiety,  or  fit  of  passion  ;  of 
cold  winds  (facial  paralysis).  Acts  well  in  drunkards.  It  is  a 
notable  antipsoric.  There  is  much  itching  of  skin  ;  at  night  in  bed  ; 
when  touched  ;  when  cold  ;  >  scratching,  which  causes  a  voluptuous 
feeling.  Skin  blue ;  yellow  ;  scaly,  cracking,  damp,  suppurating 
herpes  ;  chilblains.  Cutting,  lancinating  pains  are  prominent ;  also  a 
sense  of  constriction.  The  nasal  symptoms  are  very  important ;  no 
remedy  has  served  me  better  in  cases  of  ozaena  and  polypus. 

Relations. — Compare :  Zn.  (but  in  Zn.  the  action  is  primarily  on 
brain  ;  in  Cadm.  primarily  on  stomach) ;  in  constriction  across  chest 
with  palpitation,  K.  chlo. ;  weakness,  nausea,  vomit  and  burning,  Ars. ; 
black  vomit,  affections  of  drunkenness,  Ars.,  Lach.  ;  in  nausea  and 
retching,  Asar.,  Bry.,  Crot.  t..  Cup.,  Nux,  Pod.,  Ant.  t  ;  in  deathly 
nausea,  Ip.,  Tab. ;  greenish  gelatinous  vomit,  -^thusa,  Ars.,  Bry.,  Ip., 
Ver. ;  gelatinous  stools,  Alo,,  Cubeb.,  Hell.,  K.  bich..  Pod.,  Rhus,  Sep. 
(green) ;  loss  of  breath  on  going  to  sleep,  Carb.  an.,  Carb.  v.,  Op., 
Grind.,  Lach.  Followed  well  by :  Bell,  (rolling  of  head  with  open  eyes 
in  cholera  infantum)  ;  Carb.  v..  Lob.  inf.  (in  yellow  fever);  Nit  ac.  ; 
Alet.  (nausea  of  pregnancy).    Follows  well :  Ip.,  Ars.,  Bell. 

Causation. — Sun.    Draught  of  air.    Cold  wind.    Alcohol. 


CADMIUM   SULPHURATUM  329 

BTHPTOHB. 

I.    Mind. — Excessive  irritability. — Horror  of  solitude  and  of  work. 
8.    Head. — Constriction ;  stitches ;  pulsation. — Hammering  in  the  head, 
preceding  vomiting. — Headache  with  restlessness,  icy  coldness  of  body,  epis- 
taaa&f  constriction  in  throat,  thirst,  nausea,  vomiting ;  mostly  present  when 
awaking,  in  open  air,  from  draught  of  air,  in  sim. — Herpes  on  temples. 

J.    Eyes. — Cannot  read  small  type. — Night-blindness. — Scrofulous  in- 
flammation.— Opacity  of   cornea. — Hot    tears. — Swellings  of   lids. — Hollow 
.  eyes;  blue  circles. 

I  4.    Ears. — Sounds  echo  in  head. 

■  5.    Nose. — Ulcerative  or  cancerous  smell  (ozaena). — ^Tightness  at  root 

and  tension  in  nose. — Obstruction  of  nose  by  swelling. — Numbness  of  nose. — 

Erysipelas. — Boils  on  nose.— Caries  of  nasal  bones. — Ulceration  of  nostrils. 

&    Face. — Spasmodic  movements  of  upper  lip. — Facial  paralysis  from 

I  cdd  air— crawling  sensation— chronic  eruption  on  forehead,  nose,  and  round 

I  mouth.— Swelling  of  lips. 

8, 9.    Mouth  and    Throat. — Salivation.— Taste  first   sweetish,  then 
bitter  and  burning. — Fetid  breath. — Ulcers  ;  dryness ;    itching ;    burning ; 
I  constriction  in  throat — Dysphagia. 

11.  Stomach. — Nausea;  must  lie  quiet. — Nausea  in  mouth;  chest; 
abdomen. — Saltish,  rancid  belchings,  cold  sweat  on  face. — Vomiting  of  acid  or 

/  jeUow  substances,  cold  perspiration  on  face  and  cutting  pains  in  abdomen. — 

/  Black  vomit. — Burning  and  cutting  pain  in  stomach. — Gastric  symptoms  < 

f  after  drinking  beer  ;  in  forenoon ;  during  pregnancy  ;  in  drunkards ;  after 

cramps  in  stomach. 

12.  At)doinen. — Pain  in  abdomen  with  vomiting. — Pain  and  pulsation 
in  sides  of  abdomen. — Cutting  pains  in  bowels  and  kidneys. — Lancinations  in 
L  hypochondrium. — S3rmptoms  of  stomach  and  hypochondria  <  by  walking 
or  carrying  burdens. 

13.  Stools.  —  Stools,  almost  gelatinous,  yellowish-green,  semi  -  fluid. 
(Cholera  infantum.) 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Severe  cutting  in  region  of  kidneys;  urine 
suppressed,  or  scanty,  or  bloody. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— (Too  frequent  seminal  emissions  checked 
by  it.) 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Acts  well  during  pregnancy. — Erysipelas 
of  mammae. — Inflamed  nipples. 

1%  i8.  Respiratory  Organs  and  Chest.— Chest  feels  dilated.— Feel- 
ing as  if  lungs  adhered  to  chest. — Cough  with  loss  of  consciousness,  agitation, 
red  face,  pain  in  stomach,  or  vomiting  of  bile. — Interrupted  breathing  during 
sleep.— Chest  symptoms  <  squatting. — Brown  spots  on  chest. — Swelling  of 
external  chest. 

n.  Limbs. — Suppuration  of  axillary  glands. — Brown  spot  on  elbow. — 
Boils  on  buttocks. — Restlessness ;  jactitations  ;  startings. 

2d.  Sleep. — Sleeps  with  eyes  open. — Stops  breathing  on  going  to  sleep  ; 
wakes  up  suffocating. — Symptoms  <  after  sleep. — ^Annoying  protracted  sleep- 


330  CAJUPUTUM 


Cainca. 

Chiococca  racemosa.    (Brazil.)    N.  0.  Rubiaceae.    Tincture  of  dried 

root  bark. 

ClinieaL — ^Brighfs  disease.  Cough.  Dropsies.  Fatigue.  Kidneys,  pain  in. 
Ophthalmia.    Polyuria.    Spleen,  pain  in.    Travelling,  effects  of. 

Ohafaoteristios. — Cainca  is  related  botanically  to  China^  Ipecac,, 
and  Coffea.  Clinically  it  is  very  like  Apocynunt,  It  has  not  been  used 
much,  but  has  been  given  vtrith  success  in  dropsies,  especially  when 
associated  with  dry  skin.  It  removes  fatigue  from  too  long  riding  on 
horseback.  Polyuria  while  travelling.  There  is  also  sensitiveness  of 
the  abdomen  to  touch.    Rest  >.    Motion  <. 

Relations. — Compare :  Apocynum,  Bry.  Aniidoted  by  :  Colch., 
Rhus  (gastralgia),  Verat.  Cainca  follows  well :  Ars.  Similar  to  : 
Coffea  in  relieving  effects  of  fatigue  ;  also  Arn. 

CaasatioiL— Fatigue. 

BTMPTOHB. 

3.    £yes. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes  with  fluent  coryza. 

12.  Abdomen. — Lancinations  through  spleen  region.~Abdomen  sensi- 
tive to  touch. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pain  in  kidney  regions  in  morning;  cannot 
change  position.— Polyuria ;  whilst  riding. — Copious  urination  after  drinking 
coffee. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Attacks  of  cough  from  7  p.m.  till  i  a.m., 
with  rattling  of  phlegm  and  short  breath  ;  accumulation  of  wind  in  abdomen, 
which  feels  like  a  pair  of  bellows  set  in  motion ;  feels  it  putting  hands  there. 
— Cough  with  weeping. 

s6.    Sleep. — Somnolence;  yawning. 


Cajapntum. 


Cajuput  oil  distilled  (in  water)  from  leaves  of  Melaleuca  leucadendron. 
Variety,  M.  cajupute  minor.  (Moluccas.)  N.  0,  Myrtacese. 
Solution  of  the  oil  in  rectified  Spirit. 

QUnical.— Deafness.  Diarrhoea  (night).  Dropsy.  Epilepsy.  Gout  Head- 
ache. Heartburn.  Hiccough.  Hysteria.  Menstruation,  disorders  of.  GBsophagos, 
stricture  of.  Paralysis.  Rheumatism.  Tongue,  affections  of  ;  swelling  of.  Tooth- 
ache.   Urinary  disorders.    Vertigo. 

Ohai*aotepistios. — Cajuput  has  a  reputation  in  the  old  school  as  a 
local  application  in  rheumatism,  and  also  in  cases  of  dysmenorrhoea. 
It  has  had  a  homoeopathic  proving,  and  some  very  characteristic 
symptoms  have  been  developed.    A  feeling  of  enlargement ;  too  large 


CAJUPUTUM  331 

lU  over;  as  if  head  as  lar«  as  half  a  bushel.  Feeling  as  though 
could  not  get  himself  together  (Bapt.)  ;  could  not  get  his  clothes  for 
a  time,  though  they  were  quite  near.  As  if  poisoned.  As  if  the  arms 
were  tied  to  the  body ;  heavy ;  useless.  Numb  feeling  all  over.  A 
measles-like  eruption  ;  intense  itching.  Many  nervous  symptoms  are 
developed,  some  reflected  from  the  female  sexual  organs.  There  is 
the  persistent  choking  sensation  of  hysteria ;  nervous  dyspnoea ; 
nervous  distension  of  the  bowels.  Earache  and  faceache  ;  the  lobe 
of  the  ear  is  red  ;  alae  nasi  suddenly  turn  red  ;  nose  appears  swollen. 
It  has  cured  obstinate  hiccough  from  slightest  provocation,  talking, 
laughing,  eating,  or  any  motion.  Symptoms  appear  and  disappear 
suddenly  ;  come  at  5  a.m. ;  disappear  suddenly  on  eating.  Many 
symptoms  are  <  at  night.    Smoking  ==  desire  to  vomit. 

Relattons. — Compare :  Bov.  (swollen  sensations) ;  Plantago  (ear- 
ache, toothache)  ;  Colch.  (gout  and  rheumatism)  ;  Aco.  and  Bell, 
(effects  of  checked  sweat).  Eucalyptus,  Eugenia  caryophyllacea 
(dove),  Eugenia  jambos  and  the  Brazil-nut  tree  belong  to  the  same 
order. 

Oanaatlon. — Effects  of  checked  perspiration. 

BTHPTOHB. 

z.  Mind.— Averse  to  being  spoken  to,  though  likes  to  hear  other  people 
talk.^Can't  bear  to  look  inside  the  books  he  usually  studies ;  can  think  of  a 
thoassmd  things  in  a  minute. — Prefers  to  walk  alone,  slowly. — Feels  better  in 
the  sodety  of  ladies,  and  can  talk  with  them  (though  naturally  bashful) ;  he 
does  not  like  to  talk  with  the  men. 

2.  Head. — Intoxicated  feeling,  feels  as  if  he  would  stumble  over  his 
own  legs. — Head  feels  enlarged  ;  dull  and  heavy ;  in  ocdput.— Frontal  head- 
ache, esp,  in  eyes,  <  on  bending  forward. — Severe  headache  5  a.m.,  with 
prosopalgia  and  stiffness  of  jaws. 

3.  Eyes. — Heavy  feeling  in  eyes ;  upper  lids  feel  as  heavy  and  thick  as 
leather. 

4.  Ears. — Lobules  of  ears  turn  red. 

5.  Nose. — During  day  alae  nasi  suddenly  turn  red,  redness  suddenly 
disappearing. — Nose  is  most  prominent ;  looks  as  if  large  and  extending  out 
from  face  on  looking  down. 

6.  Face. — Face  feels  all  puffed  up. — Cannot  hurt  skin  of  face  by  pinch- 
ing it — Face  feels  rough. — Stiff,  dry  feeling  in  jaws,  with  neuralgic  pains  in 
malar  bones,  and  severe  headache  all  over  head  on  waking  at  5  a.m. 

8.  Mouth.— -Tongue  feels  swollen ;  as  if  it  filled  mouth  all  up,  making 
her  lisp ;  feels  scalded ;  looks  white  and  rough. — Profuse  salivation. — Speech 
thick  and  slow. — Acrid  taste. 

g.  Throat. — ^Constant  inclination  to  spit  and  hawk  up  large  quantities 
of  tough  white  mucus,  which  he  could  feel  drawn  through  the  nares. — 
Feels  closed  up. — Oesophagus  :  paralysed ;  swollen  sensation ;  constricted,  < 
attempting  to  swallow  solid  food. — Burning  in  pharynx  and  oesophagus.— 
Persistent  sensation  of  choking. 

IX.    Stomach. — Burning  in  throat  down  to  stomach. — Nausea. 


332  CALADIUM 

13.  stool  and  Rectum. — Rectum  paralysed.— Bright  yellow  diarrhoea 
<  night. — Choleraic  diarrhoea  from  sudden  check  of  perspiration. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  diminished,  milky ;  smells  like  cat's  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Erections  with  great  desire. — Erections  all 
night,  and  long  after  rising,  but  without  the  least  desire. — Penis  soon  became 
shrivelled  up. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Menses  suspended,  or  diminished  and 
attended  with  pain,  when  caused  by  a  cold  or  check  of  perspiration. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Warmth  down  trachea  into  limgs. — Hoarse- 
ness.— Cough  causing  vomiting. — Nervous  dyspnoea. — Sharp  pain  through 
apices  of  both  limgs  from  before  backward  (esp.  r.). 

20.    Neck. — ^All  the  muscles  of  the  neck  are  very  sensitive  to  pressure. 
31.    Limbs. — Rheumatic  symptoms  {Cajuput  oil  is  a  common  remedy  as 
an  application  to  rheumatic  joints). — Pain  as  if  joints  were  enlarged. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Arms  feel  like  soaked  wood  hanging  to  one. — Left 
arm  feels  out  of  joint. 

23.  Lower  Limbs.—Weakness  in  both  knees. — Stitching  pains  in  knees 
on  rising  in  bed. 


Calabar,  see  Physostigma. 


Galadinm. 

Caladium  seguinum.  Arum  seguinum.   Dumb  Cane,  (^uth  America.) 
N.  O.  Araceae.    Tincture  of  whole  fresh  plant. 

01lllleal« — ^Asthma.     Dropsical   swellings.      Gleet.      Impotence.     Irritation, 
Nymphomania.    Pruritus  vaginae.    Spermatorrhoea.    Typhoid.    Typhus.    Worms. 

ChaFaoteristiCB.— Like  the  other  Arums,  Caladium  has  an  in- 
tensely irritating  effect  on  the  mucous  membranes  and  skin,  and 
produces  many  burning  sensations.  Calad.  is  one  of  the  best  reme- 
dies for  that  troublesome  affection,  pruritus  vulvae.  Sometimes  this 
is  set  up  by  intestinal  worms  finding  their  way  into  the  vagina,  and 
they  may  then  cause  masturbation,  and  even  nymphomania.  There 
is  also  great  disturbance  in  the  male  sexual  sphere.  Masturbation 
and  its  results.  Nocturnal  emissions  occurring  either  without  dreams 
or  with  non-sexual  dreams.  Spermatorrhoea.  The  glans  penis  is 
flabby  from  masturbation,  prepuce  if  drawn  back  remains  so  from 
loss  of  contractility.  Catarrhal  asthma,  mucus  not  readily  raised, 
but  giving  relief  when  it  comes  up. 

H.  N.  Martin  gives  this  picture  of  Calad. :  "  Is  similar  to  Lycopod.  ; 
patient  wants  to  lie  down  always  ;  >  from  sweat  (opp.  Merc.)  ;  > 
after  short  sleep  (opp.  Lack,).  Perspiration  attracts  flies.  Genitals 
relaxed  and  perspire.  Patient  afraid  to  go  to  sleep,  and  doesn't  know 
why.    Itching  of  vulva  with  burning." 


CALADIUM  333 

It  is  suited  to  persons  of  lax,  phlegmatic  temperament.    There  is 

<  from  warmth  ;  aversion  to  cold  water  ;  but  bathing  with  cold 
water  >  itching.  Heat  with  drowsiness.  Sweet  odour  of  sweat. 
All  symptoms  >  after  sweat ;  after  sleeping  in  the  daytime.    Motion 

<  most  symptoms.  Great  desire  to  lie  down  and  aversion  to  motion ; 
but  if  he  makes  the  effort  he  is  strong  enough.  Attacks  like  fainting 
after  writing  and  thinking,  when  lying  down  or  when  rising. 

BdatioiiS. — Compare :  The  Aracece  (but  it  is  incompatible  with 
them) ;  Aco.,  Bry.,  Caust,  Carb,  v.,  Canth.,  Caps.,  Cina  (worms) ; 
Gels,  (effects  of  sexual  excesses) ;  Hyo.,  Ign.,  Lye,  Merc,  Nit.  ac, 
Nux,  Pho.,  Plat  (nymphomania  and  irritation  of  genitals) ;  Pul.,  Sep., 
Staph,  (effects  of  masturbation)  ;  Sul.,  Zingib.  Antidoted  by :  Caps.  ; 
Ign.  (stitches  in  pit  of  stomach  and  fever) ;  Carb.  v.  (rash)  ;  Hyo. 
(night  cough)  ;  Zingib.  (asthma) ;  Merc,  (preputial  symptoms). 
AtUidote  to :  Merc.  Compatible :  Aco.,  Canth.,  Puis.,  Sep.  Comple- 
meniafy :  Nit.  ac. 

BTHPTOHB. 

1.  Mind.— Low  spirits  and  gloomy  thoughts  (impotence). — Forgetful- 
ness.— Very  irritable  and  depressed.— Confused,  cannot  concentrate  the  mind. 
—Apprehensive ;  careful  about  his  health. 

2.  Head. — Dull,  frontal  headache. — ^Vertigo  with  nausea,  mornings. — 
Fulness  in  head,  as  if  too  much  blood  were  there. — ^Throbbing  pain  in  the 
head— Headache  with  nausea. — Dull,  pfessive,  or  sharp,  cutting  pain  in 
temples.— Numbness  in  side  of  head. 

3.  Eyes. — Burning  and  stitches. — Eyes  violently  inflamed. — Drowsiness 
and  heaviness. — Eyelids  red  and  inflamed,  with  smarting  and  burning. — 
DnU,  pressive  aching  in  portion  of  eyeballs. — Eyeballs  sore  and  sensitive  to 
pressure. 

4.  Ears,— Very  sensitive  to  noise  (start  from  sleep). 

5.  Nose. — Fluent  or  stopped  coryza. 

6.  Face. — Sensation  as  if  a  spider  web  or  plaster  were  sticking  here 
and  there. 

7.  Teeth.— Toothache,  teeth  feel  elongated. 

8.  Mouth. — Swelling  of  tongue  with  excessive  ptyalism  ;  saliva  resem- 
bling white  of  egg ;  mucous  membrane  red. 

9.  Throat. — Dryness  and  burning  in  fauces  and  pharynx  (without 
thirst) ;  with  aversion  to  cold  water. 

u.  Stomach. — Nausea,  esp.  in  the  morning  on  rising. — ^Acid  eructa- 
tkms. — Frequent  eructations  of  very  little  wind,  as  if  stomach  were  full  of  dry 
food  (with  asthma).— Burning  in  stomach,  not  >  by  drinking. 

13.  Atxlomen. — Spasmodic  cutting  pain  in  stomach  and  abdomen. — 
Abdomen  swollen  and  tender  to  touch.— Sensation  as  if  a  long  worm  writhing 
in  region  of  transverse  colon  or  duodenum. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — ^After  stool  thin  red  blood  passes.— Discharge  of 
mocus  from  the  rectum  after  stool. — Stitches  in  rectum  after  stool. — Soft, 
pasty,  clay-coloured  stools,  passed  with  difficulty. — Stool  containing  hard 
lumps. — ^Very  scanty,  pasty  stool. — Urging  to  stool  on  rising  in  the  morning. 
—Burning  in  the  anus  after  stool. 


334  CALADIUM 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Bladder  feels  full  without  desire  to  urinate. 
— Urine  fetid ;  with  sediment  (with  impotence  and  gleet). 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Organs  swollen  (pixGEy),  relaxed,  and 
sweating. — Swelling  of  margin  of  prepuce  with  smarting  during  micturition. 
— ^After  waking  prepuce  remains  retracted;  painful  and  swollen. — ^After 
coition  the  prepuce  remains  behind  the  glans ;  it  is  painful  and  swollen. — 
Glans  red,  dry ;  dotted  with  still  redder  points.— Glans  flabby  from  masturba- 
tion.— Painful  erections  without  sexual  desire,  alternating  with  sexual  desire 
with  relaxed  penis. — Impotence  with  mental  depression. — Frequent  nocturnal 
emissions. — Nocturnal  emissions  either  without  dreams  or  with  non*sexual 
dreams. — Imperfect  erections  and  premature  ejaculation  Of  the  semen. — 
Impotence ;  the  penis  remains  relaxed,  even  when  excited. — Feeling  of  cold- 
ness, and  cold  perspiration  of  the  sexual  organs. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Itching  of  external  genitals  with  volup- 
tuousness.— Pruritus  of  vulva  and  vagina.— ^Pruritus  vaginae ;  with  onanism 
(nymphomania). — ^Worms  escape  into  vagina  and  cause  masturbation. — 
Cramp-like  pains  in  uterus  after  midnight. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Larynx  and  trachea  seem  constricted; 
impedes  deep  breathing.— Sudden  and  involuntary  cough  caused  by  tickling 
high  up  in  throat  (above  larynx). — Oppression  of  breathing,  cannot  get  his 
breath  easily. — ^Asthma  alternating  with  itching,  burning  rash. — Catarrhal 
asthma  (with  mucus  which  is  not  readily  raised,  but  the  asthma  is  relieved 
when  it  is  raised). 

iS.    Chest. — Sharp  stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest 

80.  Back. — Rheumatic  pain  in  back ;  can  hardly  turn  in  bed. — Pain  in 
shoulder  with  headache. 

SI.  Limbs. — Limbs  feel  tired  and  weak. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  limbs. 
—Trembling  of  the  limbs. — Stitches  in  corns. — Cramps  in  the  soles  of  the  feet 
at  night. 

24.  Generalities.- Attacks  like  fainting  after  writing  and  thinking, 
when  lying  down,  or  when  rising. — Disinclination  to  move,  and  desire  to  lie 
still.— Weariness  over  the  whole  body. — Extremely  nervous. — Great  throbbing 
all  through  the  body. — Sighing  respu-ation ;  dryness  of  parts  which  are  usually 
moist 

S5.  Skin.— The  skin  has  a  rough,  dry  feeling.— Itching,  burning  rash 
(forearm  and  chest),  alternating  with  asthma.— Violent  itching  on  various 
parts. 

26.  Sleep. — Drowsy  and  sleepy. — Sleepless,  or  unrefreshing  sleep.— 
Sleepiness  in  the  daytime,  but  cannot  go  to  sleep  on  account  of  vertigo. — 
Groans  and  moans  anxiously  in  sleep. — Dreams ;  frightful. 

27.  Fever. — Chilliness  in  the  evening,  without  thirst — Chilly  even  in  a 
warm  room.— Feverish,  skin  hot  and  dry. — Face,  head,  and  hands  hot ;  legs 
and  feet  cold. — Internal  heat,  going  ofiF  from  sleep. — Heat  with  thirst,  pain  in 
the  ears,  swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands,  and  retention  of  stool. — Sweat 
towards  evening  with  prostration,  yawning,  and  drowsiness. — The  perspira- 
tion (after  the  heat)  attracts  the  flies. 


CALCAREA  ARSENICOSA  335 

Galcarea  Acetica. 

Impure  Calcium  Acetate.    Ca  (C,  H3  Oa),.    Tincture. 

ML — ^Anas,   itching   of.     Bronchitis    membranosa.     Cancer,   pains   of. 
Dysmenorrhoea  membranosa.    Headache.    Vertigo. 

Gharaeteristlcs. — ^The  symptoms  of  Calc.  acet.  (the  first  of  the 
lime  preparations  proved  by  Hahnemann)  are  in  the  main  identical 
with  those  of  Calc.  carb,  (both  being  prepared  from  oyster  shells), 
and  are  included  in  the  pathogenesis  of  that  medicine.    Among  its 
most  marked  symptoms  may  be  named :  Vertigo  when  walking  in 
the  open  air.    Stupefying,  pressive  pains  in  the  forehead  with  com- 
pression of  the  whole  head  and  obscuration  of  the  senses  whilst 
reading:  he  was  obliged  to  stop  while  reading  and  did  not  know 
^here  he  was.    Clotar  Muller  cured  many  cases  of  megrim  with 
Calc  acd.    The  indications  he  relied  on  were :  ''  Sour  taste  in  mouth, 
sour  eructations,  sensation  of  coldness  in  the  head,  and  of  emptiness. 
Pain  one-sided,  a£Fecting  right  eye,  which  was  red,  causing  lachry- 
mation.''     Sour,   ofiFensive    eructations.     Profuse,  painless,  not  ex- 
hausting diarrhoea.     Severe   itching   of   anus.     Allen    {Handbook) 
mentions  that  it  has  cured  some  marked  cases  of  membranous  dys- 
menia  and  also  of  violent  spasmodic  cough  ending  in  the  expulsion 
of  casts  of  bronchial  tubes.    For  comparisons  see  Calc.  c.    It  has  been 
med  in  the  excruciating  pains  of  open  cancer  (compare  Calc.  oxaL). 


Galcarea  Arsenicosa. 

Arsenite  of  Lime.    Tricalcic  Diarsenite.     Caj  2ASO4.     Trituration. 

ffiiwi^^ — ^Acidity.  Albuminuria.  Asthma.  Cholera.  Cirrhosis  of  liver. 
Constipation.  Consumption,  Corpulency.  Dropsy.  Embolus.  Epilepsy.  Gastric 
nJcer.  Headache.  Heart,  disease  of.  Indigestion.  Intermittent  fever.  Kidneys, 
affections  of.  Liver,  afiFections  of.  Obesity.  Palpitation.  Pancreas,  cancer  of. 
Tumours.    Typhoid. 

CharaeteristioB. — Calc.  ars.  was  prepared  and  proved  by  Hering 
in  the  4th  centesimal  tincture  in  1848.  It  has  also  been  tested  clini- 
cally. It  has  many  head  symptoms  :  Vertigo  when  moving  the 
head.  "  Flying  or  swimming  sensation  ;  as  if  feet  did  not  touch  the 
ground  ;  indescribably  well ;  most  wonderful  visions  pass  before  the 
eyes,  manifold  but  lasting  only  a  second  ;  passing  like  lightning,  but 
is  infinitely  much.''  Rush  of  blood  to  head  before  an  epileptic  attack. 
Epilepsy  with  heart  disease.  Weight  on  vertex,  later  on  occiput. 
The  headaches  go  from  before  backward  ;  <  mornings  going  out  of 
doors ;  <  on  aspect  opposite  to  the  one  lain  on,  whether  front  or 
back,  or  either  side.  >  By  mental  exertion  but  <  after.  <  After 
slightest    error  in  diet.    Headache  and  palpitation  are  <  and  > 


336  CALCAREA  ARSENICOSA 

together.    Violent  pains  over  right  eye  ;  stitches  in  right  forehead, 
recurring  weekly.    Head  is  hot.     Delirium  in  the  dark.    Blue  rings 
under  eyes.    Swelling  of  inguinal  glands,  with  tearing  pains  in  legs. 
General   dropsical  swelling,    temples,   face,  backs  of  hands,   vdth 
albuminuria.     Drawing  as  with   a  thread  from  larynx  backwards. 
Burning  and  heat  in  chest ;  feeling  as  if  he  would  suffocate  ^vith 
palpitation  ;    pains    in   heart   region  followed  by  shooting  in   back 
extending  to  feet  and  arms.    Every  fourth  beat  of  pulse  omits  ^vith 
great  regularity.    The    fever   symptoms    are   well    marked — ^inter- 
mittent,   remittent,    hectic,  and    masked    malarious.     Chilliness    is 
marked,  originates  inwardly,  with  a  sensation  as  if  skin  and  adjoining 
parts  were  hot.    Chilly  cramps  over  back  towards  arms  and  chest. 
Night  sweat  after  3  a.m.     Liver  and  spleen  somewhat  enlarged.     It 
is  the  most  efficient  remedy,  according  to  P.  C.  Majumdar,  in  the 
infantile  enlarged  liver  and  spleen  of  India.     In  albuminuria  cases 
there  is  great  sensitiveness  of  the  kidney  region.    Cholera  with  im- 
peded  respiration   from   heart    embolism.     Suited    to   lymphatic, 
scrofulous,    and    tuberculous    persons ;    fat   women,    approaching 
the  climaxis  ;  fat  persons  ;  complaints  of  drunkards  after  leaving  off 
alcohol.     It  is  a  chilly  medicine,  the  symptoms  being  <  in   cold 
weather  ;  when  out  of  doors. 

RelationB. — Compare :  Lith.  c.  (mental  symptoms,  palpitation) ; 
Graph,  (obesity)  ;  Glo.,  Puis.,  Sep.,  Sul.  (headache)  ;  Ars.  (alcohol- 
drinking)  ;  Nux  (desire  for  wine)  ;  Ars.,  K.  iod.,  Pho.  (gastric  ulcer) ; 
Ars.,  Ip.  (asthma)  ;  Ars.,  Carb.  v.,  Dig.,  Glo.  and  Lith.  c.  (heart).  Anti- 
doted  by :  Carb.  v.  (palpitation)  ;  Glo,  (headache)  ;  Puis,  (headache, 
tearing  pains  in  face).  Compatible  :  Con.,  Glo.,  Op.,  Puis.  Acts  well 
in :  Cases  which  have  been  heavily  dosed  with  Quinine. 

BTMPTOHB. 

I.  Mind. — Depression  and  anxiety. — Delirium,  evenings  in  the  dark. — 
Slightest  emotion  causes  palpitation  of  heart  {Lith.). 

3.  Head. — ^Vertigo  on  moving  the  head. — Rush  of  blood  to  head  before 
an  epileptic  attack. — Digging,  pressive  beating  through  1.  half  of  head,  from 
before  backwards. — Headache  over  r.  eye. — Weekly  headache. 

8.  Mouth. — Lips  dry. — ^Tongue  dry  ;  burning  on  tip. — Salivation  with 
tasteless  belching. — Sour  taste, 

II,  12.  Stomach  and  Abdomen.— No  appetite.~Great  thirst,  but 
when  she  drinks  too  much,  pain  in  belly  and  diarrhoea  ensue. — Region  of 
stomach  distended. — Gastric  ulcer  with  scanty  menses. — Pancreatic  disease 
(cancer) ;  with  burning  pain  and  albuminuria. — Enlarged  liver  and  spleen  in 
children. — Swelling  of  inguinal  glands  with  tearing  pains  in  legs. 

13.  Stool. — Diarrhoea  at  midnight  after  sweet  potatoes. — Looseness  and 
colic  also  during  pregnancy. — Infantile  diarrhoea. — Hard  and  difficult  stool 
for  months. — Faintness  ;  cold  hands  followed  by  a  stool  without  relief. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Sensitive  to  pressure  in  kidney  regions. — 
Frequent  micturition ;  burning  with  scanty  urine  ;  albuminuria. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Pain  in  spermatic  cords  after  great 
exertion  and  drinking  wine ;  hands  cold  ;  faintness  and  stool  without  relief. 


CALCAREA  CARBONICA  337 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — During  pregnancyi  bearing-down,  pro- 
lapsus  va^nae. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — ^A  kind  of  asthma;  awakens  soon  after 
midnight — Drawing  as  with  a  thread  from  larynx  backward,  with  headache ; 
chest  feels  full. 

19.  Heart.— Pains  in  heart  region,  burning  and  shooting,  extending  to 
arms  and  legs. — Constriction  of  heart. — Palpitation  ;  with  suffocation  ; 
synchronous  with  headache. — Palpitation  and  heart  pains  preceding  epileptic 
attack. 

SO.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  of  neck,  with  headache,  on  waking  in 
moming.—Throbbing  in  back  drives  out  of  bed  at  night.— Violent  backache 
between  shoulders  and  sacrum  ;  cannot  straighten  back. 

tt.    Upper  Limbs. — Lame  pain  as  if  beaten  in  1.  shoulder  and  arm. 
23.    Lower  Limbs. — Pain  in  1.  knee  of  neuralgic  character. — ^Weariness 
amounting  to  lameness  in  lower  limbs. 

16.  Sleep. — Sleepless,  cannot  bear  to  lie  down.— After  3  a.m.  sleep- 
less, restless,  and  perspiring. 

27.  Fever. — Chilly  crawl  over  back  towards  arms  and  chest ;  it  originates 
always  inwardly  with  a  sensation  as  if  skin  and  adjoining  parts  were  hot. — 
Shuddering  or  shivering  running  over  back ;  has  sometimes  gooseflesh,  esp. 
at  night,  and  is  sleepless. — Fever  in  afternoon  with  sensation  as  if  abdomen 
were  puffed  up  ;  much  thirst  for  cold  water  and  afterwards  loss  of  appetite. 
—Heat  in  chest  with  palpitation. — Sweat  after  3  ajn. 


Galcarea  Bromata. 

Bromide  of  Calcium.    Ca  Br^. 
GUaifiaL— Brain,  congestion  of.    Fretfulness.    Irritability.    Sleeplessness. 

Charaoteristlos. — Calc.  bro.  is  an  unproved  remedy,  recom- 
mended by  Hale  in  a  variety  of  children's  complaints.  Suited  to 
diildren  who  are  of  lax  fibre,  lymphatic,  nervous,  and  irritable.  As 
both  Bromine  and  Calcarea  are  suited  to  fair-haired  and  fat  children 
the  combination  appears  to  intensify  the  effect.  Gastric,  intestinal, 
and  cerebral  irritation  in  such  children.  Vomiting,  diarrhoea,  sleep- 
lessness, fretfulness,  and  tendency  to  brain  disease. 

RelatloilB. — Compare  :  Bellad.,  i^thus.,  Calc,  Bro. 


Galcarea  Garbonica. 

Impure  Calcium  Carbonate.  Ca  CO3.  Including  symptoms  of  Calcarea 

acetica  and  Calcarea  ostrearum,  a  trituration  of  the  middle 

layer  of   oyster  shells,   of   both  of  which  Hahnemann  made 

provings.     Koch's  provings  were  made  from  carbonate  of  lime 

VOL.  I.  23 


338  CALCAREA  CARBONICA 

precipitated  from  a  solution  of  chalk  in  hydrochloric  acid. 
Trituration. 

WaH^.^ Abdomen,  large.  Acidify,  Alcohol,  effects  of.  An€emia,  Ankles. 
weak.  Appetite,  depraved.  Beard,  sycosis  of.  Bone,  disease  of,  Bcachial  neuralgia. 
Breasts,  painful.  Bronchial  glands,  affections  of.  Calculus.  Caries.  Cataract. 
Chilblains.  Chorea.  CM.  Consumption.  Corpulency,  Coryza.  Cough, 
Coxalgia.  Croup.  Crusta  lactea.  Debilify,  Delirium  tremens.  Dentition. 
Diabetes.  Diarrhoea.  Dropsy,  Dyspepsia,  Ear,  affections  of.  Epilepsy,  Epulis. 
Eyes,  affections  of.  Fever,  intermittent  Fistula.  Gall-stones.  Glandular  swellings. 
Gleet.  Goitre,  Gonorrhoea.  Gouty  swellings.  Headache.  Hernia,  Herpes. 
Hydrocephalus.  Hypochondriasis.  Hysteria.  Impotence.  Joints,  affections  of. 
Lactation,  defective.  Leucocythamia.  Leucorrhaa,  Lupus,  Masturbahon.  Melan- 
cholia. Menstruation,  disorders  of.  Milk-fever.  Miller's  phthisis.  Miscarriage, 
Molluscum  contagiosum.  Navus.  Nervous  fever.  Neuralgia.  Night  terrors. 
Paralysis.  Parotitis.  Peritonitis,  Perspiration,  Plethora  Polypus,  Pregnancy, 
Prosopalgia.  Psoriasis  palmaris.  Ranula,  Renal  colic.  Rhagadfes.  Rheumatism. 
Rickets.  Ringworm.  Sciatica.  Scrofula.  Skin,  affections  of.  Sleep,  disorders  of. 
Sleeplessness.  Smell,  disorder  of.  Spinal  affections.  Stone-cutter's  phthisis. 
Strains.  Sycosis.  Sycosis  menti.  Tahes  mesenterica.  Tapeworm.  Taste,  dis- 
ordered. Teeth,  carious.  Toothache.  Trachea,  affections  of,  Tuberdtlosis, 
Tumours.  Typhoid.  Urticaria.  Uterus,  affections  of.  Varices.  Vertigo.  Walking, 
late.    Warts.    Whitlow.    Worms. 

CharaoteristioB. — Calcarea  is  one  of  the  greatest  monuments  of 
Hahnemann's  genius.  His  method  of  preparing  insoluble  substances 
brought  to  light  in  this  instance  a  whole  world  of  therapeutic  power 
formerly  unknown.  Moreover,  Calcarea  is  one  of  the  polychrest 
remedies,  and  ranks  with  Sulphur  and  Lycopodium  at  the  head  of  the 
antipsorics.  It  is  absolutely  essential  to  a  correct  appreciation  of  the 
homoeopathic  materia  medica  that  these  three  medicines  should  be 
thoroughly  known,  as  these  are  in  a  sense  the  standards  around 
which  the  rest  are  grouped.  All  three  have  a  very  wide  range  and 
deep  action.  They  have  many  symptoms  in  common,  but  Calc.  is 
somewhat  sharply  distinguished  u'om  Sulphur  in  that  it  is  a  chilly 
remedy,  the  patient  seeking  warmth,  whilst  the  Sulphur  patient  is 
<  by  heat,  and  >  by  cold.  Calc.  has  cold,  clammy  feet,  ''as  if  there 
were  damp  stockings  on  "  ;  Sulphur  has  characteristically  hot^  sweaty 
feet.  The  ''  sinking  sensation  "  common  to  all  three  is  most  marked 
with  Sulphur  at  ii  a.m.,  with  Lycopod,  at  4  p.m.,  with  Calcarea  at  any 
time.  Calcarea  is  closely  allied  to  Belladonna^  NuXf  Puis.,  and  Rhus 
in  its  action.  It  follows  well  Sulph,  and  Nit,  ac,,  to  both  of  which 
it  is  complementary.  It  is  inimical  to  Bryonia^  and  should  not  be 
given  immediately  before  or  after  that  medicine.  Like  many  of 
the  other  carbonates,  Calc,  carb,  corresponds  to  persons  of  soft  fibre 
with  tendency  to  be  fat.  "This  remedy  is  particularly  adapted  to 
the  real  Leucophlcgmalic  Constitution,  Where  we  find  a  large  head, 
large  features,  pale  skin,  with  a  chalky  look,  and  (in  infants)  open 
fontanelles,  we  may  think  strongly  of  Calc.  c."  (Guernsey).  The 
scrofulous  constitution  embraces  a  large  number  of  Calcarea*s 
characteristic  effects:  fat  children  rather  bloated  than  solid,  pale 
but  flushing  easily.  Fair ;  slow  in  movement ;  of  irregular  growth, 
large  heads,  with  wide-open  fontanelles  ;  large  abdomens  ;  irregular 
and  partial  sweats :  the  head  sweats  profusely,  wetting  the  pillow  for 
a  space  around  the  head  ;  enlarged  and  harcl  lymphatic  glands.     Icy 


CALCAREA   CARBON ICA  339 

coldness  in  abdomen.  In  addition  there  are  night  terrors;  child 
vrakes  at  2  or  3  a.m.  screaming,  cannot  be  made  to  understand, 
remembers  nothing  of  it  in  the  morning. 

Children  are  slow  in  teething  and  walk  late.     Sourness  is  one  of 
the  characteristic  notes  of  Cak.  c.  ;  the  body  is  sour ;  taste  sour  ;  sour 
stool  and  urine.    All  the  symptoms  are  made  worse  by  taking  cold. 
In  all  cases  where  there  is  improper  nutrition  and  imperfect  digestion, 
such  as  described  above,  and  where  there  is  chilliness,  aggravation 
from  contact  with  water  and  from  cold,  cold,  clammy  feet  and  sink- 
ing sensations,  Calcarea  will  most  likely  prove  the  remedy.    Calc,  also 
corresponds  to  ailments  following  losses  of  fluids,  such  as  from  self- 
abuse  ;  and  it  corresponds  to  a  form  of  menorrhagia,  the  flow  being 
excessive  and  the  intervals  shortened.     Periods  return  too  soon  after 
ezdtement.    There  is  often  pain  in  the  breasts  before  the  flow  com- 
mences, as  with  Conium,    But  if  the  menses  are  scanty  or  absent,  and 
the  Calc,  characteristics  of  chilliness  and   cold,  clammy  feet  are 
present,    Calc.  will  still  be  the  remedy.    Suppression  of  menses  in 
women  of  full  habit  after  working  in  water.     Bearing-down  pains. 
Ovarian  or  uterine  pains,  right  side,  extending  down  thighs ;  <  on 
reading  or  writing  (left,  LiL  /.).     In  addition  to  the  cold  symptoms 
there  are  sensations  of  heat  and  burning  :  heat  in  and  on  the  vertex. 
In  connection  with  this  the  sweat  of  the  head  must  be  remembered. 
It  occurs  chiefly  on  occiput  and  forehead  (that  of  Sil,  is  all  over). 
There  is  >  uncovering  during  the  heats  (as  vintix  Lye,  and  unlike  Sil,), 
Burning  in  soles  of  feet  at  night ;  burning  in  back  of  hands.    The 
characteristic  Calc.  hand  is  soft,  warm,  and  moist ;  a  boneless  hand. 
Also  hands  inclined  to  chap.    There  are  copious  night  sweats,  which 
may  be  sour  or  odourless.      Foot-sweat,  sour  or  odourless.     The 
sweats  of  Calc.  give  no  relief.    Bloody  sweats.    Among  other  heat 
symptoms  is  hot  breath,  with  heat  in  mouth.     Rumination  is  among 
the  Calc.  effects.    Nausea  after  drinking  water,  even  ever  so  little  ; 
but  not  if  iced.    The  ''sinking''  sensation  of  Calc.  has  some  modifi- 
cations.   There  is  ravenous  hunger ;  hunger  and  feehng  of  emptiness 
immediately  after  a  meal,  and  in  the  early  morning.    If  he  doesn't 
have  his  breakfast  at  the  proper  time,  a  headache  comes  on.    Crav- 
ing for  eggs  ;  for  indigestible  things,  chalk,  coal,  &c.     Nausea  when 
fasting.    Sour  eructations.    Sour  diarrhoea.    Soi^r  body  smell.    Milk 
disagrees  ;    sour  vomiting  of    large  curds.      Inability    to    swallow 
solidb.    Chronic  disease  of  left  tonsil ;  feeling  of  lump  in  left  side  of 
throat  which  he  wants  to  swallow  down.     Pain  from  left  tonsil  to 
ear.    Semilateral  swelling  of  tongue.    The  prosopalgia  of  Cak.  is  > 
warm  fomentations,  Uke  Pul.     Biliary  colic  :   cutting   pain  under 
light  scapula  running   to    right  hypochondrium  and  epigastrium. 
Crawling  in  rectum  as  from  worms.    Burning  in  rectum.    Weight  in 
lower  rectum.    Stools  hard  and  pasty  ;  like  chalk  or  clay  ;  offensive ; 
midigested.    Ardor  urinae ;  offensive  urine.     Impotence  ;  penis  cola 
and  relaxed.      Calcarea  is  related  to  the  pretubercular   stage    of 
phthisis  ;  it  is  more  especially  suited  to  affections  of  the  right  apex. 
Stitching  in  chest  and  sides  of  chest  when  moving  and  when  lying  on 
affected  side.    The  cough  is  provoked  by  going  into  a  cold  room  ;  by 
chilliness.    Tickling  cough,  sensation  of  feather  in  throat.    I  have 


340  CALCAREA   CARBONICA 

cured  with  Calc,  a  "  fat  cough  " — i,e,,  a  cough  with  easy  expectoration 
of  a  little  mucus — and  an  arsenical  cough  (brought  on  by  sleeping  in 
a  room  having  an  arsenical  wallpaper)  which  waked  the  patient  in  the 
middle  of  the  night,  causing  him  to  sit  up  and  cough  till  phlegm  was 
raised.  Rattling  in  the  chest ;  miller's  and  stone-cutter's  phthisis  ; 
old  suppurating  cavities.  Swelling  of  cervical  and  bronchial  glands. 
Scrofulous  glands  and  scrofulous  diseases  of  bones  ;  spinal  curvature  ; 
rickets.  Swellings  ;  false  appearance  of  fat ;  milk  leg  >  by  elevating 
the  limb,  <  hanging  it  down.  The  same  conditions  mark  the 
sciatica  of  Calc.^  which  follows  on  working  in  water.  Rheumatic  and 
gouty  conditions  from  wetting.  Joints  crack  and  crepitate  as  if  dry. 
The  skin  is  rough  and  scaly  and  inclined  to  chap.  Rhagades. 
Chapped  hands.  Chilblains  from  wetting.  Eruptions.  Cooper  has 
cured  with  it  psoriasis  palmaris.  Eruption  behind  right  ear.  Warts 
and  polypi.  Calc.  is  an  eminently  sycotic  medicine,  as  the  early 
morning  aggravation  would  indicate. 

The  mental  and  nervous  systems  of  Calc.  are  no  less  remarkable 
than  the  bodily.  The  Calc.  patient  is  slow  in  movements  (SuL  quick 
and  active).  The  state  of  mind  is  one  of  apprehension.  The  patient 
fears  she  will  lose  her  reason,  or  that  people  will  notice  her  mental 
confusion.  Fears  she  has  some  fatal  disease,  especially  heart  disease. 
Shuddering  and  dread  as  evening  draws  near.  Sees  visions  on  closing 
eyes  (hence  useful  in  delirium  tremens).  Cries  out,  twitches,  grasps 
at  flocks ;  restless  and  anxious  though  unconscious  (nervous  and 
typhoid  fever)  ;  beside  herself  with  anguish  ;  on  the  borders  of  acute 
mania.  Evil  forebodings  ;  talks  of  mice,  rats,  murders.  Forgetful. 
The  epilepsy  of  Calc.  has  an  aura  spreading  up  from  the  solar  plexus, 
in  which  case  the  convulsion  comes  on  immediately  ;  or  it  may  be 
like  a  mouse  running  on  the  arm  ;  or  it  may  run  down  from  epigas- 
trium into  uterus  or  limbs.  The  causes  are  fright,  suppressed 
eniptions  and  discharges,  sexual  excesses.  Rush  of  blood  to  head  ;  a 
sensation  of  something  rising  up  from  epigastrium  to  head  is  very 
characteristic.  Trembling,  twitching  ;  internal  trembling  sensation 
on  awaking.  Fainting,  coming  on  in  the  street  with  sensation  of 
something  rising  from  stomach  to  head.  Talking  is  a  feeling  of 
weakness  which  compels  him  to  desist.  Exertion  or  excitement  =: 
exhaustion,  though  he  may  feel  well  before.  Ascending  s=  great 
weakness.  Exhaustion  in  the  morning.  Vertigo  :  tendency  to  fall 
to  left ;  to  either  side  ;  backward.  Caused  by  turning  head  ;  < 
looking  upward  ;  going  (especially  running)  upstairs.  Sensation  as  if 
in  a  dream.  Calc.  is  one  of  the  remedies  that  has  been  used  for  the 
sensation  of  levitation.  Aversion  to  darkness.  Cloud  coming  over 
head.  In  sleep  the  mental  symptoms  come  out  again  :  the  patient  is 
either  abnormally  sleepy  or  sleepless.  Wakes  3  a.m.,  and  cannot  get 
to  sleep  again ;  tosses  about.  Horrible  phantasms.  The  child  wakes 
in  the  night  screaming  and  cannot  be  pacified  ;  in  the  morning 
remembers  nothing  of  it.  Chews  and  swallows  in  sleep.  Frightful 
dreams  of  sickness,  death,  and  smell  of  corpses. 

Neuralgias  and  paralyses  are  among  the  Calc.  effects.  A  remark- 
able case  (of  Dr.  Mayntzer's)  improved  by  Silic.  and  cured  by  Calc.  is 
quoted  in  Hofti.  League  Tract,  vol.  ii.  p.  108.    A  girl  of  nineteen  had 


CALCAREA   CARBONICA  341 

had  for  some  months  neuralgic  pains  in  both  arms,  coming  on  every 
evening,  lasting  all  night,  and  being  replaced  during  the  day  With 
sensation  of    lameness  and  weakness.      Pressure  and    movements 
aggravated.     Hands  trembling,  numb,  fingers  often  remained  opened 
out  stiff  and  could  not  be  bent.    The  Silica  symptoms  are  :  **  Tearing 
pains  in  upper  arm.     Pain  as  of  dislocation  at  wrist.     Cramp  pain 
and  lameness  of  hand  on  slight  exertion.     Gone-to-sleep  feeling  of 
hands  at  night.    Numbness  and  formication  of  hands.     Restlessness 
and  trembUng  in  right  arm."    The  symptoms  of  Calc,  are  :  "  Bruised 
pain  of  arms  on  moving  or  grasping.     Pain  as  if  sprained  in  wrist, 
with  shooting  and  tearing  in  it  when  moved.    Tearing  in  whole  arm, 
shooting,  tearing  pain  in  upper  arm  and  elbow.     Nocturnal  tearing 
and  drawing  in  arms.     Spasmodic  tearing  pain  on  outer  side  of  fore- 
arai  from  elbow  to  wrist.     Cramp  in  whole  of  one  or  other  arm. 
Cramp  in  hands  at  night  until  she  rises  in  morning.     Cramp-like  con- 
traction of  fingers.     Pain  and  weakness  of  hands  ;  trembling  of  hands 
in  morning.    Weakness  and  a  kind  of  lameness  of  arm.     Fingers  feel 
furry."    Both  remedies  were  given,  and  great  improvement  occurred 
under  Silic^  but  as  the  pain  was  not  gone  the  patient  took  Calc,  (which 
was  only  to  be  taken  in  case  of  need)  on  the  fifth  day.     On  the  sixth 
day  the  pain  was  gone  "  as  if  blown  away,"  as  the  patient  expressed 
it— and  no  wonder  !     It  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  closer  simillimum. 
The  general  condition  of  the  patient  underwent  a  complete  change 
for  the  better  at  the  same  time.      Both  remedies  were  given  in 
globules  of  6th.     Dr.  Van  den  Neucker  (H.  Recorder,  1886,  p.  139)  once 
cured  a  baker  of  paralysis  of  both  arms  with  Calc,  ;  and  also  a  case  of 
paralysis  with  many  symptoms  of  locomotor  ataxy  in  a  lymphatic 
blonde  girl  of  nineteen. 

According  to  Guernsey  Calc,  is  in  general  a  right-side  remedy. 
It  affects  specially  right  external  head  ;  right  eye  ;  right  face  ;  right 
abdominal  nng ;  sexual  organs  right  side  ;  right  back ;  right  upper 
extremities.  Left  side  neck  and  nape  of  neck  ;  left  chest  ;  left  lower 
extremities.  Complaints  prevailing  in  inner  parts.  Among  the  sensa- 
turns  of  Calc,  are:  Pain  as  if  the  parts  would  burst,  were  pressed 
asunder,  were  pushed  asunder ;  as  if  cold,  damp  stockings  were  on 
the  feet  Creeping  on  the  limbs  like  a  mouse.  Pain  as  if  sprained 
in  outer  parts.  Sensation  of  dust  in  inner  parts  as  the  eye,  bronchial 
tubes.  Pricking,  darting,  jerking,  trembling ;  itching  >  by  scratch- 
ing. It  is  often  indicated  in  epilepsy,  disposition  to  strain  a  part 
by  lifting  heapr  things,  pricking  corns,  polypus,  cysts,  occurring  in 
leucophlegmatic  constitutions.  Where  a  cold  wind  strikes  the  body 
and  it  inmiediately  runs  to  the  teeth,  causing  them  to  ache.  Ranula. 
Flatulence  or  gurgling  in  right  hypochondrium.  Cramp  in  legs  at 
3  a.m.     Hands  chap  from  hard  water. 

Alexander  Villers  cured  with  Calc,  c,  200  in  rare  doses  a  case 
combining  many  of  the  features  of  the  remedy.  The  patient,  a  lady, 
aet  20,  very  despondent  through  long-continued  depressing  circum- 
stances, became  very  nervous.  She  was  companion  to  an  exceedingly 
deaf  lady,  whose  voice  was  high-pitched.  This,  with  the  strain  on 
her  voice  to  make  herself  heard,  caused  headache  through  temples 
>  by  rapid  motion  of  head.     Outdoor  exercise  was  accompanied  by 


342  CALCAREA  CARBONICA 

hard  pressure  on  chest,  which  only  eructations  seemed  to  relieve. 
Bowels  constipated.  Menses  every  fortnight,  with  backache  and 
great  prostration.  Under  the  remedy,  repeated  at  rare  intervals,  the 
menses  came  on  monthly,  headache  and  pressure  on  chest 
disappeared. 

Among  the  Conditions  of  Calc.,  dread  of  the  open  air  ranks  most 
prominently  ;  the  least  cold  air  goes  right  through.  Great  sensitive- 
ness to  cold,  damp  air.  Also  cannot  bear  sun.  The  slightest 
change  <.  Dread  of  bathing  and  water.  There  is  inclination  to 
stretch  and  put  the  shoulders  back  ;  but  straightening  <  rheumatism. 
Calc,  is  hydrogenoid  and  sycotic — sensitive  to  cold  and  damp  and 
early  morning  aggravation.  Warts  and  polypi  also  point  to  the  same 
constitutional  state.  The  Calc.  patient  generally  feels  better  when 
constipated.  The  diarrhoea  of  Calc.  is  generally  <  in  afternoon. 
There  is  painless  hoarseness  <  in  morning.  "The  Calc.  pains  are 
most  generally  felt  while  lying  in  bed,  or  while  sitting ;  they  are  felt 
in  the  parts  upon  which  the  body  has  been  lying  for  a  time  "  (Teste). 
There  is  <  after  midnight  and  in  early  morning;  on  awaking. 
Chill  at  2  p.m.     In  the  evening,  6  to  7,  there  is  fever  without  chill, 

<  from  working  in  water  or  bathing,  <  at  full  moon  ;  at  new  moon 
and  at  solstice.     <  After  eating  (smoked  meats,  milk) ;  when  fasting. 

<  By  mental  exertion  (writing).     <    From  pressure  of  clothes. 

<  From  lifting ;  from  stooping.  <  Walking  in  open  air,  cold  air, 
wet  weather,  to  which  he  is  very  sensitive.  <  From  letting  limbs 
hang  down.     In  spite  of  the  sensitiveness  to  cold,  cannot  bear  sun. 

<  From  light  in  general ;  from  looking  fixedly  at  any  object  ;  from 
looking  upward  ;   from  turning  the  head.      Some    symptoms  are 

>  inspiring  fresh  air  ;  and  during  heat,  uncovers.  >  After  break- 
fast ;  on  rising  ;  from  drawing  up  limbs ;  from  loosening  garments. 

>  In  the  dark  ;  when  lying  on  the  back ;  after  lying  down  ;  from 
rubbing,  from  scratching ;  in  dry  weather ;  wiping  or  soothing  with 
the  hands  ;  from  being  touched.  Great  weakness  on  ascending, 
on  walking,  talking  (chests  feels  weak),  or  excitement. 

Relations. — Antidoted  by  :  Camph.,  Ip.,  Nit.  ac.  Nit.  sp.  dulc, 
Nux,  Sul.  Antidote  to:  Bism.,  Chi., Chi.  sul..  Dig.,  Mez.  (headache), 
Nit,  ac,  Phos.  Follows  well :  Cham.,  Chi.,  Con.,  Cup.,  Nit  ac,  Nux, 
Pul.,  Sul.  (especially  if  the  pupils  dilate).  Followed  well  by  :  Lye, 
Nux,  Pho.,  Plat,  Sil.  Hahnemann  says  that  Calc.  must  not  be  given 
before  Nit  ac,  or  Sul.  Complementary:  BelL  Incompatible:  Bry. 
Compare :  Alum,  and  Am.  mur,  (tightness  of  chest) ;  Am.  (strains, 
&c.) ;  Arsen.  (swollen  mesenteric  glands).  Calcarea  ovi  testas, 
Calc  ars.,  Calc.  ph.,  and  other  Calcareas.  In  ardor,  urinae  (Sep., 
burning  and  cutting  ;  Canth.,  cutting)  ;  losses  of  fluids  (Chi.,  Sul.)  ; 
left  tonsil  (Bar.  c,  Sul.,  Lach.) ;  nausea  when  fasting  (Pul.,  Lye, 
Sil.)  ;  leucorrhcea,  acrid  or  bland  TGraph.,  Sul.,  Alum.) ;  glandular 
enlargement ;  alcohol,  effects  of  (Ars.,  Chi.,  Nux,  Lach.) ;  acid 
stomach  (Chi.,  Lye,  Sul.,  Pul.,  Rob.)  ;  menses  too  copious  and 
too  early  (Bell.) ;  one  side  of  tongue  (Lauro.,  Sil.,  Thu.) ;  waking 
at  3  a.m.  (Bellis,  Nux,  Kali  c,  Ars.,  Sep.)  ;  swelling  and  painfulness 
of  breasts  before  menses  (Con. — Con.  is  an  anti-fat,  like  Calc,  pre- 
cedes and  follows  it  well ;  suits  well  Calc.  subjects  who  have  scanty 


CALCAREA   CARBON ICA  343 

menseS)  Bell,  corresponds  otherwise)  ;  dread  of  losing  senses  (Lye, 
Nux,  Sul.)  ;  levitation,  as  if  raised  from  the  ground  (Sil.,  Can.  i., 
Stictit,  GelseoLy  Asar.,  Thu. ;  Phos.  ac.  has  feeling  as  if  legs  were 
raised  above  the  level  of  head)  ;  prosopalgia  >  by  warm  fomenta- 
tions (Pul.)  ;  sinking  immediately  after  meals  (Ars.,  Cin.,  Lye,  Staph., 

Ur.  n.) ;  cough  when  eating  or  in  open  air  (after  eating,  Nux,  Ip.  ; 

<  change  of  temperature,  Lach. ;  <  current  of  cold  air,  Sil.,  Nat.  c.) ; 

ravenous  hunger  (Ars.,  Calc,  Cin.,  lod.,  SiL,  Stp.) ;  hot  breath  (Sul., 

Rhus) ;  aversion  to  darkness  (Am.  m.,  Carb.  a.,  Stro.,  Val.,  Stram.)  ; 

>  uncovering  (Aco.,  Camph.,  Fer.,  lod.,  Lye,  Pul.,  Sec,  Sul.,  Ven)  ; 
vertigo  on  turning  head  or  looking  up  (Pul.,  looking  up  ;  Sul.,  looking 
down) ;  vomits  milk  (iEth.,  Ant.  c.)  ;  tightness  of  chest  (Alum., 
Am.  m.)  ;  child  chews  and  swallows  in  sleep  ^Amyl.,  Bry.,  Ign.) ; 
convulsions,  scarlatina,  headache  (Bell.) ;  weak  from  talking  (Cocc, 
Stan.,  Sul.,  Ver.)  ;  epilepsy  (Cupr.) ;  naevus  (Fluor,  ac.)  ;  diarrhoea, 
cholera  infantum  (Ip.)  ;  constipation,  intertrigo,  gout,  ophthalmia, 
gonitis,  epilepsy,  ^hus  (Lye)  ;  intertrigo,  &c.  (Cham.) ;  canker 
sores,  quinsey,  heart,  stool,  sweat,  especially  on  chest  with  old  people 
(Merc. — compare  the  Hydrarg.  cum  creta  of  the  old  school) ;  bum- 
ins  on  vertex  (Phos.,  Sul.) ;  rheumatism  from  damp,  ophthdmia, 
innamed  glands  from  strains  (Rhus — Rhus  is  a  very  close  analogue  of 
Gale;  Bell.,  Dulc,  Nux,  Puis.,  and  Rhus  may  be  regarded  as  the 
acute  satellites  of  Calc.)  ;  desire  to  be  mesmerised  (Phos.,  Sil.) , 
naevus,  mesenteric  glands  (Sil.)  ;  epilepsy,  aura  of  mouse  running 
up  arm  (Sul. — Sul.  should  be  given  first,  and  if  it  does  not  cure, 
then  Calc.)  ;  polypus  (Teuc.) ;  scarlatina  (Zn). ;  sunstroke  and  sun- 
headaches  (Aco.,  Glo.,  Lach.,  Lye,  Sul.,  Nat.  e,  Nat.  m. — headache 

>  by  heat  of  sun,  Stro.).  Teste  puts  Calc.  in  the  Pulsatilla  group 
of  remedies.  He  says  there  is  a  '^  sort  of  negative  relation  between 
the  symptoms  of  Merc,  sol.,  or  rather  between  those  of  Nit.  ac.  and 
the  symptoms  of  Calc.  This  contrast  has  struck  me  several  times, 
and  it  is  the  most  remarkable  for  this  reason,  that  Nit.  ae  is  one  of 
the  best  antidotes  to  Cale^' 

CaiuatioiL — ^Alcohol.  Cold,  moist  winds.  Excessive  venery. 
Self-abuse.  Injury  to  lower  spine.  Over-lifting.  Strains.  Mental 
strain.  Losses  of  fluids.  Suppressed  sweat.  Suppressed  eruption. 
Suppressed  menses.    Fright. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — ^Melancholy,  dejection,  and  sadness. — Disposition  to  weep, 
even  about  trifles. — ^Vexation  and  lamentation,  on  account  of  old  offences. — 
Anxiety  and  anguish,  excited  by  fancies,  or  frightful  stories,  also  with 
shuddering  and  dread  during  the  twilight,  or  at  night. — Excessive  anguish, 
with  palpitations  of  the  heart,  ebullition  of  the  blood,  and  shocks  in  the 
qngastrium. — ^Anxious  agitation,  forbidding  rest. — Disposition  to  take  alarm. 
—Sadness,  with  heaviness  in  the  limbs. — ^Apprehensions. — Easily  frightened 
or  ofiFended. — Children  are  self-willed. — Despair  in  consequence  of  the 
impaired  condition  of  the  health ;  or  hypochondriacal  humour,  with  fear  of 
being  ill  or  unfortunate,  of  experiencing  sad  accidents,  of  losing  the  reason. 


344  CALCAREA   CARBONICA 

of  being  infected  by  contagious  diseases. — Discouragement  and  fear  of  death. 
— Impatience,  excessive  excitability,  and  excessive  liability  to  mental  impres- 
sions ;  the  least  noise  fatigues. — Excessive  ill-humour  and  mischievous  inclina- 
tion, with  obstinacy  and  a  disposition  to  take  everything  in  bad  part. — 
Indifference,  apathy,  and  repugnance  to  conversation. — ^Aversion  to  others. — 
Solitude  is  insupportable. — Disgust  and  aversion  to  all  labour  whatever. — 
Absence  of  will.--Great  weakness  of  memory  and  of  conception,  with  difficulty 
in  thinking. — Dizziness  of  mind. — Tendency  to  make  mistakes  in  speaking 
and  to  take  one  word  for  another. — She  fears  she  will  lose  her  understanding, 
or  that  people  will  observe  her  confusion  of  mind. — Loss  of  sense  and  errors 
of  imagination. — Delirium  with  visions  of  fires,  murders,  rats  and  mice. 

2.  Head. — Head  compressed,  as  if  by  a  vice. — Dizziness  after  scratching 
behind  the  ear  ;  or  else,  before  breakfast,  with  trembling. — Headache,  with 
empty  eructations,  and  nausea,  vertigo ;  <  from  mental  exertions,  stoop- 
ing, or  walking  in  the  open  air;  >  by  closing  the  eyes,  and  by  lying 
down. — ^Vertigo,  sometimes  with  obscuration  of  the  eyes,  on  mounting 
to  a  great  height,  or  only  a  flight  of  stairs,  on  walking  in  the  open  air,  on 
turning  the  head  briskly,  or  after  a  fit  of  anger. — ^Vertigo  at  night,  in  the 
evening,  or  in  the  morning. — Headache  from  over-lifting,  straining  the  back, 
or  from  having  wrapped  the  head  in  a  handkerchief,  or  in  consequence  of  a 
chill. — Headache  every  morning  on  waking. — ^Attacks  of  semi-lateral  head- 
ache, with  risings  and  nausea. — Pulsations  in  the  occiput. — Pains  in  the 
head,  producing  giddiness,  pressive  or  pulsative,  <  esp.  by  reading,  writing, 
or  any  other  intellectual  labour,  as  well  by  spirituous  drinks,  or  by  stoop- 
ing.—Fulness  and  heaviness  of  the  head,  esp.  of  the  forehead,  with 
shutting  of  the  eyes,  <  by  movement  and  physical  exertion. — Heat  in  the 
vertex. — Pressive  pains  at  the  vertex,  appearing  in  the  open  air. — ^Tensive 
and  cramp-like  pains,  with  pressure  outwards,  commencing  from  the  temples 
and  extending  to  the  vertex. — Drawing  pains  in  the  right  side  of  the 
forehead ;  the  part  is  painful  when  touched. — Shooting  pains  in  the  head. — 
Piercing  in  the  forehead,  as  if  the  head  were  going  to  burst. — Pains  of 
hammering  in  the  head,  which  force  the  patient  to  lie  down,  and  which 
appear  esp.  after  a  walk  in  the  open  air. — Icy  coldness  in  and  on  the 
head,  esp.  at  the  r.  side,  with  pale,  puffed  face. — Congestion  in  the  head. 
— Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  heat  and  stupefying  headache; 
with  redness  of  the  face  and  bloatedness;  <  in  the  morning  when 
awaking,  and  from  spirituous  drinks. — Buzzing  and  pains  in  the  head,  with 
heat  of  the  cheeks  and  in  the  head. — Movement  of  the  brain  on  walking. — 
Immense  size  of  the  head,-  with  the  fontanel  open  in  children. — Sweat  on  the 
head  (profuse,  particularly  where  it  stands  out  in  large,  bead-like  drops,  and 
in  such  profusion  as  to  soak  the  pillow  thoroughly ;  it  may  run  down  upon  the 
face  and  neck)  in  the  evening. — Profuse  perspiration,  mostly  on  the  back  part 
of  the  head  and  on  the  neck  (in  the  evening). — Strong  disposition  to  take  cold 
through  the  head. — Scabs  on  the  scalp. — Scaling  off  of  the  skin  at  the  scalp 
(dandri£F ;  milk  crust). — Painful  sensibility  in  the  roots  of  the  hair. — Falling 
ofiF  of  the  hair  (sides  of  head — temples). — ^Tumours  and  boils  in  the  scalp,  which 
tend  to  suppuration. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Aching  in  the  eyes. — Itching  and  shooting  in  the  eyes. — 
Pressure,  itching,  burning  and  stinging  in  the  eyes. — Smarting,  burning,  and 


CALCAREA  CARBON ICA  345 

indstv€  pains  in  the  eyes  and  the  eyelids,  esp.  on  reading  during  the  day, 
or  by  candle-light — Sensation  of  cold  in  the  eyes. — Eyes  inflamed,  with 
redness  of  the  sclerotica  and  abundant  secretion  of  mucus. — Inflammation  of 
the  eyes  from  foreign  bodies  coming  into  them ;  in  infants  or  scrofulous 
subjects. — Ulcers,  spots,  and  opacity  of  cornea. — Dimness  of  the  cornea. — 
Flow  of  blood  from  the  eyes. — Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  corners  of 
the  eyes. — Lachrymal  suppurating  fistula. — Lachr3rmation,  esp.  in  the  open 
air,  or  early  in  the  morning. — Quivering  in  the  eyelids. — Red  and  thick 
sweQing  of  the  eyelids,  with  abundant  secretion  of  humour  and  nocturnal 
ag^utination. — Closing  of  the  eyelids  in  the  morning. — Pupils  greatly  dilated. 
—Confusion  of  sight,  as  if  there  were  a  mist,  a  veil,  or  down,  before  the  eyes, 
chiefly  on  reading,  and  on  observing  an  object  attentively. — Obscuration  of 
the  9ght  on  reading,  or  after  a  meal. — ^A  dark  spot  is  seen  before  the  eyes,  on 
reading,  to  accompany  the  letters. — ^Great  photophobia  and  dazzling  from  too 
strong  a  light — Presbyopia. 

4.  £ars. — Shootings  in  the  ears. — Pulsation,  beating,  and  heat  in  the 
ears. — Internal  and  external  inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  ear. — Purulent 
discharge  from  the  ears. — Humid  eruption  upon  and  behind  the  ears. — 
Polypus  in  the  ears. — Humming,  buzzing,  tingling,  or  rumbling,  sometimes 
alternately  with  music,  in  the  ears. — Crackling  and  detonation  in  the  ears, 
wbcn  swallowing  and  when  chewing. — Sensation,  at  intervals,  of  stoppage  in 
the  ears,  and  hardness  of  hearing. — Hardness  of  hearing,  esp.  after  the 
suppression  of  intermittent  fever  by  Quinine. — Inflammatory  swelling  of  the 
parotids. 

5.  Nose. — ^Inflammation  of  the  nose,  with  redness  and  swelling,  chiefly 
at  the  extremity. — Ulcerated  and  scabby  nostrils. — Epistaxis,  chiefly  morning 
and  night,  sometimes  producing  fainting. — Fetid  smell  from  the  nose. — Sense 
of  smell  dull,  or  exceedingly  sensitive. — Painful  dryness  in  the  nose. — 
Obstruction  of  the  nose  by  yellowish  and  fetid  pus. — Polypus  of  the  nose. — 
Dry  cor3rza,  in  the  morning,  with  frequent  sneezing. — Excessive  fluent  coryza. 
— Coryza,  alternately  with  cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen. — Fetid  odour  before 
the  nose,  as  if  from  a  dunghill,  rotten  eggs,  or  gunpowder. 

ft.  Face. — ^Yellow  colour  of  the  face. — Face  pale  and  hollow,  with  eyes 
sunk  and  surrounded  by  a  livid  circle. — Red  patches  on  the  cheeks. — Heat, 
redness,  and  puffing  of  the  face. — Erysipelas  in  one  cheek. — Ephelis  on  the 
cheeks. — Itching  and  eruption  on  the  face,  chiefly  on  the  forehead,  in  the 
cheeks,  and  in  the  region  of  the  whiskers,  sometimes  humid  and  scabby,  with 
huraing  heat  (sycosis  menti). — Milk  crusts. — ^Acute  pains  in  the  face  and  the 
bones  of  the  face. — Swelling  of  the  face  without  heat — Pale  bloatedness  of 
the  face. — Eruptions  and  scabs  on  the  lips  and  round  the  mouth. — Lips 
cracked. — Swelling  of  the  upper  lip. — Ulcerated  corners  of  the  mouth. — 
Fissures  in  the  ulcerated  lips. — ^Attacks  of  torpor  and  paleness  in  the  lips, 
whk:h  appear  as  if  dead. — Painful  swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands. 

7.  Teeth.— Toothache,  aggravated  or  excited  by  a  current  of  air,  or  by 
coW  air,  or  by  taking  anything  too  hot  or  cold,  or  by  noise,  or  else  during 
and  after  the  catamenia ;  the  pains  are,  for  the  most  part,  shooting,  piercing, 
contractive,  pulsative,  or  gnawing,  and  digging,  with  a  sensation  as  of  excoria- 
tion.—Toothache  at  night,  as  if  from  congestion  of  blood. — Sensation  of 
leagthening  and  loosening  of  the  teeth.—Fetid  odour  of  the  teeth.—- Painful 


346  CALCAREA  CARBONICA 

sensibility  of  the  gums,  with  shootings.— Difficult  dentition.— Ready  bleeding 
and  swelling  of  the  gums,  with  throbbings  and  pulsations. — Fistulous  ulcers 
in  the  gums  of  the  lower  jaw. 

8.  Mouth.— Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  mouth.— Constant  spitting 
of  acid  saliva. — ^Vesicles  in  the  mouth  and  on  the  tongue. — Cramp-like 
contraction  of  the  mouth. — Dryness  of  the  tongue  and  of  the  mouth,  chiefly 
at  night  and  in  the  morning  on  waking. — Swelling  of  the  tongue,  sometimes 
on  one  side. — ^Tongue  loaded  with  a  white  coating. — Burning  and  pain  as  of 
excoriation  on  the  tongue  and  in  the  mouth. — ^Tongue  difficult  to  move,  with 
embarrassed  and  indistinct  speech. — Ranula  under  the  tongne. 

Q.  Throat. — Sore  throat,  as  if  from  a  plug  or  a  swelling  in  the  gullet. — 
Constriction  in  the  throat,  and  cramp-like  contraction  6f  the  gullet — Excoria- 
tion of  the  gullet,  with  shooting  and  pressure  on  swallowing. — Inflammatory 
swelling  of  the  gullet  and  of  the  uvula,  which  are  of  a  deep  red  colour,  and 
covered  with  vesicles. — Swelling  of  the  amygdalae,  with  sensation  of  contraction 
in  the  throat  on*swaiiowing. — Affection  in  the  throat  after  straining  the  back. 
— Hawking  up  of  mucus. 

zo.  Appetite. — Unpleasant  taste  in  the  mouth,  mosUy  bitter,  or  sour,  or 
metallic,  esp.  in  the  morning. — Insipidity,  or  sickly  or  sour  taste  of  food. — 
Burning  or  constant  thirst,  esp.  for  cold  drinks,  and  often  with  total  absence 
of  appetite. — Continued  violent  thirst  for  cold  drinks  (at  night). — Hunger,  a 
short  time  after  having  eaten. — Bulimy,  generally  in  the  morning. — ^Prolonged 
distaste  for  meat  and  hot  food. — Repugnance  to  tobacco-smoke ;  desire  for 
salt  things,  for  wine,  and  for  dainties. — ^Weakness  of  digestion. — ^After  having 
taken  milk,  nausea  or  acid  regurgitations. — ^After  a  meal,  heat  or  inflation  of 
the  abdomen,  with  nausea  and  headache,  pain  in  the  abdomen  or  in  the  stomach, 
or  else  risings  and  water-brash,  or  dejection  or  drowsiness. — Risings,  with 
taste  of  undigested,  or  bitter,  or  sour  food. 

iz.  Stomach. — Pyrosis  after  every  meal,  and  noisy  and  constant  eructa- 
tions.— Eructations  tasting  like  the  ingesta. — Regurgitation  of  sour  substances. 
— Frequent  nausea,  esp.  in  the  morning,  in  the  evening,  or  at  night,  sometimes 
with  shuddering,  obscuration  of  sight,  and  fainting. — Sour  vomitings. — Sour 
vomiting,  esp.  in  children,  and  during  dentition.— Vomiting  of  food,  or  of 
bitter  mucus,  often  with  incisive  and  cramp-like  pains  in  the  abdomen. — 
Black  or  sanguineous  vomiting. — Flow  of  saliva  from  the  stomach,  even  after 
a  meal. — ^The  vomitings  appear  chiefly  in  the  morning,  at  night,  or  after  a 
meal. — Pressive,  or  pinching  pain  in  the  stomach,  or  cramp-like  and  contractive 
pains,  chiefly  after  a  meal,  and  often  with  vomiting  of  food. — Cramps  in  the 
stomach  at  night. — Pressure  on  the  stomach,  even  when  fasting,  or  in  coughing, 
or  with  pressure  on  the  hypochondria,  or  else  with  squeezing  as  if  from  a 
claw,  on  walking. — Pinchings,  cutting  pains,  and  nocturnal  aching  in  the 
epigastrium. — Inflation  and  swelling  of  the  epigastrium  and  of  the  region  of 
the  stomach,  with  painful  sensibility  of  those  parts  to  the  touch  (they  look  like 
a  saucer  turned  bottom  up). — Pain,  as  of  excoriation,  and  burning  in  the 
stomach. 

Z2.  AtMlomen. — Pains  generally  shooting,  or  tensive,  or  pressive,  with 
swelling  and  induration  of  the  hepatic  region.— Stinging  pain  in  the  liver 
(during  or  after  stooping). — Painful  pulling  from  the  hypochondria  and  the 
back,  with  vertigo  and  obscuration  of  sight— Tension  in  the  two  hypochondria. 


CALCAREA  CARBON  ICA  347 

— Imbflity  to  wear  tight  clothes  round  the  hypochondria. — ^Tension  and 

inflation  of  the  abdomen. — Freqnent  gripings  and  shootings  in  the  sides  of 

the  abdomen,  in  children. — Colic,  with  crainp-like  and  gnawing  contractive 

pains»  esp.  in  the  afternoon,  and  sometimes  with  vomiting  of  food. — Frequent 

attacks  of  griping,  chiefly  in  the  epigastrium. — Shootings  or  pinchings,  and 

aching  in  the  abdomen,  even  without  diarrhoea. — ^The  pains  in  the  abdomen 

appear  chiefly  in  the  morning,  in  the  evening,  or  at  night,  as  well  as  after  a 

meaL— Sensation  of  cold  in  the  abdomen. — Pain,  as  of  excoriation  and  burning, 

in  the  abdomen. — Swelling  and  induration  of  the  mesenteric  glands. — Enlarge- 

meat  and  hardness  of  the  abdomen. — Incarceration  of  flatulency. — Pressure 

of  wind  towards  the  inguinal  ring,  as  if  hernia  were  about  to  protrude,  with 

noise  and  borborygmi. — Painful  pressure,  pullings,  griping,  and  shootings,  or 

heaviness  or  traction  in  the  groins. — Swelling  and  painful  sensibility  of  the 

tqpi^n^  g|i>nd5. 

13.    Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation. — Evacuations  suspended,  hard,  in 
small  quantity,  and  often  with  undigested  substances. — Ineffectual  efforts  to 
evacoate,  sometimes  with  pain. — Difficult  evacuation,  and  only  every  two  days. 
— Relaiation  of  the  abdomen,  frequent  or  continual ;  two  evacuations  a  day. 
— Evacnations  like  clay,  in  small  quantity,  knotty,  or  serous,  or  in  the  form  of 
pap.— White  evacuations,  sometimes  with  streaks  of  blood  and  hepatic  pains, 
00  tooching  the  region  tof  the  liver,  and  on  breathing. — Diarrhoea  of  sour 
ameli ;   pntrid  ;    during   dentition. — Involuntary  and   frothy  evacuations. — 
Diarrhoea,  of  a  sour  smell,  or  fetid,  or  yellowish,  in  infants. — Ejection  of 
ascandes  and  of  tenia. — Prolapsus  of  the  rectum  during  evacuation. — Before 
the  evacuation,  great  irascibility. — ^After  the  evacuation,  dejection,  and  relaxa- 
tion of  the  limbs. — Flow  of  blood  from  the  anus  during  the  evacuation,  also 
at  other  times. — Swelling,  and  frequent  protrusion  of  haemorrhoidal   ex- 
creseoces,  esp.  during  the  evacuations,  with  burning  pain. — Cramps,  tenesmus, 
and  contraction  of  the  rectum. — Burning  in  the  rectum  and  in  the  anus,  with 
itching  and  tingling. — Burniqg  eruption,  in  the  form  of  a  cluster,  in  the 
anus. — Excoriation  at  the  anus,  and  between  the  buttocks  and  the  thighs. — 
Affections  of  the  rectum,  as  fissures,  which  are  very  painful,  bleeding  after 
every  stool,  followed  by  extreme  exhaustion. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Tenesmus  of  the  bladder.— Too  frequent  emis- 
sion of  urine,  even  in  the  night. — ^Wetting  the  bed. — Deep-coloured  urine, 
without  sediment. — Urine  red  like  blood,  or  a  brownish  red,  of  an  acrid, 
pungent,  and  fetid  smell,  with  white  and  mealy  sediment — Passing  of  blood. 
— Flow  of  blood  from  the  urethra. — Abundant  discharge  of  mucus  with  the 
urine. — Polypus  of  the  bladder. — Burning  in  the  urethra,  when  making  water, 
and  at  other  times. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Inflammation  of  the  prepuce,  with  redness 
and  burning  pain. — Pressure,  and  pain  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  testes. — 
Weakness  of  the  genital  fimctions,  and  absence  of  sexual  desire. — Increase  of 
sexual  desire,  vnih  voluptuous  and  lascivious  ideas. — ^Absence  of  pollutions,  or 
great  frequency  of  them. — Erections  of  too  short  continuance,  and  emission 
of  semen  too  slow  and  too  feeble  during  coition. — Lancinations  and  burning 
in  the  genital  parts,  during  the  emission  of  semen  in  coition. — ^After  coition, 
confusion  of  the  head  and  weakness. — Flow  of  prostatic  fluid,  after  evacuation 
and  emission  of  urine. 


348  CALCAREA  CARBON ICA 

i6.    Female  Sexual  Organ8.-^atamenia  premature  and  too  copious. 
— Sterility,  with  catamenia  too  early,  and  too  profuse. — Before  the  catamenia, 
mammae  swollen  and  painful,  fatigue,  headache,  disposition  to  be  frightened, 
colic,  and  shivering. — During  the  catamenia,  congestion  in  the  head,  ^^th 
internal  heat,  or  cuttings  in  the  abdomen,  and  cramp-like  pain  in  the  lumbar 
region,  or  else  vertigo,  headache,  toothache,  nausea,  colic,  and  other  sufferings. 
— Suppressed  menstruation,  with  full  habit, — Miscarriage. — ^Voluptuous  sensa- 
tion in  the  genital  parts,  with  emission. — Flow  of  blood  at  a  time  diflPerent 
from  the  catamenia, — Metrorrhagia, — Itching  or  pressing  in  the  vagina. — 
Shootings  in  the  orifice  of  the  matrix,  and  pressive  pain  in  the  vagina. — 
Prolapsus  uteri,  with  pressure  on  the  parts. — Itching  in  the  womb. — Inflam- 
mation and  swelling  of  the  womb,  with  redness,  purulent  discharge,  and 
burning  pain. — ^Varices  in  the  labia  majora. — Leucorrhoea  before  the  cata- 
menia.— Leucorrhoea,  with  burning  itching,  or  else  like  milk,  flowing  by  fits, 
and  during  the  emission  of  urine. — Pain,  as  of  excoriation  and  ulceration,  in 
the  nipples. — Inflammatory  swelling  of  the  mammae  and  of  the  nipples. — 
Swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  breast. — Breasts  painful  and  tender  before 
menses. — Milk  too  abundant,  or  suppressed. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Ulceration  of  the  larynx. — Ulceration  of 
the  lungs. — Frequent  or  long-continued  hoarseness. — Hoarseness  (painless). — 
Sensation,  as  if  something  were  torn  loose  in  the  trachea.  —  Abundant 
accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  larynx  and  in  the  bronchia. — Cough,  without 
expectoration,  excited  by  a  tickling  in  the  throat,  and  often  accompanied  by 
vomiting. — Tickling  cough,  caused  by  a  sensation  of  dust  in  the  larynx. — Short 
cough  in  the  day,  as  if  from  a  feather  in  the  throat. — Cough  excited  by  playing 
on  the  piano,  or  by  eating. — Cough  in  the  evening,  in  bed,  or  at  night,  when 
asleep,  or  in  the  morning,  and  generally  violent  and  dry  (with  expectoration 
during  the  day,  but  not  at  night),  sometimes  even  spasmodic. — Cough,  with 
expectoration  of  thick  mucus ;  gray ;  bloody ;  purulent ;  tasting  sour ;  or 
yellowish  and  fetid,  generally  at  night,  or  in  the  morning. — Expectoration 
of  purulent  matter,  on  coughing. — Cough,  with  expectoration  of  blood,  pain 
of  excoriation  in  the  chest,  vertigo,  and  unsteady  walk. — On  coughing, 
pressure  in  the  stomach,  shootings  or  shocks  in  the  head,  and  pains  in  the  chest 

18.  Chest. — Obstructed  breathing  on  stooping  walking  against  the 
wind,  or  on  lying  down.— Urgent  inclination  to  inspire  deeply. — Sensation, 
as  if  respiration  were  obstructed  between  the  shoulder-blades. — Oppression  at 
the  chest,  as  if  from  congestion  of  blood,  with  tension,  mitigated  by  bringing 
shoulder-blades  together. — ^Wheezing  respiration. — Shortness  of  breath,  chiefly 
on  ascending. — ^Anxious  oppression  of  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  too  narrow,  and 
could  not  be  sufficiently  dilated. — Great  difficulty  of  respiration. — Sensation  of 
fatigue  in  the  chest  after  speaking. — ^Anxious  feeling  in  the  chest. — Pressure 
on  the  chest. — Shootings  in  the  chest  and  the  sides,  esp.  during  movement, 
on  breathing  deeply,  and  when  lying  on  the  side  affected. — Shocks  in  the 
chest. — Sensibility,  and  pain,  as  from  excoriation,  in  the  chest,  esp.  during 
inspiration  and  on  being  touched. — Burning  in  the  chest 

IQ.  Heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  also  at  night,  or  after  a  meal, 
sometimes  with  anxiety  and  trembling  movements  of  the  heart. — Shootings, 
pressure,  and  contraction  in  the  region  of  the  heart — Pricking  shootings  in 
the  muscles  of  the  chest 


CALCAREA   CARBONICA  349 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Rigidity  of  the  neck. — Hard  and  strumous 
swelling  of  the  thyroid  gland. — Hard  and  painful  swelling  of  the  glands  of 
the  neck. — ^Tumour  between  the  shoulder-blades. — Suppuration  of  the  axillary 
gbuids. — Pains,  as  of  dislocation,  in  the  loins,  back,  and  in  the  neck,  as  if 
caused  by  a  strain  in  lifting  a  weight. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back 
(as  if  sprained) ;  he  can  scarcely  rise  from  his  seat,  after  being  seated. — 
Shooting  pains  in  the  shoulder-blades,  loins,  and  back. — Nocturnal  pains  in 
the  back. — Pains  in  the  lumbar  region,  when  riding  in  a  carriage. — Drawing 
between  the  shoulder-blades,  or  pressive  pain,  with  sensation  of  suffocation. — 
Pressive  pain  between  the  shoulder-blades,  impeding  breathing,  when  moving. 
— Swellii^  and  distortion  of  the  spine. 

21.  Limbs. — As  if  the  parts  would  burst ;  were  pressed,  or  poshed, 
asunder ;  as  if  cold,  damp  stockings  were  on  the  feet ;  sensation  of  crepita- 
tkn ;  cramp  pain  in  the  muscles ;  creeping  on  the  limbs  like  a  mouse. 

tt.  Upper  Limbs. — Drawing  pains  in  the  arms,  even  at  night — Cramp, 
and  cramp-like  pains,  in  the  arms,  hands,  and  fingers. — Sudden  attacks  of 
paralytk  weakness  in  the  arms  (1.). — ^Acute,  cramp-like  pains  in  the  forearm. 
— ^Funmculi  on  the  forearm. — Pains,  as  of  dislocation,  in  the  wrist-joint  (r.). 
— Swelling  of  the  hands. — ^Arthritic  nodosities,  swelling  of  the  wrist,  and  of 
the  joints  of  the  fingers. — Swelling  of  the  veins  of  the  hands. — Sweating  of 
the  hands.^Perspiration  of  the  palms  of  the  hands. — ^Trembling  of  the  hands. 
— Hands  and  fingers  dead,  even  in  a  warm  temperature,  and  esp.  on  taking 
hold  of  an  ot>ject. — ^Warts  on  the  arms  and  on  the  hands. — Furunculi  on  the 
hands  and  the  fingers. — ^TingUng  in  the  fingers,  as  when  they  are  asleep. — 
Frequent  paralytic  weakness  in  the  fingers. — Heavy  movement  of  the  fingers. 
— Contraction  of  the  fingers. — Panaris. 

^  Lower  Limbs. — Drawing  lancinations,  onincisive,  acute  pains  in  the 
hips  and  in  the  thighs,  chiefly  when  resting  upon  them. — Limping,  which 
occurs  when  resting  on  the  toes  in  walking. — ^Weight  and  stiffness  of  the 
1^&— Oamps  in  the  legs. — Pain,  as  of  dislocation,  in  the  joints  of  the  hips, 
knees,  and  the  feet. — ^The  legs  go  to  sleep  when  one  is  seated. — Itching  in  the 
thighs  and  the  feet — Varices  in  the  legs. — ^Tearing  and  stinging  in  the  knee. 
— ^Drawings,  shootings,  and  acute  pains  in  the  knees,  esp.  when  standing  or 
sitting,  also  when  walking. — ^The  child  is  late  learning  to  walk. — Swelling  of 
the  knees. — Tension  in  the  ham,  when  in  a  squatting  position. — Cramps  in  the 
hams,  the  calves  of  the  legs,  the  soles  of  the  feet,  and  the  toes,  chiefly  on 
extending  the  legs,  pulling  on  boots,  or  during  the  night. — Red  spots  on  the 
legs.— Phlegmasia  alba  dolens. — Erysipelatous  inflammation  and  swelling  of  the 
legs.— Ulcers  on  the  legs. — Swelling  of  the  malleoli  and  of  the  soles  of  the 
feet.— Inflammatory  swelling  of  the  instep. — Furunculi  on  the  feet  and  legs. — 
Burning  in  the  soles  of  the  feet. — Sweating  of  the  feet. — In  the  evening, 
coldness  and  numbness  of  the  feet ;  esp.  at  night,  in  bed. — Painful  sensibility 
of  the  great  toe. — Corns  on  the  feet,  with  burning  pain,  as  of  excoriation. — 
Contraction  of  the  toes. 

14.  Generalities. — Cramps  and  contractions  of  the  limbs  (which  draw 
the  limbs  crooked),  esp.  of  the  fingers  and  toes. — ^Wrenching  pains. — Pulsative 
pains.~^Shootings  and  drawing  pains  in  the  limbs,  chiefly  at  night,  or  in 
sommer,  and  on  change  of  weather. — Stinging  and  cutting  in  outer  and  inner 
parts.— Arthritic  tearing  in  the  muscles. — ^Arthritic  nodosities. — ^Attacks  of 


350  CALCAREA  CARBONICA 

torpor  and  paleness  of  some  parts  of  the  body,  which  appear  as  if  dead. — 
Great  tendency  to  strain  the  back  in  lifting,  often  followed  by  pains  in  the 
throat,  or  sti£Fness  and  swelling  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  with  headache. — 
Tendency  of  the  limbs  to  numbness. — Bleeding  from  inner  parts. — Sensation 
of  dryness  of  inner  parts. — Ebullition  of  the  blood,  mostly  in   plethoric 
individuals,  and  often  with  congestion  in  the  head  and  chest — Startings  in 
different  limbs. — Epileptic  convulsions,  also  at  night  with  cries ;  during  the 
full  moon  ;  with  hallooing  and  shouting. — ^The  symptoms  are  aggravated  or 
renewed  aJFter  laboiuing  in  the  water,  as  well  as  in  the  evening,  at  night,  in 
the  morning,  after  a  meal,  and  every  second  day.  —  The  sufferings    are 
periodical  and  intermittent.— Great  uneasiness,  which  forces  the  patient   to 
move  constantly  and  to  walk  much. — Visible  quivering  of  the  skin,  from  the 
feet  to  the  head,  with  which  he  becomes  dizzy. — ^Trembling  of  the  inner  parts. 
— Frequent  trembling  of  the  whole  body,  increased  in  the  open  air. — St. 
Vitus'  dance. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  arms  and  in  the  legs,  and  also  in 
the  loins,  esp.  on  moving,  and  on  going  upstairs. — General  uneasiness  in  the 
evening,  as  preceding  an  attack  of  intermittent  fever. — ^Want  of  strength,  and 
dejection,  chiefly  in  the  morning  early. — Fatigue  and  nervous  weakness,  often 
with  paleness  of  the  face,  palpitation  of  the  heart,  vertigo,  shivering,  pain  in 
the  loins. — Fainting,  esp.  in  the  evening,  with  obscuration  of  the  eyes,  sweat 
on  the  face,  and  cold  in  the  body. — Great  fatigue  after  speaking,  or  alter  a 
moderate  walk  in  the  open  air,  as  well  as  after  the  least  exertion,  with  ready 
and  abundant   perspiration.— Strong  desire  to  be   magnetised. — Excessive 
dejection,  sometimes  with  violent  fits  of  spasmodic  laughter. — ^Tendency  in 
children  and  young  persons  to  grow  very  fat. — Bloatedness  of  the  body  and 
of  the  face,  with  enlargement  of  the  abdomen,  in  children. — Emaciation  (with 
swelled  abdomen),  without  failure  of  appetite. — Great  plumpness  and  excessive 
obesity. — Sensation  of  coldness  in  inner  parts. — Great  tendency  to  take  cold, 
and  great  sensibility  to  cold  and  damp  air. — On  walking  in  the  open  air, 
sadness  with  tears,  headache,  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  palpitation  of  the 
heart,  sweat,  great  fatigue,  and  many  other  sufferings. 

25.  Skin. — Flaccidity  of  the  skin. — ^Visible  quivering  of  the  skin  from 
head  to  foot,  followed  by  giddiness. — Burning,  smarting,  itching. — Ephelis. — 
Nettlerash,  mostly  disappearing  in  the  fresh  air. — Eruption  of  lenticular  red 
and  raised  spots,  with  great  heat,  much  thirst,  and  want  of  appetite. — Sldn  hot 
and  dry  during  motion. — Skin  of  the  body  rough,  dry,  and  as  if  covered  with 
a  kind  of  miliary  eruption. — Furf  uraceous  coating  of  the  skin ;  burning ; 
chapped. — Humid,  scabby  eruptions  and  tetters,  or  in  form  of  clusters,  with 
burning  pains. — Itching  pemphigus  over  the  whole  body. — Skin  excoriated  in 
several  places. — Skin  unhealthy ;  every  injury  tends  to  ulceration ;  even  small 
wounds  suppurate  and  do  not  heal. — Ulcers  deep ;  fistulous ;  carious. — Ulcers 
with  too  little  pus. — Erysipelatous  inflammations. — FuruncuU. — ^Warts. — 
Corns,  with  pain  as  of  excoriation,  and  burning. — Poljrpus  (nose,  ear,  uterus). 
— Encysted  tumours,  which  are  renewed  and  suppurate  every  month. — 
Bloatedness. — Swelling  and  induration  of  the  glands,  with  or  without  pain. 
Varices. — Arthritic  nodosities. — Swelling;  softening;  curvature  of;  stinging 
in  ;  caries  and  distortion  of  the  bones. — Ulceration  of  the  bones. — Panaris. — 
Flaws  in  the  fingers. 

26.  Sleep. — Drowsiness  in  the  day  and  early  in  the  evening. — ^Retarded 


CALCAREA  CAUSTICA  351 

ticcp  and  sleeplessness  from  activity  of  mind,  or  in  consequence  of  voluptuous 

or  frightful  images,  which  appear  as  soon  as  the  eyes  are  shut. — ^During  sleep, 

talking,  groans,  cries,  and  starts,  anxiety  which  continues  after  waking,  or 

movements  of  the  mouth,  as  if  one  were  chewing  or  swallowing. — Snoring 

during  sleep. — ^Dreams  frequent,  vivid,  anxious,  fantastic,  confused,  frightful, 

and  homble ;  or  dreams  of  sick  and  dead  persons. — Sleep  disturbed,  with 

tossing  about  and  frequent  waking. — Seep  of  too  short  duration,  from  eleven 

in  the  evening  till  two  or  three  in  the  morning  only. — ^Waking  too  early, 

sometimes  even  at  midnight.— At  night,  agitation,  asthmatic  suffering,  anxiety, 

heat,  pains  in  the  stomach  and  in  the  precordial  region,  thirst,  beatings  of  the 

head,  toothache,  vertigo,  headache,  ebullition  of  the  blood,  fear  of  losing  the 

reason,  pains  in  the  limbs,  and  many  other  sufferings. — On  waking,  lassitude, 

dhaustion,  and  desire  to  sleep,  as  if  the  patient  had  not  slept  at  all. — Fearful 

of  fantastic  dreams  during  sleep. 

17.  Fever.— *Pulse  full,  accelerated  or  tremulous. — Excessive  cold, 
internally. — Shivering  and  shuddering,  principally  in  the  evening,  or  in  the 
morning  after  rising. — Heat  with  thirst,  followed  by  chilliness. — Frequent 
attacks  of  transient  heat,  with  anguish  and  beating  of  the  heart. — Heat  in  the 
evening,  or  in  t>ed  at  night. — Quotidian  fever  towards  two  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon,  with  yawning  and  cough,  followed  by  general  heat,  with  desire  to 
lie  down,  at  least  for  three  hours,  after  which  the  hands  become  cold ;  all 
with  absence  of  thirst. — Tertian  fever  in  the  evening,  at  first  heat  of  face, 
foUowed  by  shivering. — Profuse  sweat  by  day,  after  moderate  corporeal 
eurdse.— Sweat  with  anxiety. — Nocturnal  sweat,  chiefly  on  the  chest — 
Sweat  in  the  morning. 


Galcarea  Caustica. 

Aqoa  Calds.     Ca  H,  O^.     Quicklime  is  slaked  in  distilled  water. 
Afterwards  alcohol  is  added  and  the  clear  liquid  decanted. 

GBBleaLr— Back,  pains  in.  Coccygodynia.  Corns.  Feet  {fains  in  heel^, 
Hoaneness.  Jaw,  affection  of.  Malar  bones,  ^n  in.  Neuralgia.  Paralysis. 
lOieomatism.    Spleen,  affections  of.    Stiff-neck.    Tapeworm.    Toothache. 

Quupaoteriatlos.— Ca/c.  causL  has  been  extensively  proved.  The 
most  marked  symptoms  are :  Thought  very  difficult.  Confusion  in 
the  head.  Vertigo  ;  as  if  room  turning  in  a  circle.  Sticking,  tearing, 
throbbing  pains  in  various  parts.  Pain  in  right  eye  as  if  a  foreign 
body  were  in  it.  Burning  and  tearing  in  eyes.  Tearing  in  right  cheek- 
bone ;  and  in  right  articulation  of  jaw.  Toothache  every  night,  2  a.m., 
with  feeling  as  if  teeth  were  fuzzy  and  too  large  (a  fuzzy  sensation 
was  noticed  in  other  parts).  Mucus  in  throat ;  burning  ;  sensation  as 
ff  a  bone  were  sticlung  in  it.  Burning  in  stomach.  Tapeworm 
passes.  Hoarseness,  vdth  pain  in  throat ;  rawness  in  trachea  and 
cough.  Stitches  in  chest.  StifiFness  and  tearing  in  all  regions  of  back 
and  in  coccyx.  Tearing  in  either  shoulder  down  arms.  Tearing  in 
left  tendo  Achillis ;  len  heel.    Sticking  in  corns.     As  an  external 


352  CALCAREA  CAUSTICA 

application  in  the  form  of  compresses,  Lime-water  has  an  ancient 
repute  in  allaying  inflammation  of  many  kinds.  It  has  rapidly  dis- 
pelled all  inflammatory  action  in  cases  of  appendicitis  ;  and  has 
removed  all  suffering  in  an  aggravated  case  of  phagedaenic  piles.  As 
with  Calc.  c,  there  is  <  of  most  s)rmptoms  in  the  evening.  Tootha<:he 
2  a.m.  <  From  motion.  <  From  hanging  down  limb.  The  Calc. 
<  from  working  in  water  is  paralleled  by  ^^  pains  in  hands  and  feet 
after  a  foot-bath." 

BelatioiUi. — Compare :  Besides  the  Calcareas,  Rhus  (pain  in  joint 
of  jaw) ;  Mez.  and  Mag.  c.  (pain  in  malar  bones) ;  Valer.  (pain  in  heel)  ; 
Pic.  ac.  and  Sep.  (loins) ;  Hep.  and  Nit  ac.  (bone  sensation  in  throat). 

8THPT0M8. 

1.  Mind. — ^Thought  very  difficult. — ^Weary  and  peevish  on  waking ;  as 
if  he  had  been  intoxicated. 

2.  Head. — Confusion  of  the  head  ;  esp.  1.  side. — ^Vertigo,  as  if  room  turn- 
ing in  a  circle  ;  thinks  she  will  fall  from  chair. — ^Throbbing  in  frontal  sinus  > 
by  contracting  skin  of  forehead. 

3.  Eyes. — Burning  in  eyes,  evening  by  candlelight. — Pain  in  r.  eye  as 
if  foreign  body  under  upper  lid  ;  in  1.  eye  on  rising  in  morning  as  if  a  thorn 
in  it. 

6.  Face. — ^Tearing  in  r.  cheek-bone. — ^Violent  pain,  swelling,  stiffness 
of  r.  joint  of  jaw. — Lips  unusually  red. 

7.  Teeth. — Severe  toothache  every  night,  2  a.m.,  as  if  tooth  was  fuzzy 
and  too  large,  with  tensive  pain  in  1.  ear  as  if  something  was  sticking  in  it. — 
Teeth  feel  too  large ;  fuzzy. 

8.  Mouth. — Mouth  offensive  ;  palate  feels  as  if  mucus  were  upon  it,  but 
none  is  expectorated. 

9.  Throat. — Mucus  in  throat,  difficult  to  raise,  almost  causing  vomiting. 
— Hawking  of  granular,  glutinous  material  like  cooked  rice. — Burning  in  fauces 
and  oesophagus  caused  by  water. — Sensation  as  of  a  bone  sticking  in  pharynx. 

11.  Stomach. — Severe  hunger  three  hours  after  eating. — Nausea  followed 
by  vomiting  of  some  fluid. 

12.  Abdomen. — Sticking  in  both  hypochondria,  esp.  severe  in  1. — Pain 
in  1.  side  of  region  of  spleen  as  if  a  ball  were  turning  on  its  axis. — Constrictive 
pain  in  abdomen  ;  griping ;  stitches. — ^Violent  stitches  in  small  intestines  when 
bending  forward. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — ^Three  thin  stools  before  breakfast  and  one 
immediately  after. — Painful  stool  as  if  a  nail  were  scratching  in  anus. — ^Thin, 
pasty  stool  with  much  mucus  immediately  after  breakfast. — Passed  many 
pieces  of  tapeworm. — Haemorrhoids. — Sticking,  tearing  motions  in  rectum 
extending  towards  anus. — Crawling  in  rectum  and  anus. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  eight  days  too  early. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Stitches  in  larynx;  1.  half. — Hoarseness, 
with  pain  in  throat ;  feeling  of  rawness  in  trachea ;  cough. — Cough  with 
stitches  in  chest,  expectoration  of  mucus  and  blood.— sternum  :  oppression  ; 
pressive  sticking  under ;  stitches  across. — Stitches  in  1.  chest. 

90.    Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  of  neck  ;  of  back  of  neck  ;  of  all  neck 


■ 


CALCAREA   FLUORATA  353 

muscles.— Tearing  in  nape. — ^Violent  pains  in  scapulae  extending  into  small 
<rf  back,  when  sitting ;  <  on  inspiration.— Tearing  between  shoulders.— Tear- 
ing in  both  scapulae,  between  Moulders,  then  through  neck  and  occiput  as 
far  as  forehead. — Sensation  in  both  shoulder-blades  as  if  they  were  fuzzy  and 

had  gone  to  sleep  (8  p.m.). — Pain  in  small  of  back ;  on  waking  >  by  moving 

about— Pressive,  drawing  pains ;  sticking ;  tearing,  in  small  of  back. — ^Tearing 

in  coccyx. 

81.    Limbs. — ^Trembling  in  limbs ;  could  not  continue  work  ;  >  by  eating 

a  piece  of  bread. — Rheumatic  pain  alternating  in  all  the  joints. — ^Wandering 

pains.— Pains  in  hamds  and  feet  after  a  foot-bath.  -4 

88.    Upper  Limbs. — ^Tearing  in  shoulders,  arms  and  axillae. — Paralysed 

condition  of  r.  hand. — Stitches  and  tearing  in  1.  wrist. 

Q.    Lo'wer  Limbs. — Severe  tension  in  lower  extremities. — Stitches  in 

hip-joints.— Tearing  in  knees  ;   in  r.  side  of  r.  tibia  down  to  toes ;  in  1.  tendo 

Achillis ;  in  1.  heel. — Sticking  in  a  corn. 

85.  Skin. — Rash-like  eruption  on  forehead. — Biting,  itching  vesicles ;  on 
neck  and  back  extending  later  to  occiput  and  behind  ears. 

86.  Sleep. — Restless  ;  many  dreams ;  nightmare. 

87.  Fever.— Violent  chill  with  chattering  teeth  7  to  7.30  p.m. 


Galcarea  Ghlorinata. 

C3ilorinated  Lime,     CaOCla.     Hypochlorate  of  lime  with  Chloride 
of  Calcium  and  a  varying  amount  of  Hydrate  of  Lime. 

CUaieaL— Boils.    Carbuncles, 

Gharaoterifltics. — ^This  preparation  has  only  been  used  as  a  local 
application,  for  boils  and  carbuncles  chiefly,  in  the  form  of  the  Liquor 
Colds  Chlorates  of  the  British  Pharmacopoeia. 


Galcarea  Fluorata. 

Calcium  Fluoride.    Fluor  spar.     Ca  F,.    Trituration. 

Clfnteftli — ^Adenoids.  Aneurism.  Bone  affections.  Breast,  indurations  of. 
Cataract  Catarrh.  Cold  sores.  Corneal  opacities.  Cough.  Exostosis.  Flatu- 
lence. Glands,  indurated.  Haemoptysis.  Herpes.  Hod^kitCs  disease.  Joints, 
cracking  of.  Liver,  affections  of.  Lumbago.  Nodes.  Ozsena.  Parturition.  Post- 
nasal catarrh.    Spavin  (horses).    Strains.    Syphilis. 

Charaoteristios. — Calc.  fluor,  is  Schussler's  ^^  bone  salt."  It  is 
found  in  the  surface  of  bones,  the  enamel  of  teeth,  in  elastic  fibres  and 
in  the  cells  of  the  epidermis.  It  has  been  principally  used  for  dis- 
persing bony  growths  ;  ulcerations  of  bone  ;  and  for  fistula.  A  giant- 
celled  sarcoma  of  upper  maxilla  causing  the  deformity  known  as  ^'  frog- 
fiace  "  was  very  greatly  relieved  by  Calc.  fluor.  in  a  short  space  of  time, 
VOL.  I.  24 


354  CALCAREA   FLUORATA 

after  Silica  had  failed  to  make  much  impression.  W.  P.  Wesselhoeft 
cured  two  cases  of  syphilitic  periosteal  swelling,  one  on  right  radius, 
one  on  left  ulna,  one  sensitive,  one  not,  one  patient  male  dark, 
the  other  blonde  female.  Each  case  received  a  dose  of  Calcfl,  cm. 
G.  P.  Hale,  with  the  3X,  has  removed  induration  after  typhlitis,  also 
encysted  tumour  of  eyelids.  He  regards  induration  threatening  sup- 
puration as  a  marked  indication.  Induration  in  epigastric  region 
after  a  kick  from  a  horse  was  cured.  Also  indurated  glands  (of  neck  ; 
of  breast,  &c.)  of  stony  hardness.  The  mental  condition  is  one  of 
depression  ;  anxiety  ;  indecision.  Cephalhaematoma.  Spots  on  cornea. 
Senile  cataract  has  t>een  cured  by  it  Ozaena.  Herpes  (hard,  small) 
on  Ups.  Deficient  enamel  of  teeth.  Prickly,  burning,  suffocating 
sensation  in  throat.  Bleeding  piles.  One  prover,  Dr.  Sarah  N.  Smith, 
had  among  other  symptoms  mis  peculiar  and  constant  one  in  the  head : 
A  sort  of  creaking,  straining,  and  drawing,  like  the  noise  of  a  corn- 
stalk fiddle,  greatly  interfenng  with  sleep.  Dr.  Sarah  Hogan  gave 
Calc.fluor.  with  complete  success  in  a  case  of  flatulency  in  a  preg- 
nant woman.  The  patient  passed  through  the  labour  quite  easily, 
whereas  the  previous  labour  had  been  very  difficult.  In  many  other 
cases  Dr.  Hogan  found  the  remedy  facilitate  labour.  She  found 
flatulency  a  marked  indication  for  the  remedy  independently  of  preg- 
nancy. In  haemoptysis  it  has  been  used  with  success,  its  effect  being 
apparently  to  cause  contraction  of  the  blood-vessels.  Lumbago  from 
strains;  <  after  rest,  >  after  moving  a  httle  and  from  warmth. 
Vivid  dreams  of  death.  Warmth  >  ;  warm  drinks  >,  cold  drinks  < 
throat  pain.  <  From  damp  weather,  but  >  from  fomentations.  > 
By  rubbing. 

Relations.— Com^ari^ ;  Calc.  ph.  (ozsena ;  suppuration  of  bones) ; 
Nat.  m.  (cold  sores)  ;  Sil.  (swellings  on  skulls  of  infants  ;  suppuration 
of  bones  ;  spavin) ;  Phos.  ac.  (spavin).  It  cured  lumbago  <  by  rest, 
>  by  motion,  after  failure  of  Rhus. 

8THPT0M8. 

1.  Mind.— Indecision. — Anxiety  about  money  matters ;  fear  of  want. 

2.  Head.— Exostosis. — Cephalhaematoma.^A  sort  of  creaking,  straining, 
and  drawing,  like  the  noise  of  a  corn-stalk  fiddle,  greatly  interfering  with 
sleep. 

3.  Eyes.— Flickering  and  sparks  before  eyes. — Spots  on  cornea. — 
Cataract. — Eyeballs  ache ;  >  closing  eyes  and  pressing  tightly. 

4.  Ears. — Calcareous  deposits  on  tympanic  membrane. 

5.  Nose. — Copious,  offensive,  thick,  greenish-yellow  nasal  catarrh; 
with  bony  growths. — Post-nasal  catarrh. 

6.  Face. — Hard  swelling  on  jaw ;  under  jaw. — Cold  sores,  rather  small, 
hard,  on  lips. 

7.  Mouth. — Deficient  enamel  of  teeth. — Great  dryness  of  mouth  and 
throat,  and  dryness  and  harshness  of  skin. 

8.  Throat. — Prickling,  burning,  suffocative  sensation  in  throat ;  <  at 
night  and  from  cold  drinks;  >  from  warm  drinks. — Increased  mucus  in 
posterior  nares. 


CALCAREA   HYPOPHOSPHOROSA       355 

II.    Stomach.— Vomits  undigested  food. — Hiccough. 

Id.  Abdomen. — Flatulence. — Paroxysm  of  lancinating  pains  in  r.  hypo- 
chondrium  under  nth  rib,  awaking  him  about  midnight ;  <  lying  on  painful 
side,  which  causes  a  feeling  of  bursting  outward ;  >  lying  on  painless  side, 
and  by  doubling  up ;  with  restlessness.  At  8  a.m.  frequent  attacks  of  lan- 
cinating pain  in  hepatic  region ;  <  when  sitting ;  >  after  lying  down  at 
night. — Dull  weight  and  discomfort  in  r.  hypochondrium. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Slight  diarrhoea  with  painful  urging  before 
stool. — Constipation  with  dizziness  and  dull  headache. — Itching  in  anus 
awakening  him  at  night. — Bleeding  piles. — Fissure ;  fistula. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  causes  smarting  along  urethra,  particu- 
larly at  external  orifice. — Urine  diminished,  high-coloured,  offensive. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Induration  of  testes. — Hydrocele.— Hun- 
terian  chancre. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Excessive  menses. — Prolapsus  uteri. — 
Bearing-down  ;  dragging  pains  in  uterus  and  thighs. — Hard  knots  in  breasts. — 
Flatulence  in  pregnant  women. — Favours  parturition. — ^Af ter-pains  from  feeble 
contractions. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Hoarseness  after  laughing  or  reading  aloud. 
— Soon  after  itching  at  anus,  itching  tickling  in  larynx,  forcing  a  spasmodic 
cough,  which  was  relieved  after  a  few  hours  by  hawking  a  little  mucus  from 
larynx. — Hacking  cough,  from  tickling  in  larynx  as  of  a  foreign  body ;  not  > 
by  coughing. — Difficulty  of  breathing,  as  if  epiglottis  was  nearly  closed. 

20.  Neck  and  Back.— Goitre. — Indurated  cervical  glands  of  stony 
hardness. — Lumbago  from  strains ;  severe  backache  after  a  long  ride ; 
<  after  rest,  >  after  moving  a  little  and  from  warmth. — ^Tired  aching,  as 
from  a  long  ride ;  with  restlessness. 

21.  Limbs. — Cracking  in  jomts. — Synovial  swellings. — Easy  dislocations. 
— Exostoses. — (Spavin). 

25.  Skin.---Skin  harsh  and  dry. — Chaps ;  fissures. — Fistulas. 

26.  Sleep.— Vivid  and  distinct  dreams,  with  weeping. — ^Jumped  from  bed 
in  a  dream  and  tried  to  get  out  of  a  window,  which  woke  him. 


Calcarea  Hypophosphorosa. 

Hypophosphite  of  Lime.    Ca  2PHaOa.    Trituration  and  solution. 

Glinioal.— Angina   pectoris.     Arteries,  affections  of.     Asthma.     Congestion. 
Headache.    Paralysis.    Sweating. 

Charaoteristios.— This  salt  has  been  proved  by  A.  R.  Barrett 
and  a  friend,  who  each  took  one  grain  of  2x  trit.  The  following 
are  the  chief  symptoms  it  caused :  Dull,  heavy  pressure  from  whole 
top  of  head  between  frontal  and  occipital  bones ;  pain  generally 
increased  with  increasing  depression.  Great  fulness  and  oppression 
round  heart,  fulness  throughout  thorax  and  head  ;  veins  of  upper 
parts  and  upper  extremities  stand  out  like  whipcords.    Dyspnoea ; 


356  CALCAREA   lODATA 

must  have  air.  Profuse  sweat  all  over.  Complete  loss  of  muscular 
power  with  loss  of  desire  to  move.  Pallor  of  skin.  With  the  first 
trituration  Nash  cured  a  boy  of  eight  who  had  several  abscesses  in 
and  around  the  knee-joint.  The  tibia  was  ulcerated,  and  the  ragged 
edge  of  the  bone  protruded  through  the  surface.  There  was  emacia- 
tion, loss  of  appetite,  and  he  was  as  pale  as  a  corpse.  The  appetite 
returned  at  once  in  great  force. 

RelationB. — Compare :   Calc.  phos.,  Glon.,   Baryt.    c. ;    K.    ca. 
(excessive  sweating,  weakness,  pallor) ;  Cact  (heart  and  arteries). 


BTHPTOMB. 

1.  Mind. — Mental  depression. — Indisposition  to  move. 

2.  Head. — Dull,  heavy  pain,  pressive,  across  top  of  head,  including 
whole  of  parietal  bones,  increasing  gradually,  mental  depression  increasing 
in  proportion ;  general  sense  of  fulness,  with  oppression  round  heart,  followed. 
— ^As  symptoms  subsided,  pain  (dull,  pressive)  left  vertex,  passed  to  forehead, 
pain  extending  from  r.  to  1.  temple  throughout  whole  frontal  bone. 

IQ.  Heart. — Following  headache,  great  fulness  and  oppression  round 
heart ;  fulness  throughout  whole  thorax  and  head,  veins  of  hands,  arms,  neck, 
and  head  standing  out  like  whipcords ;  no  flushing  or  perceptible  increase  in 
pulse ;  dyspnoea,  must  have  windows  open ;  profuse  sweat ;  complete  loss  of 
power. 

84.  Generalities. — Limbs  perfectly  powerless;  unable  to  rise  from  chair 
or  move  either  arms  or  legs  in  the  least ;  generally  unable  to  speak  except  in 
a  low  monotone. — Total  loss  of  all  desire  to  move  or  make  any  muscular 
exertion,  with  inability  to  do  so. 

27.  Fever. — Profuse  sweat  all  over. — ^When  the  symptoms  had  passed 
off,  lips  were  dry  and  cracked,  as  from  fever ;  considerable  thirst 


Galcarea  lodata. 

Iodide  of  Lime.    Ca  I,. 

GUnieal.— Can^:^.   Consumption,   Flatulenu,   Glandular  swellings.    Headache. 
MoUities  ossium.    Tumours  of  the  breast 

Charaoteristios. — Calc.  iod.  has  had  a  short  proving,  but  it  has 
been  used  mostly  on  indications  suggested  by  its  two  components  in 
the  diseases  named  above.  It  is  similar  to  BaryL  iod,  in  its  action  on 
enlarged  glands,  and  is  especially  indicated  for  enlarged  tonsils 
honey-combed  with  little  crypts.  Riding  against  a  cold  winds 
headache.  C.  L.  NichoUs  has  cured  a  number  of  cases  of  breast 
tumour  with  the  3X ;  nodular  tumours,  movable,  tender  to  touch, 
painful  on  moving  arm. 

BelationB.— Com^ar^ :  Calc,  Baryt.,  Calc.  ph.,  Carb.  v. 


CALCAREA  MURIATICA  357 


8T1EPT0M& 

I.    Mind. — Indifference. — Indolence. 

a.    Head. — Light-headed. — Giddy  headache. — ''Sensation  as  if  the  head 

D%  yet  was." — Headache  whilst  riding  against  a  cold  wind.-— Constant, 
severe,  dull  headache,  forehead  and  temples ;  <  stooping. — Sharp,  piercing 
paun  in  r.  temple. 

8.  Mouth. — Dry,  furred  feeling  on  lips  and  tongue. — Bitter  taste  >  by 
tdbacca— Astringent  taste. 

XI.    Stomach. — Eructations;  hiccough;  nausea. 

IS.  Abdomen. — Rimibling  in  bowels. — Constant  evacuation  of  large 
qvantifcies  of  wind  downwards. 

25.  Skin. — Itching  in  various  parts,  disappearing  and  reappearing  in 
otber  parts,  only  >  after  much  scratching. 


Galcarea  Muriatica. 

Calcium  Chloride.    Chloride  of  Lime.    Ca  CI,. 

GttlkiL— Bof/s.    Glandular  swellings.    Impetigo,    Scrofula.    Vomiting. 

GhanuiterLitlos. — The  following  symptoms  have  been  noted : 
Faintness,  anxiety  and  weakness.  Trembling  and  giddiness.  Res- 
piration quick  and  snoring ;  increased  secreSon  of  mucus  (as  with 
other  chlorides),  perspiration  and  urine.  Nausea  and  vomiting ;  pre- 
cordimn  tender  ;  diarrhoea  ;  pulse  accelerated.  Cold  sweats  ;  con- 
vulsions; paralysis.  In  scrofulous  cases  it  promotes  the  action  of 
mercury.  Under  its  use  glandular  swellings  and  indurations  soften  and 
disappear.  Hence  its  use  in  scrofula  and  boils.  **  C.  W."  has  recorded 
a  remarkable  instance  of  the  action  of  this  remedy  (Horn,  W,j  March, 
1891).  A  scrofulous  and  rheumatic  woman  had  suffered  from  abscess 
of  cornea,  followed  by  rheumatic  iritis,  and  a  dense  opacity  was  left. 
An  old-school  practitioner  had  treated  her  with  mercurials  during  two 
years  in  a  vain  endeavour  to  "  touch  her  mouth."  C.  W.  put  one  grain 
of  Calc.  mur.  in  an  8-oz.  bottle,  and  directed  the  patient  to  take  a 
tablespoonful  three  times  a  day.  The  medicine  had  not  been  taken 
tea  minutes  before  she  felt  it  at  her  fingers'  ends.  The  mercurial 
action  was  evoked,  and  she  was  in  bed  a  fortnight,  terribly  salivated. 
The  condition  of  the  eye  was  unchanged.  Calc.  Mur,,  in  the  form  of 
the  Uquor  (i  part  to  2  of  distilled  water),  was  one  of  Rademacher's 
''Stomach  Remedies,"  and  was  used  with  great  success  by  him  in 
cases  of  obstinate  vomiting.  He  gave  15  drops  of  the  liquor  in  half 
a  cup  of  water  five  times  a  day.  The  indications  were  :  Vomiting  of 
all  food  and  drink ;  vomiting  when  no  food  had  been  taken ;  jaundice ; 
pain  in  left  hypochondrium.  He  adso  found  it  indicated  in  gastric 
pain ;  bloating  and  eructations. 

Belations. — Compare :  Calc.  iod.,  Calc.  chlor.,  Nat.  hyperchlor. 


358  .  CALCAREA   PHOSPHORICA 

Galcarea  Oy!  TestsB. 

Egg-shell.  Trituration  of  the  shell,  not  including  its  lining  membrane. 

GlinioaL — Leucorrhcea.    Warts. 

Charaoteri8tio8.~This  preparation  of  Cakarea  has  been  used  in 
preference  to  others  in  cases  of  simple  bland  leucorrhcea.  Water  in 
which  eggs  have  been  boiled  is  popularly  supposed  to  have  the 
property  of  causing  warts  if  brought  in  contact  with  the  hands.  This 
suggests  Calc.  ov.  test,  as  possibly  the  best  Calcarea  preparation  to 
prescribe  in  cases  of  warts.  No  doubt  Calc,  ov,  test,  has  the  general 
properties  of  Calc,  carb,  ostrear,  (i.e.,  ordinary  Calc.  carb.\  but  it  has 
been  little  used  clinically.  **  Backache,  as  if  broken  in  two,'*  is 
a  keynote. 

Galcarea  Oxalica. 

Calcium  Oxalate.    Ca  C3O4. 
GlinieaL— Cancer. 

ChanoteriBtiOB. — Calc,  ox,  has  been  found  useful  in  allaying  the 
pains  of  cancer. 

Relations. — Compare :  Acet.  ac,  Oxal.  ac,  Citric  ac,  Euphorb., 
Euphorb.  het. 

Galcarea  Phosphorica. 

Phosphate  of  Lime.  Tricalcic  Phosphate.  Cag  2PO4.  A  mixture 
of  the  basic  and  other  phosphates  of  lime,  made  by  dropping 
dilute  phosphoric  acid  into  lime  water.    Trituration. 

QUnlcal. — Ancemia.  Ankles^  weak.  Back,  weakness  or.  Bones,  afifections  of. 
Brain-fag.  Bright's  disease.  Cholera  infantum.  Chorea,  Consumption,  Cretinism. 
Debility,  Dentition.  Diabetes.  Dyspepsia.  Emissions.  Enuresis.  Epilepsy. 
Erotomania,  Face,  boils  on.  Fistula.  Fracture,  Gleet.  Gonorrhoea.  Headaches. 
Hernia.  Hydrocele.  Hygroma.  Joints,  affections  of.  Leucorrhcea.  Lumbago. 
Nymphomania.  Phosphaturia.  Rheumatism.  Rickets.  Self-abuse.  Spermatorrhoea, 
spina  bifida.  Stiff-neck.  Strabismus.  Testicles,  swollen.  Throat,  sore.  Tobacco 
habit.    Tonsils,  enlarged.    Uterus,  prolapsus  of ;  polypus  of.    Yawning. 

Charaoteristios. — Calc,  phos.,  whilst  exhibiting  strong  points  of 
resemblance  with  Calc,  carb,y  has  nevertheless  a  very  distinct  indi- 
viduality. It  has  been  proved  and  tested  clinically,  and,  having  been 
adoptea  by  Schiissler  as  his  leading  "  antisporic,"  a  number  of  valuable 
indications  have  been  added  by  him  and  his  followers.  The  Calc, 
phos.  patient  is  generally  emaciated  instead  of  fat  like  the  typical 


CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA  359 

Cafe,  carb,  child.  The  Calc.  ph.  patient  is  less  chalky- white  and  more 
dirty-white  or  brownish  than  the  Calc.  c.  patient.  Both  have  large 
abdomens,  but  that  of  the  Calc.  phos.  patient  is  flabby.  Calc.  c.  has 
craving  for  eggs  ;  Calc.  phos.  for  salt  or  smoked  meats.  "  Craving  for 
fat  bacon  "  in  children  is  a  well- verified  characteristic  of  Calc.  phos. 
Calc.  ph.  has  cored  dyspepsia,  pain  >  for  a  short  time  by  raising  wind, 
when  fasting  the  pain  goes  to  the  spine,  feeling  as  if  one  ought  to 
raise  wind  and  could  not.  Dyspepsia  with  indescribable  distress  in 
region  of  stomach,  only  temporarily  >  by  eating.  The  stools  of  Calc. 
piws.  are  green  and  slimy,  or  hot  and  watery  with  fetid  flatus ;  of 
Calc.  carb.,  sometimes  green,  generally  watery,  white,  and  mixed  with 
curds.  Calc.  carb.  has  an  open  anterior  fontanelle ;  Calc.  phos.  has 
both  open,  especially  the  posterior.  The  skull  is  thin  and  soft,  almost 
cracks,  Uke  paper  when  pressed  upon. 

The  mental  state  of  Calc.  ph.  is  one  of  weakness  :  weak  memory  ; 
inability  for  mental  exertion.  Hence  it  is  appropriate  in  effects  of 
mental  strain,  such  as  school  headaches  in  children,  weak-minded 
children.  In  this  it  is  like  Nat.  m.  A  schoolboy  to  whom  I  was 
giving  Calc.  ph.  developed  these  new  symptoms :  "  Tongue  thickly 
coated  white,  taste  pasty ;  felt  absolutely  sUly ;  taking  coffee  whilst 
playing  a  game,  he  put  the  sugar  on  the  draught-board  instead  of  into 
the  cup,  and  didn't  know  he  had  done  anything  foolish."  Peevish 
and  fretful.  Wants  to  be  at  home,  and  when  at  home  wants  to  go 
out ;  goes  from  place  to  place.  Complaints  are  <  when  thinking  of 
them.  The  sexual  organs  are  the  centre  of  many  symptoms.  Nym- 
phomania ;  all  organs  in  erection  with  irresistible  desire,  particularly 
before  catamenia.  Voluptuous  feeling,  as  if  all  the  parts  were  filled 
with  blood  ;  pulses  in  all  the  parts  with  increased  desire  ',  after  urina- 
tioiL  Many  of  the  uterine  symptoms  are  like  those  of  Sepia.  There 
is  a  weak,  sinking  sensation  in  the  hypogastrium,  and  sinking,  empty 
feeling  in  epigastrium ;  prolapsus  <  during  stool  or  micturition. 
Aching  in  uterus.  Cutting  through  to  sacrum.  Cream-like  leucor- 
rhoea.  Burning  in  vagina  with  pain  on  both  sides  of  bladder  and 
uterus ;  burning  like  fire  up  into  chest.  Flushes  of  heat  and  faintness ; 
sweats  easily.  But  the  menses  are  profuse,  and  the  patient  is  weak 
and  consumptive.  She  has  partial  profuse  sweats,  but  less  profuse 
than  those  of  Stpia.  Every  exposure  increases  the  rheumatic  pains 
of  Calc.  ph.  and  the  uterine  distress.  Defective  bone  growth  ;  bones 
thin  and  brittle.  It  is  useful  in  cases  of  fistula  ;  and  when  fistula  has 
been  operated  on  and  symptoms  have  appeared  elsewhere ;  fistula 
alternating  with  chest  symptoms.  Enlargement  of  tonsils,  acute  and 
chronic.  Short  breath.  Involuntary  sighing.  Contraction  of  chest 
and  difficult  breathing  ;  evening  till  10  p.m.,  >  lying  down,  <  getting 
up.  Constant  stretching  and  yawning.  Crying  out  in  sleep.  Cannot 
get  awake  in  morning.  Grauvogl  considered  it  the  most  important 
remedy  in  chronic  hydrocephalus,  and  he  very  properly  gave  it  as 
a  prenatal  remedy  during  pregnancy  to  women  who  had  previously 
bonie  hydrocephalic  children.  The  chills  of  Calc.  ph.  strike  upwardf. 
Hering  gives :  **  The  chills  run  up  the  back  ;  terrible  muscular  jerks  in 
body,  which  almost  throw  him  out  of  his  chair." 
Calc.  phos.  corresponds  to  defective  nutrition,  whether  of  childhood, 


36o  CALCAREA   PHOSPHORICA 

puberlv,  or  of  old  age.  Predisposition  to  glandular  and  bone  diseases. 
Slow  development  of  teeth.  Spinal  curvature.  Slow  walking ;  neck 
too  thin  and  weak  to  support  head.  Rickets.  Diabetes  when  the 
lungs  are  affected.  Motion  <  and  rest  >  most  symptoms.  <  ^Vhen 
thinking  of  his  symptoms.  A  slight  draught  causes  rheumatic  pains  ; 
every  cold  causes  pains  in  joints  and  sutures.  Changes  of  weather, 
especially  when  the  snow  melts,  or  in  east  winds  <.  Damp,  rainy, 
cold  weather  <.     It  is  suited  to  scrofulous,  gouty  constitutions. 

BelationB, — Its  nearest  analogue  is  Carb.  an.  (which  contains 
Calc.  phos.).    Follows  well :  Ars.,  Chi.,  lod.,  Merc.    Is  followed  well 
by :  Sulph.     Complementary :   Ruta.     Compare :  In  bone  affections 
and  fistula,  Berb.,  Calc,  Calc.  fl.,  Fluor,  ac,  Ruta,  Sil.,  Sul. ;  in  joint 
affections,  Berb.,  KaU  ph.,  Nat.  m. ;  in  caries  of  teeth,  Fluor,  ac., 
Mag.  ph.,  Sil. ;  in  epilepsy,  Calc,  Fer.  ph..  Kali  m..  Kali  ph.,  Sil.  ; 
in  diabetes,  Kah  ph.,  Nat.  ph. ;  in  tabes,  Ars.,  lod.,  Merc. ;  haemor- 
rhoids, Fer.  ph. ;  worms,  Nat.  ph. ;  in  debility  after  acute  disease ; 
chest  affections  >  by  lying  down,  Pso. ;  in  peevishness  and  fretfulness 
of  children,  Cham.    School  headaches ;  housemaid's  knee,  Nat.  m. ; 
in  tonsillitis ;  weak-minded  children.  Bar.  c  ;  chest  affections  after 
operation  ;  in  fistula,  Berb. ;  uterine  affections,  Sep.  (but  in  Csdc  ph. 
the  menses  are  more  profuse ;  there  is  more  sexual  excitement ;  the 
patient  is  apt  to  be  weak,  emaciated,  and  consumptive) ;  osteitis  of 
diaphyses,  Conchiolinum ;  in  fractures,  &c,  Symphytum ;  <  from 
motion,  Biy. ;  <  from  wet,  DuL,  Sil.,  Sul.,  Cans.,  Rhus. 

Caasatloii. — Over-growth.  Lifting.  Ascending.  Over-study. 
Sexual  excesses.  Sexual  irregularities.  Grief.  Disappointed  love. 
Unpleasant  news.    Operation  for  fistula.    Getting  wet. 

BTHPTOMB. 

1.  Mind. — Great  depression ;  slow  comprehension  ;  cretinism. — Chil- 
dren are  peevish  and  fretful ;  dif&culty  in  performing  intellectual  operations. 

2.  Head. — Large  open  fontanelles. — Delayed  closure  or  re-opening  of 
fontanelles. — Headache  <  from  change  of  weather  extending  from  forehead 
to  nose ;  from  temples  to  jaws  ;  with  some  rheumatic  feeling  from  collar-bone 
to  wrists. — Vertigo,  with  nausea. — Head  compressed,  heavy,  and  painful,  on 
waking  in  the  morning. — Painful  sensation  of  fulness  in  the  head,  as  if  the 
brain  were  pressed  against  the  cranium,  <  by  movement  and  by  change  of 
position,  >  by  lying  still. — Headache  with  craving  for  tobacco  smoke,  which 
>. — During  the  headache,  face  and  head  hot,  with  indolence  and  ill-humour. 
— ^The  headache  is  <  in  the  open  air,  or  on  stooping. — Headache  on  vertex, 
behind  ears,  with  drawing  in  muscles  of  neck  to  nape  and  occiput. — Head- 
ache, with  flatulency  in  the  abdomen. — Headache  of  school-girls  with 
diarrhoea. — Crawhng  sensations  run  over  top  of  head  as  if  ice  were  lying  on 
upper  part  of  occiput ;  the  head  is  hot  with  smarting  of  the  roots  of  the  hair. 
— Skull  soft ;  crackling  noise  like  paper  when  pressed,  mostly  in  occiput.^ 
Itching  in  the  scalp  every  evening. 

3.  Eyes. — Sensation  in  the  eye  as  if  something  in  it,  renewed  if  others 
talk  about  it. — Cannot  read  ;  light  hurts,  esp.  candle-  tor  gaslight. — Cataract ; 
amaurosis;   ulcers  on  the  cornea. — Squinting. — Lachrymation ;   most  with 


CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA  361 

jawoiiig. — ^Pain  in  the  eyes  and  nose,  as  if  a  foreign  body  were  introduced 
into  them. 

4.  Bars. — Singing  or  other  noises  in  the  ears.^Inner  and  outer  ear 
red,  sore  itching. — External  ear  swells  suddenly  and  appears  as  if  it  woidd 
burst  with  eczema. — Excoriating  discharge  from  ears. 

^  Nose. — Coryza :  fluent  in  cold  room ;  stopped  in  warm  air  and  out 
of  doors. — Swollen  nose  with  sore  nostrils  in  scrofulous  children. — Lrarge 
pedunculated  polypi. — Streaks  of  blood,  nose-bleed  in  afternoon. — Frequent 
sneesing,  with  flow  of  mucus  from  the  nose,  and  salivation. — Blood  follows 
when  the  nose  is  blown. 

6.  Face. — Pain  esp.  in  upper  jawbone  from  r.  to  1. ;  extends  from  other 
parts  to  face  or  from  face  to  other  parts. — Coppery  face  full  of  pimples.— 
(Warts  on  mouth). — ^Acne  in  the  face ;  red  pimples,  filled  with  a  yellowish 
pus,  with  shooting  pains  on  being  touched. — Swollen  upper  lip ;  painful,  hard 
and  burning. 

7-  Teeth.— Teeth  sensitive  to  chewing. — Pain  in  molars.— Tearing, 
boring  pain  at  night ;  <  from  warm  or  cold  things. — Slow  dentition,  with 
cold  tomows  and  emaciation. — ^Too  rapid  decay. — Convulsions  without  fever 
daring  dentition. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  :  swollen,  numb,  and  stiff. — Tip  of  tongue  sore, 
bomiDg,  little  blisters  on  it— Tongue  white  furred  at  root,  most  in  morning. 
—Accumulation  of  acid  saliva  in  the  mouth. — Insipid  disgusting  taste. — Bitter 
taste  in  the  morning  with  headache. 

9.  Throat. — Sore  aching  (on  waking  in  morning)  <  by  swallowing. — 
Senation  of  ccmtraction  in  throat. — ^When  swallowing,  pain  in  tongue,  fauces, 
pbaiynx,  chest,  and  pit  of  stomach. — Chronic  swelling  of  tonsils. 

m.  Appetite. — ^Unusual  hunger  4  p.m. — Infant  wants  to  nurse  aU  the 
tioie.— Craves  fat  bacon ;  salt  meats. — Desire  for  tobacco  smoke ;  smoking 
>  headache. — Complete  loss  of  appetite  before  and  during  catamenia. — 
Colic  and  diarrhoea  from :  ice  creams  ;  juicy  fruit  or  cider ;  every  attempt  to 
eat ;  drinking  cold  water  (colic  or  diarrhoea). 

II.  Stomach. — Nausea,  with  vertigo,  perplexity  of  head,  and  confusion 
of  kleas.— After  taking  coffee,  nausea,  pyrosis,  head  confused  and  painful,  and 
excessive  ill-humour. — Heartburn  and  water-brash. — Sour  rising. — ^Acute  pains 
in  the  stomach,  with  great  weakness,  headache,  and  diarrhoea ;  the  least 
morsel  that  is  eaten  renews  the  pains  in  the  stomach. — ^After  belching,  a 
bailing  in  epigastrium. — Empty,  sinking  sensation  (at  the  epigastrium) ; 
7  pjn.— Persistent  vomiting  of  milk,  whether  of  breast  or  other. — ^Vomiting 
from  hawking  phlegm. — Easy  vomiting  in  children. 

IS.  Abdomen. — ^Aching  soreness  and  pain  round  navel ;  >  after  fetid 
flatus  passes  off. — Oozing  of  bloody  fluid  from  navel  of  infants. — ^Violent  colic 
with  inflation  of  abdomen,  and  great  accumulation  oi  flatulency,  or  with 
headache. — Difficult  escape  of  wind,  without  mitigation  of  suffering. — 
Burning  in  alxlomen. — ^Aching  soreness,  cutting,  drawing  in  1.  groin,  later  in 
r.— Burning  aching  in  groins. — ^Abdominal  weakness  in  anaemic  patients. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Evacuations  with  much  flatulency. — Stools  in 
which  there  were  many  small  white  points  or  flakes,  like  pus,  scarcely  per- 
ceptible.—Offensive  pus  with  stools.— Daily  watery,  very  hot  stools. — Stools 
green  and  loose,  sometimes  slimy. — Diarrhoea,  very  fetid.— Offensive  flatus. — 


362  CALCAREA   PHOSPHORICA 

Cutting,  pinching,  sharp  colic,  followed  by  diarrhoea. — Diarrhoea  from  juicy 
fruit  or  cider;  from  vexation. — Diarrhoea  of  dentition. — Hard  stools,  with 
mental  depression. — Hard  stools  with  much  blood. — ^After  stool,  buzzing  in 
ears ;  weak  feeling  in  male  sexual  organs. — Bleeding  after  stool ;  protruding 
piles,  aching,  itching,  sore  ;  oozing  of  a  yellow  fluid  and  bleeding. — Itching 
in  anus;  most  in  evening. — Single  stitches  in  rectum  towards  anus,  or 
shooting  in  anus. — Sore  feeling  in  anus,  <  one  side,  with  shaking,  burning, 
throbbing. — Fistula  in  ano,  alternating  with  chest  symptoms. — Fistula;  in 
persons  who  have  pains  in  joints  with  every  spell  of  cold,  stormy  weather. 
— Fissures. — Haemorrhoids  oozing  a  watery  fluid  all  the  time. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — In  region  of  kidneys  violent  pain  when  lifting, 
or  blowing  nose. — Frequent  micturition. — Urine  passed  in  large  quantities 
with  sensation  of  weakness. — Urine  deep-coloured  and  sometimes  hot. — After 
evacuation  of  faeces  and  emission  of  urine,  the  genital  parts  feel,  as  it  were, 
fatigued. — Cutting  in  urethra  before  and  after  urinating ;  burning  during. — 
Enuresis. — Phosphatic  urine  (Bright* s  disease). 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Increase  of  sexual  desire  in  the  morning, 
with  unusual  enjoyment  in  coition. — Nocturnal  emissions. — Erections  while 
riding  in  a  carriage,  without  desire. — Shooting  through  the  perineum  into  the 
penis. — Swelling  of  testicles. — Scrotum  :  itching ;  sweating ;  sore ;  oozing  a 
fluid. — Hydrocele. — Chronic  gonorrhoea  in  anaemic  subjects. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Nymphomania  ;  esp.  before  catamenia. 
— ^Aching  in  uterus ;  weakness  and  distress  in  uterine  region ;  <  during 
defecation  and  micturition ;  uterine  displacement. — Pressure  upward  over  mons 
veneris,  throbbing.— Voluptuous  feeling  as  if  the  parts  were  filling  up  with 
blood  ;  feels  pulse  in  all  the  parts,  with  increased  sexual  desire. — Prolapse. — 
Polypus. — Menses  :  too  early,  light,  or  dark  (esp.  with  rheumatic  patients) ; 
labour-like  pains. — Menses  too  early,  blood  bright,  with  girls ;  too  late ;  blood 
dark,  or  first  bright,  then  dark,  in  women. — Leucorrhoea,  like  white  of  egg, 
day  and  night ;  <  morning  after  rising ;  of  sweetish  odour ;  increased  whites 
with  a  stool  of  bad  odour. — Burning,  pain,  swelling  of  vagina  and  external 
parts. — Pains  in  navel ;  sacrum ;  symphysis  pubis ;  mammae  (sore  and 
burning ;  nipples  aching,  sore)  during  pregnancy. — Child  refuses  breast,  milk 
has  a  saltish  taste. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness  ;  burning  in  throat ;  constant 
hawking  and  hemming  to  clear  voice  when  talking. — Cough  ;  tickling ;  with 
drjmess  of  throat  and  hoarseness ;  with  yellow  expectoration,  <  morning ; 
with  stitches  in  chest. — Cough  during  difficult  dentition. — Breathing  frequent, 
short,  difficult. — ^With  inhalation  ;  shooting  in  1.  breast  and  r.  temple  ;  sudden 
jerking  pain  in  back. — Involuntary  sighing. 

18.  Chest. — Contraction  of  chest,  and  difficult  breathing,  evening  till  10 
p.m. ;  >  Ijring  down  ;  <  when  getting  up.— Obstinate  pain  through  lower  1. 
lung  and  1.  hypochondrium  (uterine  disease). — Burning  sensation  in  chest  from 
below  up  into  throat. — Sharp  pain  like  an  instrument  through  end  of  sternum. 
— Cracking  in  sternum. 

19.  Heart.— Sharp  cutting  pain,  shooting  in  heart  region  interrupting 
breathing. — Dropsy  from  heart  disease. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Rheumatic  pain  and  stiffness  of  neck  with  dul- 
ness  of  head ;  from  slight  draught  of  air. — ^Cramplike  pain  in  neck  first  one 


CALCAREA   PICRICA  363 

side  then  the  other  (r.  to  1.).— Throbbing  or  jerking  pains  below  scapula. — 
Violent  pain  in  region  of  back  when  making  the  least  effort — Backache  and 
uterine  pains. — Sharp  pains  in  sacrum  and  coccyx. — Soreness  as  if  separate 
in  sacro-iliac  synchondrosis. — Curvature  of  the  spine  to  the  left;  lumbar 
vertebrae  bend  to  the  left ;  spina  bifida. 

21.  Limbs. — Aching  in  all  the  limbs  with  weariness. — Pains  flying 
about,  in  all  parts  of  rump  and  limbs  after  getting  wet  in  rain. — ^Extensors 
more  affected  than  flexors. 

28.  Upper  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pains  in  shoulder  and  arm>  also  with 
sveUing  of  the  diseased  part  and  febrile  heat — Ulcerative  pain  esp.  in  roots 
of  finger  nails  of  r.  hand  ;  and  in  middle  finger. — Gouty  nodosities. — Sore- 
ness, torpor,  and  paralysis  of  the  (1.)  arm. — Paralysis  of  the  joints  of  the  hand 
and  of  the  fingers,  esp.  in  the  thumbs,  sometimes  from  a  chill. 

13.  Lo^^er  Limbs. — Buttocks  and  back  "  asleep/'  with  a  sensation  of 
uneasiness. — Lower  limbs  fall  asleep  ;  restless  ;  anxious  feeling ;  has  to  move 
them  to  jump  out  of  carriage ;  also  at  night. — ^Abdomen,  sacrum,  and  lower 
limbs  asleep;  cannot  rise  from  seat— Cramp  in  calves;  on  a  small  spot 
inside,  when  walking. — Legs  tired,  weak,  restless,  crawling,  tingling. — Pains 
above  knee. — Pains  in  joints  and  bones,  esp.  shin  bones. 

24.  Generalities. — Large  pedunculated  polypi;  copper-coloured  face, 
foU  of  pimples ;  tongue  swollen. — Rheumatic  pains  of  all  kinds. — Pains  in 
different  parts  of  the  body,  proceeding  along  the  musdes  into  the  joints. — 
Rheumatism  which  gets  well  in  summer  and  becomes  bad  again  in  cold 
weather.— The  loins,  knees,  and  thumbs  are  principally  affected. — ^Veins 
swollen. — Burning  itching  over  the  whole  body. — Ulcers. — Caries. — ^Weari- 
ness, when  going  upstairs;  wants  to  sit  down;  hates  to  get  up. — Ill- 
humour,  and  aversion  to  labour. — On  every  little  coki  ^e  is  much  worse. — 
Sensations  frequently  on  small  spots. — Children  do  not  learn  to  walk,  or  lose 
the  ability;  lose  flesh. — Pains  along  sutures  or  at  symphyses. — Flabby, 
shrunken,  emaciated  children. — Soreness  of  tendons  when  flexing  or  ex- 
tending.—The  heat  of  the  room  appears  insupportable. 

fl6.  Sleep. — Constant  stretching  and  yawning. — Cannot  awake  in  early 
morning.— Sleep,  early  in  the  evening,  with  frequent  waking  during  the  night. 
— Restiessness  for  two  or  three  hours  after  midnight. — Frequent  dreams, 
sometimes  with  reflections,  dreams  of  dangers  and  fires. — ^Transient,  frequent 
shuddering. — Starting  from  sleep  as  from  fright. 

27.  Fever. — Frequent  creeping  shiverings. — Copious  night  sweats,  on 
single  parts. 


Galcarea  Picrica. 

Picrate  of  Calcium.    2  (CeH,  (NOj)  OCa. 

CUaiesL — ^Ear,  perifollicular  inflammation  of.    Boils  in  meatus. 

Charaoteristios. — ''  Indicated  by  clinical  experience  for  perifol- 
licular inflammation.     The  extreme  prostration  of  Picric  acid  is 


364  CALCAREA   SULPHURICA 

relieved  by  this  salt  also  "  (Houghton).  Minute  and  excessiyeiy 
painful  boils  in  meatus.  Picric  acid  and  all  its  salts  are  curative  in 
states  of  intense  prostration  and  fatigue. 

Belatioiis.— Com^ar^ ;  Picric  acid,  Ferr.  pic. 


Galcarea  Renalis. 

Urate  of  Lime  renal  calculi.    Also  Phosphate  of  Lime  renal  calculi. 

Trituration. 

GlInicaL — Gout.     Gravel.     Joints,  nodosities  on.     Renal  calculL     Stone  in 
bladder.    Teeth,  tartar  on. 

GhaFaoteristioB. — H.  Recorder  (Aug.,  1895)  reprints  a  paper  by 
Dr.  BredenoU,  of  Erwitte,  in  which  he  gives  his  experience  with  this 
remedy  in  his  own  case.  Following  a  repercussed  eruption  he  had 
among  a  host  of  other  troubles  renal  colic  of  great  intensity,  with 
passage  of  uric  acid  calculL  One  of  these  was  triturated  in  the  propor- 
tion of  5  parts  to  95  of  sugar  of  milk,  and  of  this  he  took  ^grain 
doses  for  a  considerable  time,  with  the  result  that  the  formation  of 
calculi  ceased,  the  tartar  which  had  formed  on  the  teeth  dropped  ofiF, 
and  a  nodosity  of  stony  hardness  disappeared  from  the  extensor 
tendon  of  the  right  middle  finger. 


Galcarea  Silicica. 

Silicate  of  Calcium.    Ca  Si«  O5.    Trituration. 
OUnieal.— Atrophy.    Cornea,  ulcer  of.    Scrofula.    Ulcers. 

GharaoteriBtioB. — ^This  preparation  has  been  used  by  Ussher 
{H.W.,  xxxiv.  401)  in  the  ix  and  6x  potencies  in  cases  of  atrophy  of 
children.  He  has  found  it  succeed  where  Silica  has  failed  in  these 
cases  and  in  corneal  a£Eections.  It  causes  absorption  of  corneal  exuda- 
tions.    Ulcers  with  punched-out  edges  indicate  it. 

Relations. — Compare :  Salufer,  Fluoric  acid,  Lapis  alb. 

Galcarea  Silico-flaorica,  see  Lapis  Albas. 
Galcarea  Solpharica. 

Sulphate  of  Calcium.    Gypsum.   Plaster  of  Paris.   CaS04.  Trituration. 

OUnleal.-— Abscess.    Anus,  abscess  near.    Boils.    Buboes.    Bums.    Carbuncles. 
Chilblains.   Cornea,  ulceration  of.   Cough.    Crusta  lactea.    Cysts.    Dropsy.   Dysen- 


CALCAREA  SULPHURICA  365 

letj.  Ecsema.  Fistula.  GUndnlar  swellings.  GonorrhGea.  Hasmorrha^es. 
Injories,  effects  of.  Pneumonia.  Polypi.  Scarlatina.  SpermatorrhcBa.  Syphilis. 
Toosilfitis.    Tumours.    Ulcers. 

ChanurteristioB. — Cak.  sulph.  is  closely  related  to  Hepar  sulph. 
calc.^  which  is  an  impure  sulphide  of  calcium,  but  has  a  wider  sphere 
and  deeper  action  in  suppurative  processes.  It  is  Schussler's  ''  Con- 
nective-tissue salt,"  and  most  of  the  indications  for  its  use  are  derived 
from  his  clinical  experience.  In  the  last  edition  of  his  Biochemic  Therapy 
Schuster  discards  Calc.  suL  because  it  is  not  an  actual  constituent  of 
the  tissues,  and  he  distributes  its  functions  between  Silicea  and  Nat. 
pkos.  Homoeopaths,  having  no  Biochemic  theory  to  support,  may 
continue  its  use  without  scruple,  especially  as  it  has  been  proved 
by  Hering  and  others.  It  is  indicated  in  all  kinds  of  cases  after 
pms  has  found  a  vent.  Nash  has  cured  a  case  of  suppurating  kidney 
with  it.  It  differs  from  Hepar  in  sensitiveness  to  air  :  Hepar  cannot 
bear  the  slightest  exposure  ;  Calc.  sul.  has  >  in  open  air  ;  better 
walking  in  it ;  desire  for  it.  Both  have  <  from  change  of  weather. 
Calc,  sul.  has  not  the  excessive  sensitiveness  to  touch  found  in  Hepar. 
Hansen  recommends  it  in  dry  eczema  in  children.  Cystic  tumours, 
fibromata  and  polypi  have  been  cured  with  Calc.  sul. 

BelatioiiS. — Connate :  Calend.,  Hep.,  Kali  mur.,  Nat.  sul.  (post- 
scarlatinal dropsy)  ;  oil.  (hard,  or  suppurating  glands,  ulcers  of  cornea, 
tonsillitis,  mastitis,  frostbites).    Follows  well :  Kali  m.,  Nat.  sul.,  Sil. 


BTMPTOMB. 

2.  Head. — Sensation  round  head  as  if  he  had  his  hat  on.— Painful 
pimples ;  hard  swellings  at  edge  of  hair,  bleeding  when  scratched. — Crusta 
lactea. — Cranio-tabes. 

3.  Eyes. — Sees  only  half  an  object.— Ophthalmia  with  purulent  dis- 
charge.— Ulceration  of  cornea. — Eyes  protrude. 

5.  Nose.— Coryza,  with  thick,  yellow,  lumpy,  mattery  discharge- 
Influenza  and  sneezing  >  in  open  air ;  coryza  r.  side  after  a  bath,  >  out  of 
doors. — ^Edges  of  nostrils  sore,  excoriated. 

6.  Face. — Swollen  cheek  with  toothache. — Herpetic  eruptions ;  pimples ; 
pustules.— Exceedingly  pale,  sickly  appearance  (gypsum  workers).— Blister- 
like sores  on  lower  lip. 

7.  Teeth.— Rheumatic  toothache  ;  swollen,  tender,  easily  -  bleeding 
gums. 

8-    Mouth.— Taste  soapy.— Tongue  coated  yellow  at  base.— Glossitis. 
9.    Throat.  —  Diphtheria  of   soft   palate;   scarlatinal  sore  throat  — 
Tonsillitis  with  suppuration. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea  with  discharge  of  pus  or  bloody 
pas.— Dysentery  with  pus-like  slime. — Painful  abscesses  about  anus  in  cases 
of  fistula.— Costiveness  with  hectic  fever ;  with  difficult  breathing. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Chronic  nephritis.— Red  urine  with  hectic  fever. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Spermatorrhoea  with  impotency. — Gonor- 
rhoea in  suppurative  stage. — Chronic  syphilis. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs.— Croup.— Catarrh  with  thick,  lumpy,  white- 


366  CALENDULA 

yellow  or  pus-like  secretion. — ^Asthma  or  cough  with  hectic  fever. — Pain  in 
chest  and  headache. — Pneumonia  third  stage. — Emphysema. 

22.    Upper  Limbs.— Whitlow,  when  suppuration  begins. 

2^.  Lower  Limbs. — Itching  and  podagra. — Pain  in  knee  from  a  bloiw. — 
Stitches  in  knee. — Legs  tender  to  touch,  feet  slightly  swollen. — Burning  and 
itching  in  soles  of  feet. 

25.  Skin. — Suppurating  chilblains. — Burns  and  scalds  when  suppuration 
takes  place.  —  Scarlet  rash.  —  Skin  afiFections  with  greenish,  brownish  or 
yellowish  scabs.— Greyish  lead-coloured  skin. — (Ehy  eczema  in  children.) 


Calendula. 

Calendula  officinalis.     Marigold.     N,  O.  Compositae.     Tincture   oi 

leaves  and  flowers. 

Glinioal. — Abscess.  Balaniiis.  B reastj suppurating  ;nodosi\ies in.  Bubo.  Burns, 
Carbuncle.  Chilblains.  Deafness.  Eyes,  inhamed.  Fever.  Fistula.  Glandular 
swellings.  Jaundice.  Labour.  Nails,  pulp  off  inflamed.  Nipples,  sore.  Suppuration. 
Tetanus,  ulcers.  Uterus,  inflammation  of ;  cancer  of ;  offensive  discharge  from. 
Varicosis.    Whitlow.    Wounds. 

GharooteriBtiOB. — Calendula  belongs  to  the  same  family  as  those 
other  great  vulneraries  Arnica  and  Bellis  perennis.  The  special  kind 
of  wounds  indicating  its  use  are  lacerated  wounds  and  suppurating 
wounds.  It  is  the  homoeopathic  antiseptic — ^it  restores  the  vitality  of 
an  injured  part,  making  it  impregnable  against  the  forces  of  putrefac- 
tion. Unlike  Arnica  it  has  no  irritating  property  capable  of  producing 
erysipelas.  It  is  therefore  suitable  to  all  cases  of  injury  where  the 
skin  is  broken.  Jahr,  who  was  in  Paris  during  the  Coup  (P  Atat  of 
1849,  treated  a  number  of  cases  of  gun-shot  wounds  with  comminuted 
bones,  and  saved  several  limbs  by  means  of  Calendula.  It  prevented 
suppuration  and  pyasmia.  In  some  cases  of  carbuncle  it  acts  with 
great  promptitude,  subduing  pain  and  fever.  In  obstetric  practice 
it  is  invaluable.  The  application  of  a  sponge  saturated  with  a  hot 
solution  of  Calendula  aiter  delivery  gives  the  greatest  comfort  to 
the  patient.  Hot  Calendula  lotions  are  generally  preferable  to 
cold,  as  they  conserve  the  vitality  of  the  injured  parts.  Hot 
Calendula  fomentations,  intermittently  applied,  are  far  better  than 
poultices  as  applications  to  forming  abscesses.  If  they  do  not 
abort  the  process  they  favour  the  maturation  and  ultimate  healing. 
C.  R.  Crosby  (H.  /?.,  xii,  370)  gives  it  internally  (in  the  3x)  as  well  as 
externally.  He  has  also  had  excellent  results  from  its  use  as  a  hot 
compress  (an  ounce  to  the  pint)  in  pneumonia  and  other  internal 
inflammations.  It  is  an  excellent  haemostatic  in  tooth-extractions. 
Calendula  has  not  been  largely  proved,  but  very  definite  fever 
symptoms  have  been  elicited,  and  cases  of  jaundice  have  been  treated 
with  it  successfully.  Some  of  the  symptoms  are  :  Irritability  ;  easily 
frightened  ;  great  tendency  to  start,  nervousness  ;  hearing  very  acute. 


CALENDULA  367 

Dxinking  aggravates  ;  also  damp  weather.  Cooper  gives  this  modality : 
<  in  cloudy  weather.  (The  flowers  close  when  a  dark  cloud  passes 
over.)  Drinking  causes  a  shaking  chill  or  creeping  crawls  ;  even 
daring  the  heat  Very  sensitive  to  cold  air.  Nodosities  in  breast. 
In  Germany  it  is  regarded  as  a  "cancer  cure."  Almost  all  the 
symptoms  make  their  appearance  during  the  chilly  stage  of  the  fever ; 
he  feels  most  comfortable  when  walking  about,  or  else  when  lying 
perfectly  still.  A  correspondent  of  the  Horn,  Worlds  "C.W."  (1891), 
mentions  that  a  friend  of  his  who  chewed  for  a  few  minutes  a  leaf  of 
Calendula  noticed  that  it  entirely  removed  for  some  days  a  difficulty 
of  passing  virater  such  as  is  commonly  met  with  in  old  men.  "  C.W./* 
himself  a  pharmacist,  noticed  the  following  effect  on  himself  when 
making  the  fresh-plant  tincture  :  ''  There  was  such  a  feeling  as  if  some 
overwhelming  calamity  was  hovering  over  me  as  to  be  almost  unbear- 
able. Three  years  ago,  just  after  making  the  tincture,  my  old  enemy 
the  gout  nipped  me  in  the  middle  of  the  spine,  and  in  three  days 
spoiled  all  my  powers  of  walking,  and  then  the  dreadful  feeUng 
became  very  much  exaggerated."  His  experience  led  him  to  con- 
clude that  Calendula  has  an  action  on  the  spinal  cord. 

Balatiomu — Calendula  contains  much  nitrogen  and  phosphoric 
acid.  Antidoied  by :  Am.  Incompatible  :  Camph.  Complementary  : 
Hep.  Compatible :  Arn.,  Ars.,  Bry.,  Nit.  ac,  Phos.,  Rhus.  Follows 
well:  Ars.  Is  followed  well  by:  Arn.,  Hep.  Compare:  Arn.,  Ars., 
Biy.,  Calc,  sul.,  Carb.  an.,  Carb.  v..  Ham.,  Hep.,  Hyper.,  Lred.,  Nit.  ac, 
Pho.,  Rhus,  Ruta,  Sahc.  ac,  Sul.  ac,  Symph. 


8THPT0H8. 

1.  Mind. — Great  irritability  ;  easily  frightened  ;  hearing  acute. — In- 
tense depression. 

2.  Head. — Dulness  of  the  head,  as  after  a  nighfs  revel. — Heaviness  of 
the  head  in  the  morning,  as  after  a  long  illness. — Pressure  and  feeling  of 
heaviness  in  the  occiput. — Headache,  and  feeling  of  heat  in  the  forehead 
after  a  meaL — Flushes  of  heat  on  the  forehead,  in  the  evening. — Inflammation 
of  the  white  of  the  eyes,  with  pressure  at  times  in  the  forehead,  at  times 
in  the  temples,  only  when  lying  down. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Dryness  and  biting  in  the  margins  of  the  lids,  as  from  smoke. 

4.  Ears. — Hearing  too  acute  ;  starts  with  a  fright. — (Deafness  <  from 
^kinking ;  <  from  damp  weather. — Cooper.) 

8.  Mouth. — Small  vesicles  in  the  comer  of  the  mouth. 

9.  Throat. — The  submaxillary  glands  are  painful  to  the  touch,  with 
sensation  as  if  swollen  ;  or  actual  swelling,  and  sensation  as  if  ulcerated  in  the 
interior. — Drawing  and  tension  in  the  submaxillary  glands,  when  moving  the 
head.— Pressure  in  the  oesophagus  during  deglutition,  from  pain  in  the 
sobmaxillary  glands. — Bitter-slimy  taste  in  the  throat,  the  food  having  a 
natural  taste. 

II.  Stomach. — Diminished  appetite  at  dinner,  although  he  relishes  his 
food.— Hiccough  when  smoking. 

u.   Abdomen. — Boring  and  digging  deep  in  the  umbilical  region.— 


368  CALOTROPIS 

Sticking  in  the  1.  side  of  the  abdomen,  daring  movement,  going  off  during 
rest — Stool  in  the  morning,  accompanied  with  feverish  chilliness,  preceded 
by  pinching  and  uneasiness  in  the  abdomen. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Frequent  micturition,  with  emission  of  pale^ 
clear,  hot,  and  even  burning  urine. — ^Tearing  in  the  urethra  during  the  chilliness. 

18.  Chest. — Drawing  pressure  in  1.  side  of  chest,  when  standing,  also 
in  sternum,  with  stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest,  in  evening  when  lying  in  bed. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — ^Tearing  with  pressure  between  the  scapulae. — 
Pain  under  the  r.  scapula  as  if  ulcerated  and  bruised,  with  pressure. — 
Rheumatic  drawing  in  the  r.  side  of  neck,  <  when  bending  the  neck  over  to 
one  side  and  when  raising  the  arm. 

21.  Limbs.--The  axillary  glands  are  painful  to  the  touch. — Pressure  and 
drawing  tension  in  the  hand  and  in  the  tarsal  joints,  during  rest. — Tearing 
burning  in  the  calf,  when  sitting. — Spasmodic  drawing  in  the  inner  border  of 
the  foot,  when  sitting. 

24.  Generalities. — Rheumatic  drawing  pains,  only  during  motion. — 
The  wound  becomes  raw  and  inflamed,  is  painful  in  the  morning  as  if  beaten, 
with  stinging  as  if  it  would  suppurate  ;  the  parts  around  the  wound  become 
red,  with  stinging  in  the  wound  during  the  febrile  heat. — Great  tendency  to 
start,  with  great  nervousness  and  extreme  sensitiveness  of  hearing. — Drowsi- 
ness with  ill-humour  and  delirium  ;  restless  night,  constant  waking,  frequent 
micturition  and  drinking,  and  uneasiness  in  every  position. — Almost  all  the 
symptoms  make  their  appearance  during  the  chilly  stage  of  the  fever,  he  feels 
most  comfortable  when  walking  or  else  in  a  state  of  perfect  rest. 

27.  Fever. — Coldness  and  great  sensitiveness  to  the  open  air,  the  whole 
morning. — Shuddering  in  the  back,  with  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  last 
true  rib  of  1.  side,  and  movements  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen  as  if  he 
would  faint — Shuddering  and  goose-flesh,  although  the  skin  feels  warm  to  the 
touch. — Feverish  chilliness  in  the  hands  and  feet,  the  whole  morning,  with 
rheumatic  drawing  and  pressure  in  the  whole  body,  and  pain  in  the  ribs  as  if 
pressed  together  and  bruised,  after  sitting. — Heat  in  the  afternoon,  with 
frequent  thirst,  chilliness  and  shiverings  intermixed,  particularly  after  drinking. 
— Heat  in  the  evening,  with  coldness  of  the  head  and  hands,  intermingled 
with  shivering,  and  accompanied  with  aversion  to  drinks. — Feeling  of  heat  in 
the  face,  hands,  and  feet,  after  a  meal,  succeeded  by  thirst — Great  heat,  in 
the  evening  when  in  bed,  accompanied  with  moisture  on  the  feet,  which 
are  burning. — Great  heat  the  whole  morning,  with  copious  perspiration, 
feeling  of  qualmishness  in  the  chest,  and  burning  in  the  axillae. 


Galotropis. 


Calotropis  gigantea.  (E.  India.)  The  root-bark  is  called  Mudar, 
Mirdar,  Yercum.  N,0,  Asclepiadaceae.  Tincture  or  tritura- 
tion of  bark  of  root.    Tincture  of  the  milky  juice. 

GllnioaL — Feet,  pain  in.    Fever.  Hands,  pains  in.  Leprosy,  tubercular.  Lopas. 
Syphilis. 

GhaFaoteristios. — ^The  inspissated  juice,   root  and  bark   have 
been  extensively  used  in  the  Bast  for  their  emetic,  sudorific,  alterative, 


CALOTROPIS  369 

and  purgative  qualities.  The  fresh  juice  is  considered  a  valuable 
remedy  in  skin  a£Fections.  A  short  proving  brought  out  the  following 
symptoms :  Weak,  tired  feeling  ;  coldness  ;  dizziness  ;  pain  and  con- 
fusion in  head  ;  nausea  and  vomiting  of  bile ;  frequent  micturition  ; 
pain,  soreness,  and  redness  of  thigh ;  pain  in  both  legs,  swelling  of 
knees,  stiffness  and  inability  to  walk  ;  pains  in  hands  and  feet ;  first 
left  then  right,  pains  <  movement  or  putting  weight  on  them.  Dr. 
Gramm,  of  Philadelphia  (Minn.  H,  Mag.^  Aug.,  1897),  has  used  the 
tincture  with  great  success  in  cases  of  syphilis  when  Mercury  can 
no  longer  be  given ;  in  the  anaemia  of  syphilis  ;  secondary  syphilis. 
A  sense  of  warmth  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  is  a  leading  indication 
for  the  remedy.  In  one  case  of  severe  and  advanced  syphilis,  with 
enormous  thickening  of  the  ends  of  all  the  nails,  Cah.  effected  a 
cure.  The  remedy  was  given  in  one-  to  five-drop  doses  of  the 
tinctore,  or  in  pellets  saturated  with  equal  parts  of  the  tincture  and 
95  per  cent,  alcohol. 

BgiBiiOTiB*— Compare :  Asclep.  syr.,  Asclep.  tub.  (botanical 
relations).  Ipec.  (emetic).  Berb.  aquifol.  (syphilis).  Coffee  caused 
vomiting  when  before  there  was  only  nausea,  but  antidoted  many 
effects.    Camph.  also  antidoted. 

SYMPTOMS. 

z.    Mind. — Depressed,  tired  feeling. 

8.  Head. — Dizziness. — Dull  occipital  headache  from  11  a.m.  till  mid- 
night, very  bad  at  times  in  evening. — Head  painful,  throbbing,  and  confusion. 
— Head  and  face  hot 

6.    Face. — Cheeks  burning  like  fire. — Lips  and  throat  dry. 
8b    Month.— Slight  soreness  and   swelling  of  r.  palate,  paining  on 
moving  jaws. — Breath  foul. 

II.    Stomach.— Constant  eructations.— Faint  and  giddy  with  inclination 
to  vomit ;  after  strong  coffee  vomited  a  wineglassf ul  of  yellow  bile. 

14.    Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  urination. — Urine  dark  red,  like  home- 
brewed beer,  and  with  strong  smell  but  no  noticeable  deposit 

17.    Respiratory  Organs. — Oppression  at  chest,  and  short  breathing. 

19.    Heart. — Pulse  quickened. 

90.    Back. — Frequent  chills  passing  up  spine. 

as.    Upper  Limbs.— Cramp-like  pain  in  centre  of  r.  palm  when  grasping 
anytliing,  lasting  many  days ;  pain  in  wrist  when  moving  it 

Q.  Lower  Limbs. — Slight  pain  when  moving  at  inside  of  r.  thigh  just 
below  groin  :  two  days  later  back  of  thigh  very  sore  and  hard,  making  turning 
irksome ;  next  morning  thigh  sore,  swollen,  and  painful,  so  that  he  could 
not  bend  leg  in  walking,  which  gave  him  pain  at  every  step. — Slight  pain 
in  L  foot  on  movement,  or  when  bearing  on  it;  with  deep  tenderness  as 
if  op  tarsal  bone.— Intermitting  cramp-like  pain,  must  keep  foot  moving 
about  in  bed. — Pain  in  foot  when  at  rest  so  severe  as  to  bring  pain  into  eyes  ; 
>  after  coffee ;  later,  instep  slightly  red  and  swollen  but  not  tender ;  unable 
to  put  foot  to  ground  except  by  very  slow  degrees,  could  then  stand  without 
pain,  but  pain  returns  when  taking  weight  off  again.— Some  days  after,  r.  foot 
be^an  to  pain  and  became  the  worse  of  the  two. 
VOL.  I.  ^5 


370  CAMPHORA 

36.    Sleep. — Restless  and  feverish ;  tossing  from  side  to  side. 

27.  Fever. — Body  cold,  frequent  chills  passing  up  spine  ;  at  same  time 
head  and  temples  hot,  cheeks  burn  like  fire.--Chill  returned  towards  t>edtime 
though  he  was  close  to  the  fire ;  continued  in  bed,  running  from  feet  up 
spine,  movement  of  feet  seemed  to  excite  them. — Fits  of  perspiration  alter- 
nating with  chills. 


Galtha  Palustris. 

Marsh  Marigold.  N,  0.  Ranunculaceas.  Tincture  of  fresh  shoots  and 

flowers. 

Clinioal*— Cancer.    Pemphigus. 

ChaFaoterifltics. — This  is  an  unproved  remedy,  but  it  has  irritant 
properties  like  the  other  Ranunculaceas.  Hansen  gives  as  indications  : 
**  Pemphigus  ;  bullae  are  surrounded  by  a  ring,  much  itching.  On  the 
third  day  they  are  transformed  into  crusts.''  Cooper  has  used  it  with 
excellent  effect  in  a  case  of  uterine  cancer,  giving  single  doses  of  the 
f  tincture  at  long  intervals. 


Gamphora. 


Camphor.    Cjo  H,6  O.    N.  0.  Lauraceae.    A  gum  obtained  from 
Laurus  camphora.    Solution  in  rectified  spirit. 

Olinieal. — ^Angina  pectoris.  Bed-sores.  Cholera  Asiatica.  Chordee.  Cold. 
Convulsions.  Epilepsy.  Eruptions,  suppressed.  Erysipelas.  Gonorrhoea.  Heart 
affections.  Hyperpyrexia.  Influenza.  Measles.  Memoryt  loss  of.  Priapism.  Rheu- 
matism. Sexual  mania.  Skivering.  Sleeplessness.  Siiake-bites.  Spasms 
Siranguty.  Sunstroke.  Taste,  disordered.  Tetanus.  Tobacco  habit.  Twitching 
Urethra,  spasmodic  stricture  of.    Urine,  suppression  of. 

Ohapaoteristics. — "Chill  ;  cramp  ;  convulsion  with  mental 
anguish  " — these  give  an  idea  of  the  essential  action  of  Camphor.  It 
causes  retreat  from  the  circumference  to  the  centre ;  and  its  chief 
remedial  action  is  in  correcting  just  such  conditions — cold,  collapse, 
repercussed  eruptive  diseases.  "Great  coldness  of  surface,  with 
sudden  and  complete  prostration  of  the  vital  forces."  Feeling  as  if 
a  cold  wind  were  blowing  over  body.  In  all  kinds  of  sudden  internal 
pains  arising  from  chill,  or  other  causes,  Camphor  in  rapidly  repeated 
doses  will  be  very  likely  to  prove  curative.  In  these  conditions  it  is 
often  prescribed  on  broad  indications  and  given  in  the  lower 
potencies,  but  those  whose  knowledge  of  Camphor  is  confined  to  its 
coarser  actions  will  never  understand  what  a  great  remedy  ft  is  when 
used  according  to  its  fine  symptomatic  indications  and  given  in  the 
higher  potencies.  Camph.  produces  tetanic  spasms,  with  showing  of 
teeth  by  drawing  up  the  mouth  corners  (like  Nux  and  Phytolacca,  but 


CAMPHORA  371 

the  deathly  coldness  of  Camph.  distinguishes  it  from  both).    Camph, 
has  mtemal  heat  and  external  coldness.     In  the  collapse  of  cholera  it 
corresponds  rather  to  the  initial  chill  before  either  vomiting  or 
diarrhcea.      (The  collapse  of  Carbo  v.  is  rather  the  result  of  alvine 
discharges.)    The  tongue  is  cold.    If  he  can  speak,  the  voice  is  either 
hi^  pitched  or  husky.     The  cramps  of  Camph,  are  less  pronounced 
than  in  Cupr. ;  but  cramps  with  icy  coldness  of  limbs  is  characteristic 
of  Camph.     The  coldness  of  Camph,  resembles  that  of  Vcrat.^  but  with 
the  latter  the  discharges  are  copious,  and  Camph.  has  marked  nausea, 
and  the  escpression  of  nausea,  upper  lip  drawn  up.    In  some  epidemics, 
Camph.  given  early  has  alone  cured  a  large  majority  of  the  cases  treated, 
and  that  iwhether  given  in  drop  doses  of  the  tincture  or  in  the  30th. 
Salzer  (Otm  Cholera,  p.  68)  says  the  cases  calling  for  it  are  those  in 
which  "  arterial  spasm,''  with  difficult  breathing  (spasm  of  pulmonary 
arteries),  coldness  and  lividity  are  the  leading  features.    In  its  actions 
on  the  genito-urinary  sphere  Camph.  approaches  Canth.  in  intensity, 
and  is  one  of  the  antidotes  to  the  latter.    Strangury  and  priapism  are 
among  its  efiFects.     Camph.  is  indicated  in  many  conditions  of  sudden 
collapse  from  overpowering  influences  acting  on  the  nervous  centres. 
For  example,    sunstroke :    vitality    ebbing    away ;    fainting    spells 
growing  worse ;  body  icy  cold  and  bathed  in  cold  sweat.    Some 
characteristics  are :    Most  pains  are  felt  during   a    half-conscious 
condition,  and  disappear  when  thinking  of  them.    Afraid  of  his  own 
thoughts ;  wants  to  be  diverted  from  thoughts  of  himself.     Fears  to 
be  left  alone.    Memory  lost.    Great  sensitiveness  to  cold  and  cold 
air ;  which  <  pains ;  takes  cold  easily.    Surface  cold  to  touch,  yet 
ihrinss  off  all  covering.     Extremities  cold,  with  cramps.    Awkward- 
ness.   Spasmodic  movement  of  head  ;  head  drawn  to  r.  side  ;  rest 
of  body  relaxed  ;  unconscious.  Spasmodic  drawing  of  head  laterally 
or  backwards  with  deathly  coldness.    Erysipelas  spreading  to  central 
membranes.    Repercussed  eruptions.    Soft  parts    drawn  in.    Skin 
painfully  sensitive.    In  the  form  of  the  ordinary  Camphor  pilules,  I 
have  found  it  an  excellent  remedy  for  simple  sleeplessness.    In  this, 
as  in  its  e£Fect  on  colds,  it  resembles  Aeon.     Irritable,  weakly  blondes 
most  affected.    Scrofulous  children  most  sensitive  to  Camph. 

BelatioilB. — Camph.  has  very  important  antidotal  relations.  It  is 
antidoted  by  :  Op.,  Sp.  nit.  dulc,  Dulc,  and  Phos.  //  antidotes  : 
Am.  a,  Csmth.,  Carb.  v..  Cup.,  Lye,  Squil.,  Nat.  m.,  so-called  worm- 
medicines,  tobacco,  bitter  almonds,  and  other  fruits  containing  prussic 
add ;  adso  the  secondary  affections  remaining  after  poisoning  with 
adds,  salts,  metals,  poisonous  mushrooms,  &c.  Incompatible :  Nitrum. 
Tea,  cofifee,  and  lemonade,  as  a  rule,  do  not  interfere,  but  sometimes 
coffee  <.  Compare :  Alo. ;  Carbo  v.  (coldness  from  undeveloped 
exanthema,  collapse;  epistaxis,  dark,  persistent;  low  haemorrhages 
generally) ;  Canth. ;  Cup.  ;  Dulc.  ;  Sec.  (skin  cold  with  desire  to 
micover) ;  Lye  (head  drawn  to  one  side — Lye.  to  left,  Plumb,  and 
Stram.  to  right,  Bufo  to  either)  ;  Op.  (narcotism,  heart  aiOfections)  ; 
Pho.  (anguish  and  burning  in  cholera).  Sp.  dul.  nit.,  Squil.,  Verat. 
Teste  pate  Camph.  in  his  Belladonna  group,  with  Agar.,  Lach.,  Cedr., 
Stram.,  Tabac,  and  others.  He  notes  that  it  acts  much  more  power- 
fully on  carnivorous  animals  than  on  herbivora. 


372  CAMPHORA 

CaoBathm. — Shock  from  injuxy.  Eraptions,  suppressed  Cold 
air.    Sunstroke.    Vexation. 

SYMPTOMS. 

z.  Mind. — ^Anxiety  with  fretfulness. — Great  anguish  and  discounge- 
ment. — ^Afraid  of  his  own  thoughts. — Quarrelsome  and  combative  humour ; 
mania  to  dispute. — ^Duiness  of  the  senses. — Loss  of  consciousness.— Confusion 
of  ideas ;  delirium. — Rage. — Loss  of  memory. 

a.  Head. — Dizziness,  as  if  from  intoxication,  esp.  on  walking. — Giddi- 
ness, with  heaviness  of  the  head  and  vanishing  of  the  senses. — ^Vertigo,  and 
heaviness  of  the  head,  which  obliges  the  patient  to  incline  the  head  back- 
wards.— Headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  bruised,  or  sore  from  a  wound. — Dull 
headache  above  the  os  frontis,  with  inclination  to  vomit. — Constrictive  head- 
ache, esp.  in  the  occiput  and  above  the  root  of  the  nose,  greatly  aggravated 
by  stooping,  by  lying  down,  or  by  the  touch,  and  disappearing  when  the 
attention  is  directed  to  the  pain. — Incisive  shocks  in  the  head  on  lying  down. 
— Pulsative  headache  at  night,  with  shootings  in  the  forehead  and  heat  of  the 
body. — Congestion  in  the  head. — Inflammation  of  the  brain. — Inflammation  of 
the  brain  (after  sunstroke),  with  pulsation  and  sensation  of  constriction  in  the 
brain,  spasmodically  turned  head  (to  the  side  or  backward),  <  from 
movement  or  in  the  cold  air ;  >  when  lying  down,  or  when  thinking  of 
it. — Spasms,  which  draw  the  head  on  one  side. 

3.  Eyes. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes. — Red  spots  on  the  eyelids. — 
Trembling  of  the  eyehds. — Staring,  wild  look. — Eyes  sunken. — Eyes  haggard, 
and  turned  convulsively  upwards.— -Contraction  of  the  pupils.— -Obscuration 
of  the  sight.— Visions  of  strange  objects. — Photophobia.— Everything  appears 
too  bright  and  brilliant. 

4.  Ears.— Heat  and  redness  of  the  ears,  esp.  in  the  lobes.— Abscess  in 
the  meatus  auditorius,  with  deep  redness  and  pressive  shooting  pain. 

5.  Nose. — Dry  coryza. — Coryza  fluent  or  dry. — Sneezing,  beginning  of 
coryza. — Catarrhal  affections  with  headache,  from  sudden  change  of  weather. 
— Nose-bleed. — Nose  cold  and  pointed. — ^Violent  stitching  or  crawhng,  from 
root  of  nose  almost  to  tip. 

6.  Face. — Face  deadly  pale ;  or  deep  red. — Icy-cold,  livid,  pale  face. — 
Erysipelas  in  the  face. — Convulsive  distortion  of  the  features.— Convulsive 
clenching  of  the  jaws. — Hippocratic  face. — Foam  at  the  mouth. — Cold  sweat 
on  face,  upper  lip  everted. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Toothache,  as  if  from  swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands, 
with  sensation  of  lengthening  of  the  teeth. — ^Acute  shocks  in  the  roots  of  the 
incisors. — Painful  looseness  of  the  teeth. — Flying  toothache,  gnawing  boring 
in  molars,  mostly  in  hollow  ones  ;  much  <  if  even  a  soft  little  crust  of  bread 
touches  the  affected  tooth ;  <  from  drinking  coffee  or  spirituous  liquors ; 
>  after  drinking  beer  or  cold  water ;  but  <  from  vrater  kept  in  mouth ;  >  by 
coition. 

8.  Mouth. — Breath  fetid  in  the  morning. — Foam  at  the  mouth. — 
Abundant  accumulation  of  a  viscid  and  slimy  saliva. 

9.  Throat. — Soreness  in  the  throat  on  swallowing,  as  if  from  excoriation 
of  the  throat,  which  is  felt  even  at  night. — Dry,  scraping  sensation  of  the 


CAMPHORA  373 

palate. — Burning  heat  in  the  throat,  extending  from  the  palate  to  the  stomach. 
— More  decided  relish  for  all  food,  and  esp.  for  broth. — Bitter  taste  of  tobacco 
and  of  food,  esp.  of  meat. — Dislike  and  repugnance  to  tobacco  smoke. — 
Excessive  thirst. 

11.  Stomach.— The  pit  of  the  stomach  is  very  sensitive  to  the  touch. — 
Almost  continual  eructations  after  dinner ;  nausea  >  by  eructation. — Inch- 
nation  to  vomit,  followed  by  attacks  of  vertigo. — ^Vomiting  of  bile  or  of  blood. 
— ^At  the  commencement  of  the  vomiting,  cold  sweat,  chiefly  on  the  face. — 
Sensation  of  burning  and  heat  in  the  stomach. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the 
epigastrium. — Strong  pressure  in  the  epigastrium. 

12.  Abdomen. — Cramps  in  the  abdomen. — Cutting  colic  at  night. — 
Belly-ache  as  if  diarrhoea  would  follow. — Drawing  pain,  as  from  a 
bruise,  on  the  entire  of  r.  side  of  the  abdomen. — Sensation  of  fulness  in 
the  abdomen. — Sensation  of  cold  or  of  burning  heat  in  the  epigastrium  and  in 
the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation. — Difficult  evacuation,  as  if  from 
inactivity  of  the  intestines,  or  from  contraction  of  the  rectum. — ^The  rectum 
feels  narrow  and  swollen ;  is  painful  during  the  emission  of  flatulence. — 
Asiatic  cholera,  with  cramps  in  calves,  coldness  in  body,  anguish,  burning  in 
oesophagus  and  stomach. — Diarrhoea  :  with  colicky  pain,  esp.  when  caused  by 
cold ;  attack  very  sudden  ;  sudden  and  great  sinking  of  strength. — Involuntary 
diarrhoea. — Blackish  faeces. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Retention  of  urine.  —Strangury,  with  tenesmus 
of  the  neck  of  the  bladder. — Urine  flowing  slowly  and  in  a  small  stream,  as  if 
the  urethra  were  contracted. — Urine  of  a  yellowish  green,  turbid,  and  of  a 
mouldy  smell. — Haematuria. — Burning  pain  during  the  emission  of  urine. — 
Urine  thick  and  red,  with  turbid  and  thick  sediment. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Inceased  desire. — Erethism.—Attacks  of 
violent  priapism  during  dreams. — ^At>sence  of  sexual  desire,  and  impotence. — 
Sudden  laxness  of  penis. — Nocturnal  emissions. — Involuntary  masturbation. — 
Sensation  of  contraction  in  the  testes. — On  1.  side  of  root  of  penis,  while 
standing,  a  pressure  outwards  as  if  a  hernia  would  protrude. — Strangury  from 
stricture. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Sexual  orgasm.— -Erethism  of  sexual 
system. — Labour-like  pains. — Menses  too  profuse ;  or  absent. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Voice  husky ;  weak ;  mucus  in  air  passages, 
not  removed  by  hacking ;  high  and  squeaky.— Constriction  of  larynx,  feeling 
as  if  throat  tied. — Cutting,  cold  feeling  deep  in  windpipe ;  causes  a  slight 
cough.  —  Dry  f eehng  at  bifurcation  of  trachea.  —  Breathing  :  anxious ; 
oppressed ;  sighing ;  quiet ;  deep  and  slow  ;  snoring ;  almost  completely 
arrested. — ^Asthma,  <  from  bodily  exertion. — Hot  breath  (with  acute  eruptive 
diseases). — Cool  breath. — A  cold  feeling  in  chest  followed  by  cold  breath. — 
Fatiguing,  hacking,  dry  cough. — Every  inspiration  starts  the  cough. 

iS.  Chest. — SufiFocating  oppression  of  the  chest,  and  constriction  of  the 
larynx,  as  if  from  the  vapour  of  sulphur. — Excessive  accumulation  of  mucus 
in  the  respiratory  organs,  with  danger  of  su£Focation. — Cramps  in  the  chest — 
Shootings  in  the  chest 

19.  Heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  which  can  be  heard  striking  against 
the  side,  esp.  after  a  meal. — ^Anxiety  at  heart.-r-Spasmodic  stitches  in  region  of 


374  CAMPHORA 

heart,  with  oppression  of  chest  when  lying  on  1.  side,  >  when  turning  on 
r.  side. 

90.  Neck  and  Back.— Tension  and  stiffness  of  the  neck  on  moving  it 
— Heat  with  an  inward  vibration  spreads  from  neck  and  from  bet^ireen 
shoulders  into  limbs. — Drawing  stitches  through  and  between  shoulder-blades, 
extending  into  chest  when  moving  arms. — Pressure  in  small  of  back  Dvith 
leaden-like  heaviness  of  lower  limbs. — Coldness  in  small  of  back  and  loins  ; 
inner  coldness  <  by  walking  a  few  steps. — Sensation  as  if  cool  air  ^vas 
blowing  on  back. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Drawing  lancinations  between  the  shoulder-blades, 
while  moving  the  arms. — Convulsive  movement  of  the  arms,  which  describe 
circles. — Pressure  and  acute  drawing  in  the  arm  and  forearoL — Hands  icy 
cold. — Hands  do  not  feel  anything  he  touches. — ^Fingers  stiflE,  open, 
distorted  ;  thumb  drawn  back. 

9^  Lovrer  Limbs. — Pains,  as  from  a  tn-uise,  in  the  thighs  and  in  the 
knees. — Great  weakness  of  the  legs. — Cramp-like  pains  and  acute  drawings  in 
the  legs,  and  in  the  instep. — Cramps  in  the  calves  of  the  legs ;  with  icy  cold- 
ness.— ^Acute  drawing  in  the  extremities  of  the  toes  and  under  the  nails,  on 
walking. 

24.  Generalities. — Convulsions  and  cramps  of  difiFerent  kinds. — Tetanus^ 
with  loss  of  consciousness,  and  vomiting. — ^Attacks  of  epilepsy,  with  rattling 
in  the  throat ;  face,  red  and  pufiFed  ;  convulsive  movements  of  the  limbs,  and 
even  of  the  tongue,  of  the  eyes,  and  of  the  muscles  of  the  face ;  hot  and  viscid 
perspiration  on  the  scalp,  and  on  the  forehead ;  after  the  fit,  comatose  drowsi- 
ness.— He  falls  down  insensible. — Diminished  circulation  of  the  blood  to  the 
parts  most  distant  from  the  heart. — Uneasiness,  relaxation,  and  heaviness 
over  the  whole  body. — Sinking  of  all  strength. — Fainting  fits.— Cracking  in 
the  jomts. — Rheumatic  lancinations  in  the  muscles. — Difiiculty  in  moving  the 
limbs. — Painful  sensibility  of  the  periosteum  of  all  the  bones. — Su£Ferings  in 
consequence  of  a  chill. — Icy  coldness  of  the  whole  body,  with  paleness  of  the 
face. — ^The  majority  of  the  symptoms  appear  during  movement,  or  else  at 
night,  or  are  aggravated  by  cold,  the  open  air,  and  contact. — The  symptoms 
often  disappear  as  soon  as  attention  is  called  to  them. 

25.  Skin. — Skin  sorely  sensitive,  even  to  the  slightest  touch. — Erysipe- 
latous inflammations. — Skin,  bluish  and  cold,  with  coldness  of  the  body. — 
Dryness  of  the  skin. 

26.  Sleep.  Strong  desire  to  sleep  in  the  day.— Coma,  with  incoherent 
words. — Nocturnal  sleeplessness,  from  nervous  excitement. — Snoring  and  toss- 
ing during  sleep. — During  sleep,  the  inspirations  are  shorter  than  the 
expirations. — Dreams:  anxious.;  fearful;  visions  of  spirits;  about  what  is 
intended  or  what  has  happened  in  morning  hours. — Extreme  restlessness 
with  anxiety. 

27.  Fever. — Excessive  sensibility  to  fresh  air,  and  tendency  to  take  cold. 
— Cold  over  the  whole  body,  with  deadly  paleness  of  face,  shivering,  and 
chattering  of  the  teeth. — Icy  coldness  of  the  whole  body,  with  congestion  to 
the  head  and  chest. — Heat  of  the  body,  with  redness  of  face,  esp.  in  the 
cheeks,  and  in  the  lobe  of  the  ear. — General  heat,  which  becomes  excessive 
on  walking. — Heat  with  distended  veins,  aggravated  from  every  movement- 
Pulse  remarkably  small  and  slow,  or  excessively  quick  and  full. — ^The  blood 


CANCHALAGUA  375 

does  not  circulate  to  the  parts  distant  from  the  heart— Sensation  of  dryness 
00  the  whole  cutaneous  surface. 


Gamphora  Bromata. 

Monobromide  of  Camphor ;  a  compound  in  which  one  atom  of 
hydrogen  of  the  camphor  has  been  replaced  by  one  of  bromine. 
C„  H,5  Br  O.    Trituration. 

GUnittaL— Cholera  infantum.  Chordee.  Direction,  sense  of»  lost.  Gastric 
cataiTh.  Hysteria.  Influenza.  Irritation  in  acute  eczema.  Nervous  excitability. 
Sleep,  disorders  of.    Spermatorrhcea. 

Caiaraeteristios.— Dr.  Cooper  has  found  Camph.  bro.  of  wide 
utility  in  all  cases  where  nervous  excitability  is  present.  He  has 
given  it  chiefly  in  single  doses  of  3X  trituration.  In  a  case  reported 
by  Dr.  E.  M.  Beard  of  a  young  man  who  suflfered  from  gastric  catarrh 
in  convulsive  paroxysms  which  were  induced  by  the  sight  of  physical 
deformity,  the  touch  of  a  cold,  clammy  hand,  and  Uie  mention  of 
odours,  the  actual  presence  of  which  did  not  affect  him,  complete 
relief  was  afforded  by  3  gr.  doses  of  Camph,  bro.  every  3  or  4  hours. 
But  the  drug  set  up  these  singular  symptoms  :  Directions  appeared 
to  be  reversed ;  north  seemed  south,  and  east  seemed  west ;  in- 
numerable blade  flies  seemed  to  be  flitting  over  the  field  of  vision  ; 
he  was  sleepless ;  and  when  he  did  sleep  it  was  restless  and  vexed 
with  ghastly  dreams.  (Camph,  has  visions  of  spirits  in  sleep.)  The 
reversal  of  directions  lasted  many  days,  and  the  strain  on  the  faculty 
of  attention  was  so  torturing  that  he  became  prostrate  in  mind  and 
body  (C.  D.  P.).  Hale  mentions  among  the  conditions  relieved  by  it : 
Hysteria,  weeping  and  laughter  alternately.  Headache  in  women  and 
young  girls  due  to  mental  excitement  and  excessive  study.  Delirium 
tremens.  Chordee.  Neuralgia  of  testes  and  prostate.  Impotence. 
Spermatorrhoea. 

Cancer  FluYiatilis  see  Astacus 
Fluviatilis. 


Ganchalagua. 


Erythraea  chironioides.     N.  0,  Gentianaceae.     Tincture  of  whole 
plant  when  in  flower. 


-Influenza.    Intermittents. 


ChftrftOtePifltios* — ^This  is  a  popular  Califomian  remedy.  It  is 
indicated  in  intermittents  of  most  severe  tvpe  of  hot  countries  ; 
general  sore,  bruised  feeling,  nausea  and  retching,  the  skin  becomes 


376  CANNABIS    INDICA 

wrinkled  like  a  washerwoman's.  It  was  proved  by  Dr.  Richter,  who 
experienced  the  following  among  other  symptoms :  Head  feels  con- 
gested.  Scalp  tight ;  feels  as  if  drawn  together  by  indiarubber. 
Stitches,  pain,  buzzing  and  roaring  in  ears.  Constipation,  hard, 
knotty  stools.  Chills  repeatedly  down  back  <  in  bed,  at  night. 
Sleeplessness.  After  the  proving,  a  cold  wind  could  be  borne  better 
than  before. 

Relations* — Compare  :  The  Gentians,  Chi.,  Ipec. 

8THPT0M8. 

3.    Head.— Head  feels  congested. — Pressive  pains  in  forehead.-^Scalp 
feels  tight,  as  if  drawn  together  with  indiarubber. 

3.  Eyes. — Burning  in  eyes,  first  1.  then  r. 

4.  Ears. — Piercing  or  stitches  in  ears. — Increased  buzzing  and  roaring. 
8.    Mouth. — Spitting  of  white  mucus,  with  trembling  and  nervousness. 

II.  Stomach. — Increased  appetite.  —  Eructations.  —  Regurgitations. — 
Water-brash. 

•12.    Abdomen. — Flatus.— Slight  pain  >  by  pressure. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Several  loose  stools  a  day. — Constipation. — Hard, 
knotty,  morning  stool. 

18.    Chest. — It  alleviated  a  catarrh  produced  by  influenza 

24.  Generalities. — That  kind  of  pain  in  head  and  fingers  which  is 
concomitant  with  the  attacks  of  intermittent  fever. 

26.  Sleep. — Sleeplessness  (from  ist  trit.). 

27.  Fever. — Chills  repeatedly,  down  the  spine  and  all  over,  esp.  in  bed  at 
night. — Heat  in  whole  body ;  I  could  bear,  after  the  proving,  the  cool  trade 
wind,  usually  setting  in,  in  San  Francisco,  in  the  afternoon,  better  than 
before. 


Cannabis  Indica. 

East  Indian  Cannabis  sativa  (Cannabis  sativa  and  Cannabis  indica 
are  botanically  identical  ;  the  difference  in  their  properties  is 
solely  due  to  the  difference  of  soil  and  climate  in  which  they 
are  grown).  Hashish.  Bhang.  Ganja.  N.  0,  Cannabinaces. 
Tincture  of  young  leaves  and  twigs. 

Ollnioal* — Catalepsy.  Chordee.  Clairvoyance.  Delirium  tremens.  Delusions. 
Epilepsy.  Gonorrhoea.  Headache.  Mania.  Menorrhagia.  Paralysis.  Prostatitis. 
Satyriasis.    Stammering.    Uraemia.    Urinary  disorders. 

OhaFaoteristios. — The  use  of  Cannabis  ind,  in  the  East  as  an 
intoxicant  gives  the  leading  note  of  its  sphere  of  action.  It  produces 
a  state  of  exaltation  with  subUme  visions,  delusions,  and  hallucinations 
in  great  variety.  Time  seems  interminable,  space  ilUmitable.  Imagines 
himself  in  a  room  of  which  the  walls  gradually  close  in  upon  him. 
Double  consciousness.  Fixed  ideas.  Apprehensive  of  approaching 
death  ;  of  becoming  insane.  Great  agitation  ;  anxiety ;  nervousness. 
Horror  of  darkness.    Incoherent  tal£ng.    UncontroUable  laughter. 


CANNABIS   INDICA  377 

Inability  to  fix  his  tlioughts  on  one  subject.    Forgets  what  he  intends 
to  wiite  or   speak.    Can.  ind,  produces  a  sensation  of  levitation. 
Sensation  as  if  in  a  dream.    Vertigo  on  rising,  with  stunning  pain  in 
back  part  of  head.    {Can.  ind.  removed  for  me  a  vertigo  in  which  the 
patient  felt  as  if  the  house  were  falling  in  ruins  about  her.)    Shocks 
through  brain  on  regaining  consciousness.  Guided  by  this  symptom,  I 
removed  with  this  remedy  a  "  noise  like  a  crash  or  explosion  during 
sleep.''    Sensation  as  of  brain  boiling  over  and  Hfting  cranial  arch  like 
a  Hd ;  opening  and  shutting  sensation.  Weight  at  occiput,  from  which 
pains  start  up  sides  of  head  to  temples  and  vertex.     Headache  with 
flatulence  ;  lasts  till  flatus  can  be  passed  up  or  down  ;  throbbing  of 
occiput.    Scalp  sore  feeling  ;  crawUng  on  vertex ;  sensation  as  though 
skin  tightly  stretched  over  bones  of  face.    Clairvoyance  and  clair- 
audience  ;  extreme  sensitiveness  to  noise.    Grinds  teeth  whilst  asleep. 
Stammering  and  stuttering.    There  is  a  sensation  in  anus  as  if  sitting 
on  a  ball ;  as  if  anus  and  part  of  urethra  were  filled  by  a  hard,  round 
body.    The  urinary  and  generative  organs  are  very  strongly  affected. 
There  is  constant  dull  pain  in  region  of  right  kidney.     Pains  in 
kidneys  when  laughing.     Urine  loaded  with  slimy  mucus  after  ex- 
posure to  damp  and  cold.     Frequent  micturition  with  burning  pain, 
in  evening.    DribbUng.   Urging  and  straining,  but  cannot  pass  a  drop. 
Burning,  scalding,  or  stinging  in  urethra  before,  during,  and  after 
urination.     Increased  sexual  desire,  satyriasis,  priapism.     Erections  : 
while  riding,  walking,  or  sitting  still,  not  caused  by  amorous  thoughts  ; 
violent ;  painful.    Gonorrhoea  ;  without  pain  ;  with  light-headedness  ; 
very  profuse  yellowish-white  discharge.    Feeling  as  if  discharge  in 
urethra.    Chordee.    Very  profuse,  painful,  dark  menstruation,  but 
without  clots.     Palpitation,  awakens  from  sleep.    Stitches  in  heart, 
with  oppression,  >  deep  breathing.    Warmth  of  spine  extending  to 
head.    Backache  <  during  catamenia,  which  occur  every  two  weeks 
and  are  scanty.    Paratysis  of  lower  Umbs  and  right  arm.    Nash  relates 
the  case  of  a  lady  suffering  from  cardiac  dropsy,  who,  when  reUeved 
of  the  latter,  suddenly  lost  the  power  of  speech.    In  answer  to  a 
question  ^e  could  begin  a  sentence,  but  could  not  finish  it,  as  she 
could  not  remember  what  she  wished  to  say.    She  was  very  impatient 
about  it ;  woi^d  cry,  but  could  not  finish  the  sentence,  though  she 
could  signify  assent  if  any  one  did  finish  it  for  her.    Can.  ind.  cured 
rapidly.    [In  one    case  of  over-dose  the  observer  experienced  a 
modification  of  this :  Absolute  forgetfulness  of  the  thought,  speech, 
or  acts  of  the  previous  moment ;  startled  by  hearing  the  echo  of  the 
last  words  of  a  sentence  he  has  just  spoken.     Having  suggested  a 
walk  to  a  companion  and  meeting  him  at  the  street  door,  wondered 
why  they  were  there.    Afterwards  he  could  remember  everything. 
<  Lying  down  quietly :  then  thought  succeeded  thought  only  to  be  im- 
mediately blotted  out :  no  inclination  to  sleep.     >  Walking  about  out 
of  doors.]    Can.  t.,  like  Bell.f  has :  Wants  to  sleep  but  cannot    Very 
sleepy.    During  sleep  :  starting  ;  talking ;  grinding  teeth  ;  nightmare. 
In  paralysis  there  is  tingling  of  the  affected  parts.    The  sensitiveness 
to  noise  is  extreme  ;  can  hear  a  whisper  in  adjoining  room  and  is 
initated  thereby.    In  some  subjects  a  perfect  condition  of  catalepsy 
is  produced. 


378  CANNABIS   INDICA 

Relations. — Can.  sat.  In  extreme  sensitiveness  to  noise :  Nit 
ac.  (to  jarring  and  rumbling  of  waggon  in  street) ;  CoflE.  (to  all 
somids) ;  Borax  (slightest  noise,  fall  of  door  latch,  rumpling  of  paper, 
rustling  of  silk) ;  Asar.  (to  scratching  of  linen  or  silk,  or  even  the 
thought  of  it).  Levitation  (Asar.,  Calc,  Coccul.,  Phos.  aa,  Sil.,  Sticta, 
SuL,  Thu.).  As  if  in  a  dream  (Ambr.,  Anac,  Calc,  Con.,  Cup.,  Med., 
Rhe.,  Stram.,  Val.,  Ver.,  Zn. — ^the  sensation  of  time  being  intenninable 
distinguishes  Can.  i.  from  the  others).  Horror  of  darlaiess  (Am.  m., 
Bar.  c,  Calc,  Carb.  an.,  Phos.,  Stram.,  Stro.,  Val.).  Noise  like  a  crash 
or  explosion  in  head  (Alo.). 

SYHPT0M8. 

1.  Mind. — Exaltation  of  spirit,  with  excessive  loquacity. — Full  of  fun 
and  mischief,  and  laughs  immoderately. — Hallucinations  and  imaginations 
innumerable. — ^Anguish,  accompanied  by  great  oppression :  >  in  the  open 
air. — Constant  fear  of  becoming  insane. — Exaggeration  of  duration  of  time 
and  extent  of  space  ;  seconds  seem  ages,  a  few  rods  an  immense  distance. — 
Horror  of  darkness. — Fear  of  approaching  death. — Inability  to  recall  any 
thought  or  event,  on  account  of  different  thoughts  crowding  on  his  brain. — 
Sudden  loss  of  speech ;  begins  a  sentence  but  cannot  finish  it — Stammering 
and  stuttering. — Exaltation  of  spirits,  with  excessive  loquacity. — ^Very  absent- 
minded. — Every  few  minutes  he  would  lose  himself,  and  then  wake  up,  as  it 
were,  to  those  around  him. — Constantly  theorising.— Clairvoyance. — Delirium 
tremens ;  trembling  ;  hallucinations ;  tendency  to  become  furious  ;  nausea ; 
unquenchable  thirst. — Laughs  at  merest  trifle. — Sudden  loss  of  memory. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo  on  rising,  with  stunning  pain  in  back  part  of  head. 
— Sensation  as  if  the  room  were  falling  in  pieces  about  her. — Frequent 
involuntary  shaking  of  the  head. — Heavy  pressure  on  the  brain,  forcing  him 
to  stoop. — ^Violent  shocks  pass  through  the  brain;  (noise  like  a  crash  or 
explosion  during  sleep). — Dull,  drawing  pain  in  forehead,  esp.  over  the  eyes. 
— ^Throbbing,  aching  pain  in  forehead. — ^Jerking  in  r.  side  of  forehead, 
toward  the  interior  and  back  part  of  head. — ^A  sensation  of  the  brain  boiling 
over  and  lifting  the  cranial  arch  like  the  lid  of  a  tea-kettle. — Opening  and 
shutting  sensation  at  vertex. — Aching  in  both  temples,  most  severe  in  r.— 
Dull  stitching  in  the  r.  temple. — Pain  in  the  whole  r.  side  of  the  head.— 
Head  feels  heavy,  loses  consciousness  and  falls. — Dull,  heavy,  throbbing  pain, 
with  sensation  as  from  a  blow,  on  back  of  head  and  neck. — Heavy  weight  at 
back  of  head,  pains  shoot  up  to  temples  and  vertex ;  pain  at  midday  forces 
her  to  cry. — Headache  accompanied  by  flatulence,  continuing  until  he  can 
pass  flatulence  up  or  down  ;  throbbing  of  occiput. — Migraine. 

3.  Eyes. — Fixed  gaze. — Eyes  bright  and  shiny. — ^Visual  clairvoyance. 
— ^Jerking  in  extreme  corner  of  the  eye  and  eyelid. — Injection  of  vessels  of 
conjunctiva  of  both  eyes. — Letters  run  together  when  reading.— Twinkling, 
trembling,  and  glimmering  before  the  eyes. 

4.  Ears. — Hearing  very  acute. — ^Aching  in  both  ears. — ^Throbbing  and 
fulness  in  both  ears. — Ringing  and  buzzing  in  the  ears. — Noise  in  the  ears, 
like  boiling  water. — Periodical  singing  in  the  ears  during  a  dreamy  spell, 
ceasing  when  he  came  to  himself. 

6.    Face. — Countenance  dejected  and  careworn.— Wearied,  exhausted 


CANNABIS   INDICA  379 

^pearance. — Drowsy,  stupid  look. — Skin  of  face,  esp.  of  forehead  and  chin, 
feds  as  if  drawn  tight 

ft.  Mouth. — Lips  fed  as  if  glued  together. — Gritting  and  grinding  of 
the  teeth  while  sleeping.— Dryness  of  the  mouth  and  lips.— White,  thick, 
frothy,  and  sticky  saliva. — Every  article  of  food  is  extremely  palatable. — 
Stammering  and  stuttering. 

9.  Tbroat. — ^The  throat  is  parched,  accompanied  by  intense  thirst  for 
cokl  water. 

n.  Stomach. — Ravenous  hunger. — Pain  in  the  cardiac  orifice,  relieved 
by  pressure. — Su£Eocative  feeling  while  eating. 

n.  Abdomen. — Flatulence  on  rising  in  morning  (with  headache); 
rambling  in  bowels  at  night. — ^Abdomen  feels  swollen ;  >  by  belching. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Sensation  in  the  anus  as  if  he  were  sitting  on  a 
ban ;  as  if  the  anus  and  part  of  the  urethra  were  filled  up  by  a  hard,  round 
body.— Painless  yellow  diarrhoea. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Pain  in  the  kidneys  when  laughing.— Burning, 
aching,  or  sharp  stitches  in  the  kidneys. — ^A  white  glairy  mucus  may  be 
squeezed  from  the  urethra. — Burning  and  scalding,  or  stinging  pain  in  the 
Tiretfara  before,  during,  and  after  urination. — Urging  to  urinate,  but  cannot 
pass  a  drop. — Profuse,  colourless  urine. — Has  to  wait  some  time  before  the 
urine  flows. — Has  to  force  out  the  last  few  drops  with  the  hand.— The  urine 
dribbles  out  after  the  stream  ceases. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sexual  desire  excessively  increased. — 
Satyriaas ;  priapism. — Erections  not  caused  by  amorous  thoughts. — ^Violent 
painful  erections. — Penis  relaxed  and  shrunken. — Itching  in  the  glans  penis. — 
Sharp  pricking,  like  needles,  in  urethra,  so  severe  as  to  send  a  thrill  to  cheeks 
and  hands. 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Very  profuse  menstruation;  painful, 
dark  but  without  clots. — Spasmodic  uterine  colic,  pains  returning  like  labour 
pains;  great  agitation  and  sleeplessness. — ^Threatened  miscarriage  in  8th 
month;  burning  on  micturition  with  purulent  discharge. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Rough  cough,  with  scraping  immediately 
raiAgsc  the  sternum. — It  requires  a  great  effort  to  take  a  deep  inspiration. 

18.  Chest. — Oppression  of  chest,  with  deep,  laboured  breathing. — He 
feels  as  if  suffocated,  and  has  to  be  fanned. — Stitches  extending  from  both 
nipples  through  chest. 

19.  Heart  and  Pulse.— Palpitation  of  the  heart,  awaking  from  sleep. — 
Pressing  pain  in  the  heart,  with  dyspnoea  the  whole  night. — Piercing  pain  in 
the  heart.— Sensation  as  if  drops  were  falling  from  the  heart. — Stitches  in  the 
lieart,  accompanied  by  great  oppression ;  the  latter  relieved  by  deep  breathing. 
—Pulse  very  slow  (as  low  as  46). 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Pain  across  the  shoulders  and  spine;  must 
stoop,  cannot  walk  erect. — Chin  suddenly  drawn  down  to  sternum,  lasting 
three  days.— Warmth  in  spine  extending  to  head. — Backache,  <  during 
menses,  which  occur  every  two  weeks  and  are  scanty. 

22.  Upper  Umbs.— Agreeable  thrilling  through  the  arms  and  hands. — 
Paralysis  of  the  r.  arm. — Coldness  of  r.  hand,  with  stiffness  and  numbness  of 
r.  thumb. 

83.   Lower  Limbs. — Entire  paralysis  of  the  lower  extremities  — ^Weari* 


38o  CANNABIS   SATIVA 

ness  in  limbs,  and  stiffness  and  aching  in  knees  ;  almost  paialysis.*-Agreeable 
thrilling  from  the  knees  down,  with  a  sensation  as  if  a  bird's  claws  were  clasp- 
ing the  knees. — On  attempting  to  walk,  intensely  violent  pain  as  if  treading  on 
spikes,  which  penetrated  the  soles,  and  ran  upward  through  the  limbs  to  the 
hips  ;  worse  in  r.  limb,  and  accompanied  by  drawing  pains  in  both  calves. — 
Shooting  pains  in  the  joints  of  the  toes  of  1.  foot ;  worse  in  great  toe  ;  aching 
and  stitching  pain  in  ball  of  1.  great  toe. 

24.  Generalities. — Great  desire  to  lie  down  in  the  daytime.— Thoroughly 
exhausted  after  a  short  walk. — Felt  so  weak  that  he  could  scarcely  speak,  and 
soon  fell  into  a  deep  sleep. 

90.  Sleep. — Excessive  sleepiness  ;  sound  sleep,  with  melancholy  dreams. 
— Starting  of  the  limbs  while  sleeping,  causing  him  to  awake. — ^Voluptuous 
dreams,  with  erections  and  profuse  seminal  emissions. — ^Talks  during  sleep. — 
Gritting  teeth  during  sleep. — Dreams  prophetic  ;  vexatious  ;  of  dead  bodies, 
of  danger,  and  of  perils  to  be  encountered. — ^Nightmare  every  night  as  soon 
as  he  falls  asleep. 

27.  Fever.— Loss  of  animal  heat— General  chilliness.— Coldness  of  the 
face,  nose,  and  hands  after  dinner. — Profuse  sticky  sweat,  standing  out  in 
drops  on  his  forehead. 


Cannabis  Sativa. 

European  or  American  Hemp.    N.  0.  Cannabinaceae.    Tincture  of 
male  and  female  flowering  tops. 

CUnloal*— Ascites.  Asthma.  Cataract.  Cystitis.  Eyes ;  corneal  opacity.  Fingers, 
contracted.  Gofwrrhoea.  Headache.  Hysteria.  Infantile  leucorrhoea.  Nephritis. 
Nose-bleed.  Palpitation.  Phimosis.  Pleurisy.  Pneumonia.  Post-partum  haemor- 
rhage.   Priapism.    Stammering.   Tetanus.    Trachea^  mucus  in.   Urethral  caruncle. 

OharaoteriBtios. — Cannabis  saliva  resembles  closely  Cannabis 
indica,  but  the  mental  symptoms  and  head  symptoms  are  less 
pronounced  and  the  eye  and  genito-urinary  symptoms  more  so. 
Characteristic  sensations  are  :  ''  As  if  hot  water  were  poured  over 
him  ;  over  heart  As  if  drops  of  cold  water  were  falling  :  on  head  ; 
from  anus ;  from  heart."  As  if  pinched  with  pincers  in  back. 
Pressure  as  with  a  sharp  point  in  coccyx.  Gonorrhoea,  esp.  when 
the  patient  walks  with  the  legs  apart.  Sexual  over  excitement 
in  either  sex.  Threatened  abortion  from  too  frequent  sexual  inter- 
course. Threatened  abortion  complicated  with  gonorrhoea.  The 
urethra  is  very  sensitive  to  touch  and  pressure ;  the  patient  cannot 
bear  the  legs  close  together.  Can.  sal.  has  cured  many  cases  of 
urethral  caruncle  ;  and  of  phimosis.  It  resembles  Canlh.  in  its 
urethral  symptoms,  but  has  more  burning  and  smarting  {Canth. 
more  tenesmus).  Drawing  pains  in  region  of  kidneys  extending  into 
inguinal  glands,  vnth  anxious  sensation  of  nausea  at  epigastrium. 
Unendurable  fine  stitching  over  whole  body,  as  from  a  thousand 
needle  points,  at  night  when  sweating  from  warm  covering,  > 
uncovering.    Feet  feel  neavy  on  going  upstairs. 


CANNABIS   SATIVA  381 

Balftttoiifl. — Antidotes:  of  large  doses — ^lemon-juioe,  Strychnia^ 
iaradization  of  respiratory  muscles  to  maintain  respiration  ;  of  small 
dose9-<:amph.,  Merc.  Contpaiible :  Bell.,  Hyo.,  Lye,  Nux,  Op., 
Puis.,  Rhus,  Verat.  Cofnparc :  Can.  ind,  Act.  r.,  Am.,  Bry.,  Canth., 
PetroL,  Petros.,  Stan.,  Stram.,  Sul.  ;  Sars.  «  going  up  stairs) ;  in 
phimosis  (Merc.,  Sul.,  Nit.  ac.,  Sep.,  Thu.  Rhus,  Sabi.) ;  as  if  some- 
thing alive  in  abdomen  (Croc,  s.,  Thuj.). 

8THPT0HS. 

I  I.    Mind. — Sadness  and  indifiFerence. — ^The  slightest  contradiction  gives 

/  offence— Di^Msition  to  be  easily  frightened. — Mania,  sometimes  gay,  some- 

times serious  or  furious. — Irresolution  and  uncertainty,  in  consequence  of  too 
ficUe  an  imagination. — ^As  if  in  a  dream. — ^Voices,  including  her  own,  seem 
to  come  from  a  distance ;  her  own  voice  seems  strange,  as  if  it  were  some- 
body else  speaking. — Lectophobia. — In  writing,  many  errors  are  made. — 
Vanishing  of  thoughts. — ^Want  of  words. — Ideas  seem  to  stand  still ;  he  stares 
iofrcmt  of  him ;  is  absorbed  in  higher  thoughts,  but  is  unconscious  of  them, 
s.  Head. — ^Attacks  of  vertigo  on  walking,  or  when  standing  for  some 
time,  to  such  an  extent  as  to  cause  falling. — Sensation  as  if  intoxicated. — 
Headache,  as  if  there  were  a  stone  pressing  upon  it. — Sensation  oi  a  heavy 
iveight  on  the  vertex. — Pressure  and  tension  on  the  temples. — Compression 
in  the  sinciput,  from  the  margins  of  the  orbit  to  the  temples. — Congestion  in 
the  head,  with  throbbings  in  the  brain,  cheeks  red  and  hot;  with  pulsation, 
and  not  unpleasant  warmth  in  it. — Sensation  at  the  scalp,  as  if  something 
were  creeping  on  it,  and  frequent  sensation,  as  if  drops  of  cold  water  were 
falling  on  the  head. 

3.  £3re8.— Aching  pain  in  the  balls  of  the  eyes. — Cramp-like  pulling  in 
the  eyes.— Weakness  and  confusion  of  sight,  on  viewing  objects  either  distant 
or  near.— Specks,  and  opacity  of  the  cornea.— Appearance  of  a  denticulated 
circle  of  whitish  flames  before  the  eyes. 

4.  Ears. — ^Throbbing  and  pressure  in  the  ears;  disappearing  when 
stooping,  and  reappearing  when  raising  the  head  again. — Buzzing  in  the 
ears,  and  sensation  as  if  a  skin  were  before  them. 

5.  Nose. — Swelling  of  the  nose,  with  copper-like  redness. — Stupefying 
pressure  on  the  root  of  the  nose. — Heat  and  dryness  of  the  nose. — Epistaxis, 
preceded  by  a  sensation  of  burning  in  the  nose. 

6.  Face. — Paleness  of  the  face. — ^Tingling,  itching,  and  smarting  in  the 
face,  as  if  from  salt — Palpitation  of  the  muscles  of  the  face. — Heat  of  the 
iaux,  and  redness  of  the  cheeks. 

8.  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth,  with  viscid  saliva,  and  absence  of 
thirst — Eruption  in  the  vermilion  border  of  the  lips. — Embarrassed  speech  ; 
at  one  time  words  are  wanting,  at  another  the  voice  fails. — ^The  speech  stops 
with  extraordinary  anxiety  and  agony  on  account  of  pain  in  the  back. 

ix«  Stomach. — Empty  risings. — Regurgitation  of  acrid  substances  of  a 
bitter  sourness. — ^Nausea,  with  inclination  for  food. — ^Vomiting  with  sensation 
of  strangulation,  from  the  epigastrium  to  the  throat. — ^Vomiting  of  green 
bile.— Pain  in  the  stomach,  on  being  touched,  as  if  it  were  ulcerated,  > 
by  eating. — Attack  of  violent  cramps  in  the  stomach,  with  paleness,  and  sweat 


382  CANNABIS  SATIVA 

of  the  face;  pulse  almost  extinct,  and  respiration  rattling.— Aching,  pinchings, 
and  cuttings  in  the  epigastrium,  and  in  the  upper  part  of  the  stomach. 
.  12.  Abdomen. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  intestines. — Sensation 
of  soreness  in  the  abdomen  (dropsy). — Hard  and  painful  swelling  of  the 
hepatic  region. — Cramp-like  pains  in  the  epigastrium. — Pulsation  of  the 
abdomen,  as  if  from  within  outwardly. — Shuddering  in  the  abdomen,  as  if 
cold  water  were  running  through  it. — Painful  jerks  in  the  abdomen^  as  if  it 
contained  some  living  object. — Shaking  of  the  intestines,  as  if  they  were 
detached,  when  the  arms  are  moved. — Partial  swelling  of  the  abdomen,  as 
from  an  encysted  ascites. — Shocks  and  pressure  towards  the  outside  in  the 
region  of  the  groins. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea,  accompanied  by  cramp-like  pains 
in  the  abdomen. — Pressure  in  the  rectum  towards  the  outside. — Sensation, 
as  of  a  running  of  cold  water  from  the  anus. — Constipation,  and  hard 
faeces. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Sensation  of  soreness  and  inflammation  of  the 
kidneys. — Urgent  inclination  to  make  water,  with  pressive  pain. — Difficulty 
of  making  water,  as  if  from  paralysis  of  the  bladder,  and  nocturnal  strangury.— 
Obstinate  retention  of  urine. — Stoppage  of  the  urinary  ducts  by  mucus  and 
pus. — Urine,  turbid,  white,  or  reddish,  and  as  if  mixed  with  blood  and  pus.— 
Incontinence  of  urine. — Stream  of  water  scattered. — Emission,  drop  by  drop, 
of  a  scanty  and  sanguineous  nature. — Burning  pain  in  the  urethra  and  in  the 
bladder,  t)efore  and  during  the  emission  of  urine. — Urethra  inflamed  and 
painful  to  the  touch. — Discharge  of  watery  mucus  from  the  urethra  (gonor- 
rhoea).— ^Yellow  and  mucous  discharge  from  the  urethra. — Ejection  of  a  stone 
on  making  water. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Genital  parts  cold. — Itching  and  inflam- 
matory swelling  of  the  prepuce,  glans,  and  penis,  with  deep  redness,  and 
phimosis. — ^The  penis  feels  sore  and  burnt  when  walking ;  walks  with  legs 
apart — ^Aching  in  the  testes,  and  tension  in  the  spermatic  cord,  when  standing 
upright. — Swelling  of  the  prostate  gland. — Erections,  with  tensive  pains. — 
Repugnance  to  coition,  or  strong  excitement  of  sexual  desire. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Profuse  menstruation.— Sterility.— 
Miscarriage,  with  convulsions. — ^Threatened  abortion,  complicated  with 
gonorrhoea;  or  on  account  of  too  frequent  sexual  intercourse. — Great 
excitement  with  sterility. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Loss  of  voice.-— Accumulation  of  tenacious 
mucus  in  the  larynx,  with  scraping,  and  difiiculty  of  respiration. — Cough, 
violent  and  dry. — Cough  with  greenish  and  viscid  expectoration. — Difficulty 
of  respiration,  as  if  there  were  a  weight  on  the  chest,  with  wheezing  and 
rattling  in  the  bronchia. — Respiration  short  and  oppressed. — Respiration 
difficult,  and  possible  only  when  standing  upright. — Difficulty  of  respiration, 
and  oppression  on  the  chest,  with  uneasiness  in  the  throat ;  <  lying  down. — 
Respiration  rattling. 

18.  Chest. — Shootings  in  the  bottom  of  the  chest,  esp.  on  breathing  or 
speaking,  or  during  movement. — Inflammation  of  the  lungs,  with  greenish 
vomiting  and  delirium. 

19.  Heart. — Painful  strokes  in  the  region  of  the  heart. — Sensation  as  if 
drops  were  falling  from  the  heart. — Inflammation  of  the  heart. — Painful  con- 


CANTHARIS  383 

straiat  and  tension  in  the  heart,  with  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  anxiety. — 
Beati]^  of  the  heart,  which  are  felt  lower  than  their  ordinary  place. 

30.  Keck  and  Back. — Pains  in  the  back,  which  impede  speech  and 
saspend  respiration. — Shooting  pain  between  the  shoulder-blades. — Pressure 
tofwards  the  outside  in  the  sacral  region  and  coccyx. 

Si.  Upper  limbs. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  shoulder  and  fore- 
arm during  movement — Cramps  in  the  hands  and  the  fingers. — Cramp-iike 
oontraction  ol  the  metacarpal  bones,  of  the  (r.)  hand. — Sudden  paralytic 
weakness  ol  the  hand,  with  trembUng  on  laying  hold  of  an  object,  and 
inability  to  hold  it  firmly. 

^  Lower  Limbs. — Cramps  in  the  thighs,  the  calves  of  the  legs,  and 
the  hams.— Weakness,  staggering,  and  pains  of  the  knees. — Displacement  of 
the  patella  on  going  upstairs. — Pulsation  and  stretching  pain  in  the  feet,  and 
in  the  joints  of  the  foot,  as  after  a  long  walk. — Spasmodic  contraction  of  the 
the  teodo  Achillis,  with  violent  pains. 

2|.  Generalities. — ^Acute  drawing,  and  contractive,  pressive  pains, 
with  sensation  of  paralysis,  or  shocks  and  deep  shootings  in  different  parts, 
or  else  a  sensation  as  if  pinched  with  the  fingers.— Rheumatic  pulling  during 
movement,  apparently  in  the  periosteum. — General  dejection,  with  tottering 
and  soreness  oiF  the  knees. — Great  fatigue,  from  having  spoken  or  written. — 
Tetanus,  chiefly  in  the  upper  limbs,  and  in  the  trunk. — Several  symptoms  are 
aggravated  or  provoked  by  touch,  open  air,  and  heat,  as  well  as  at  night,  and 
after  midnight ;  by  exercise,  and  after  a  meal. — Sensation,  as  if  drops  of  cold 
water  were  falling  (on  head ;  from  the  anus ;  from  heart). — ^Affections  of 
ban  of  the  foot  or  under  part  of  the  toes. — Typhoid  fevers  where  strangury 
exists 

96.  Sleep. — ^Invincible  desire  to  sleep  during  the  day« — Sensation  of 
greater  fatigue  on  waking  in  the  morning,  than  when  going  to  bed  in  the 
evening.— Nocturnal  sleeplessness. — Great  anxiety  of  heart. — ^At  night,  pricking 
and  sensation  of  burning  over  the  whole  skin,  as  if  from  boiling  water. 

97.  Fever. — Shuddering  and  shivering,  with  thirst — Uneasiness  and 
eztenial  cold. — Coldness  of  the  body,  with  heat  in  the  face. — Heat  only  in 
the  face. — Pulse  weak,  slow,  and  scarcely  perceptible. — Burning  heat  over 
the  whole  body  at  night. 

Gantharis. 

Cantharis  vesicator.     Lytta  vesicator.     Spanish  fly.     N,0.  Insecta, 
Coleoptera.    Tincture  or  trituration  of  living  insects. 

COndcaL^-BUuliUr  affecUons,  Burns.  Chordee.  Diphtheria.  Dysentery. 
Edema.  Emissions.  Erotomania.  Erysipelas.  Eyes,  inflammation  of.  Gastritis. 
Gonorrkaa.  Herpes  zoster.  Hydrophobia.  Kidneys,  affections  of.  Mania.  Neu- 
ral^ Nymphomania.  Ovaries,  affections  of.  Peritonitis.  Pleurisy.  Pregnancy, 
disorders  of.  Retained  placenta.  Satyriasis.  Scarlatina.  Sfermatorrhaa. 
Strangury.  Thirst  Throat,  sore.  Tongue,  inflammation  of.  Urtne,  abnormal, 
YcMcation  of  skin. 

CSharftCteristios. — Cantharis  belongs  to  the  animal  kingdom  and 
finds  its  most  prominent  sphere  of  action  in  exciting  the  animal 


384  CANTHARIS 

passions.     There  is  anger  in  a  very  acute  degree  amounting   to 
paroxysms  of  rage;  and  a  corresponding  condition  of  the  txxlily 
tissues.     The  word  ^^irritaUon"  best  expresses  the  totality  of    the 
Cantkaris  e£Eects.    The  pains  are  burning,  and  sharp,  lancinating 
along  the  course  of  a  nerve.     Neuralgia  of  head  and  face  from 
taking  cold,  with  loud  screams  and  jerking  of  muscles.    The  slightest 
touch  or  approach  aggravates  the  mental  symptoms.    Violent  spasms 
reproduced  by  touching  larynx.  There  is  also  <  from  dazzling  objects 
and  by  water — completing  the  hydrophobia  picture.  It  may  be  well  to 
remember  in  this  connection  the  violent  erotic  action  of  Canih.,  for 
many  have  maintained  that  rabies  only  arises  among  domesticated 
animals  where  sexual  functions  are  under  more  or  less  abnormal  con* 
ditions.    Guernsey  gives  as  the  special  indications  in  hydrophobia : 
*'  Moaning  and  violent  cries,  interspersed  with  barking."    Canth.  pro- 
duces amorous  frenzy,  unbounded  sexual  desire  ;  also  sexual  erethism 
and  excitability.    It  acts  on  the  brain,  producing  inflammation  of  the 
tissues.    The  eyes  are  bright,  pupils  widely  dilated.    Erysipelas  com- 
mencing in  nose.    The  face  is  generally  pale  or  yellowish,  with  an 
expression  of  deep-seated  sufiFering.    There  is  diphtheritic  inflamma- 
tion of  throat,  severe  burning,  constriction ;  thirst,  with  aversion  to 
drinking.     The  stomach  is  inflamed.      Pain  in  abdomen  coIic-Uke, 
doubling  the  patient  up,  cutting,  burning,  lancinating.      Dysenteric 
stools  with  tenesmus.     In  the  genito-urinary  region  the  most  intense 
action  is  developed.     There  is  extreme  superhcial  sensitiveness  in 
hypogastrium  (especially  when  the  bladder  is  full),  attended  with  un- 
bean^le  tenesmus  vesicae.    Cutting,  burning  pains  from  the  kidney 
down  to  urethra.    Strangury.    Can  pass  only  a  few  drops,  like  molten 
lead.    Irritation  of  all  grades.    The  sexual  appetite  is  aroused  to  the 
point  of  mania.     Coitus  does  not  always  reduce  it.    On  the  skin  and 
serous  membranes  the  irritating  effects  of  the  remedy  are  equally  pro- 
nounced.   Pleurisy  with  effusion  has  been  cured  by  the  remedy  given 
internally.     Burning,  stitches,  shooting  pains  and  exudation  are  the 
indications.    So  the  fly-blister  treatment  of  olden  days  had  more  to 
say  for  itself  than  those  who  used  it  knew.    Vesication  is  the  note  of 
its  effects  on  the  skin  and  indicates  its  use  in  bums  of  the  first  degree, 
erysipelas,  blisters.    In  bums  the  part  may  be  treated  with  a  lotion 
containing  a  few  drops  of  the  tincture  to  the  ounce  of  water,  a  dilu- 
tion being  given  internally.     An  ointment  made  with  the  3X  is  a 
good  application  for  herpes  zoster.     H.  N.  Guernsey  observed  that 
Canth,  is  almost  always  the  remedy  for  whatever  other  sufferings 
there  may  be,  when  there  is  as  weU  frequent  micturition  with  burn- 
ing, cutting  pain;    or  if   cutting   burning  pain  attends  the   flow, 
even  when  micturition  is  not  very  frequent.    Guernsey  also  pointed 
out  that  Canth.   should  be   studied  in    treating  affections   of    the 
air-passages  when   the   mucus  is  tenacious.      Nash  records  a  case 
in  which   this   observation  led   him  to   make  a  pretty  cure.      Kali 
tick,  had  completely  failed    to  relieve   a    lady   who   had  suffered 
long   from   bronchitis.      The  mucus   was   profuse,    tenacious,    and 
ropy.    One  day  the  patient  mentioned  that  she  had  great  cutting  and 
burning  on  urinating,  which  she  was  obliged  to  do  very  frequently. 
Canth.  made  a  rapid  cure.  Canth.  has  cured  a  case  of  malarial  cachexia 


CANTHARIS  385 

in  which  the  symptoms  were  always  <  when  the  urine  was  scanty. 
"Burning"  runs  through  the  Cantn,  pathogeneses  in  a  very  striking 
way.  Another  marked  feature  of  the  remedy  is  its  effect  in  increasing 
the  secretions  of  membranes.  Canih.  ''expels  moles,  dead  fetus, 
placentae  ;  promotes  fecundity"  (Guernsey).  The  <  is  :  from  drink- 
ing; from  co£Fee;  from  drinking  cold  water  ;  whilst  urinating  ;  after 
urinating ;  from  touch.     >  From  rubbing ;  from  warm  applications. 

Belatioiia. — Antidotes :  Camph.  antidotes  the  strangury  and  reten- 
tion of  urine  of  Canth.,  Apis  the  cystitis.  Kali  nit.  the  renal  symptoms. 
For  its  throat  symptoms  it  is  nearest  to  Capsicum.  Other  antidotes : 
Aeon.,  Lauro.,  Puis.  Canth.  is  antidote  to :  Camph.,  Vinegar,  Alcohol. 
Compatible :  Bell.,  Merc,  Pho.,  Pul.,  Sep.,  Sul.  Incompatible  :  Coffea. 
Compare:  Doryph.,  Coccus  cact,  Coccionella,  Apis,  Bell.,  Bry., 
Can.  s.  (more  burning  and  smarting ;  Canth.  more  tenesmus) ;  Petros. 
(sudden  urging) ;  C^ps ;  Puis,  (retained  placenta) ;  Ars.  (delayed 
urination  after  parturition) ;  Thuja  (erections ;  those  of  Canth.  pre- 
vent urination ;  those  of  Thuja  do  not) ;  Merc,  (semen  mixed  with 
blood) ;  Sarsapar.  (urine  burns  like  fire,  shreddy  particles  and  blood 
in  it) ;  Arum,  Am.,  Rhus,  Ranunc.  seel.  (Teste  classes  Canth.  with 
Sene^  and  Phos.  ac.  in  his  Conium  group.) 

8THPT0MB. 

z.  Mind. — Dejected  and  lachrymose  humour. — ^Anxious  inquietude,  with 
agitation,  which  necessitates  constant  motion. — Want  of  confidence  in  one's 
sdf.^PusiUanimity  and  timidity. — Disposition  to  be  angry,  and  to  fly  into  a 
rage.— Paroxysms  of  rage,  with  cries,  blows,  and  barkings,  renewed  on  feeling 
the  gullet,  and  at  the  sight  of  water. — Delirium. — Insanity. — Mania,  with 
extravagant  acts  and  gestures. — Constantly  attempting  to  do  something,  but 
accomplishing  nothing. 

2.  Head. — V^ligo,  with  loss  of  consciousness,  and  mist  before  the 
sight,  chiefly  in  the  open  air.  —Headache,  which  interrupts  sleep  at  night. — 
Ptessive  lancinations  in  the  head,  which  disappear  on  walking.—Acute  draw- 
ing pains  in  the  head,  with  vertigo. — Congestion  in  the  head. — ^Throbbing  in 
the  brain,  and  heat,  which  ascends  to  the  head. — Sensation  of  burning  in  the 
head,  as  if  the  interior  were  raw,  with  inflammation  of  the  brain. — Drawing, 
jerking,  and  gnawing  in  the  bones  of  the  head. — Headache,  as  if  the  hair  were 
pulled.— Hair  standing  on  end. — Headache,  as  if  coming  from  the  nape  of  the 
neck,  and  wishing  to  escape  by  the  forehead. — Burning  in  the  sides  of  the 
head,  ascending  from  the  neck,  with  soreness  and  giddiness ;  <  in  the 
morning  and  afternoon ;  when  standing  or  sitting ;  >  when  walking  or 
lying  down. 

3.  Eyes — Pain  in  the  eyes,  with  sensation  as  if  the  eyelids  were  ex- 
coriated, chiefly  when  they  are  opened. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  with 
burning  smarting. — ^YeUowish  colour  of  the  eyes. — Prominence,  and  con- 
vulsive movements  of  the  eyes ;  fiery,  sparkling,  staring  look. — Objects 
seemed  to  be  tinged  with  a  yellow  hue. 

4*    Ears.— Inflammation  and  burning  heat  of  the  ears. 
5.    Mose. — Swelling  of  the  nose,  even  in  the  interior,  with  redness  and 
burning  heat.— Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  the  dorsum  of  the  nose,  extend- 
VOL.  I.  26 


386 


CANTHARIS 


ing  to  the  cheeks  (r.)  with  hardness  and  subsequent  desquamation.--Fetid  and 
sickly  smell  before  the  nose.— Coryza  of  long  duration,  and  catarrh,  with 
copious  flow  of  viscid  mucus  from  the  nose. 

6.  Face.— Paleness  of  the  face.— Face  hollow,  hippocratic,  with  features 
which  express  anguish  and  despair.— Yellowish  colour  of  the  face. — Erysipe- 
latous inflammation  and  desquamation  of  the  cheeks. — ^Burning  redness  and 
swelling  of  the  face.— Swelling  at  one  side  of  the  face  (r.),  with  tension.— 
Swelling  and  inflammation  of  the  lips. — Fissure  and  exfoliation  of  the  lips. — 
Trismus. 

7.  Teeth.— Toothache,  generally  drawing,  <  by  eating.— Fistula  in  the 
gums. — Ulceration  of  the  gums. 

8.  Mouth.— Taste  of  cedar  pitch  in  the  mouth.— Inflammation  of  the 
mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth. — Inflammation  of  the  mouth  and  phauynz. — 
Inflammation  and  suppuration  of  the  tonsils,  with  inability  to  swallow.— 
Burning  in  the  mouth,  extending  down  the  pharynx,  oesophagus  and  stomach ; 
<  from  drinking  cold  water. — Phlegmonous  inflammation  of  the  interior 
of  the  cheek. — ^Aphthae  in  the  mouth. — Frothy  salivation,  with  streaks  of  blood. 
— Foam  at  the  mouth.— Coagulated  blood  coming  from  the  mouth. — Inflam- 
matory swelling  and  suppuration  of  the  tongue. — Suppuration  of  the  gums. — 
Fistula  dentalis  (suppurating)  (upper  incisors).- Weakness  of  the  organs  of 
speech,  and  languid  diction. 

9.  Throat. — Sore  throat,  on  swallowing. — Difficult  deglutition,  with 
strangulation  in  the  throat,  and  nocturnal  regurgitation  of  food. — Impeded 
deglutition,  esp.  in  the  case  of  liquids. — Burning  in  the  throat,  on  swallowing. 
— Inflammation  and  ulceration  of  the  tonsils  and  of  the  throat ;  with  inability 
to  swallow. — Burning  pains  in  the  throat,  <  by  drinking  water. 

ID.  Appetite. — Loss  of  taste. — Taste  of  pitch  in  the  mouth  and  in  the 
throat.— Thirst,  from  dryness  of  the  lips,  with  repugnance  to  all  drinks.— 
Want  of  appetite,  with  disgust  and  repugnance  to  all  sorts  of  food. 

11.  Stomach. — Risings,  with  burning  sensation,  as  if  from  pyrosis, 
aggravated  by  drinking. — Sob-like  risings,  which  seem  to  take  an  inverse 
direction  and  to  return  towards  the  stomach. — ^Vomiting  of  undigested  food. 
— ^Vomiting  of  bilious  and  slimy  substances,  or  of  blood. — Great  sensitiveness 
of  the  precordial  region. — Pressive  fulness,  with  anxiety  and  inquietude  in 
the  stomach. — Smarting  and  burning  pains  in  the  stomach. — Inflammation  of 
the  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pains  in  abdomen,  after  taking  coffee. — Inflammation  of 
the  liver. — Shootings  and  contraction  in  r.  hypochondrium. — Great  sensibility 
of  the  abdomen  to  the  touch. — Burning  pain  in  the  abdomen,  from  the  gullet 
to  the  rectum. — Burning  pain  above  the  navel,  on  coughing,  on  sneezing,  on 
blowing  the  nose,  with  yellowish  spots  on  the  part  affected. — Inflammation  oi 
the  intestines. — Dropsical  swelling  of  the  abdomen. — Incarceration  of  flatu- 
lency under  the  hypochondria. 

i^  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation  and  hard  faeces. — Diarrhcea,  with 
evacuation  of  frothy  matter,  or  of  greenish  mucus,  with  cutting  pains  after  the 
evacuation  and  burning  pains  in  the  rectum. — During  stool,  burning  in  the 
anus  ;  prolapsus  ani. — ^After  stool,  chilliness  and  tenesmus. — Dysenteric 
diarrhoea,  with  nocturnal  evacuation  of  whitish  mucus,  and  of  solid  pieces, 
like  false  membranes,  with  streaks  of  blood. — Sanguineous  evacuations. 


CANTHARIS  387 

14.  Urinary  Organa. — ^Retention  of  urine,  with  cramp-like  pains  in 
the  biadder. — Urgent  and  inefiFectual  efforts  to  make  water,  with  painful 
emission,  drop  by  drop. — Difficult  emission  of  urine,  in  a  weak  and  scat- 
tered stream. — ^Increased  secretion  of  urine. — Urine,  pale  yellow,  or  of  a  deep 
red  oolour. — ^Flow  of  sanguineous  mucus  from  the  bladder. — Emission  of 
blood,  drop  by  drop. — ^Purulent  urine. — Burning  smarting,  on  making  water. 
-Incisive  pains  in  the  front  part  of  the  urethra,  during  the  emission  of  urine, 
and  afterwards. — Sharp,  tearing,  and  incisive  pains,  successive  pullings  and 
polsatioas  in  the  urinary  orgasms. — Burning,  stinging  and  tearing  in  the  kidneys, 
— Pressing  pain  in  the  kidneys,  extending  to  the  bladder ;  along  the  ureters ; 
relieved  by  pressing  upon  the  glans. — Inflammation  and  ulceration  of  the 
kidneys,  of  the  bladder,  and  of  the  urethra. — Exceedingly  painful  sensibility 
of  the  region  of  the  bladder  on  its  being  touched. 

15.  ICale  Sexual  Organs.— Draggings  in  the  spermatic  cord,  on 
making  water. — Inflammation  and  gangrene  of  the  genital  parts. — Painful 
swelling  of  the  testes. — Sexual  desire  greatly  increased,  with  painful,  frequent 
erections  (with  j^norrhcsa),  of  long  continuance,  as  in  priapismus. — Ready 
emissioii,  during  amorous  caresses. — Spermatorrhcsa. — ^Af ter  coition,  burning 
pain  in  the  urethra. 

16.  Female  Seamal  Organs.— Catamenia  premature  and  too  copious, 
with  black  blood  and  pains  during  the  flow. — ^Voiding  of  moles,  of  foetus,  and 
of  placentae. — Inflammation  of  the  ovaries. — Swelling  of  the  cervix  uteri. — 
Corrosive  leucorrhoea,  with  burning  sensation  on  making  water,  and  excite- 
ment of  sexual  desire. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness,  with  painful  rattling  of  viscid 
mncos,  copious,  and  coming  from  the  chest,  and  with  incisive  shootings  in  the 
trachea.— Oppression  of  breathing,  with  sensation  of  constriction  of  the 
pharyox.— Stitches  in  the  chest  during  an  inspiration.  (Inflammation  of  the 
Inngs.)— Inflammation  of  the  larynx. — Sensation  of  excessive  weakness  in  the 
organs  of  respiration,  on  speaking  and  on  breathing  deeply. — ^Voice  feeble, 
timid,  and  trembling. 

18.  Chest. — Respiration  rendered  difficult  and  oppressed  by  constric- 
tion of  the  throat,  and  dryness  of  the  nose. — Suspension  of  respiration  in  going 
ap  a  hill,  with  rattling  in  the  chest  and  nausea. — Shootings  in  the  chest,  and 
in  the  sides.~-Buming  pains  in  the  chest,  from  whence  small  clots  of  blood 
are  at  times  detached. — Palpitation  of  the  heart.  - 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  with  tension 
when  bending  it  over. — Acute  drawing  pains  in  the  back. — ^Tearing  in  the 
back  (after  rising  from  a  seat). — Sensation  of  constriction  in  the  spine. — £m- 
prosthotonos  and  opisthotonos. 

21.  Limbs. — ^Weakness  and  swelling  of  limbs. — Dropsical  swelling  of 
hands  and  feet. — Cold  sweat  of  hands  and  feet. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Acute  tractive  pains  in  the  arms. — ^Want  of  strength 
in  the  hands.>-£czematous  eruption  on  dorsum  of  hand  and  between  Angers, 
itching  and  burning  f eariully,  <  from  cold  water,  >  from  warmth. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Pains  in  the  hips,  with  spasmodic  sufferings  in  the 
orinary  passages.— Acute  tractive,  piercing  pains,  in  the  legs,  from  the  feet  to 
the  hips.— Trembling  of  the  legs. — Darting  pain  from  r.  foot  to  r.  side  of  head 
in  paroxysms. 


388  CAPSICUM 

34.  Generalities. — Burning  pains,  as  from  excoriation,  in  all  the 
cavities  of  the  body. — ^Acute  shootings  towards  the  interior  in  different 
parts. — Drawing,  arthritic  pains  in  the  limbs,  with  afiEection  of  the  urinary 
ducts,  mitigated  by  rubbing. — ^Violent  pains,  with  groans  and  lamentations. — 
Sensation  of  dryness  in  the  joints. — ^Want  of  flexibility  of  the  whole  body. — 
Dejection  and  weakness,  with  excessive  sensibility  in  all  parts  of  the  body, 
trembUng,  and  desire  to  lie  down. — Prostration  of  strength,  proceeding  even 
to  paral3rsis. — Convulsions,  tetanus. — ^The  sufferings  show  themselves  chiefly 
on  the  r.  side,  and  are  mitigated  in  a  recumbent  posture. — ^The  symptoms  are 
renewed  every  seven  days. 

25.  Skin. — Itching  vesicles,  with  burning  pain  on  being  touched. — 
Blisters,  from  burns. — Erysipelatous  inflammations. — Acute  drawing  pains  in 
ulcers,  with  increased  suppuration. 

26.  Sleep. — Great  drowsiness,  esp.  in  the  afternoon,  with  yawnings  and 
stretching.— Sleeplessness  without  apparent  cause. — At  night,  half  sleep,  with 
frequent  waking. 

27.  Fever.— -Pulse  hard,  full  and  rapid.— Fever,  which  manifests  itself 
only  by  cold. — Coljd  and  shivering;  with  cutis  anserina  and  paleness  of  the 
face. — ^Thirst  only  after  the  shivering. — Perspiration ;  cold,  esp.  on  the  hands 
and  feet ;  on  the  genitals. — Sweat,  of  the  smell  of  urine. — Pulsation  through 
the  trembling  limbs. 


Capsicum. 


Capsicum  annuum.    Cayenne  Pepper.    (South  America  and  West 
Indies.)    N.  O,  Solanaceas.    Tincture  of  the  dried  pods. 

CUnioal.— Amaurosis.  Asthma.  Brain,  irritation  of.  Delirium  tremens.  Cough. 
Diarrhoea.  Diphtheria.  Dysentery.  Ear  affections.  Glandular  swellings.  Hctmor- 
rhoids.  Headache.  Heartburn.  Hernia.  Home-sickness.  Intermittents.  Lungs, 
affections  of.  Measles.  Mouth,  ulcers  in.  Neuralgia.  Nose,  affections  of.  Obesity. 
(Esophagus,  stricture  of.  Paralysis.  Pleuro-pneumonia.  Pregnancy,  disorders  of. 
Rectum,  diseases  of  Rheumatic  gout.  Rheumatism.  Sciatica,  Scrofula.  Sea- 
sickness. Stomatitis.  Throat,  sore.  Tongue,  paralysis  of.  Trachea,  tickling  in. 
Urine,  disorders  of    Whooping-cough.    Yellow  fever. 

Charaoteristics. — Capsicum  should  be  studied  in  connection  with 
the  other  great  members  of  the  Solanum  family,  Belladonna,  Stra- 
moniuntf  Hyoscyatnus,  Dulcamara,  Solanum  Carolincnse,  Solanum 
nigrum,  Solanum  tuberosum  (Potato),  and  Lycopersicum  csculentum 
(Tomato).  It  acts  with  great  intensity  on  the  mucous  membranes, 
and  also  on  the  bones :  affections  of  bones  in  general ;  pains  in 
bones  of  face  ;  inflammation  of  petrous  bone.  Capsicum  corresponds 
especially  to  persons  of  light  hair  and  blue  eyes ;  also  to  persons 
of  lax  fibre  and  muscles ;  obesity ;  lazy,  fat,  unclean  persons 
who  dread  the  open  air ;  clumsy  children ;  awkward  persons ; 
haemorrhoidaJ  troubles.  Lack  of  reaction  and  bodily  irritability. 
Symptoms  generally  appear  on  left  side.  As  with  Dulcamara, 
there  is  extreme  sensitiveness  to  cold  and  damp  which  <  most 


CAPSICUM  389 

symptoms.   The  well-known  burning  effects  of  red  pepper  is  a  leading 
indication  for  its  use  :  ''  Burning  pains  "  wherever  occurring  demand 
that  Capsicum  should  have  the  first  consideration,  if  there  are  no  other 
determining  symptoms  in  favour  of  another  remedy.    The  burning  of 
Caps,  is  <  from  cold  water.    Redness  of  the  skin,  and  even  a  scarlet 
eruption  like  Belladonna,    Very  characteristic  is  a  cough  with  fetid 
breath,  or  bad  taste.    Cough  causing  splitting  pain  in  head.    Chill  at 
10.30  a.m.,  banning  between  shoulders  and  running  down  back.    A 
case  of  poisoning  in  a  worker  in  a  capsicum-plaister  factory  brought 
out :  severe  chill  with  shaking ;  and  it  ended  in  an  intense  coryza. 
Caps.  30  brought  speedy  reUef  in  a  case  of  tympanites  following 
laparotomy,  the  concomitant  symptoms  being :  cold  nose  and  ex- 
tremities, and  cyanosis.   Caps,  is  a  notable  fever  remedy.    The  patient 
is  thirsty — but  drinking  causes  shuddering.    Absence  of  thirst  during 
beat    Burning,  pungent  pains,  <  by  application  of  cold  water,  are 
very  marked.    Burning,  pungent  sensation  in  face  <  by  slightest 
draught  of  cold  air ;  burning  in  throat ;  burning  blisters  in  roof  of 
mouth  (diphtheria  or  gangrene) ;  constriction  of  throat,  spasmodic 
closure,  pain  when  not  swallowing;   burning  in  rectum,  tenesmus, 
hemorrhage  ;   burning  on  urination  ;   burning  in  bladder.    Caps,  is 
among  the  remedies  of  the  front  rank  in  stomatitis ;  in  inflammation  of 
the  middle  ear,  with  involvement  of  mastoid  cells  ;  in  the  sore  throat 
of  smokers  and  drinkers,  with  inflammation,  burning,  relaxed  uvula, 
sometimes  dry,  sometimes  with  tough  mucus  diflicult  to  dislodge. 
Local  burning  and  general  chilliness  distinguish    Caps,  in  a  vast 
nnmt)er  of  cases.    Caps,  is  indicated  where  there  is  lack  of  reaction 
in  persons  of  lax  fibre.     The  mental  state  shows  home-sickness. 
"  Home-sickness,  with  red  cheeks  and  sleeplessness  ;  with  hot  feeling 
in  fauces.''      (With  a  few  doses  of  Caps.  I  cured  completely  an 
Australian  girl,  of  florid  complexion,  who  had  come  to  London  to 
study,  and  who  was  quite  incapacitated  by  home-sickness.)    There 
is  awkwardness,  fearfmness,  obstinacy.      Alternating  states  ;  laughs 
and  weeps  by  turns ;  is  now  jocose  and  sings,  but  becomes  angry 
from   slightest   cause.      Delirium  :    it  has  been  given  with  great 
success  in  delirium  tremens,  mostly  in  drachm  doses  of  the  tinc- 
ture, given  in  milk.     >  From  heat  is  the  most  important  modality. 
Paitients  who  cannot  get  to  sleep  without  a  hot  bottle  at  their 
back    Rest  <  some  forms  of  headache  and  >  others.    Motion  =s 
headache  as  if  skull  would  split ;  as  if  bruised ;  asthma ;  chilliness ; 
stiff  joints  to  crack.    Ascending  ^  asthma.     <  By  touch.     Shuns 
open  air ;   dreads  uncovering ;    dreads  air,  especially    a    draught. 
Spirits  become   lower  as  body  becomes  cooler.    Sensation  as  if 
cayenne  pepper  were  sprinkled  on  parts.    Violent  pains  in  various 
places;  now  here  now  there.    Sensation  as  if  parts  would  go  to 
sleep.    I  had  one  patient  on  whom  Caps,  acted  well  in  summer,  but 
not  in  winter.     Equal  parts  of  tincture  of  Caps,  and  glycerine  make 
an  exceUent  liniment  for  external  use   in  many  cases  of  chronic 
rheumatism  and  neuralgia. 

BdBXLoiUL--Antidoted  by :  Calad.,  Camph.,  Cina,  Chi.,  Sul.  ac,  or 
vapour  of  burning  sulphur.  It  antidotes :  Effects  of  Alcohol,  Coffee, 
Opium,  Quinine.    Compatible :  Bell.,  Lye,  Puis.,  Sil.    Compare :  Am., 


390  CAPSICUM 

Bdl.  (headache,  &c.) ;  Bry.  (headache  from  cough) ;  Canth.  (burning 
pains,  throat  symptoms,  dysentery,  urinary  symptoms) ;  Pso.  (lack  of 
reaction  ;  despair  of  recovery  ;  Caps,  m  persons  of  lax  fibre) ;  Lach. 
(thirst  before  chill ;  continues  into  chill ;  drinking  <  ;  also  Klaps)  ; 
Nat.  m.,  Carb.  v.  and  Menyanth.  ^intermittents ;  Nat.  m.  is  the 
*^  chronic  "  of  Caps.) ;  Carb.  an.  and  Nit.  ac.  (inflammation  behind  ears, 
Aur.  and  Nit.  ac.  preferable  in  abscess  ;  Sil.  in  chronic  suppuration)  ; 
Phos.  ac.  (home-sickness ;  Caps,  has  red  face) ;  Ars.,  Alum.,  Carb.  v., 
Lye.  have  burning  pains  >  by  heat.  Merc,  Nit.  ac,  Sul.  have  passage 
of  blood  from  bowels.  Crot.  t.  (after  drinking  urging  to  stool)  ; 
Helleb.  (colic  with  spasm  of  bladder) ;  Plat,  (burning,  pungent  pain 
in  face,  <  slightest  draught  of  air,  warm  or  cold).  Compare  also 
Solanaceas. 

8TMPT0MB. 

I.  Mind.— Tendency  to  take  alarm. — Discontent— Opinionativeness. — 
Strong  disposition  to  take  everything  in  bad  part,  to  fly  into  a  rage,  even  on 
account  of  harmless  jests,  and  to  utter  reproaches. — Capricious  and  exceed- 
ingly changeable  humour. — Dulness  of  all  the  senses. — ^Want  of  reflection  and 
awkwardness. — Nostalgia,  with  redness  of  the  cheeks  and  sleeplessness. — 
— Disposition  to  jest,  and  to  utter  witticisms,  but  gets  angry  at  least  trifle. 

t.  Head.  —Bewilderment  of  the  head. — I  ntoxication,  as  if  from  spirituous 
liquors. — Headache,  as  if  the  cranium  were  going  to  burst,  on  walking,  or 
moving  the  head  or  coughing.— Attack  of  semi-lateral  headache,  pressive  and 
shooting,  with  nausea,  vomiting,  and  loss  of  memory,  aggravated  by  movement 
of  the  eyes. — Shooting,  or  acute,  drawing  pains,  e^.  in  the  sides  of  the  head. 
— Pain  of  pressive  severing  in  the  brain,  as  if  from  fulness. — Pulsative  headache  ; 
(better  in  motion). — Gnawing  itching  in  the  scalp,  with  pain  in  the  roots  of  the 
hair  after  scratching. 

3.  Eyes. — Pressure  in  the  eyes,  as  if  from  a  foreign  body  introduced 
into  them. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  with  redness,  burning  pain,  and  lachry- 
mation. — Eyes  prominent. — Confusion  of  sight,  esp.  in  the  morning,  as  if 
something  were  swimming  on  the  cornea,  mitigated  for  an  instant  by  rubbing. 
— Objects  appear  black  when  brought  before  the  eyes. — Sight  entirely  extinct, 
as  if  from  amaurosis. 

4.  Ears. — ^Acute  drawing  pains  in  the  ears.— Itching  and  pressure  in  the 
bottom  of  the  auditory  tube. — Painful  swelling  on  the  bone  behind  the  ear  ; 
<  by  touch. — ^Tearing  behind  1.  ear. — Diminution  of  hearing  after  previous 
burning  and  stinging  in  the  ear. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis,  esp.  in  bed,  in  the  morning. — Painful  pimples 
under  the  nostrils. — Dry  coryza,  with  tingling  and  tickling  in  the  nostrils. 

6.  Face. — Redness  of  the  face  (without  heat),  often  alternately  with 
paleness. — Many  small  red  spots  on  the  face. — Corroding,  itching  tetter  on  the 
forehead. — Pains  in  the  face,  in  the  bones,  where  they  are  aggravated  by  the 
touch,  or  in  the  nerves  where  they  are  aggravated  during  sleep. — Dull  pressure 
on  the  cheek-bone.— Swelling  of  the  lips. — Ulcerated  eruptions,  and  Assures 
in  the  lips. 

7.  Teeth. — Pains  in  the  teeth,  as  if  they  were  set  on  edge,  or  elongated. 
— PuUings  in  the  teeth,  and  in  the  gums. — Swelling  of  the  gums. 


CAPSICUM  391 

8.  Mouth. — Burning  vesicles  in  the  mouth  and  on  the  tongue.— Viscid 
saliva  in  the  mouth. 

9.  Throat. — Sore  throat  with  painful  deglutition  and  pulling  sensation 
in  the  pharynx. — Inflammation,  with  dark  redness  and  burning  of  the  throat. 
—Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  throat. — Uvula  elongated,  with  sensation  as  if 
it  were  pressing  on  something  hard. 

10.  Appetite. — Unnaturally  increased  appetite,  alternated  with  aversion 
to  food. — ^Aqueous  and  insipid  taste. — Sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  and  also  a  taste 
of  broth. — ^Want  of  appetite. — Desire  for  coffee,  with  inclination  to  vomit 
before  or  after  taking  it. — Pyrosis. — ^Nausea,  felt  generally  in  the  epigastrium, 
with  pressure  on  the  part. 

11.  Stomach. — Pain  in  the  stomach,  which  is  inflated. — Sensation  of 
cdd  in  the  stomach. — Burning  pain  in  the  stomach,  and  in  the  epigastrium, 
esp.  just  after  a  meal. — Shootings  in  the  epigastrium,  on  breathing  rapidly  and 
deeply,  on  speaking,  and  on  the  part  being  touched. 

n.  Abdomen. — Abdomen  inflated,  almost  to  bursting,  with  pressive 
tension,  and  suspension  of  respiration. — Painless  rumbling  in  the  abdomen. — 
Colic  about  umbilicus,  with  mucous  stools. — Draggings  and  movements  in  the 
abdomen- — Strong  pulsations  in  the  abdomen. — Flatulent  colic. — Protrusion, 
flatulent  hernia  in  the  inguinal  ring. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — ^Tenesmus — Small  dysenteric  evacuations,  with 
d^harge  of  slimy  and  sanguineous  matter,  preceded  by  flatulent  colic. — 
Nocturnal  diarrhoea,  with  burning  pains  in  the  anus. — Blind  haemorrhoids, 
with  pain  during  evacuation. — Hsemorrhoidal  tumours,  with  burning  (bleed- 
ing). 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Tenesmus  of  the  bladder.— Frequent,  urgent 
and  almost  useless  efforts  to  make  water. — Burning  pains  on  making  water. — 
Cramp-like  and  incisive  contractions  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder. — Incisive  and 
shooting  pains  in  the  urethra,  when  not  urinating. — Purulent  running  from 
the  urethra,  as  in  gonorrhoea. — Flow  of  blood  from  the  urethra,  which  is  pain- 
ful to  the  touch. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Impotence  and  coldness  of  the  genital 
parts.— Purulent  discharge  from  the  urethra. — Dwindling  of  the  testes. — 
Violent  erections  in  the  morning. — ^Trembling  of  the  whole  body,  during 
amorous  caresses. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Disordered  menstruation,  with  a  pushing 
or  sticking  sensation  in  1.  ovarian  region. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness. — Cough,  more  violent  in  the 
evening  and  at  night,  with  pains  in  other  parts  of  the  body,  esp.  in  the  head 
and  in  the  bladder,  as  if  they  were  going  to  burst,  or  with  pressure  in  the 
throat  and  ears,  as  if  an  abscess  were  about  to  open  in  them. — Cough,  after 
taking  coffee.— Cough,  with  fetid  breath,  and  disagreeable  taste  in  the 
mouth. 

18.  Chest. — ^Want  to  breathe  deeply. — Deep  breathing,  almost  like  a 
si^.— Oppressed  respiration,  sometimes  as  if  proceeding  from  the  stomach, 
or  from  fulness  of  the  chest. — Asthma,  with  redness  of  the  face,  eructation 
and  sensation  as  if  the  chest  were  extended. — Constrictive  pain  in  the  chest. 
—Shootings  in  the  chest  on  breathing. — Pulsative  pain  in  the  chest,  which 
suspends  respiration,  and  which  is  increased  by  movement 


392  CARBO  ANIMALIS 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  of  the  neck. — ^Acute  drawing  pains  n 
the  back. 

21.  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pain  in  limbs. — ^Tension  in  the  knees  and  stiff- 
ness in  the  calves  of  the  legs  on  walking. — Stiffness  of  the  arms  and  legs,  with 
tingling  as  when  they  are  asleep. — Shooting-tearing  from  hip  to  knee  and  foot, 
esp.  when  coughing. — Caries  of  r.  hip;  1.  leg  atrophied,  violent  pains  in 
atrophied  leg. — Cold  sweat  on  upper  part  of  legs. 

24.  Generalities. — ^Aching  pains. — Drawing  pains  in  the  limbs  excited 
by  movement. — Pain,  as  from  dislocation,  and  stiffness  in  the  joints,  with 
cracking,  esp.  at  the  beginning  of  a  walk. — Phlegmatic  temperament,  and 
relaxed  fibres. — Cramps  in  the  body,  with  stiffness  in  the  arms  and  legs,  with 
numbness  and  sensation  of  tingling. — Repugnance  to  movement. — ^The  symp- 
toms show  themselves  chiefly  in  the  evening  and  at  night,  and  are  aggravated 
by  the  open  air,  by  contact,  and  by  cold,  as  well  as  on  beginning  to  move, 
and  after  drinking  or  eating. — Great  sensibility  to  fresh  air,  and  to  a  current 
of  air. — Symptoms  generally  appear  on  1.  side ;  suited  for  light-haired  people  ; 
tendency  to  get  fat ;  laxness  of  the  muscles  ;  bloatedness  of  the  skin. — ^Affec- 
tions of  the  bones  in  general ;  pains  in  bones  of  the  face. 

26.  Sleep. — Sleeplessness,  without  apparent  cause. — Sleeplessness  after 
midnight. — Sensation  as  if  falling  from  a  height  during  sleep. — Sleep  full  of 
dreams. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse  irregular,  and  often  intermitting. — Febrile  shivering 
and  cold  over  the  whole  body,  with  ill-humour  increasing  with  the  cold,  or 
else  with  anxiety,  dizziness  and  dulness  of  the  head. — Shivering,  commencing 
at  the  back ;  between  shoulders. — Cold  and  shivering  whenever  drink  is 
taken. — Fever  with  predominance  of  cold,  and  with  thirst,  burning  heat,  and 
affections  of  the  mucous  membranes. — Shiverings,  with  much  thirst,  after- 
wards heat,  (without  or)  with  thirst  and  perspiration. — On  the  upper  part  of 
the  legs  cold  perspiration. 


Garbo  Animalis. 

Animal  Charcoal.    Made  from  charred  ox-hide.    Contains  Calc.  phos. 
C  (impure).    Trituration. 

OlinioaL  Acne  rosacea.  Aneurism.  Appetite^  disordered.  Breast,  cancer  of. 
Bubo.  Cancer.  Cataract.  Constipation.  Coccygodynia.  Cough.  Empyema. 
Eructations,  Face,  eruption  on.  Gangrene.  Glandular  indurations.  Hcemorrhaids, 
Headache.  Home-sickness.  Hypertrophy.  Lactation,  effects  of.  Legs,  pains  in, 
Leucorrhoea.  Lumbago.  Nose,  affections  of.  Otorrhcesa.  Pancreas,  indurated. 
Perspiration,  altered.  Pleurisy.  Polypus.  Scrofula.  Strabismus.  Syphilis. 
Tongue,  affections  of.  Trachea,  affections  of.  Ulceration.  Uterus,  cancer  of. 
Vision,  disorders  of. 

Charaoteristios. — Carb.  an,  is  suited  to  old  persons,  greatly 
debilitated,  especially  when  there  is  venous  plethora,  and  blueness 
of  skin.  Complaints  occurring  in  scrofulous  or  venous  constitu- 
tions. Ulceration,  gangrene,  and  decomposition  are  marked,  and  may 
be  looked  upon  as  the  counterpart  of  the  antiseptic  properties  of  the 


CARBO  ANIMALIS  393 

crude  substance.    Copper-coloured  eruptions  show  the  appropriate- 
ness of  the  drug  to  many  cases  of  constitutional  s)rphilis.    Glands  of 
stony  hardness.    Buboes.    It  is  often  indicated  in  the  last  stage  of 
pneumonias,  bronchitis,  phthisis.      Right  chest  is    most   affected. 
Cancer  of  breast  with  burning,  drawing  pains  through  breast.    Cancer 
of  uterus,  burning  pains  down  thigh.    MFections  from  loss  of  animal 
fluids,  especially  niursing  women.    Weakness  of  nursing  women  ;  can 
hardly  walk  across  the  room.    "  Gone "  feeUng  from  loss  of  fluids. 
Too  weak  to  eat.    Weeps  when  she  eats.    Nausea  at  night.    Hunger 
in  early  morning.    The  goneness  of  Carb,  a.  is  not  >  by  eating 
(Carb,  V,  >  eating).    Constipation  where  patient  thinks  bowels  will 
be  moved  but  only  wind  passes.    There  is  a  smothering  feeling  on 
closing  eyes.    Aversion  to  dark.    A  peculiar  symptom  is  :  A  feeling 
of  looseness— of  eyes  in  sockets  ;  of  brain  on  motion  or  coughing. 
Far-sighted  {Carb.  v.  is  near-sighted).   Objects  seem  farther  apart  and 
blister.    Aversion  to  cold  {Carb.  v.  to  heat).    There  are  many  sensa- 
tions of  coldness  :  in  chest ;  about  stomach.  Discharges  are  ichorous  ; 
but  the  discharge  from  piles  is  inodorous.    Carb.  an.  3X  trit.  has  been 
used  for  insufiOation  in  aural  polypi.    The  leucorrhoea  stains  Unen 
yellow.    Sweat  stains  yellow.    Expectoration  is  greenish,  purulent, 
offensive  {Carb.  v.  yellow,  more  fetid).     Gnawing  pains  in  tibiae 
(during  the  night),  such  as  usually  followed  cold  feet.     A.  W.  K. 
Chondhury  reports  a  case  of  cough  of  two  years'  duration,  in  an 
unhealthy  boy  of  twelve,  cured  by  Carb.  a.    The  symptoms  were  : 
*^  Cough  evening  and  morning,  or  after  lying  down^  especially  at  nighty 
thick  or  frothy  whitish  or  yellowish  sputa,  sweetish  when  thick ;  < 
lying  on  r.  side ;  <  from  exposure  to  air,  to  which  he  is  very  sensi- 
tive.   Great  tendency  to  catch  cold."     The  pains  in  the  coccyx 
are  peculiar ;  a  dragging,  bruised  pain,  when  touched  it  becomes 
burning.    It  has  cured  many  cases  of  injured  coccyx  and  of  neu- 
ralgia of  the  bone.    The  lumbago  of  Carb.  an,  occurs  when  walking, 
standing,  and  Wing  ;  feels  as  if  the  back  were  broken.    The  mental 
state  is  one  of  low  spirits,  sadness ;  weeps  when  she  eats ;  easily 
frightened,  afraid  in  the  dark ;    home-sick ;    wants    to  be  alone. 
Fear  of  the  dark  and  <  on  closing  eyes  is  very  marked.    Hearing 
is  confused  ;   cannot  teU  the  direction  from  which  sounds  come. 
There  is  an  ichorous  otorrhoea ;  and  swelling  of  the  periosteum 
over  the  mastoid  bone  is  very  characteristic.     Tip  of  nose  red ;  or 
blue.     Disagreeable  smoothness  of  the  teeth.     There  is  a  hoarse, 
sufiFocating  cough  producing  a  shaking  of  the  brain  as  if  it  were 
loose.     Green,  purulent,  horribly  offensive  expectoration.    Axillary 
^ands  inflamed  ;  buboes  in  groins.    Pressure  with  hand  >  cold- 
ness of  stomach.    Symptoms  are  <  in  cold  air  ;    >  in  warm  room. 
<  From  sprains  ;   from  touch.      <  After  shaving.      Rest  <   head 
symptoms.     <  Lying  on  r.  side  (cough).    After  menses,  throbbing 
headache,  <  in  open  air.    Weakness  <  during  menses. 

Balatioiis. — Compare :  Calc.  phos.  (nearest  analogue  ;  Carb.  an. 
contains  Calc.  ph.) ;  in  indurations,  suppurations,  &c.,  Bad.,  Bro. ;  loss 
of  fluids,  Chi. ;  Graph. ;  nostrils  adhere  to  septum,  Pho. ;  gone  feeling, 
loss  of  fluids,  induration  of  cervix,  pressmre  on  back,  groins,  and 
thi^s  during  menses,  Sep.  (Sep.  has  not  the  venosity,  the  copper- 


394  CARBO   ANIMALIS 

coloured  face,  flatulent  gastric  disturbances,  or  oflFensive  ichoroas 
discharges,  or  throbbing  headache  after  menses  of  Carb.  an. ;  Carb. 
V.  has  not  the  indurations  of  Carb.  an.  or  Sep.)  ;  Coccul.  has  the  same 
weakness  and  prostration  as  Carbo  an.,  but  in  the  case  of  the  latter 
the  weakness  is  in  consequence  of  the  loss  of  fluid,  whilst  with  Coccul. 
it  is  part  of  the  general  eflfect  of  the  remedy.  Puis. ;  Sil. ;  in  vertigo 
with  epistaxis,  Sul. ;  aversion  to  darkness.  Am.  m..  Bar.  c,  Calc,  Stro., 
Stram. ;  hunger  in  early  morning,  Ant.  c,  Asar.,  Calc,  Sabad. ;  swell- 
ing behind  ear.  Caps.,  Aur.  ;  burning  pains,  Caps.  ;  weakness  of 
nursing  women,  Oleand.  Antidoted  by :  Ars.,  Camph.,  Nux,  Vinegar. 
Antidote  to :  Effects  of  Quinine.    Complementary :  Calc.  phos. 

Cansatioil.— Loss  of  fluids.  Lifting.  Strain.  Eating.  Eating 
spoiled  fish.    Eating  decayed  vegetables.    Quinine. 

STMPTOMB. 

1.  Mind. — Nostalgia  and  mournful  feeling  of  isolation,  with  tears. — 
Weeps  during  a  meal. — Pear  and  apprehension,  esp.  in  the  evening. — 
Discouragement  and  despair. — Disposition  to  be  frightened. — Fright  in  the 
dark. — ^Alternate  feeling  of  gaiety  and  gloom,  or  of  irascibility  and  ill- 
humoured  taciturnity. — Confusion  of  ideas  and  dulness,  esp.  in  the  morning. 

2.  Head. — Vertigo,  esp.  in  the  evening  or  in  the  morning,  and  some* 
times  with  nausea  in  the  act  of  rising,  after  remaining  long  in  a  recumbent 
posture,  or  with  obscuration  of  the  eyes,  on  moving  the  head. — Headache  in 
the  morning,  as  after  a  debauch. — Headache  at  vertex  as  if  skull  torn  open. — 
Headache  in  the  open  air,  and  aggravated  by  damp  weather. — Heaviness,  esp. 
in  the  occiput,  with  bewilderment. — Pressive  headache,  even  after  a  meal, 
forces  the  closing  of  the  eyelids. — Congestion  and  internal  heat  of  the  head. — 
Sensation  of  wavering  of  the  brain,  at  every  movement. — Sensation  of  torpor 
in  the  head.— Acute,  drawing  pains  in  the  teguments  of  the  right  side  of  the 
head. — ^Tension  of  the  skin  of  the  forehead,  and  of  the  crown  of  the  head. — 
Sensibility  of  the  scalp  to  the  pressure  of  the  hat. — Scabs  and  eruption  on  the 
head. 

3.  Eyes. — Sensation  as  if  the  ball  of  the  eye  were  detached  from  the 
socket,  with  weakness  of  sight. — Presbyopia  with  dilatation  of  the  pupils. — A 
net  seems  to  swim  before  the  eyes. 

4.  Ears. — Running  from  the  ears. — Discharge  of  pus  from  the  ears. — 
Confusion  of  hearing;  sounds  reach  the  ears  indistinctly,  does  not  know 
from  what  direction  they  come. — Buzzing  in  the  ears.— Swelling  of  the 
periosteum  behind  the  ear. — Swelling  of  the  parotids. 

5.  Nose. — End  of  the  nose  red  and  cracked,  with  burning  pain. — Nose 
swollen,  with  scabby  pimples  (as  at  the  commencement  of  a  cancer  ?). — 
Desquamation  of  the  skin  of  the  nose. — Painful  sensibility  of  the  bones  of  the 
nose. — Epistaxis,  preceded  by  vertigo,  or  pressive  headache. — Stoppage  of 
the  nose. — Dry  coryza. — Fluent  coryza,  with  loss  of  smell,  sneezing  and 
frequent  yawning. 

6.  Face. — Spots  in  the  face,  which  are  smooth,  palpable  to  the  touch, 
and  rose-coloured. — Shootings  in  the  cheek-bones,  in  the  teeth  and  jaws. — 
Painless  copper-coloured  eruption  in  the  face. — £r3rsipelas  in  the  face. — 


CARBO  ANIMALIS  395 

Svelfing  of  the  month  and  of  the  lips,  with  burning  pain. — Heat  of  the  face 
and  head  in  the  afternoon. — Blisters  on  the  lips. — Lips  cracked  and  bleeding. 

7.  Teeth. — Pulling  odontalgia  on  eating  bread,  or  with  dull  pulsation 
after  drinking  anything  cold. — Excessive  looseness  of  the  teeth. — ^Tractive 
pains  in  the  gums. — Red  and  painful  swelling  and  bleeding  of  the  gums. — 
Purulent  vesicles  in  the  gums. 

8.  Mouth. — Fetid  smell  from  the  mouth. — Burning  vesicles  in  the 
mooth  and  on  the  tongue. — Dryness  of  the  tongue  and  of  the  palate. 

9.  Throat. — Sore  throat,  as  from  excoriation,  with  scraping  and  shoot- 
ing from  the  throat  to  the  stomach. — ^Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  throat, 
with  coughing  and  rattling. 

10.  Appetite. — Bitterness  in  the  mouth,  esp.  in  the  morning. — 
Add  and  mucous  taste. — Repugnance  to  fat  and  tobacco  smoke,  which  cause 
nausea. — Great  weakness  of  digestion,  to  such  an  extent  that  almost  all  food 
occasions  su£Fering. 

XI.  Stomach. — Risings  with  taste  of  food,  or  else  acid. — Empty  risings 
witi)  pain. — Pyrosis,  with  scraping  in  the  throat. — Hiccough  after  a  meal. — 
Considerable  inflation  after  a  meal. — Flow  of  sour  water  from  the  mouth. 
—Nausea,  also  at  night. — Faint,  gone  feeling  ;  also  from  suckling  child,  not 
>  by  eating. — ^Water-brash. — Pressure  at  the  stomach,  as  if  from  a  weight, 
when  fasting,  and  in  the  evening,  after  lying  down. — Cramp-like  or  con- 
tractive pains  in  the  stomach. — Burning  pain  in  the  stomach. — Squeezing  in 
the  stomach,  as  if  by  daws. — Noisy  grumbling  in  the  stomach. 

It.  At>doinen. — Pain  in  the  liver,  as  if  from  excoriation,  when  the 
region  is  touched. — Pressure  and  cuttings  in  the  hepatic  region. — ^Abdomen 
inflated  and  extended.— Constriction  and  squeezing,  as  if  by  claws,  in  the 
abdomen. — Cuttings  and  shootings  in  the  groins. — Inguinal  hernia. — Loud 
rumbling  in  the  abdomen. — ^Incarceration  of  flatus. — Fetid  flatulency. 

i^  Stool  and  Anus. — Ineffectual  efforts  to  evacuate;  discharge  of 
wind  only. — During  stool,  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  with  inflation  of  the 
abdomen. — Faeces  hard  and  knotty. — Frequent  evacuations  during  the  day. — 
Before  the  evacuation,  traction  from  the  anus  to  the  vulva. — Sacral  pains 
daring  the  evacuation. — Burning  haemorrhoidal  tumours  in  the  anus. — Burn- 
ing pains  and  shooting  in  the  anus,  and  in  the  rectum. — Excoriation  and 
oozing  (inodorous)  at  the  anus. — Discharge  of  tenia. — ^Viscid  oozing  at  the 
perinasum. — ^Tendency  to  galling  at  the  anus  from  riding  on  horseback. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urgent  desire  to  make  water,  with  abundant 
emission. — Emission  of  urine  at  night. — Involuntary  emission  of  urine. — Fetid 
urine.— Burning  urine. — Burning  soreness  in  the  urethra  when  urinating. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — ^Absence  of  sexual  desire. — Frequent 
pollotions,  followed  by  weakness  and  anxious  inquietude. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Premature  catamenia. — Leucorrhoea 
burning,  smarting,  or  which  imparts  a  yellow  tinge  to  the  linen. — Serous  and 
fetid  lochia. — Painful  nodosities  and  indurations  in  the  mammae. — Erysipe- 
latous inflammation  of  the  breasts. — Nausea  of  pregnant  females,  coming  on 
principally  at  night ;  faint  and  empty  sensation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  is 
produced  by  nursing. — Menses  are  followed  by  great  exhaustion. — Uterine 
haemorrhages  where  there  is  much  a£Eection  of  the  glands. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Oppression  of  the  chest,  esp.  in  the  evening 


396  CARBO  ANIMALIS 

and  at  night. — ^Aphonia  at  night — Matutinal  hoarseness. — Hoarse  cough,  with 
pain  as  of  excoriation  in  the  throat ;  in  the  morning,  after  rising. — Dry  cough 
at  night. — Suffocating  cough,  esp.  in  the  evening,  after  having  slept. — 
Matutinal  cough  with  expectoration,  excited  by  a  sensation  of  dryness  in  the 
throat. — Cough,  with  purulent  expectoration,  and  shootings  in  the  r.  side  of 
the  chest — Cough,  with  discharge  of  greenish  pus  (suppuration  of  the  lungs). 
— Cough  <  l3ang  on  r.  side. 

i8.  Chest. — Panting  respiration. — Rattling  in  the  throat,  in  bed  in  the 
evening. — Oppressed  respiration,  esp.  in  the  morning  and  after  a  meaL — 
Suffocating  constriction  of  the  chest,  esp.  in  the  morning,  in  bed.^-Sharp 
burning  stitches. — Shootings  in  the  chest,  as  from  an  abscess,  esp.  on  breath- 
ing.— Pleurisy  assuming  a  typhoid  character,  sickly  bluish  colour  of  skin, 
expectoration  puriform,  often  putrid  in  character. — Far  gone  pleurisy. — In 
pleurisy  where  everything  is  cured  but  the  stitch,  and  that  remains.— Green  pus 
from  chest. — R.  side  most  afiFected,  stitches  in  r.  side. — Sensation  of  cold  in 
the  chest. 

IQ.  Heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  in  the  morning,  in  the  evening, 
and  on  singing  in  a  public  place. — (Atheroma  and  aneurism.) 

ao.  Neck  and  Back.-— Painful  swelling  and  induration  of  the  glands 
of  the  neck,  and  of  the  parotid  glands,  with  shooting  pain. — ^Tetters  under 
the  arm-pit. — Moisture  in  the  arm-pit. — Induration  of  the  axillary  glands. — 
Nocturnal  pains  in  the  back. — Pressure  and  shooting  in  the  loins,  esp.  on 
breathing  deeply. — Burning  pain  in  the  sacrum. — Contusive  pain,  with  strain- 
ing in  the  coccyx,  or  aching  pain  which  increases  towards  evening,  so  violent 
as  to  force  the  patient  to  curve  his  body ;  with  pain  as  of  an  ulcer  when  the 
part  is  pressed. — Burning  in  the  coccyx,  when  it  is  touched. — Burning  pain  in 
the  back. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Aching  in  the  bones,  digging  pains  in  the  arms. — 
Pressure  on  the  shoulders. — Pain  as  of  dislocation  in  the  wrist — ^Torpor  and 
numbness  of  the  hands  and  of  the  fingers. — Painful  tension  and  arthritic 
stifiFness  of  the  joints  of  the  fingers. — Shootings  in  the  fingers. 

23.  Lower  Limbs.— Shooting  pain  in  the  (1.)  hip  when  seated  (the  pain 
causes  limping).— Tension  and  contraction  in  the  groins,  which  do  not  permit 
the  legs  to  be  extended. — Tension  in  the  hams  and  the  instep,  with  con- 
traction of  the  parts. — Drawing  and  sensation  of  contraction  under  the  knee 
— Pain  as  from  excoriation  in  the  knees. — Cramps  in  the  calves  of  the  legs 
the  legs  and  the  toes. — PuUings  and  shootings  in  the  legs. — Loss  of  strength 
in  the  joints  of  the  feet,  which  give  way  readily  when  walking. — Pain  as  of 
dislocation  when  walking  or  moving  the  limbs. — Coldness  of  the  feet. — In- 
flammatory swelling  of  the  feet  and  of  the  toes,  as  if  they  had  been  frozen 
with  heat  and  burning. — Burning  pain  in  the  toes. 

24.  Generalities. — Pressive  pains  in  the  joints,  and  the  muscles  of  the 
limbs. — Burning  pains. — Nocturnal  pains  in  the  joints. — Pain  as  from  a 
bruise,  want  of  strength,  and  cracking  in  the  joints,  which  yield  easily. — 
Arthritic  stifiFness  and  gouty  nodosities  in  the  joints. — ^Tension  in  some  limbs, 
as  if  from  contraction  of  the  tendons. — Spasmodic  contraction  of  several  parts. 
— ^Tendency  to  strain  the  loins. — Numbness  of  all  the  limbs.— Torpor  of  all 
the  members,  esp.  of  the  head. — Great  fatigue  and  weakness,  produced  esp. 
by  walking,  with  easily  produced  perspiration,  chiefly  on  eating  and  on  walk- 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS  397 

tng  in  the  open  air. — Excessive  sensibility  to  the  open  ak,  and  especially  to 
the  cold  air  of  winter. — Ebullition  of  the  blood,  and  tendency  to  become 
easily  overheated. 

25.  Skin. — Itching  over  the  skin  of  the  whole  body,  esp.  in  the  evening 
in  bed. — Erysipelatous  inflammations. — Chilblains. — Hard  and  painful  swell- 
ing of  the  glands. — Swelling  of  the  external  parts,  with  burning  pain. 

s6.  Sleep. — Sleep  deferred,  and  nocturnal  sleeplessness,  caused  by 
inquietude,  anguish,  ebullition  of  the  blood,  and  fear  of  being  stifled. — 
Frightful  visions  before  going  to  sleep. — Sleep,  with  unquiet  dreams,  tears, 
talking  and  hollow  groans. 

47.  Fever. — Pulse  accelerated,  esp.  in  the  evening. — Chill,  esp.  in  the 
afternoon,  in  the  evening,  and  after  eating. — Shiverings,  esp.  in  the  evening, 
in  bed,  with  perspiration  during  sleep. — Excessive  cold  in  the  feet  and  in  the 
hands  in  the  evening. — Nocturnal  heat. — Easily  produced  perspiration  during 
the  day,  esp.  at  a  meal,  or  when  walking. — Debilitating,  and  fetid  sweat,  esp. 
at  night  and  in  the  morning,  principally  on  the  thighs. — Sweat,  which  stains 
the  linen  a  yellow  colour. 


Garbo  Yegetabilis. 

Vegetable  Charcoal.    C  (impure).    Trituration. 

.-^Acidity.  Acne  Angina  Pectoris.  Aortitis.  Aphonia.  Asthenopia. 
Asthma.  Breasts,  erysipelas  of.  Bronchitis.  Bums.  Carbuncle,  Catarrh.  Chil- 
bUtts.  Cholera.  Constipation.  Cough.  Deafness.  Debility.  Diarrhoea.  Dis- 
tension.  Dysentery.  Dyspepsia.  Emphysema.  Erysipelas.  Eructations.  Feet, 
cold.  Flatulence.  Gangrene.  Hasmorrhages.  Hasmorrhoids.  Hair,  falling  out. 
Headache.  Hearty  diseases  of.  Influenza.  Intermittents.  Intertrigo.  Irritation. 
LarynfiUs.  LungSj  congested.  Measles.  Mumps.  Nose,  bleeding  of.  (Esophagitis. 
Ordutis.  Otorrhoea.  Pregnancy,  disorders  of.  Purpura.  Scabies.  Scurvy. 
Shiverings.  Sleep,  disorders  of.  Starting.  Stomach,  disordered.  Stomatitis. 
Trachea,  dryness  of.    Tympanites.    Typhus.    Ulcers.    Yellow  fever. 

Chamcteristios. — The  deodorant  and  disinfectant  properties  of 
charcoal  in  bulk  had  already  been  discovered  when  Hahnemann  was 
at  work  on  his  Materia  Medica.  Provings  with  the  crude  and  the 
potentised  substances  showed  that  the  latter  were  much  more  power- 
ful in  their  effect  on  the  animal  organism.  These  brought  out  the 
fact  that  there  is  an  exact  correspondence  between  the  effect  of  crude 
charcoal  and  potentised  Carbo  veg.  Both  are  antiseptic  and  deodorant. 
The  signs  and  symptoms  of  decay  and  putrefaction  are  the  leading 
indications  for  its  medicinal  use :  Decomposition  of  food  in  the 
stomach  ;  putrid  diseases  and  ulcerations ;  symptoms  of  imperfect 
oxygcnisation  of  the  blood.  Carbo  veg.  antidotes  the  effects  of  putrid 
meats  or  fish,  rancid  fats,  salt  or  salt  meats,  and  also  the  pathogenetic 
action  of  Cinchona,  Lachesisy  and  Mercurius.  It  is  suited  to  conditions 
where  there  is  lack  of  reaction  (like  Opium)  ;  to  low  states  of  the  vital 
powers,  where  the  venous  system  is  engorged  ;  debility  of  greater 
intensity  than  Carbo  an. ;  to  children  after  exhausting  diseases ;  to 


398  CARBO  VEGETABILIS 

old  people.  Leading  symptoms  are :  Numbness  of  limbs.  Burning 
pains  (as  also  Carb.  an. — ^both  the  products  of  a  burning  process). 
Great  debility  as  soon  as  he  makes  the  least  effort  Guernsey 
considers  Carb,  v,  especially  suited  to  cachectic  individuals  whose 
vital  powers  have  become  weakened.  In  cases  where  disease  seems 
to  have  been  engrafted  on  the  system  by  reason  of  the  depressing 
influence  of  some  prior  derangement.  "Thus,  for  instance,  the 
patient  tells  us  that  asthma  has  troubled  him  ever  since  he  had 
whooping-cough  in  childhood;  he  has  dyspepsia  ever  since  a 
drunken  debauch  which  occurred  some  years  ago ;  he  has  never 
been  well  since  the  time  he  strained  himself  so  badly;  the  strain 
itself  does  not  now  seem  to  be  the  matter,  but  his  present  ailments 
have  all  appeared  since  it  happened ;  he  sustained  an  injury  some 
years  ago,  no  traces  of  which  are  now  apparent,  and  yet  he  dates  his 
present  complaints  from  the  time  of  the  occurrence  of  that  accident ; 
or,  again,  he  was  injured  by  exposure  to  damp,  hot  air,  and  his 

J)resent  ailments  result  from  it."    Another  form  of  debiUty  is  that 
ollowing  childbirth,  causing  falUng  out  of  hair. 

Among  other  effects  of  Carbo  v.  are  :  Aversion  to  darkness. 
Fear  of  ghosts.  Excessive  accumulation  of  gas  in  stomach  and 
intestines.  '*  Stomach  feels  full  and  tense  from  flatulence."  "  Great 
pain  in  stomach  on  account  of  flatulence,  <  especially  on  lying  down.** 
Great  desire  for  air ;  must  be  fanned ;  wants  to  be  fanned  hard. 
<  From  warmth  :  on  the  other  hand  it  has  cough  <  entering  cold  air 
from  a  warm  room.  <  From  brandy.  Coldness  is  characteristic : 
cold  breath  (as  in  cholera) ;  cold  knees ;  cold,  but  wants  to  be  fanned. 
The  mental  state  of  Carb.  v.  is  one  of  torpor  and  indolence, 
which  distinguishes  it  from  Ars.  in  many  cases  ;  slow  thinking  ;  <  in 
morning  on  waking.  Indifference.  There  is  also  peevishness ;  easily 
angered.  Vertigo  from  stomach,  with  fainting,  especially  at  meals. 
Lividity  is  a  common  indication  ;  mottled  sldn  round  ulcers  ;  indolent 
gangrene ;  varicose  veins  of  arms,  legs,  vulva.  Hippocratic  coun- 
tenance, cold  breath.  Collapse  ;  with  cold  knees.  Dull  headache  in 
occiput  with  confusion  of  mind ;  proceeding  from  occiput  to  fore- 
head ;  dull,  heavy  aching  over  eyes ;  in  warm  room ;  buzzing  in 
ears ;  very  sensitive  to  pressure  of  hat.  The  congestive  symptoms 
of  Carb.  v.  are  those  of  poisoning  by  carbonic  acid ;  pulse  thready ; 
face  pale,  covered  with  cold  sweat ;  desire  to  be  fanned ;  anxiety 
without  restlessness ;  dyspnoea.  Haemorrhages  are  frequent ;  epistaxis ; 
haemorrhage  from  throat  in  dysentery ;  from  bowels ;  menorrhagia 
and  metrorrhagia,  with  burning  pains  across  sacrum  and  spine ; 
haemorrhage  from  the  lungs ;  dyspnoea  from  chronic  aortitis.  It 
corresponds  to  fever  of  many  types :  typhoid,  intermittent,  yellow 
fever,  hectic,  and  cholera.  In  intermittents  of  long  standing  where 
quinine  has  been  abused ;  thirst  only  during  chill ;  feet  ice-cold  up 
to  knees ;  heat  in  burning  flushes ;  sweat  sour  or  offensive ;  weak, 
mind  befogged.  A.  H.  Birdsall  has  recorded  a  typical  case  of 
Carb.  V.  intermittent.  A  man,  36,  had  had  fever  eight  months, 
partially  suppressed  by  Arsenic  and  Quinine.  Type,  tertian.  Head- 
ache for  one  or  two  hours  before  chill.  ChiU  always  from  9  to 
10  a.m.,  beginning  in  feet  and  hands,  spreading  over  body;  nails 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS  399 

very  blue.    Thirst  with  chill.    Cold  stage  lasts  two  to  three  hours, 

followed  immediately  by  hot  stage ;  much  heat  in  head  and  face, 

which  is  flushed  red  ;   thirstlcssness.     Sweating  stage  short ;  sweat 

sour.      Apyrexia :    sweats   easily,   especially   from   least   warmth ; 

awakens    in    morning    always    with    slight    sour-smelling    sweat. 

Weak;    dispirited;    flatulent.     A   single   dose  of   Carb.  v.   cured. 

There  were  only  three  more  attacks,  each  of  diminished  intensity. 

There  is  catarrh  from  warm,  moist  atmosphere.     The  cough  of 

Carb,  V,  is  <  on  entering  cold  air  from  a  warm  room.    Hoarseness 

from  damp  air  <  morning  or  evening.    Cough  caused  by  a  sensation 

as  if  sulphur  fumes  were  in  larynx.    There  is  leucorrhcea,  greenish 

yellow,  <  in  morning.    The  leucorrhoea  excoriates.    Many  symptoms 

occur  during  menses :    headache ;    itching,  burning    soreness   and 

smarting  at  vulva  and  anus ;   ha&morrhoids.     A  carbon  ointment, 

made  by  carbonising  a  wine  cork  by  plunging  it  into  a  clear  fire 

and  then,  in  its  still  Rowing  state,  into  vasehne  and  mixing  thoroughly, 

is  regarded  as  a  sovereign  remedy  in  anal  irritation  and  hasmorroidal 

troubles.    The  menstrual  discharge  is  corrosive  and  has  a  strong 

pungent  odour.     Premature  and  profuse.     Preceded  and  followed 

by  leucorrhoea.    Perinaeum  moist,  raw,  oozing.    Carbo  v,  has  weak 

digestion  with  enormous  production  of  flatulence,  >  by  eructations. 

Flatulence  accompanies  many  other  complaints,  as  asthma  and  heart 

affections.     Heaviness,  full  feeling  and  burning.    Aversion  to  fat, 

to  meat ;  to  milk,  which  causes  flatulence.    Desire  for  coffee  (which 

does  not  reheve) ;  for  acids ;  for  sweet  and  salt  things.    Effects  of 

alcohol ;  of  fish,  especially  if  tainted  ;  ice- water  ;  vegetables ;  salt 

or  salt  meats.    Disorder  from  high  living,  and  especially  toifer-eating. 

Burning  itching  on  skin ;    frozen  limbs  ;    chilblains ;    excoriations 

between  toes.    Tinea  capitis  or  scald-head.     Scalp  very  sensitive, 

feels  as  if  bruised.    Whooping-cough  with  pain  at  base  of  brain. 

Excessive  gagging  cough  in  the  morning,  compelling  him  to  vomit 

everything  in  his  stomach  immediately  after  breakfast      Bros,  is 

complementary  to  Carbo  v.  in  this.     Enuresis,  which  is  <  in  morning 

after  the  first  sleep. 

Relations. — Aniidoied  by :  Ars.,  Camph.,  Coff.,  Lach.,  Spir.  nit. 
dulc,  Fer.  met.  (Teste).  //  antidotes  :  Effects  of  putrid  meats  or  fish, 
rancid  fats,  salt  or  salt  meats;  Chi.,  Lach.,  Merc.  CompUmentafy : 
China ;  Dros. ;  Kali  c.  (stitches  in  heart,  &c. — Carb.  v.  contains 
potash).  Carb.  an.  has  more  pronounced  induration  of  glands  and  is 
suited  to  cases  which  have  been  opened  too  soon  ;  is  more  appropriate 
to  cancer  and  syphilis  than  Carb.  v.  Carb.  v.  has  weak  digestion  in 
nm'sing  women  ;  every  particle  of  food  disagrees  ;  Carb.  an.  has 
coldness  at  stomach,  >  by  hard  rubbing  or  hard  pressure ;  piles, 
with  oozing  of  inodorous  fluid.  Carb.  v.  is  near-sighted ;  Carb.  an. 
far-sighted.  In  ear  affections  Carb.  an.  has  swelUng  behind  ear. 
Carb.  V.  is  more  suited  to  sequelae  of  exanthemata.  Many  of  the 
effects  of  Carb.  v.  are  Uke  those  in  Lycopod.,  and  an  occasional  dose 
of  Carb.  v.  assists  the  action  of  Lye.  Compare  also  Raphanus  in 
flatulence.  Compatible:  Ars.,  Chi.,  Dros.,  Kali  c,  Phos.  ac.  Bell., 
Bry.,  Nux,  Sep.,  Sul.  Compare :  Graphit.  and  all  the  carbons. 
Caust.,  Lach.,  Eup.  perf.,  Pho.  and  Rumex  in  hoarseness  (Rumex  is 


400  CARBO  VEGETABILIS 

<  4  a.m.  and  ii  p.m.  Caust.  <  in  morning;  from  dry  cold. 
Carb.  V.  <  evening  ;  from  damp  evening  air).  Camph.  ;  Chi.  in 
haemorrhages,  intermittents,  hectic,  affections  of  drunkards  ;  Ipec. 
in  haemorrhages  and  intermittents ;  Menjranthes  in  intermittents 
with  coldness  of  legs ;  Op.,  Sul.  and  Pso.  in  deficient  reaction ; 
Sul.  ac  in  dyspepsia  of  drunkards  (Carb.  v.  has  more  putridity ; 
Sul.  ac.  more  sourness) ;  Pho.  in  easily  bleeding  ulcers ;  Puis.,  bad 
effect  from  fat  food  and  pastry ;  Sul.  in  acrid-smelling  menses ; 
erysipelas  of  breasts  ;  Ars.  and  Bellis  in  effects  of  ice-cream  and  ice- 
water  in  hot  weather.  Nux  in  dyspepsia,  easily  angered ;  effects  of 
debauchery  (Nux  is  thin,  spare,  yeUow,  wiry  ;  Carb.  v.  sluggish,  stout, 
lazy) ;  Sec.  in  haemorrhages,  cold  breath ;  coldness  <  by  warmth. 
Calc,  Carb.  an.,  and  Stram.  in  aversion  to  darkness ;  Lach.  in  weak 
digestion  (Lach.  craves  milk  ;  Carb.  v.  has  aversion  to  it),  intolerance 
of  clothing  round  waist ;  intermittent  fever,  flashes  of  burning  heat 
without  thirst.  Sep.  in  tiearing-down  in  rectum  and  vagina  (Carb.  v. 
has  strong  odour  of  menses  which  Sep.  has  not).  Rhus  in  strains ; 
in  typhus  ;  Colch.  in  cholera  ;  cold  breath,  prostration.    Cupr. 

€aa8ation. — ^Alcohol.  Bad  food  :  eggs,  wines,  liquors,  fish.  Fat 
food.  Butter.  Salt  or  salt  food.  Poultry.  Ice-water,  Debauchery. 
Strains.  Lifting.  Over-work  (asthenopia).  Change  of  weather. 
Warm,  damp  weather.    Hot  air  inhaled  from  fire.    Overheating. 


SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Inquietude  and  anxiety,  esp.  in  the  evening  (4-6  p.m.). — 
Fear  of  spectres,  esp.  at  night. — ^Timidity,  irresolution,  and  embarrassment  in 
society. — Despair  with  lachrymose  humour,  and  discouragement,  with  desire 
for  death,  and  tendency  to  suicide. — Disposition  to  be  frightened. — Irascibility 
and  passion.— Sudden,  and  periodical  weakness  of  memory. — Slowness  of 
apprehension. — ^Fixed  ideas. — ^Aversion  to  labour. 

2.  Head. — Vertigo,  after  the  slightest  movement  of  the  head,  or  after 
having  slept,  as  well  as  on  stooping  and  walking. — ^Vertigo  with  nausea, 
obscuration  of  the  eyes,  trembling,  buzzing  in  the  ears,  and  even  loss  of 
consciousness. — Pressive  headache,  with  tears  in  the  eyes ;  they  are  painful 
when  moving  them. — Headache  from  being  overheated. — Headache,  with 
trembling  of  the  jaw. — Nocturnal  headache. — Cramp-like  tension  in  the 
brain,  or  sensation,  as  if  from  contraction,  of  the  teguments  of  the  head. — 
Heaviness  of  the  head. — Pressive  headache,  esp.  above  the  eyes,  in  the 
temples  and  in  the  occiput. — Drawing  pain  in  the  head,  commencing  at 
the  nape  of  the  neck,  with  nausea. — Shootings  in  the  vertex. — Beating  and 
pulsation  in  the  head,  esp.  in  the  evening,  or  after  a  meal,  with  congestion  of 
blood  and  heat,  or  burning  sensation  in  the  head. — ^The  headache  frequently 
extends  from  the  nape  of  the  neck  to  the  brain,  and  is  sometimes  aggravated 
after  a  meal. — ^Acute  tractive  pains  in  the  teguments  of  the  head,  esp.  in  the 
occiput  and  in  the  forehead,  often  commencing  in  the  limbs. — Painful  sensi- 
bility of  the  hairy  scalp  to  external  pressure  (for  instance,  that  of  the  hat). — 
Sensitiveness  of  scalp  is  <  in  the  afternoon  and  evening,  and  after  eating ; 
<  from  taking  cold,  or  when  getting  warm  in  bed. — Susceptibility  to  cold  in 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS  401 

the  head.— Falling  off  of  the  hair,  with  itching  of  the  scalp  in  the  evening, 
when  getting  warm  in  bed. 

3.  Eyes.— Pains  in  the  eyes,  after  having  fatigued  the  sight,  and  from 
fine  work. — Pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  eyes,  on  looking  upwards. — Itching, 
smarting,  heat,  pressure  and  burning  pain  in  the  eyes,  and  in  the  corners  of 
the  eyes.-— Nocturnal  agglutination  of  the  eyelids. — Bleeding  of  the  eyes,  often 
with  strong  congestion  in  the  head. — ^Quivering  and  trembling  of  the  eyelids. 
—Black,  flying  spots  before  the  eyes. — Myopia. — Insensibility  of  the  pupil. 

4.  Ears.— Otalgia  in  the  evening.— In  the  evening,  redness  and  heat 
of  the  (r.)  external  ear. — ^Want  of  cerumen. — Flow  of  fetid  pus  from  the 
inner  ear.— Ot>stniction  of  the  ears.— Pulsations  in  the  ears.— Tingling  and 
buzzing  in  the  ears. — Swelling  of  the  parotids. 

5.  Nose. — Itching  in  the  nose,  with  tickling  and  tingling  in  the  nostrils. 
—Redness  of  the  tip,  and  scabs  at  the  point  of  the  nose. — Obstruction  of  the 
nose,  esp.  towards  evening,  or  serous  flow,  vdthout  coryza.— Violent  coryza, 
with  hoarseness  and  rawness  of  the  chest,  tingling  and  tickling  in  the  nose, 
and  ineffectual  inclination  to  sneeze.— Frequent  and  continued  epistaxis,  esp. 
at  night  and  in  the  morning,  with  paleness  of  the  face,  or  else  after  having 
stooped,  or  after  straining  to  evacuate. 

(L  Face. — Paleness  of  the  face.— Complexion  yellow,  greyish,  greenish. 
—Pace  hippocratic. — ^Tractive  pains,  acute  pullings,  piercings,  and  burning 
pains  in  the  bones  of  the  face. — Swelling  of  the  face  and  of  the  cheeks. — 
Tetters  in  the  face. — Furunculi  before  the  ear,  and  under  the  jaw. — ^Red 
pimples  on  the  face  (in  young  persons). — Swelling  of  the  lips.— Lips  cracked. 
—Purulent  blisters  on  the  lips. — Fissures  of  the  ulcerated  lips. — Eruptions, 
like  tetters,  on  the  chin,  and  on  the  commissures  of  the  lips.— Twitchings  of 
the  opper  lip. 

7.  Teeth.— Toothache,  with  pulling  or  drawing  pains ;  acute,  or  con- 
tractive, ulcerative,  or  pulsative  pains,  provoked  by  taking  anything  hot  or 
cold,  as  well  as  by  food  too  salt. — Obstinate  looseness  of  the  teeth. — ^The 
goms  recede  from  the  teeth  (incisors). — Unfastening,  retraction,  excoriation, 
and  nloeration  of  the  gums. — Bleeding  of  the  gums,  and  sockets  of  the  teeth. 

8.  Mouth. — Heat  and  dryness,  or  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth. 
—Dryness  of  the  mouth,  without  thirst. — Roughness  in  the  mouth  and  on  the 
ton^.— Tongue  coated  white  or  yellow-brown. — Stomacace. — Excoriation 
of  the  tongue,  with  difficulty  in  moving  it. 

9.  throat. — Sore  throat,  as  if  from  internal  swelling. — Sensation  of 
constriction  in  the  throat,  with  impeded  deglutition. — Smarting,  scraping, 
and  bnming  pain  in  the  throat,  the  palate,  and  the  gullet. — Feeling  of 
coldness  in  the  throat. — Pain  of  excoriation  in  the  throat  on  coughing,  on 
blowing  the  nose,  and  on  swallowing. — Rattling  from  much  phlegm  in  the 
throat,  which  is  easily  detached. — Swelling  and  inflammation  of  the  uvula, 
with  stitches  in  the  throat. 

10.  Appetite. — Bitter  taste. — Salt  taste  in  the  mouth,  and  of  food. — 
Want  of  appetite,  or  thirst  and  immoderate  hunger. — Chronic  dislike  to 
meat,  milk,  and  fat — ^Desire  for  salt  food,  or  food  sweetened  with  sugar. — 
Great  desire  for  coffee. — ^Af ter  a  meal,  but  esp.  after  taking  milk,  great  infla- 
tion of  the  abdomen,  acidity  in  the  mouth,  and  sour  risings.— Sweat,  esp. 
dncing  a  meal — Great  heat  after  drinking  wine. — After  dinner,  confusion  of 

VOL.  I.  27 


402  CARBO  VEGETABILIS 

the  head  and  pressure  of  the  stomach,  or  headache,  heaviness  in  the  limbs 
and  mental  anxiety. — ^Weakness  of  digestion;  the  plainest  food  inconveni- 
ences him. 

zx.  Stomach. — Empty  or  bitter  risings. — Risings  of  food,  and  esp.  of 
fat  food. — Sour  risings,  esp.  after  a  meaL — Pyrosis. — Hiccough  after  every 
movement — Nausea,  esp.  in  the  morning,  after  a  meal,  or  at  night. — Continual 
nausea. — Flow  of  water  from  the  stomach,  like  saliva,  even  in  the  niglit — 
Vomiting  of  blood ;  of  food  in  the  evening. — Heaviness,  fulness,  and  tension 
in  the  stomach. — Cramps  in  the  stomach,  contractive,  or  pressive  and  burning, 
with  accumulation  of  flatus,  and  great  sensitiveness  of  the  epigastrium. — 
Sensation  of  scraping  and  of  trembling  in  the  stomach. — ^The  pains  in  the 
stomach  are  aggravated  or  renewed  by  f right,  opposition,  a  chill,  as  well  as 
after  a  meal,  or  at  night,  and  esp.  after  having  taiken  flatulent  food,  also  by 
suckling.— Colic,  with  the  sensation  of  a  burning  pressure ;  much  flatulence 
and  sensitiveness  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Pressure  at  the  pit  oi  the 
stomach,  as  if  the  heart  were  going  to  be  crushed,  esp.  in  suckling  women. 

13.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  the  hypochondria  like  that  of  a  bruise,  and 
esp.  in  the  hepatic  region,  chiefly  when  it  is  touched. — Shooting  pain  under 
the  ribs. — ^Tension,  pressure,  and  shootings  in  the  hepatic  region. — Shootings 
in  the  spleen. — Pressure  of  the  clothes  on  the  hypochondria. — Pains  in  the 
umbilical  region  on  its  being  touched. — Heaviness,  fulness,  inflation  and 
tension  of  the  abdomen,  with  heat  in  the  whole  body. — Colic,  produced  by 
the  motion  of  a  carriage. — Pressure  and  cramps  in  the  abdomen. — Pain  in 
the  abdomen,  as  from  lifting  a  weight,  or  from  dislocation. — Burning  pain 
and  great  anguish  in  the  abdomen. — Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  coming  from 
the  1.  side  and  tending  towards  the  r.  side,  with  sensation  of  paralytic  weakness 
in  the  thigh. — ^Much  flatulency,  esp.  after  a  meal,  and  sometimes  with  sensa- 
tion of  torpor  in  the  abdomen. — Flatulent,  cramp*like  colic,  even  at  night. — 
Borborygmi  and  movements  in  the  abdomen. — Excessive  discharge  of  flatus, 
of  a  putrid  smell. — ^Aggravation  of  the  abdominal  sufferings  after  eating  the 
smallest  portion  of  food. — ^The  pains  in  the  abdomen  are  often  accompanied 
by  anxiety  and  tears.— He  cannot  bear  any  tight  clothing  around  his  waist 
and  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Constipation.— Hardj  tough,  scanty  stool.— 
Insufficient  evacuations. — Difficult  evacuations,  without  being  hard,  with 
straining,  burning  pain  in  the  anus,  and  pains  similar  to  those  of  parturition, 
in  the  abdomen. — Evacuations  liquid,  pale  or  mucus-like. — Discharge  of 
mucus  and  of  blood  instead  of  faeces  during  the  evacuation,  with  cries 
(in  children). — Involuntary  evacuations  of  substances  of  a  putrid  smelL — 
Discharge  of  blood  from  the  anus  with  every  evacuation. — ^Af ter  the  evacua- 
tion, aching  pain  in  the  abdomen. — Large  painful  hasmorrhoidal  tumours  of  a 
deep  blue  colour  at  the  anus, — Fluent  haemorrhoids. — Shooting,  itching  and 
burning  pain  in  the  anus. — Discharge  from  varices. — Discharge  of  taenia. — 
Discharge  of  a  viscous  and  corrosive  serum  from  the  anus  and  rectum,  esp. 
at  night. — Excoriation  and  oozing  at  the  perinseum. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Diminution  of  the  secretion  of  urine. — Frequent, 
anxious,  and  urgent  inclination  to  make  water,  day  and  night — ^Wetting  the 
bed. — Urine  red,  and  very  deep-coloured,  as  if  it  were  mixed  with  blood. — 
Urine  of  a  deep  red,  with  a  dark  cloudy  appearance. — Copious  urine,  of  a 


CARBO  VEGETABILIS  403 

dear  yellow  colour,  or  thickish  and  whitish  (diabetes). — Smarting  on  making 
water.— Constriction  of  the  urethra  every  morning. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Extraordinary  affluence  of  voluptuous 
thoughts. — Frequent  pollutions. — ^Too  speedy  emission  in  coition  ;  followed 
by  roaring  in  the  head. — Smooth,  red,  and  oozing  spots  on  the  glans  penis. — 
Disdiarge  of  prostatic  fluid  while  at  stool. — Itching  and  moisture  at  the  thigh, 
near  the  scrotum. — Pressure  in  the  testes. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Premature  and  too  copious  catamenia ; 
or  too  feeble,  with  pale  blood. — Before  the  catamenia,  cramps  in  the  abdomen 
and  headache. — During  the  catamenia,  vomiting  and  pains  in  the  teeth,  head, 
loins,  and  abdomen. — Itching,  burning,  excoriation,  aphthae  and  swelling  at 
the  vulva.— Varices  on  the  pudenda. — Milk-white,  thick  and  yellowish, 
greenish  and  corrosive  discharge  from  the  vagina. — Leucorrhoea  before  the 
catamenia. — Disposition  to  miscarriages. — Inflammation  of  the  mammae. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Prolonged  hoarseness,  esp.  towards  the 
evening. — In  the  morning  and  in  the  evening  hoarseness,  aggravated  by 
prolonged  conversation,  more  esp.  by  cold  and  damp  weather.—Loss  of  voice 
at  night,  or  when  talking. — Scrying,  tingling,  and  tickling  in  the  larynx. — 
Cough  excited  by  a  tingling  in  the  throat,  or  with  burning  pain  and  sensation 
of  excoriation  in  the  chest— Soreness  and  ulcerative  pain  in  the  larynx  and 
pharynx. — Cramp-like  cough,  also  with  retching,  and  vomiting,  three  or  four 
times  a  day,  or  else  in  the  evening,  for  a  long  time  successively. — Spasmodic 
hoUow  cough  (whooping-cough) ;  four  or  five  attacks  every  day,  caused  by  a 
tinghng  irritation  in  the  larynx ;  expectoration  only  in  the  morning,  yellow, 
like  pus ;  brownish ;  bloody ;  tasting  putrid,  sour,  salt,  and  of  offensive  smell. 
—The  cough  is  <  in  the  evening ;  till  midnight ;  from  movement ;  when 
walking  in  the  open  air ;  from  cold,  wet  weather  :  from  going  from  a  warm 
to  a  cold  place ;  after  lying ;  after  eating  and  drinking ;  esp.  cold  things ; 
from  talking. — Cough  in  the  evening  before  going  to  bed,  and  in  bed. — On 
coughing,  painful  shootings  in  the  head. — Cough,  with  expectoration  of 
greenish  mucus,  or  of  a  yellovrish  pus. — Cough,  with  spitting  of  blood  and 
burning  pain  in  the  chest — Cold  tnreath. 

18.  Chest. — ^Laboured  respiration  and  shortness  of  breath,  while  walking. 
—Wheezing  and  rattling  of  mucus  in  the  chest — Great  difficulty  of  respira- 
tion, and  oppression  of  the  chest — Fits  of  suffocation  caused  by  flatulency. — 
On  breathing,  painful  throbbing  in  the  head  and  teeth. — Frequent  want  to 
take  a  deep  inspiration. — ^Want  of  breath,  esp.  in  the  evening  in  bed. — 
Boming  pain,  shootings,  and  pressure  on  the  chest  (hydro  thorax). — Com- 
pression and  cramp-like  constriction  in  the  chest. — ^The  chest  is  tight,  with 
a  sensation  of  fulness  and  anxiety. — Pains  as  from  excoriation  in  the  chest. — 
Sensation  of  fatigue  in  the  chest. — Burning  pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart, 
with  congestion  in  the  chest,  and  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart. — Rheumatic, 
drawing  pains,  acute  pullings  and  pressure  on  the  chest. — Brownish  spots  on 
the  chest — Brown-yellow  blotches  on  the  chest. — Erysipelatous  inflammation 
of  the  mammae. 

90.  Neck  and  Back.— Rigidity  of  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Swelling  of 
the  cervical  glands. — Rheumatic,  drawing  pains,  acute  pullings  and  shootings 
m  the  back,  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  the  muscles  of  the  neck.— Continual 
shootings  in  the  loins,  esp.  on  making  a  false  step. — Rigidity  of  the  dorsal 


404  CARBO  VEGETABILIS 

spine. — Painful  stiffness  of  the  back  in  the  morning,  when  rising. — Itching 
pimples  on  the  back. — Itching,  excoriation,  and  oozing  under  the  armpits. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Acute  drawing  and  burning  pains  in  the  muscles 
and  in  shoulder- joint. — Pulling  and  acute  drawing  pains  in  the  forearms,  the 
wrists,  and  the  fingers. — Relaxation  of  the  muscles  of  the  arms  and  of  the 
hands,  on  laughing. — Tension  in  the  joints  of  the  hand,  as  if  they  were  too 
short. — Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  hands. — Heat  of  the  hands ;  burning  in 
the  hands. — Icy-cold  hands. — ^The  tips  of  the  fingers  are  covered  with  cold 
sweat. — Paralytic  weakness  of  the  wrists  and  of  the  fingers,  esp.  on  grasping 
an  object. — Fine  granulated,  and  itching  eruption  on  the  hands. — Extremities 
of  the  fingers  become  ulcerated. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Torpor  and  insensibility  of  the  legs  and  feet. — 
Drawing  and  paralytic  pain  in  the  legs. — Acute  pulling,  and  drawing,  burning 
pains  in  the  hip  and  knees. — Strong  tension  and  cramp-like  pains  in  the  coxo- 
femoral  joints,  the  thighs,  and  the  knees. — ^Aneurism  in  the  ham,  with  tensive 
pain  and  pulsation. — Tetters  in  the  knee. — Cramps  in  the  legs,  and  (esp.)  in 
the  soles  of  the  feet,  and  at  night,  in  the  calves  of  the  legs. — Fetid  and  easily 
bleeding  ulcers,  in  the  legs. — Obstinate  torpor  in  the  feet — Perspiration  of 
the  feet. — Redness  and  swelling  of  the  toes,  with  shooting  pain,  as  if  they 
had  been  frozen. — Ulceration  in  the  extremity  of  the  toes. — Senile  gangrene, 
which  begins  in  the  toes  and  works  all  the  way  up  the  limb. 

24.  Generalities. — Pains  with  anxiety,  heat  and  complete  discourage- 
ment, or  with  dejection  after  the  paroxysm. — ^Acute  puUings  and  arthritic 
drawing  pains,  with  paral3rtic  weakness,  chiefly  in  the  limbs,  and  sufferings 
from  flatulency,  or  with  difficulty  of  respiration,  when  it  is  the  chest  which  is 
attacked. — Pain  as  from  dislocation  in  the  limbs,  or  pain  as  if  caused  by  a 
strain  in  the  loins. — Burning  pains  in  the  limbs  and  in  the  bones,  ulcers. — 
Pulsation  in  different  parts  of  the  body. — Sufferings  from  a  strain  in  the  back, 

or  from  riding  in  a  carriage. — Trembling  and  jer kings  in  the  limbs  by  day. —  j 

Numbness  of  the  limbs  readily  induced. — ^The  majority  of  symptoms  appear 
while  walking  in  the  open  air. — Emaciation,  esp.  of  the  face. — Contusive  pain 
in  all  the  limbs,  esp.  in  the  morning,  immediately  on  rising. — Great  weakness 
of  the  flexors. — Great  debility  and  weakness  as  soon  as  he  makes  the  least 
exertion. — Excessive  dejection,  frequently  proceeding  to  fainting,  even  in  the 
morning  in  bed,  or  else  at  the  beginning  of  a  walk. — Sudden  prostration  of 
strength. — General  dejection  towards  noon,  with  necessity  to  support  the 
head,  and  to  be  still. — Paralysis,  and  total  absence  of  pulse. — Liability  to  take 
cold. 

25.  Skin. — Sensation  of  tingling  of  the  skin,  throughout  the  body. — 
General  itching  in  the  evening,  and  on  becoming  warm  in  bed. — Burning 
sensation  in  different  parts  of  the  skin. — Eruption  of  small  pimples  like 
miliary  scabies. — Nettle-rash. — ^Tetters. — Streaks  of  a  reddish  brown. — Pain- 
less ulcers  in  the  extremities  of  the  fingers  and  of  the  toes. — Fetid  ulcers,  with 
burning  pains,  and  discharge  of  corrosive  and  bloody  pus. — Chilblains. — 
Varices. — Plexus  of  the  veins,  formed  by  a  dilatation  of  the  capUlary  vessels, 
with  violent  haemorrhage,  after  the  slightest  injury. — Lymphatic  swellings, 
with  suppiu-ation  and  burning  pains. — ^Swelling  and  induration  of  the  glands. 
—Gangrenous  spots  from  l)ring  in  bed  ;  old  wounds  having  healed  break  out 
again ;  punctured  wotmds  which  won't  heal. 


CARBOLICUM   ACIDUM  405 

A  Sleep. — Strong  inclination  to  sleep  during  the  day,  disappearing  on 
movement — Sleep  in  the  morning,  or  early  in  the  evening  (with  sleeplessness 
at  night).— Coniatose  sleep,  with  rattling  in  the  throat.— No  sleep,  with 
inability  to  open  the  eyes. — Retarded  sleep  and  sleeplessness  caused  by  un- 
easiness in  the  body.— At  night,  or  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  headache, 
anguish,  with  oppression  of  the  chest,  startings  and  pains  in  the  limbs,  cold 
m  the  hands  and  in  the  feet,  &c. — Dreams  frequent,  fantastical,  anxious  and 
terrible,  with  tossing  about  of  the  body,  or  with  starting  and  fright. 

«7.  Fever. — Shivering  and  cold  in  the  body. — Febrile  shivering  in  the 
evening  and  at  night,  followed  by  transient  heat. — Fever  with  thirst  during 
the  cold  stage  only,  or  with  profuse  perspiration  followed  by  shiverings. — 
Febrile  state  with  comatose  drowsiness,  rile,  cold  sweat  on  the  face  and  at 
the  extremities,  face  hippocratic,  pulse  small  and  evanescent. — Pulse,  small, 
weak,  imperceptible  ;  uneven ;  intermitting.— Febrile  condition  at  night,  with 
general  heat,  and  burning  heat  in  the  hands  and  feet. — Frequent  attacks  of 
transient  heat — Nocturnal  sweat. — In  the  morning,  acid  sweat — Cold  sweat 
on  the  limbs  and  on  the  face. 


Garbolicum  Acidmn. 

Carbolic  Acid.     Phenol.    Monoxy  Benzine.    Phenic  Acid.     Phenyl 
Alcohol.       C6H5  OH.    Solution  in  rectified  spirit. 

flUwi^i- — Acne.  Bums.  Carbuncle.  Cholera.  Constipation.  Diabetes. 
Dianhcea.  Dysentery.  Dyspepsia,  Eczema.  Eructations,  Erysipelas.  Flatulence. 
Gangrene.  Hydrocephalus.  Influenza.  Intermittent  fever.  Irritation.  Leprosy. 
Meningitis.  Neuralgia.  Pneumonia.  Psoriasis.  Pityriasis  versicolor.  Scarlatina. 
Small-pox.  Smelly  disordered.  Stomachy  affections  of.  Toothache.  Ulcers.  Urcemia. 
Utenis,  displacements  of.    Vomiting. 

Chanoteri8ti08. — Carbolic  acid,  like  the  Carbons,  is  a  powerful 
antiseptic,  and  its  use  as  such  in  surgery  has  led  incidentally  to  the 
poisoning  of  both  patients  and  surgeons.  These  experiences  have 
provided  a  number  of  the  symptoms  indicating  its  medicinal  use. 
The  pains  of  carbolic  acid  come  suddenly.  They  are  burning  and 
pricking,  sticking.  The  urine  is  very  dark,  black  or  blackish  olive- 
green  ;  grass  or  olive-green.  There  is  numbness  and  twitching. 
Putrid  ^charges  are  a  marked  indication.  The  skin  is  inflamed, 
and  other  symptoms  appear,  with  burning,  tingling,  itching,  and 
numbness.  Gangrene  has  been  caused  by  the  application  of  2  to  5 
per  cent  solutions.  There  is  profound  prostration  and  fatigue  ;  con- 
vulsions ;  collapse  ;  cold,  clammy  sweat.  Constant  yawning.  R.  K. 
Ghosh  finds  it  admirable  in  cases  of  cholera  where  Verat.  alb,  seems 
indicated  and  fails.  There  is  intolerance  of  warm  room ;  but  also 
sensitiveness  to  cold  air  which  <  many  symptoms.  Many  poisoning 
cases  show  pneumonia,  single  or  double,  affecting  the  bases  prin- 
dpally.  Dr.  Proctor  has  recorded  a  brilliant  cure  of  a  double  basal 
pneumonia  with  drop  doses  of  the  B.  P.  solution,  after  failure  of  more 


4o6  CARBOLICUM   ACIDUM 

commonly  used  remedies.  Nervous  dyspepsia  of  intensely  painful 
character  has  frequently  been  cured  by  it ;  and  R.  K.  Ghosh  has 
reported  great  improvement  in  a  case  of  diabetes  when  the  remedy 
was  given  for  something  else.  Proell  has  recorded  his  own  case  of 
idiopathic  erysipelas  a£Eecting  the  back  of  the  right  hand,  first  three 
fingers  and  arm,  with  violet-coloured  swelling  and  roughness.  Rhus 
removed  the  fever,  but  did  nothing  to  stop  the  erysipelas.  This 
CarboL  ac,  30  did  promptly.  It  was  prescribed  by  Dr.  Streintz. 
Fahnestock  reports  a  case  of  poisoning  observed  by  himself  from 
inhaUng  the  fumes.  The  patient,  a  woman,  feeling  ill,  ran  across  the 
street  to  a  neighbour's.  Before  reaching  the  house  she  fell  prostrate, 
pale,  gasping  tor  breath.  When  taken  in,  she  had  to  be  propped  up 
in  order  to  breathe  ;  trembled  all  over ;  wanted  her  hands  held  ; 
"  pricking  Uke  needles,"  all  over  body ;  unable  to  raise  right  arm. 
Cold  hands  and  feet.  Wanted  a  drink  of  water  every  few  minutes  ; 
nausea  but  no  vomiting ;  pain  in  lumbar  region.  Symptoms  lasted 
four  hours.  It  has  been  used  with  success  in  the  vomiting  of 
drunkards ;  of  pregnant  women  with  violent  frontal  headache. 
Great  flatulent  distension  of  the  abdomen,  with  belching  of  iidnd 
and  desire  for  stimulants,  indicates  the  drug.  Palpitation  of  the  heart 
at  night  has  been  cured  by  it  It  has  relieved  cases  of  cancer  of  the 
stomach,  and  has  apparently  cured  epithelioma  of  the  cheek  and 
nose,  with  haemorrhages  (Allen).  Deschere  has  found  CarboL  ac.  30 
of  great  service  in  uterine  displacements,  with  or  without  discharges, 
but  these,  if  present,  are  always  offensive.  The  symptoms  first  relieved 
are  the  agonising  backache  across  the  loins  with  a  dragging  sensation 
down  the  buttocks  into  the  thighs.  Cooper  regards  it  as  specific  in 
influenza,  in  the  3X  for  the  attack,  and  ^oth  for  resulting  debility. 

RdationB.— /<  is  antidoied  by :  Chalk  ;  Saccharated  Lime.  In 
bums  from  carbolic  acid,  Elias  C.  Price  found  milk  give  immediate 
relief.  He  suggests  copious  draughts  of  milk  in  poisoning  cases. 
Compare :  Gels.  Merc,  and  Sul.  in  band-like  headache  ;  Ars.,  Garb,  v., 
Chi.  and  Kre.  in  bums,  ulcers,  unhealthy,  offensive  discharges ;  Pic. 
ac.  (tightly  drawn  iron  band  at  base  of  brain  ;  Carbl.  ac,  has  this  round 
head)  ;  Ant.  t.  and  Variol.  in  Small-pox. 

BTMPTOHS. 

I.  Mind. — Irritability. — Disinclination  for  mental  exertion. — Muddled, 
confused,  bewildered. 

3.  Head. — Headache:  heavy,  dull. — Periodical  sick-headache,  as  if 
enclosed  in  tight  hand. — Dull  frontal  headache,  as  if  an  indiarubber  band 
were  stretched  tightly  over  forehead  from  temple  to  temple,  >  by  pressure. — 
Itching  of  scalp. — Headache  >  by  green  tea  ;  while  smoking;  by  tight 
band ;  by  cold  hand ;  by  bending  head  forward. 

3.    Eyes.— Very  severe  orbital  neuralgia  over  r.  eye. — Pupils  dilated. 

5.  Nose.— Tight  and  stopped  up.  —  Tickling,  prickhng,  itching  in 
nostrils. — Sense  of  smell  very  acute. — Ozaena,  with  great  fetor  and  ulcera- 
tion. 

6.  Face. — Pale  ;  or  flushed  and  burning. — ^Jaws  clenched. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Aching  of  teeth  in  r.  upper  jaw. 


CARBOLICUM   ACIDUM  407 

8.  Mottth. — ^Lips  dry,  cracked,  painful  or  black. — ^Tongue  burning  and 
tingling,  as  if  a  thousand  pins  were  sticking  in  it. — ^Tongue  dry  and  chippy, 
parched  and  fissured. — ^Throat  and  tongue  black,  tender  and  ulcerated  patches 
in  inside  of  lips  and  cheeks. — Intensely  bad  smell  from  mouth. 

9.  Throat. — Prickling  and  burning  in  throat  and  cesophagus. — Heat 
rising  up  from  the  stomach. — Spasmodic  contraction  of  oesophagus. — Inability 
to  swallow. — Sore-throat  worse  on  r.  side. — Hawking  of  clear  white  mucus. — 
Fauces  red  and  covered  with  a  mucous  exudation. — Uvula  whitened  and 
shrivelled. 

II.  Stomacli. — ^Wants  a  drink  of  water  every  few  minutes. — Constant 
belching  up  of  wind. — Vomiting  of  drunkards. — Excessive  nausea,  and 
inclination  to  vomit ;  while  eating  a  little,  after  breakfast.— Vomiting  of : 
Brigfaf  s  disease ;  sea-sickness ;  cancer ;  pregnancy. — ^Weight  in  epigastrium 
as  if  burdened  with  flatulence. — Burning  in  stomach. — Total  loss  of  appetite. 
—Desire  for  whiskey. 

18.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  r.  hypochondrium ;  also  in  that  region  of  both 
sides.— Rumbling  and  rolling  in  abdomen. — Burning  in  lower  part  of  abdomen 
and  top  of  head. 

13*  Stools. — Diarrhoea  and  dysentery;  mucous  stools  like  scrapings; 
stools  like  rice-water ;  thin,  black ;  v^y  offensive. — Cholera  infantum,  with 
putrid  discharge  like  foul  eggs. — Constipation  with  offensive  breath. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine :  dark  greenish  brown ;  greenish ;  very 
dark;  black  or  blackish. — Quantity  increased  and  passed  frequently. — 
Diabetes.— Albuminuria. — Urine  of  high  specific  gravi^ ;  urea  abundant. — 
While  urinating  always  an  involuntary  mucous  discharge  from  anus. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Itching,  or  burning-itching  of  scrotum, 
>  scratching  but  it  soon  returns. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Pain  in  region  of  1.  ovary  walking  in 
open  air. — Painful  swelling  of  1.  ovary. — Menses  irregular ;  too  profuse,  dark 
colour,  followed  by  headache  and  nervous  irritability. — Puerperal  fever,  with 
pntrid  symptoms. — Ulceration  of  the  cervix  uteri. — Offensive  discharges. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Unable  to  lie  down,  gasping  for  breath 
continually,  wants  hands  held.— (Removed  in  a  prover :  short  breath  going 
up-hill,  or  upstairs.)— Short,  hacking  cough  with  tickling  in  throat;  can 
hardly  retain  anything  in  stomach. — Stertorous  respiration. 

18.  Chest.— Feeling  of  narrowness  in  chest  as  if  diaphragm  depressed 
the  lungs.— Tight  feeling,  esp.  in  centre  of  chest.— Pneumonia  of  (r.)  base- 
Gangrene  of  lung. 

ig.  Heart.— Stitches  in  region  of  heart.— Fearful  palpitation  <  night, 
with  great  dyspnoea.— Jerking  in  1.  common  carotid  artery  while  walking 
rapidly  after  dinner. 

90.  Neck  and  Back.— Neck  stiff,  lame  and  sore.— Severe  pain  in  lumbo- 
saoal  region,  <  latter  part  of  night.— Pain  in  loins  on  straightening  one's  self 
and  by  jolting  while  riding. 

n.  Limbs.— Soreness  of  muscles  of  back  and  limbs.— Twitching  in 
mosdes. 

M.  Upper  Limbs.— Aching,  rheumatic  pains  in  shoulders. — Unable  to 
raise  r.  arm.— Aching,  rheumatic  pains  in  arms  strongly  flexed  in  tonic  spasm. 
-OAd  hands  and  feet.— Vesicular  itching  eruption  on  hand. — ^Erysipdas  of 


4o8  CARBONEUM 

back  of  r.  hand,  first  three  fingers  and  arm,  violet-coloured  swelling,  rough 
skin. 

2^  Lower  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  hip-joint — Dragging  doixm 
buttocks  and  into  thighs. — Paralysis  of  lower  extremities;  with  dragging 
sensation. — ^Aching  soreness  beneath  1.  patella  all  day  up  to  4  p.m. ;  feels  as  if 
it  would  be  stiff  and  sore  to  move  it,  but  it  is  not  felt  during  motion. — Sharp 
pain  in  1.  shin. — Cramps.— Cold  hands  and  feet 

a^.  Generalities. — Fainting  and  insensibility,  lasting  for  hours. — 
Pricking  like  needles  all  over  body.— Tonic  spasm  ;  arms  flexed,  difficulty  in 
straightening  them. — Prostration  from  a  short  walk. — Offensive  discharges. 

25.  Skin. — Offensive  odour  from  skin.  —  Erysipelas  ;  violet  colour 
swelling,  roughness. —  Miliary  vesicles. —  Malignant  scarlatina. —  Confluent 
variola. — (Acne;  eczema;  impetigo;  scabies;  psoriasis;  prurigo;  leprosy; 
pityriasis  versicolor ;  lupus ;  carbuncles ;  cancerous  sores ;  sloughing  wounds ; 
chronic  ulcers ;  bums). 

a6.    Sleep.— Yawning  and  sleepy.— Waking  often  in  night. 


Garboneom. 

Carboncum.     C.  (A.  W,  12).    Lamp-black.    Amorphous  Carbon 
(obtained  from  the  chimney  of  a  coal-oil  lamp).    Trituration. 

01iniosL-*Convul8ion8.    Sore-throat.    Tetanus.    Tongue,  spasm  of. 

Charaoteristics.— This  substance  was  proved  by  Dr.  Burt  in  the 
IX  trit.  It  produced  sore-throat,  costiveness,  great  craving  for  adds, 
and  a  peculiar  convulsive  attack  described  as  follows :  Spasms,  com- 
mencing on  the  tongue,  passing  down  the  trachea  to  the  lungs  which 
prevented  him  from  breathing  for  about  two  moments  ;  then  gradually 
left  and  went  to  stomach,  arms,  hands,  and  legs.  It  took  four  persons 
to  hold  him — two  at  his  hands  and  two  at  his  feet.  Spasms  both 
tonic  and  clonic.  Lasted  two  hours  then  gradually  ceased.  The  hands 
had  no  feeling  in  them  ;  they  were  closed  and  could  not  be  opened. 
Wrists  perfectly  pulseless,  hands  shrivelled  and  cold.  At  2  p.m.  the 
spasms  came  on  very  suddenly  the  same  as  the  first  time  but  not  so 
violent.  They  did  not  affect  the  lungs  this  time  but  were  much 
harder  in  the  stomach.  Lasted  three  hours  then  gradually  ceased. 
He  seemed  at  the  point  of  death.  The  spasms  left  him  so  weak  that 
he  could  not  lift  his  hand  to  his  head  nor  sit  up. 

RelationB.— Cam^ar^^ ;  Carb.  an.,  Carb.  v.,  Carb.  h.,  Carb.  o., 
Nuz  v.,  ^thus.,  CEnanth. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Head. — Dull,  heavy  ache  in  forehead,  during  the  spasms  (lasted  2i 
days). 

5.  Nose. — ^Very  profuse  seaetion  of  thick  yellow  mucus  from  nose 
(lasted  8  days)» 


CARBONEUM   HYDROGENISATUM      409 

8.  Mouth.— Tongue  coated  white,  morning  (3rd  day).^Spasms  com- 
mendng  in  tongue. 

9.  Throat.— Throat  very  sore  4  a.m. 

11.  Stomach. — ^3rd  day  appetite  lost ;  began  to  return  4th  day  with  a 
great  craving  for  acids  which  he  could  not  allay. 

13.    Stool. — Bowels  very  costive  (4th  day)' 

19.  Heart.— Pulse  80  to  90  weak  and  irregular.— After  third  day  fell  to 
70  and  was  very  weak. 

90, 21.    Back  and  Limbs. — Back  and  limbs  ached  much. 

^,  Generalities. — Spasms  and  convulsions,  tonic  and  clonic. — Hands 
cold,  shrivelled,  pulseless,  devoid  of  sensation. 

95.  Skin. — Every  10  to  15  minutes  tingling,  prickly  sensation,  passed  all 
over  body,  esp.  the  numb,  tingling  sensation,  until  2  p.m.,  when  he  went  into 
spasms. 


Carboneom  Hydrogenisatom. 

Csuburetted  Hydrogen.     Ethane.     Olefiant  gas.     C,  H4.     Solution 

in  alcohol. 

GUaieaL— Apoplexy.    Eyes,  convulsions  of .    Tetanus.    Whooping-cough. 

Clianusteri8ti08.-^This  gas,  which  was  experimented  with  by 
Sr  Humphrey  Davy,  produces  a  condition  almost  resembling  an 
apoplectic  attack.  Stupefaction  :  comatose ;  surface  cold  and  com- 
pletely insensible.  Spasm  as  in  lock-jaw.  Arms  flexed  at  elbows. 
One  mental  symptom  is  peculiar :  an  extraordinary  sensation  of  con- 
tentment, so  that  life  seems  exalted ;  all  his  thoughts  appear  in  a 
moment  as  if  seen  in  an  inner  mirror.  Many  eye  symptoms  were 
noted  :  steady  and  extreme  oscillation  of  the  eyeballs.  Eyes  distorted. 
Lads  half  closed.  Dark  bodies  moving  before  eyes.  >  By  open  air 
(vertigo,  convulsions).  It  is  a  popular  custom  to  take  children  suffering 
trom  whooping-cough  to  breathe  the  air  at  a  gas-works.  A  case  has 
been  recorded  in  which  an  accidental  escape  of  gas  in  a  child's  bed- 
room affected  a  prompt  cure  of  its  whooping-cough.  Illuminating 
^  is  a  complex  gas,  carburetted  hydrogen  being  the  leading 
mgredient  In  the  Schema  are  included  some  symptoms  produced 
by  iUluminating  coal  gas. 

BdatioiiB.— Com^ari^:  Chloroform,  iCther,  Amyl  nit.,  Carboneum. 

BTMPTOHB. 

I.  Mind.— Contentment ;  life  seems  exalted ;  all  his  thoughts  appear  in 
a  moment  as  if  seen  in  an  inner  mirror. — ^Answers  questions  slowly. — Fell 
Qnoonsdous. — Coma. 

s.  Head.- Vertigo ;  <  going  into  open  air;  with  nausea,  loss  of 
memory  and  sensation. — Excruciating  pain  in  forehead  and  between  eyes. — 
Pfessnre  in  brain. 


4IO         CARBONEUM   OXYGENISATUM 

3.  Eyes.— Eyes  distorted;  half  closed.— Eyeballs  oscillate  steadily; 
synchronously  with  breathing  (illuminating  gas). — Dark  bodies  moving  before 
eyes. 

6.  Face. — Staring  look. — Face  turgid. — Cheeks  flap. — Some  degre^  of 
trismus  ;  interrupted  by  yawning. 

II.    Stomach.— Violent  cramps  in  stomach. — Nausea  and  vomiting. 

13.  Stool. — Involuntary  passage  of  stool  and  urine. — Stools :  rice-water  ; 
thin  faeces  mixed  with  dark  blood  and  mucus. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — ^Voice  feeble  and  indistinct — Paroxysms  of 
cough. — Dyspnoea. — ^Violent  tearing  pains  in  thorax. 

19.  Heart. — Beating  of  heart  scarcely  perceptible. — Pulse  :  strong,  rapid, 
regular ;  or  small  and  extremely  weak. 

20.  Back. — ^Violent  spasm  in  the  extensors  of  the  back. 

ai.  Limbs. — Spasmodic  stitching  and  trembling  of  limbs;  felt  para- 
lysed. 

94.  Generalities. — Rapid  fluctuation  of  symptoms  (coal  gas). — ^Im- 
movable ;  later  reg^ned  power  in  1.  arm  and  hand,  but  r.  arm  and  leg 
remained  paralysed  (coal  gas). — Lying  as  if  dead  cold  and  pale,  as  soon  as  the 
windows  were  open  violent  convulsions  set  in. — ^Anaesthesia. 

90.  Sleep.—Sleep  prolonged  and  very  deep,  interrupted  hy  cramps  in 
jaws  and  toes. 

27.  Fever. — Skin  icy  cold. — Sweating  copiously ;  sweat  smells  of  gas 
(coal  gas). 


Carbonewn  Oxygenisatmn. 

Carbonous  Oxide.    CO.    Solution  in  water. 

OlinioaL— Cramps.  Headache.  Herpes  zoeter.  Paralysis.  Pemphigus. 
Sciatica.     Trismus. 

CharaoteristiCB. — ^The  e£Fects  of  Carb.  ox,  have  been  noted  in 
persons  poisoned  by  the  gas.  It  produces  a  state  like  intoxication. 
The  person  is  conifused,  stupid.  There  is  loss  of  consciousness. 
Anaesthesia,  but  the  slightest  touch  with  a  hot  iron  recalls  sensibility. 
Convulsions  and  cramps.  Great  sleepiness  lasting  for  several  days ; 
interrupted  by  cramps  in  cheeks  and  toes.  Great  coldness  of  surface, 
hands  icy  cold.  Marked  >  of  symptoms,  especially  of  chest,  in  open 
air. 

Relatioiis. — Compare :  Carb.  hydro. 

BTMPTOHB. 

I.  Mind. — Depressed ;  stupid  ;  apathetic— Anxiety,  with  desire  for  air 
but  too  paralysed  to  seek  it. 

a.  Head. — ^Vertigo  ;  inclination  to  turn  in  a  circle. — Headache,  violent, 
persistent,  with  throbbing  in  temporal  arteries. — Frontal  headache  which 
extends  over  the  whole  head,  but  chiefly  felt  in  forehead,  which  seems  pushed 
out. — Weight ;  throbbing ;  compression ;  sticking  headache. 


CARBONEUM   SULPHURATUM  4" 

3-  Byes.— Eyes  protrude ;  sight  dim  ivith  vertigo,  and  fluttering  and 
flickering  before  sight 

4-  Ears. — Roaring  in  ears. 

ft.    Face. — ^Trismus ;  jaws  firmly  clenched. 
8.    Mouth. — Paralysis  of  tongue. 

XI.  Stomach.— Stomach  so  irritable  that  everything  eaten  was  imme- 
diately vomited* 

13.  Stool. — Involuntary  evacuations. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Paralysis  of  bladder. — Urine  contains  sugar. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Rattling  of  mucus  in  air-passages.— Bloody 
mucus  raised. — Expired  air  feels  cool  to  back  of  observer's  hand. — Breathmg 
stertorous,  slow. — Sense  of  sufiFocation. 

ig.    Heart. — Intolerable  pain  in  region  of  heart.— Violent  palpitation. 

so.    Back. — Burning  pain  at  right  scapula. 

a^  lower  Umbs.— Shooting  pains  in  r.  natis  and  down  sciatic  nerve 
to  footy  not  <  by  pressure  or  movement. 

85.  Skin. — ^Whoie  skin  covered  with  large  and  small  vesicles  of  pem- 
phigus.—Purple  maculation  of  skin. — Herpes  zoster  1.  side  of  face  along 
branches  of  trigeminus. 

s6.  Sleep. — Great  sleepiness  for  several  days.— Never  slept  so  long 
before.— Sleep  deep,  prolonged,  interrupted  by  cramps  in  cheeks  and  toes. 


Garboneam  Solpharatum. 

Carbon  Bisulphide.    Alcohol  Sulphuris.    Alcohol  Lampadii.    CS,. 
Solution  in  rectified  spirit. 


-Acne.  Amblyopia.  Anaemia.  Apoplexy.  Bums.  Clergyman's  sore 
throat.  Glandular  swellings.  Goitre.  Gout  Heartburn.  Hemiplegia.  Hernia. 
Herpes  phlyctenoides.  Herpetic  dyscrasia.  Impetigo.  Itch.  Liver  affections. 
Memory,  Icwt  Meniere's  disease.  Noises  in  the  head.  Progressive  muscular 
atrophy.    Rheumatism.    Scalds.    Sdatica.    Spinal  sclerosis.    Tetanus. 

Charaoteristlos. — Carbon,  sulph.  combines  many  characters  of  its 
two  elements.  It  was  first  brought  into  notice  by  its  effects  on  workers 
in  rubber  works.  Here  is  an  acute  case  :  a  girl,  aged  15,  employed 
in  vulcanising  works,  was  exposed  to  the  fumes  one  whole  day.  Before 
this,  she  had  had  from  the  tumes,  frontal  pains  and  heaviness  of  the 
bead.  After  this,  the  pains  became  more  violent,  and  were  accom- 
panied by  i>ainf ul  contraction  of  masseters,  then  by  stiffness  of  neck 
and  vertebral  colunm  ;  finally  of  legs  and  arms.  The  contracture  was 
generalised,  but  nowhere  complete,  though  the  jaws  could  not  be 
separated.  Ulcerative  stomatitis  ensued  and  tartar  accumulated  on 
the  teeth.  Among  the  chronic  effects  are :  Digestive  disorders  of 
extreme  severity.  Tremor,  giddiness,  ringing  in  the  ears  with  poor 
hearing ;  inability  to  sleep ;  muscular  wesdoiess,  more  or  less  ataxia, 
strong  increase  of  mechanical  muscular  irritabihty,  disturbance  of 
sigbt  and  sensibility,  Romberg's   symptom  (trophoneurosis ;  facial 


412  CARBONEUM   SULPHURATUM 

hemiatrophy) ;  incontinence  of  urine ;  impotence.  In  the  Medical 
Argus  (July  to  December,  1891)  H.  H.  Crippen  has  collected  from 
several  sources  instances  of  intoxication  of  workers  with  Carb,  bisuL 
The  action  on  vision  was  very  marked  in  many  cases.  Myopia,  asthe- 
nopia ;  achromatopsia,  dyscnromatopsia,  cloudiness  and  atrophy  of 
optic  disc,  central  scotoma  for  light  and  colours  ;  retinal  congestion, 
arteries  and  veins  tortuous ;  veins  distended,  arteries  contracted ; 
optic  discs  pale.  Everything  seemed  in  a  fog  ;  as  if  a  spider's  web 
over  objects ;  green  or  red.  One  patient  had  complete  right  hemi- 
plegia, following  sudden  loss  of  consciousness,  blindness  of  right  eye 
and  great  impairment  of  vision  of  left.  Loss  of  memory,  especially 
for  words,  was  a  very  frequent  s)rmptom  ;  delusions  were  common  : 
"Heard  voices  and  believed  he  had  committed  a  robbery";  "sensa- 
tion of  a  hole  close  by,  into  which  he  was  in  danger  of  faUing." 
£.  £.  Case  has  cured  with  Carb.  sul,  30  in  a  slender,  nervous 
woman,  the  following  symptoms  :  "Sensation,  as  of  a  weight  between 
the  scapulae,  compelling  her  to  bend  forward.  Throbbing  in  the 
dorsal  spine  as  if  a  heart  were  beating  there.  Constipation  with 
ineffectual  urging  to  stool.  Haemorrhage  of  bright  blood  from  rectum 
after  stool.  Itching  of  anus  after  stool,  also  in  the  night  Feet 
swollen,  hot  and  throbbing  in  the  evening."  Carb.  sul.  has  the 
flatulency  of  Carbo  veg.  and  the  abdominal  soreness  of  Sulphur,  It 
produces  eruptions  of  herpes  and  impetigo,  discharges  excoriating 
and  producing  violent  itching.  It  corresponds  to  the  herpetic 
diathesis.  The  pains  are  burning,  tearing,  jerking,  and  stitching 
and  are  apt  to  return  at  regular  intervals  for  a  long  time.  Pains 
come  and  go  quickly.  The  periodicity  shows  itself,  as  in  diarrhoea, 
which  comes  every  six  weeks.  The  <  from  warmth  common  to 
Carb.  V.  and  Sulph.  shows' itself  in  "Toothache  brought  on  by  warm 
food."  Vision  >  in  evening ;  in  twilight ;  after  eating.  <  From 
slightest  motion ;  from  walking.  <  At  night.  Sleep  is  restiess  with 
tossing  in  bed.  A  feeling  of  vibration  and  trembling  in  whole  body, 
particularly  in  hands.    Anaesthesia  of  skin  and  mucous  membranes. 

Relations. — Compare :  Caust,  Chi.,  and  Nat.  salic.  in  Meniere's 
disease  ;  Carb.  v.  in  flatulence ;  Sulph.  (sensitiveness  of  abdomen)  ,- 
Benz.  dinit.  (vision)  ;  Anac.  (hears  voices^ ;  Can.  ind.  (openiujg  and 
shutting  sensation  in  head).  Kali  bi.,  Sil.,  Sul.  (hair  sensation  in 
throat). 

STHPT0H8. 

I.  Mind. — Difficult  thinking. — Memory  defective  ;  cannot  find  the  right 
word. — Great  loquacity,  but  frequent  loss  of  memory  for  words. — Sought  for 
things  lying  before  them. — Childish  and  idiotic. — Surly,  morose ;  vehemeat, 
irascible. — Exhilaration  bordering  on  drunkenness. — ^Indifferent  to  the  sur- 
roundings.— Irritability  followed  by  indigestion. — Laughter  without  cause,— 
Delusions ;  heard  voices  and  believed  he  had  committed  a  robbery. — Saw 
obstacles  in  front  of  him  which  did  not  exist. — Sensation  of  a  hole  close  by 
into  which  he  was  in  danger  of  falling. — ^Attacks  of  semi-unconsciousness 
with  convulsive  movements  of  the  limbs  lasting  half  a  minute. — ^Attacks 
resembling  hysterical  fits,  with  convulsive  movements  of  the  face. — Sudden 


CARBONEUM   SULPHURATUM  413 

k>ss  of  conscioiisness  lasting  seven  days,  with  complete  right  hemiplegia,  total 
blindness  of  r.  eye  and  great  impairment  of  vision  of  L 

2.  Head. — Sudden  attacks  of  vertigo  while  sitting. — Headache  and 
vertigo. — Dull,  muddled  feeling  in  forehead  as  if  contracting.^Frequent 
attacks  of  fainting. — Pressure  most  in  forehead. — Headache  of  a  compressive 
character  with  severe  heavy  pain  in  forehead  and  temples  as  if  the  head  were 
compressed  in  a  vice  or  supporting  a  heavy  weight. — ^Violent  headache,  in- 
creasing till  the  mind  is  affected.— Very  sharp  pains  in  head,  through  temples, 
nearly  every  day,  notably  after  dinner ;  numbness  through  to  vertex. — Head- 
ache in  the  temples  and  occiput. — Severe  pain  in  the  occiput. — Headache  as 
if  the  head  was  opening  and  shutting. — Penetrating  pain  <  shaking  head  and 
heavy  steps. — Fluctuations  in  head  <  moving  head. — Painful,  heavy  feeling  in 
head  after  breakfast — Brushing  hair  is  painful. — Itching  on  head ;  pimples 
sore  to  touch. 

3.  £yes. — Dim  sight ;  objects  fade  away.— Vanishing  of  sight.— Dim- 
ness of  vision  with  vertigo. — Dimness  of  vision  as  from  a  fog  or  mist  before 
the  eyes. — Dimness  of  vision ;  objects  appearing  green,  then  red  and  foggy. — 
Makes  mistakes  as  to  form  of  objects. — Diplopia. — Complete  achromatopsia. — 
Contraction  of  field  of  vision  for  white  and  blue;  red  and  green  totally  absent. 
— Central  scotoma  for  red. — Central  scotoma  for  white  and  colours. — Dazzled 
by  bright  light. — Constant  flashes  and  spots  before  the  eyes. — Muscae  voli- 
tantes. — ^Appearance  as  of  a  spider's  web  before  the  eyes. — Reading  brings 
tears  to  eyes. — Slight  insensibiUty  of  the  conjuctiva  to  touch. — Pupils  dilated 
and  sluggish. — Fine,  floating  filaments  and  specks  in  the  vitreous. — Deposit 
of  whitish,  shining  nodules  in  the  macula  lutea. — Ischaemia  of  the  optic 
papilla.-- Atrophy  of  the  optic  papillae. — Optic  disc  pale,  deeply  cupped,  less 
transparent  than  normal.-— Congestion  of  the  optic  discs. — Retinal  congestion, 
arteries  and  veins  tortuous. — Dilation  of  retinal  veins ;  arteries  too  small. — 
Small  zone  of  circumscribed  retinitis  along  the  retinal  vessels ;  blood-vessels 
have  a  double  contour. — ^Vision  >  in  the  twilight. — ^Vision  >  by  eating,  < 
when  fasting,  could  often  read  after  a  meal. — Obliged  to  wink  to  see  clearly. 
—Vision  >  in  the  evening. — Pustule  on  upper  lid,  itches  and  bums. — Lids 
heavy;  sore  on  moving;  quivering. 

4.  Ears. — Stitches  in  ears ;  after  stool. — Pain  in  1.  ear  when  swallowing. 
—Ears  as  if  stopped  up. — Ringing  lasting  several  days. — Singing  and  buzzing 
like  an  ^Bolian  harp  when  walking  in  morning. — Deafness. 

5.  Nose. — End  of  nose  bums,  is  pink  red,  burning  as  if  raw. — ^Tickling 
in  tip  with  irritation  to  sneeze. — ^Eruption. — Diminution  of  sense  of  smell. — 
Epistaxis. 

6.  Face. — Paleness  of  face. — Bewildered  expression. — Eruption  like  the 
acne  of  drankards  on  nose  and  cheeks. — Lips  dry  and  burning.— Contractive 
feeling  in  muscles  of  lower  jaw. — Lockjaw. 

7.  Teeth.— Tartar  accumulates  on  teeth.— Toothache  brought  on  by 
warm  food. 

S.  Mottth. — Lisping,  stammering  speech  like  that  of  a  child. — Saltish 
ta^te  of  phlegm  hawked  up. — Dry  mouth  with  unquenchable  thirst. — Saliva- 
tion with  nausea;  glutinous  saliva. — ^Accumulation  of  water  oi  a  sweetish 
taste  in  the  mouth. 

9.   Throat.— Tickling  back  of  palate  after  lying  down. — Burning  in 


414  CARBONEUM   SULPHURATUM 

throat  extending  to  stomach. — Sensation  as  if  a  hair  had  lodged  in  throat ;  as 
if  a  piece  of  bone  had  lodged  in  upper  oesophagus. — Swallowing  difficult, 
causes  pain  in  1.  ear. 

ID.  Appetite.— Voracious  appetite. — Hunger  with  aversion  to  eating. — 
Loss  of  appetite  and  heavy  satiety  when  eating. — Great  thirst,  desire  for  beer. 
— Many  symptoms  come  on  after  eating. — Acrid  burning  eructations  after 
eating. 

IX.  Stomach. — Sour  belching  with  passage  of  much  sour  flatus;  >  from 
belching. — Inclination  to  vomit  when  entering  a  room  or  going  into  open  air. 
— ^Vomiting  of  bitter  water.— Vomiting  followed  by  immediate  relief. — Press- 
ing, stitching,  burning  pains  in  stomach. — Feeling  in  stomach  as  if  tied 
together. — Extreme  tenderness. — Heartburn. 

18.  Abdomen.— Vomiting ;  pains  in  the  belly  ;  painful  cramps  followed 
by  such  muscular  weakness  he  could  not  stand. — Liver  complaint  with  dropsy 
of  feet. — Cutting  in  bowels.— Navel  drawn  in  with  pain. — ^Twisting,  rolling, 
rumbling ;  distension ;  abdominal  walls  sore. — Strangulated  hernia. 

13.  Stool  and  Anu8«^Very  offensive  and  frequent  passage  of  flatus. — 
Stools:  thin,  papescent,  small;  yellowish,  frothy,  sour-smelling,  fluid,  with 
tenesmus  and  colicky  pains ;  navel  drawn  in ;  came  on  in  night — Chronic 
diarrhoea  coming  on  every  four  to  six  weeks  and  lasting  one  or  two  days. — 
After  stool :  headache ;  stitches  in  ears ;  pressure  in  stomach ;  burning ; 
weakness  and  trembling. — Bright  red  blood  with  stool. — Constipation  :  with 
belching ;  with  hunger. — Burning  and  itching  at  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Stitch-like  cramping  pain  in  bladder  and  neck 
of  bladder,  through  to  urethra,  at  same  time  similar  pain  in  anus  and  rectum. 
(At  midnight,  on  coming  home  and  drinking  a  glass  of  wine.) — Frequent 
desire  to  pass  water ;  tickling  in  fore  part  of  urethra. — Involuntary  micturition. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sexual  excitement  followed  by  complete 
loss  of  desire. — Desire  lost  without  previous  sexual  excitement — Burning  in 
urethra :  with  erections ;  when  urinating. — L.  testicle  swollen  and  indurated. 
— Impotence  in  atrophied  testicles. 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. —  Menses  five  days  early.  —  Ovaries 
almost  obliterated. — Labour  pains  too  weak. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness,  irritation  to  hawk;  heat  in 
larynx;  scratching  and  scraped  feeling.— Breath  hot — Breathing  difficult; 
only  >  by  breathing  deeply  in  open  air. — Flying  stitches  in  chest,  quickly 
passing  over,  but  frequently  returning.— (Asphyxia  from  alcohol  and  from  coal 
gas).— Cough  from  irritation  in  larynx  or  at  bifurcation  of  trachea. — Cough 
caused  by  heartburn. 

so.  Neck  and  Back.— Rheumatic  pains  and  sti£Fness  of  neck. — G<utre. 
— Feeling  of  heavy  load  hanging  on  back  between  scapulae. — Pain  in  small 
of  back  and  loins. 

ai.  Limbs. — Crackling  in  joints. — ^Tearing,  jerking,  stitching,  flying  pains, 
returning  at  regular  intervals.— -Great  weakening  of  the  muscular  forces  of  the 
limbs ;  beginning  in  the  upper  limbs,  with  cramps  in  the  arms,  calves  and 
abdomen. — ^Weakness  of  limbs. — Pains  in  the  limbs  and  joints. — Painful 
twitchings  in  the  limbs. — Contracture  of  legs  and  arms,  but  nowhere 
complete. 

aa.    Upper  Limt>s.— Formication  in  the  hands  and  arms.— Gradual  loss 


CARDUUS  BENEDICTUS  415 

of  sensation  in  the  r.  hand. — Numbness  of  the  fingers  and  inability  to  hold 
small  objects^ — ^Weakness  of  the  upper  limbs  to  the  elbow  with  considerable 
diminntion  of  the  sensibility  and  slight  paresis. — Marked  atrophy  of  the 
thenar  eminence  ci  the  thumb  and  of  the  fnterossei. — Laming  and  pain  in  1. 
arm ;  arm  goes  to  sleep. 

S3.  Lower  Limbs.— Sciatica  1.  thigh,  from  taking  cold,  with  entire 
inability  to  walk. — Chronic  sciatica  r.  thigh  ;  movement  impeded. — Stiffness 
of  lower  limbs. — Pains  in  lower  limbs  with  cramp  and  trembling. — Pain  in 
lower  limbs  accompanied  by  cramps  and  formication. — Cramps  in  calves  of 
le|E^  and  in  toes. — Stabbing,  piercing  pain  from  intercostal  bones  through  toes 
while  walking. — Great  difficulty  in  walking,  1.  leg  more  a£Fected  than  r. 

84-  Generalities. — Incomplete  contraction  of  all  the  muscles  of  the 
body. — Emaciation. — ^Athermia. — Cold  sweats  and  general  weakness. — Sudden 
attack  of  general  trembling,  with  dimness  of  vision. — ^Twitching  in  single 
fibnllae  of  muscles. — Fear  of  walking  in  the  dark. — ^Anaesthesia  of  certain 
portions  of  the  skin. — Peripheral  neuritis. 

15.    Skin. — BoLis. — Hyperaesthia  of  the  integument. 
aO.    Sleep. — ^Very  drowsy. — Deep  and  prolonged  sleep. — Disturbed  sleep. 
—Nightmare. — Sudden  waking  from  bad  dreams  or  nervous  starting. — Con- 
stant tossing  about  and  throwing  head  about. 

27.  Fever. — Unusual  chilliness. — Cold  cheeks,  hands,  and  feet. — Chills 
7  pjn.— Skin  hot  and  burning  like  nettles. — ^Warmth  rises  up  from  pit  of 
stomach  through  chest  to  head,  and  also  goes  down  to  navel. — ^Absence  of 
sweat—- Perspiration  checked. — Dryness  of  skin  and  oppressive  heat  prevents 
sleep ;  head  heavy. 


Cardans  Benedictus. 

Cnicus  benedictus.    Centaurea  benedicta.    N.  0.  Compositae. 
Tincture  of  whole  plant  when  in  flower. 

GUaieal.— Amaurosis.     Diarrhoea.    Eyes,   affections   of.     Fever.    Headache. 
Joints,  craddng  of.    (Esophagus,  stricture  of.    Varicosls.    Vision,  affections  of. 

Chanusteristios. — The  proving  of  Card,  ben.  shows  a  strong 
action  on  the  eyes  :  twitchings,  and  disturbance  of  vision  ;  flickerings  ; 
muscae  voUtantes.  The  prover  had  "  blackness  before  eyes  for  a  short 
time."  Eyeballs  feel  larger.  **  Burning  "  is  a  symptom  which  runs 
through  the  proving.  There  is  a  "  bitter  burning  "  in  the  stomach,  as 
if  it  were  much  deranged  ;  burning  in  hands  after  sweat ;  burning  in 
the  arms  on  exerting  thenL  The  gastro-abdonunal  disturbances  of 
Card,  mar.  are  observed,  in  less  degree,  in  Card,  ben.  There  is  dis- 
ordered taste,  dysphagia ;  yawning  and  hiccough  ;  cutting  pains  in 
abdomen,  vomiting  and  diarrhcea.  The  respiratory  sphere  is  strongly 
afEected  and  there  is  pain  and  contractive  sensation  in  the  trachea 
with  hoarseness.  Inspired  air  feels  cold.  Other  symptoms  are  : 
Feeling  as  if  buccal  cavity  were  contracted.  Tension  in  tendons. 
Aching  and  cracking  in  joints.    Aching,  cutting  pain,  slight  swelling 


4i6  CARDUUS   BENEDICTUS 

of  veins.  Red  and  afterwards  yellow  spots  on  skin.  The  most 
prominent  of  all  the  symptoms  m  the  proving  is  the  sensation  of 
contraction  which  occurs  in  many  parts.  Symptoms  are  <  by  motion, 
by  touch,  by  walking,  by  stretching  the  limbs. 

[In  two  fatal  cases  of  poisoning,  of  a  boy  and  a  girl,  from  eating 
the  root  of  the  Carline  Thistle  (Carlina  gummifera^  AiracMis  gummi- 
fera)y  which  has  an  enormous  root,  purple  composite  flowers,  sur- 
rounded by  radical  spinous  leaves,  there  was  stertorous  breatiiing, 
drowsiness,  retching  without  actual  vomiting,  asphyxia  and  coma. 
After  death  the  tongue  protruded  slightly  between  the  lips ;  pupils 
were  greatly  dilated  ;  there  was  evidence  of  general  venous  conges- 
tion. In  one  case  (that  of  the  boy)  the  veins  of  the  brain  were 
extremely  congested.] 

BelationB. — Compare  :  Card.  mar. ;  Bell.,  Atrop.  (vision)  ;  Chi. 
and  Salicyl.  ac.  (noises  in  ears) ;  Agar,  (twitching  of  eyelids). 


8THPT0H8. 

I.  Mind. — ^Anxiety,  fear,  starting  at  every  noise,  freqoendy  breaking 
into  cold  sweat. — Fretful ;  during  fever. — Cross  humour. 

8.  Head. — Confusion  of  the  head,  interrupted  stitches  in  temples,  four 
times  in  succession  (more  1.  than  r.). — ^Vertigo  on  raising  head,  <  on  stooping. 
— Pressure  in  occiput  from  crown  ;  for  several  days  pressure  on  eyeball  as  if 
it  would  come  out. — Pressure  on  forehead  esp.  when  stooping. — Heaviness  in 
head. 

3.  Eyes. — Sensation  as  if  (1.)  eyeball  would  be  pressed  outwards,  rather 
a  pleasant  than  a  painful  sensation. — Quivering  movement  in  1.  canthus; 
tickling  in  1.  eye,  very  painful,  with  flow  of  tears ;  stitches  in  inner  canthus. — 
Eyeballs  feel  larger. — Dimness  and  whirling  before  eyes. — Grey  spots  pass 
before  eyes. — Blackness  before  eyes,  for  a  short  time. — Flickering  before  L 
eye  as  if  small  Eery  stars  passed  in  front  of  it,  removed  by  winking. 

4.  Ears. — Ringing  in  ears. — Roaring  in  r.  ear,  soon  going  off. — ^Feeling 
as  if  something  were  in  ears,  also  as  if  something  burst  like  a  bladder,  and 
then  humming. 

5.  Nose. — Continued  violent  griping  and  tickling  in  nose  as  if  coryza 
were  coming  on. 

6.  Face. — Flushes  of  heat  in  face. 

8.  Mouth. — Continued  feeling,  lasting  for  8  to  10  days,  as  if  buccal 
cavity  contracted  and  narrowed,  beginning  and  declining  slowly ;  >  after 
eating. — Much  mucus  in  mouth. — Constant  overflow  of  saliva. — Sour  taste  for 
six  days,  always  getting  worse  and  almost  sulphurous,  >  for  awhile  by  eating. 
— Mouth  dry,  morning  and  evening,  with  thirst — Tickling  on  surface  of 
tongue  near  root,  lasts  Eve  minutes  and  changes  to  shoots  like  electric  sparks ; 
toothache  r.  side  in  periods,  drawing  more  than  shooting. — Plat  taste,  tongue 
sensitive  as  if  swollen  ;  much  furred. 

g.    Throat. — Swallowing  difficult 

II.  Stomach. — Bitter  burning,  as  though  stomach  very  much  deranged. 
— After  eating,  eructation. — Constant  yawning  and  hiccough. — ^Though  stomach 
is  full  it  feels  empty.— Appetite  bad  ;  nausea.— Vomiting. 


CARDUUS  MARIANUS  417 

1%    Abdomen. — Constant  drawing,  cutting  pain  in  abdomen. — Slight 
pinching  in  abdomen ;  curious  sounds  r.  side  of  navel. 
13.    StooL— Diarrhcea. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Hoarseness. — Pain  in  trachea  as  if  inflamed ; 
as  if  fatigued  by  long  coughing ;  inspired  air  feels  cold ;  coughs  frequently,  it 
soonds  roogh,  like  hissing. — Dyspnoea. — Breathes  quickly,  must  draw  in  air 
with  an  e£Eort,  as  the  trachea  feels  closed  up,  each  inspiration  is  like  a  low 
whistle,  esp.  evenings. — Peels  as  if  too  tightly  laced ;  unable  to  sing  or  talk 
king  for  several  days. — Constant  dry  cough. 

18.  Chest. — ^Throbbing  below  1.  breast. 

90.  Neck,  Back,  and  Trunk. — Dull  shooting  in  sides  over  hip,  now  r. 
now  L,  at  first  only  on  stooping  or  moving,  but  afterwards  at  all  times. 

SI.  Limbs. — Cracking  in  joints,  motion  difficult. — Limbs  heavy  as  if 
paralysed ;  <  during  the  fever. — Sensation  when  touching  the  limbs  as  if 
there  were  bruised  spots  (veins  painful  and  prominent). — Pains  in  all  the  bones, 
e^.  when  the  limbs  have  been  stretched. — Tension  in  tendons. 

2S.  Upper  Limbs. — ^When  leaning  on  arms  burning  in  them,  but  they 
are  not  hot  to  the  touch. — Contraction  in  elbows ;  and  arms. — Feeling  in  fore- 
arm, as  if  in  the  blood-vessels,  like  a  long  knife-stab,  with  continued  burning. 
—Trembling  of  hands. 

Q.  Loiter  Limbs. — ^Weakness  and  giving  way  of  knees  when  walking, 
esp.  during  the  fever. — Feet  weak  after  sitting,  soles  feel  sore  when  treading. 

24.  Generalities. — Aching  and  slight  swelling  of  veins. — Long,  knife- 
like  stab  in  veins  of  forearm. 

35.  Skin. — Painless  rash,  like  nettle-rash  ;  a  goose-skin,  rather  pointed, 
hard,  preceded  by  cold  creeping  over  the  whole  body,  accompanied  by 
feverish  symptoms,  lasting  several  days  and  slowly  disappearing.— -Small  red 
spots  on  the  finger,  lasting  several  days,  followed  by  a  yellow  spot  lasting  a 
longtime. 

•7.  Fever. — Febrile  chill  with  goose-flesh  several  days  from  noon  to 
evening,  at  times  appearing  earlier. — Fever  consisting  of  flushes  of  heat  in 
face ;  after  eating,  over  whole  body,  without  thirst,  with  dimness  of  vision 
and  pressure  in  the  eyes,  hot  breath,  hot  lips,  hands,  and  feet. — Burning  on 
exerting  arms. — Burning  under  skin  on  face,  afterwards  in  other  parts  of 
body.— Slight  general  sweat. — Sweat  followed  by  burning  heat  in  hands. 


Cardans  Marianas. 

Siiybnm.    AT.  O.  Compositae.    Tincture  or  trituration  of  the  seeds. 

gHi><o^l^ — ^Bronchitis.  Dropsy.  Epistaxis.  Fever.  Gall-stones.  Haemo- 
pMs.  Haemorrhages.  Haemorrhoids.  Ii&uenza.  Intermittents.  Jaundice.  Liver, 
affections  of.  Metrorrhagia.  Neuralgia.  Phthisis.  Pleurisy.  Rheumatism. 
Sdatica.    Spleen,  affections  of.    Typhlitis.    Varicose  veins. 

Chanoteristios. — To  Rademacher  we  are  principally  indebted 
for  this  remedy.     It  is  with  him  primarily  an  hepatic  :   all  its  mani- 
festations originating  in  some  disorder  of  the  liver.    According  to 
VOL  L  28 


4i8  CARDUUS   MARIANUS 

Burnett  the  greatest  effect  of  Card,  m.  is  felt  on  the  spleen  and  liver, 
especially  the  splenic  end  of  the  liver.  G.  F.  Laidlaw  (H.  Af .,  xxxiv. 
686)  gives  a  condensed  translation  of  Ridemacher's  remarks  about 
Card.  tn. :  He  regards  haematemesis  as  most  frequently  due  to  chronic 
disease  of  the  spleen  ;  less  frequently  to  disease  of  the  liver.  People 
who  have  long  suffered  from  pains  in  left  hypochondrium  are  apt 
to  vomit  blood,  after  which  they  are  relieved.  Rademacher  regards 
the  bleeding  as  often  beneficial,  and  says  it  should  not  be  checked 
too  soon.  In  the  treatment  of  haematemesis  he  says  it  is  best 
to  use  a  remedy  that  acts  on  the  epigastric  region  without  irritating 
the  stomach  and  interfering  with  the  healing  of  the  lesion.  Such 
a  remedy  he  found  in  a  decoction  of  the  seeds  of  Card.  mar.  He 
used  to  give  Opium  before,  but  this,  he  says,  in  some  people  "  produces 
an  array  of  symptoms  similar  to  those  seen  in  severe  haemorrhage, 
and  might  aggravate  the  condition."  He  adds  :  ''  It  is  probable  that 
many  small  haemorrhages  of  the  stomach  escape  notice  because  there 
is  no  vomiting,  and  that  it  is  in  this  manner  that  obscure  abdominal 
complaints  are  sometimes  suddenly  relieved  or  cured." 

The  liver  enlargement  of  Carduus  m.  is  in  the  transverse  direction 
(that  of  Chel.  being  more  vertical).  Burnett  relates  the  case  of  a  girl 
of  sixteen  who  had  had  severe  attacks  of  vomiting  for  three  months, 
with  pains  in  abdomen.  The  vomiting  was  relieved  by  remedies 
symptomatically  related,  but  the  pains  were  not.  An  examination 
showed  "  liver  and  spleen  both  very  much  enlarged  so  that  they  seem 
to  fill  the  abdomen."  Card.  m.  f  gtt.  v.  night  and  morning  soon  cured 
the  patient.  Dudgeon  has  given  an  account  of  Winddband's  and 
Kunze's  experience  with  the  remedy.  Windelband  in  treating  a 
woman  for  chronic  swelling  of  the  fiver  with  Card,  m.,  incidentally 
cured  at  the  same  time  some  "  colossal "  varicose  ulcers.  This 
experience  led  him  to  cure  a  large  number  of  like  cases  with  the  same 
remedy.  He  also  cured  gastro-intestinal  catarrh  ;  epistaxis ;  metror- 
rhagia ;  haemorrhoidal  flux  ;  dependent  on  portal  congestion.  Tender- 
ness of  the  liver  ;  bilious  fever  ;  symptoms  resembUng  peritonitis  and 
stitch-in-the-side  have  been  cured  by  it.  Kunze  commends  the 
remedy,  in  addition,  in  cases  of  spasm  of  the  stomach,  pains  contrac- 
tive, vomiting  occurring  at  the  climax,  cold  rising  from  precordium  to 
throat ;  feeling  of  spasmodic  constriction ;  pressive,  shooting  pain 
right  side  of  aMomen  spreading  to  back  or  shoulder.  He  has  cured 
with  it  pains  in  hepatic  and  splenic  regions  accompanied  with 
haemoptysis,  or  expectoration  of  viscid,  lumpy  mucus,  and  evening 
fever.  Even  phthisis  pituitosa  has  been  cured  by  it.  Local  muscular 
rheumatisms  dependent  on  liver  disease.  E.  A.  Cook  (formerly  of 
Richmond)  gave  Card.  m.  i  to  a  patient  suffering  from  liver  conges- 
tion, swollen  veins  of  legs,  piles,  and  headache,  with  great  benefit  to 
all  the  symptoms.  On  the  second  day  the  patient  developed  these 
new  symptoms,  which  she  had  never  had  before  and  which  alarmed 
her  greatly  :  "  Great  giddiness  with  inclination  to  fall  forward  ;  and 
a  sudden  and  profuse  epistaxis  followed  by  great  relief."  A  striking 
cure  by  Card.  m.  in  "  Miner's  Disease  "  is  recorded  by  Proell.  :  An 
old  miner  in  the  gold  mines  of  Bockstein  suffered  from  the  so-called 
"  Bergsucht "  (miner's  disease).     "  His  chief  symptoms  were  :  earthy 


CARDUUS   MARIANUS  419 

complexion,  eyes  dim,  hardness  of  hearing,  mucous  coating  on 
toi^e,  loss  of  appetite  even  for  his  favourite  food  and  tobacco  ; 
great  dyspnoea  and  palpitation  on  going  up-hill ;  spleen  and  stomach 
distended  ;  much  wind  eructated,  constant  borborygmus,  constipation 
alternating  with  diarrhoea,  but  the  latter  more  freouent,  evacuations 
grey,  urine  scanty  and  pale,  skin  dry  as  if  witherea,  great  weakness, 
pulse  slow  and  weak.  Especially  remarkable  was  the  disposition 
of  this  man.  Formerly  cheerful,  he  is  now  joyless  and  apathetic  ; 
the  most  important  events  he  took  no  notice  of.  I  gave  him  tinct. 
Card,  mar.y  a  few  drops  four  times  a  day.  I  was  unable  to  efiEect 
any  alteration  in  his  food,  drink,  or  regimen.  A  month  after  this 
he  returned  looking  much  better.  On  asking  him  how  he  was,  he 
replied :  '  You  have  made  a  new  man  of  me.'  Almost  all  the  former 
symptoms  had  disappeared  and  given  place  to  the  opposite.  His 
complexion  was  fresh,  his  eyes  sparkled,  he  was  cheerful,  wished  to 
live  and  work,  had  good  appetite,  motions  brown,  more  urine  passed, 
poise  normal.  He  said  he  now  for  the  first  time  knew  what  it  was  to 
be  well,  and  he  remained  so  for  many  years."  (Z«7.,  Berl.  Ver. — 
Amtr.  Hom,y  December  15,  1895.)  Proell  also  recommends  it  in  affec- 
tions of  liver,  spleen,  and  kidneys  caused  by  abuse  of  alcoholic 
beverages  and  especiaUy  beer.  He  relates  two  cases  :  one  in  a  cook 
who  had  ^mptoms  of  cirrhosis  of  the  liver  and  general  dropsy  which 
made  her  features  unrecognisable  ;  and  one  in  a  worker  in  a  brewery 
who  developed  dropsy.  Both  were  cured  by  the  tincture.  The 
brewery  man,  thinking  the  remedy  was  intended  to  be  purgative, 
and  thinking  the  4  drops  prescribed  would  not  be  sufficient,  took 
the  whole  amount,  2^  drachms,  at  one  dose,  without  markedly  bad 
effects,  and  was  quickly  cured.  Proell  adds  that  Card,  m,  is  indicated 
where  there  is  a  relaxed  state  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach 
as  evidenced  by  flatulence  and  diarrhoea,  especially  when  the  stools 
are  clay-coloured.  Much  fatigue  is  experienced,  <  after  eating ;  when 
riding ;  on  awaking ;  frequency  accompanied  by  yawning.  Chilliness 
is  prominent,  on  awaking ;  at  night ;  <  uncovering.  Coldness  of 
knees.  Head  very  sensitive  to  cold.  Sweating  of  forehead  and 
back  after  meals.  Stitches,  drawing  pressure  are  prominent  among 
the  sensations,  also  radiating  pains ;  constriction,  band-sensation  and 
cramps.    Motion  <  most  complaints. 

Bdations. — Compare:  Bry.  (epistaxis,  &c.) ;  Chel.,  Merc,  Nux, 
Pod.,  Chelone. 

8THPT0HS. 

I.  Mind. — Forgets  what  he  has  just  intended  to  do. — Disposition  to 
become  angry. — Melancholy  with  liver  siffections. — ^Joyless  ;  apathetic. 

a.  Head. — Great  giddiness,  with  tendency  to  fall  forward,  >  by 
epistaxis. — Fulness  in  head  with  dull  headache,  esp.  in  forehead  or  temples, 
confusion,  vertigo. — Pressure  in  forehead,  over  eye,  in  occiput. — Constriction 
aroond  skull ;  over  eyebrows. — Pain  in  1.  parietal  bone. 

3.  Eyes. — Burning  and  pressure  in  eyeballs  and  lids. — Pressiu-e  as  if 
eyeballs  were  pressed  against  side  of  orbits. 

5.    Nose. — ^Tickling  first  in  r.  then  1.  nostril  with  watery  discharge  from 


420  CARDUUS   MARIANUS 

same.— Burning  in  nostrils  (r), — Epistaxis ;  habitual  in  psoric  young  persons. — 
Sudden  profuse  epistaxis,  relieving  vertigo. 

6.  Face. — Heat  in  face. — Earthy,  yellowish-grey,  dirty  or  florid  com- 
plexion. 

S,  g.  Mouth  and  Throat. — Bitter  taste.— Tongue  white ;  white 
centre;  red  tip  and  edges;  white-coated  on  side. — Collection  of  water  in 
mouth. — Smooth  sensation  of  mucous  membrane  of  palate  as  though  covered 
with  fat. — Repeated  eructations  of  air  with  burning  in  oesophagus. 

II.  Stomach. — Intense  nausea,  painful  retching  and  vomiting  of  some 
greenish  fluid. — Stitches  in  scrobiculum. — Contents  of  stomach  and  intestines 
sour. — Pressure  in  stomach ;  with  eructation  of  air  ;  at  night  on  awakening ; 
lasting  all  day  ;  coming  and  disappearing  during  day. — Sensation  of  empti- 
ness with  headache  before  dinner,  goes  off  after  dinner. — Burning  as  of 
acidity  with  transient  pressure. — Stitches  in  L  of  stomach  (spleen  ?)  <  on 
inspiration. 

18.  AtKlomen. — Fulness  in  h3rpochondria  necessitating  deep  mspiration. 
— Liver  region  sensitive  to  pressure. — Pressure,  tension,  and  stitches  in  liver 
on  lying  on  1.  side. — Stitches  in  spleen  <  on  inspiration  and  on  stooping. — 
Swelling,  sensitiveness,  and  induration  of  I  lobe  of  liver,  causing  by  compres- 
sion respiratory  embarrassment,  and  cough  with  thick  expectoration. — Liver 
disease  affecting  lungs  and  causing  haemoptysis. — Drawing  pain  between 
umbilicus  and  pit  of  stomach,  coming  and  going,  in  peritoneum  of  abdominal 
wall,  from  r.  to  1.,  followed  by  pain  and  sensation  of  heat  in  spots  as  large  as 
a  hen's  egg  between  umbilicus  and  inguinal  region  to  1. — Sensation  of  motion 
in  intestines  on  expiration,  and  extending  breadth  of  a  hand  around  umbilicus. 
— Distension;  rumbling;  cutting. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Melasna. — Stool  very  hard  and  knotty; 
insufficient — Paste-like,  clayey  stool. — Burning  pain  in  rectum  and  anus 
which  interferes  with  sitting. — Itching. — Hasmorrhoids  with  acidity  of 
stomach  and  distension  of  bowels. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urging  to  urinate,  without  necessity  of  passing 
water. — Pressure  on  bladder,  producing  dribbling  of  urine  after  unavailing 
urging  to  stool. — Burning  at  meatus  ;  in  urethra. — Urine  turbid,  golden  yellow, 
and  acid. — Strangury ;  calculi. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Catamenia  too  profuse  or  suppressed. 
— Chronic  uterine  haemorrhage  with  portal  derangement 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Irritation  in  posterior  part  of  larynx 
causing  cough.  — Expectoration :  pure  blood;  mucus  mixed  with  blood. 

18.  Chest. — Drawing  pain  on  margin  of  1.  rib,  with  pain  during  breath- 
ing.— Cough  with  stitches  in  sides  of  chest  and  bloody  sputa. — Splenic  or 
hepatic  cough. — Pains  in  chest,  going  to  front  part,  to  shoulders,  back,  loins, 
and  abdomen  combined  with  urging  to  urinate. — Drawing  pains  through  1. 
pectoral  and  1.  intercostal  muscles  t>elow  axillae. — Stitches  in  chest ;  from  1. 
nipple  to  r.  downward. — Pains  extend  over  entire  front  of  chest,  motion 
almost  impossible. 

19.  Heart.—Pain  pressure  and  stitches  in  region  of  heart ;  oppression 
on  deep  breathing. 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — Sensitiveness  in  dorsal  and  cervical  vertebrae.— 
Drawing  pains  in  back  ;  drawing ;  tearing ;  burning  in  1.  shoulder-blade. 


I 


CARLSBAD  421 

It.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Violent  rheumatic  pains  in  r.  deltoid ;  in  r.  arm.*— 
Drawing  pain  In  mosdes  covering  1.  radius,  alternating  with  pain  in  muscles 
of  r.  side.— Cramp-like  pain  in  muscles  of  arms ;  hands ;  fingers ;  calves,  and 
feet 

$3.  Lower  Limbs.— Pain  in  hip-joints  through  buttocks,  causing 
difficulty  in  rising,  <  from  stooping. — Rheumatism  and  spasm  of  extremities. 
— ^Pain  :  in  L  tibia ;  dorsum  of  foot ;  muscles  of  sole  r.  foot ;  lower  part  r.  heel. 
— Varicose  ulcers. 

SS.    Skin.— Varicose  ulcers. — Itching  on  l3ring  down  at  night. 
flS.    Sleep. — Restless  sleep  with  frequent  awakening  and  many  dreams. 
— ^Nightmare  from  lying  on  back. — Fatigue  with  yawning. — Uncontrollable 
yawning. 

«7.  Fever. — Chilliness  on  awakening  with  strong  urging  to  urinate. — 
Oiilliness  at  night  <  uncovering.— Sweat  on  forehead  and  back  after 
meals. 


Carlsbad. 

The  waters  of  the  Spnidel  and  Muhlbriinnen  Springs.    Dilutions. 

flHwfaial* — Blushing  after  eaUng.     Constipation.    Cramp.    Debility.    Diabetes. 
Gout    Rheumatism.    Sciatica.    Sprains.    UrinCf  urging  to  pass. 

Gharaoteristios. — Carlsbad  water  is  a  very  complicated  solution 
containing  the  sulphite,  bicarbonate  and  chloride  of  sodium  in  pre- 
ponderating quantity,  with  carbonates,  sulphates,  phosphates,  fluoride 
and  oxides  of  Calcium,  Magnesium,  Strontium,  Ferrum,  Manganum, 
Potassium,  Aluminium,  Silicon,  and  Carbon,  with  traces  of  iodide  and 
bromide  of  sodium,  of  Cassium,  Rubidium,  Lithium,  and  Boracic 
oadde.  Its  chief  fame  has  been  gained  by  its  action  on  the  liver,  and 
in  the  treatment  of  obesity  and  diabetes.  Its  action  has  been 
observed  on  some  healthy  persons,  but  the  bulk  of  the  symptoms, 
many  of  which  are  striking  peculiar,  have  been  obtained  from 
patients  under  treatment.  They  are,  however,  sufficiently  charac- 
teristic and  have  furnished  the  indications  for  many  homoeopathic 
cures.  Most  prominent  are  the  following  :  Sensation  of  prostration  ; 
of  weakness  so  that  she  trembled  and  could  hold  nothing  securely. 
Tired,  dejected,  sluggish  ;  anxious  trembling.  Weakness  of  all  organs ; 
of  orgEms  of  speech^S^mfO  abdominalis) ;  of  bladder  (stream  weak  and 
slow,  only  passed  with  assistance  of  abdominal  muscles) ;  of  rectum 
(stool  slow  and  only  passed  with  help  of  distant  parts  of  intestinal 
canal ;  peristaltic  motion  seemed  to  cease  not  far  from  end  of  intestines 
and  no  amount  of  pressure  was  of  any  avail ;  faeces  seemed  held  back 
rather  than  pushed  forward.)  General  discomfort.  General  anxious 
sensation  as  if  blood  in  artery  would  stagnate,  with  constant  flushes 
of  heat  Pains  :  dislocated  and  spraining  ;  drawing  ;  tearing,  stitch- 
iog ;  burning ;  dull  shocks  and  jerks.  I  have  found  CarUb,  in  the 
potencies  admirably  respond  to  its  indications.    W.  J.  Guernsey  cured 


422  CARLSBAD 

with  it  sciatica  in  an  old  man,  with  cramp  in  left  ankle.  About  a 
month  after  ceasing  the  remedy  the  patient  complained  that  he  fdt 
paralysed  in  the  loins  for  sever^  hours  after  rising  from  bed,  better 
as  the  day  advanced.  This  was  a  new  symptom  very  like  the  Carlsb, 
effects.  Periodicity  is  noted  :  effects  repeated  after  from  two  to  four 
weeks.  The  skin  has  red  spots  and  streaks,  frequently  burning  like 
fire.  Pimples  and  pustules.  Crawling  and  prickling  on  various  parts, 
with  breaking  out  of  sweat.  Itching  on  various  parts.  Much  itching 
and  increased  sweat  of  genitals.  Increased  sensitiveness  of  the  skin. 
Sensitiveness  to  cold  air  ;  great  liability  to  take  cold.  Frequent  alter- 
nations of  shuddering,  chilliness,  and  heat.  Flushes  of  heat  all  over, 
especially  in  face,  with  sweat  on  forehead.  Heat  of  head  with 
redness  of  face  and  creeping  shudders.  Sweats  more  easily.  Sweat 
stains  linen  yellow.  Symptoms  <  morning  and  evening  ;  after  eating 
and  drinking  ;  on  ascending  ;  after  lying  down  in  bed.  >  In  open 
air  ;  on  motion.    Even  the  headaches  are  >  by  motion. 

Relations.— Corn^ar^.'  Nat.  sul.  (sensitive  to  cold);  Carb.  an. 
(sweat  staining  yellow)  ;  Cepa  (lachrymation) ;  Nux  (<  after 
eating)  ;  Puis.,  Carb.  v.  (>  in  open  air) ;  Bell.,  Glo.  (headache) ; 
Anac,  Apis,  Nux  mosch.,  Pho.  ac.  (absent-minded) ;  Alo.  (cracking  in 
head). 

8THPT0H8. 

1.  Mind, — Excited  and  peevish  (in  the  morning  on  rising),  often  as  if 
beside  himself  about  trifles,  with  flushes  of  heat  all  over. — Self-satisfied,  very 
talkative  and  uncommonly  good-humoured. — Sensitive,  affected  to  tears  by  the 
sorrows  of  others. — Painful  dejection  with  full  stomach. — Constrictive  anxiety 
in  a  room ;  >  open  air. — Discouraged  and  anxious  about  domestic  duties. — 
Difficult  thinking;  indisposition  to  all  mental  exertions. — ^Absent-minded; 
heedless ;  forgets  names ;  great  difficulty  in  expressing  himself  in  writing ; 
often  omits  letters. 

2.  Head. — Dizzy  confusion  and  heaviness  <  after  eating ;  >  open  air. — 
Momentary  attacks  of  vertigo,  had  to  hold  himself  up ;  also  turning  as  if  in  a 
circle ;  >  open  air. — Rush  of  blood  to  head,  with  heaviness  and  confusion. — 
Cracking  as  if  something  breaking  in  head  <  evening  on  lying  down. — Press- 
ing, stupefying,  tearing  headache. — ^Tearing  headache,  now  r.  now  1.,  in 
temples  and  occiput,  >  motion. — ^Throbbing  and  beating  in  head,  vertex  and 
occiput  with  bluish  red  face,  <  ascending. — Headache,  forehead,  and  temples, 
with  swollen  temporal  veins. — Headache  <  in  room,  >  open  air,  >  on 
motion. — Drawing  creeping  in  cranial  periosteum. — Sensitiveness  of  perios- 
teum.— Hair  falls  out. — Smoothing  down  hair  is  very  painful. — Sensation  as  if 
something  cold  ran  over  whole  head,  and  hair  bristled  up. 

3.  Eyes. — Heat  streams  from  eyes  with  burning  and  pressing  in  them 
and  an  appearance  of  black  spots  swimming  about. — Burning  and  pressing, 
as  if  eyes^were  being  pressed  downwards ;  as  if  too  large  for  orbits.— Violent 
pressure  above  orbits. — ^Twitching,  quivering  in  upper  lids,  causing  rubbing, 
as  if  a  foreign  body  were  there. — Excessive  lachrymation,  <  using  eyes. — 
Eyes  weak,  water ;  lids  agglutinated  ;  cannot  do  fine,  near  work. — Objects 
swim  before  sight. — Quivering,  flickering  before  sight ;  fiery  sparks ;  zigzags ; 
bifurcated  bodies  and  grey  spots  ;  clouds ;  veils. 


CARLSBAD  423 

4-  Ears. —Increased  warmth  in  ear,  which  itches. — Fine  twitching 
stitches  from  Eustachian  tube  to  tympanum  >  boring  with  fingers. — Humming, 
roaring,  ringing,  changing  at  times  into  transient  loss  of  hearing. 

5.  Nose. — Bluish  colour  of  nose ;  swelling  of  nasal  veins. — Habitual 
bleeding  of  nose. — Nose-bleed  on  suppression  of  menses. — Frequent  sneezing ; 
blowing  out  thick  mucus. — Catarrh  of  nose  and  throat,  with  hoarseness. — 
Stopped  catarrh. — Sensitiveness  of  nose,  as  in  incipient  catarrh. — Loss  of  smell 
after  stoppage  of  nose. 

6.  Face. — Face  yellow ;  sallow  ;  changes  colour  ;  redness  and  heat ; 
somewhat  swollen. — R  cheek  quivering  and  prickling ;  tearing,  drawing  ;  cut- 
tii^  drawing  in  zygomatic  process  below  r.  eye ;  as  if  zygomatic  processes 
distended ;  r.  zygomatic  process,  sensation  of  cobwebs  as  if  he  must  constantly 
nib  something  away. — Lower  jaw  pressed  against  upper  in  sleep  ;  even 
grinding  of  the  teeth.  ^ 

7.  Teeth. — ^Thick  pappy  mucus  coating  on  teeth. — ^Teeth  loosen  and  fall 
out ;  prominent ;  gums  painifully  swollen. — ^Tearing  in  roots  of  upper  molars ; 
<  after  every  meal  (>  olfaction  of  Cham,). — ^Toothache  <  cold  or  warmth. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  coated  white  with  offensive  smeU  from  mouth. — 
Dryness  of  whole  mouth,  esp.  roof,  as  if  dried  up  with  increased  thirst. — Flow 
of  saliva  and  frequent  spitting. — In  morning,  aiter  waking,  the  entire  mouth 
is  often  lined  with  mucus  which  sticks  like  paste  to  the  teeth  and  causes  a 
furry  sensation  in  the  mouth. — Clayey,  pappy  taste  with  salivation. — Every- 
things  tastes  as  if  salted. 

g.    Throat. — Constantly  much  hawking  up  of  mucus. 

u.  Stomach. — ^Appetite  and  thirst  much  increased. — Frequent  eructa- 
tions; sometimes  smelling  and  tasting  of  the  food,  sometimes  very  bitter. — 
Hicooogh  and  yawning  at  same  time,  <  after  drinking  and  eating. — Frequent 
heartbom  with  accumulation  of  much  water  in  the  mouth  ;  also  with  eructation 
of  almost  corroding  liquid  and  long-lasting  sour  taste  in  mouth. — Nausea  with 
salivation  and  shuddering. — Sensation  as  of  emptiness  and  afterwards  canine 
hunger,-— Pressure  and  heaviness  after  eating  ;  contraction ;  distension ; 
anarting;  scraping,  rancid  sensation. 

18.  Abdomen. — Pressing,  pinching  now  in  hypochondria,  now  shooting 
thence  towards  navel. — ^Twitching  stitches  in  jerks. — Burning  pain  in  spleen. 
—Sensation  of  ring  stretched  round  abdomen  esp.  on  deep  inspiration. — 
—Transient  stitches  from  region  of  small  of  back  tlurough  pelvis  towards  the 
pubes  and  inguinal  region. — Griping  and  wind  colic. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Flowing  haemorrhoids. — Burning  in  rectum 
with  constant  pressure  ;  the  rectum  is  often  pressed  out. — Shooting  pain  in 
rectum  and  anus  frequently  extending  to  penis. — Lumps  as  large  as  hazel- 
nuts at  anus,  with  burning  after  stool  and  impeded  walking. — Discharge  of 
bloody  mucus  with  itching  and  burning  in  anus,  extending  up  towards 
rectum.— Discharge  of  blood  in  drops  or  in  a  stream,  even  without  stool  when 
walking.— Mucous  diarrhoea. — Pappy  soft  stools. — Stools  green,  or  dark  green. 
— <>all-stones  passed. — Sensation  during  a  thin  stool  as  though  it  passed  in 
pieces.— Constipation,  stool  missed  for  several  days,  hard  lumps,  very  difi&cult. 
—Stool  slow,  only  evacuated  with  help  of  distant  muscles  ;  peristaltic  action 
seemed  to  cease  near  end  of  intestine  ;  faeces  seemed  held  back. 

14.  Urinary   Organs. — Frequent  urging  with  discharge  of   copious 


424  CARYA  ALBA 

watery  urine. — Urine  flows  slowly  in  a  weak  streaoii  with  help  of  abdominal 
muscles. — Sediment  at  times  brick*red,  at  times  tenacious  like  frog-spawn ; 
at  times  thick  mucus,  and  even  containing  small  lumps  of  blood. — Urine 
stains  linen  dark  yellow. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs*-— Testicles  swollen  without  sign  of  inflam- 
mation ;  pressive  pain. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Three  days  after  cessation  of  menstrua- 
tion discharge  of  lumps  of  tenacious  black  blood,  and  later,  unconunonly 
violent  leucorrhoea. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Frequent  hawking  of  mucus. — Sensation 
of  soreness  ;  sensitiveness ;  scraping  and  tiokling. — Hoarseness  and  roughness 
of  voice. — Difficult  breathing  on  ascending  steps ;  and  on  carrying  a  slight 
and  customary  burden. 

x8.  Chest. — ^Weakness  in  the  chest  whilst  writing,  >  walking. — Heavi- 
ness; fulness;  oppression;  anxiety. — Peculiar  sensation  of  oppression  in 
lower  part  of  chest,  as  if  lung  had  not  room  enough  to  expand,  had  to  rehire 
deeply. — Stitching  in  chest. — Painf ulness  in  heart,  frequent  transient  stitching 
and  painful  drawing. 

xg.  Heart. — ^Tension  and  contraction  in  heart  region. — Pressing  and 
burning  with  warm  ebullition  and  rush  of  blood. — Sudden  momentary  twitch- 
ing stitches  through  heart  without  special  cause,  so  that  he  has  to  stop  while 
walking. 

do.  Neck  and  Back. — Drawing  pain  in  nape  of  neck  and  shoulder- 
blade. — Sti£Fness ;  paralysis  ;  pressure. — Heat  and  burning  and  at  times  a 
shudder  over  back. — Tensive  and  pressing  pains  from  small  of  back  towards 
the  region  of  the  privates. 

81.  Liml>s.-~Cracking  in  all  the  joints. — ^Trembling  and  crawling  in  the 
joints  and  limbs. — Restlessness ;  now  extending,  now  flexing  ;  with  yawning. 
— Sensation  of  falling  asleep  ;  stiffness. — Heaviness  of  the  arms  after  writing, 
with  coldness  and  going-to-sleep  sensation  in  finger-tips. — ^Varicosesof  super- 
ficial veins  of  lower  limbs. 

86.  Sleep.-^k)nstant  yawning  and  sleepiness ;  <  after  a  meal. — Dreams 
frightful  with  tossing. — Unremembered  dreams. 


Garya  Alba. 

Shellbark,  or  Shagbark  Hickory.  AT.  0.  Juglandaceae.  Tincture  of  nuts. 
OllBioaL— Purpura.    Scurvy. 

OharaoteristicB.— Like  Juglans  Regia  and  yuglans  Cinerea^  Carya 
alba  appears  to  possess  antiscorbutic  properties.  An  exclusive  diet  of 
the  nuts  for  three  or  four  weeks,  in  a  girl  seven  years  old,  produced 
pronounced  symptoms  of  scurvy ;  haemorrhages  from  all  surfaces ; 
on  the  least  excoriation  of  skin  very  dark  blood  gushed  out.  Blood 
gushed  from  gums,  nose,  ears,  and  other  parts. 

Belattons.— Com^ard:  Am.,  Carbo  v.,  Pho.,  Merc,  Ham.,  Bry., 
Rhus.,  Citrus  lim.,  and  Juglandaceae. 


CASCARILLA  425 


STHPTOHS. 

6.    Face.— Face  clay*coloured ;  swollen. 

8.    If  outh*— Goms  swelled,  began  to  bleed  and  turn  black ;  could  not 
move  lips  without  causing  pr<^use  discharge. 

IS.    Abdomen. — Swollen  abdomen. 

13.    Stool.— Discharge  of  black  blood  by  stool. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs.— Breath  short,  difi&cult ;  pulse  quick. 

n.    Limbs. — Extremely  swollen. 

H-  Generalities.— Whole  body,  including  face,  covered  with  livid  spots 
from  one  inch  in  diameter  to  size  of  pin's  head ;  largest  like  a  bruise,  smaller 
sometimes  red  like  flea-bites. 


Casoara  Sagrada. 


Rhamnus  Purshiana.  (California.)  AT.  0.  Rhamnaceae.  Extract  of  bark. 

GBniflsL — Constipation.    Rheumatism. 

OharaeterlBtics. — I  mention  this  well-known  purgative  because 
it  has  been  f  omid  empirically  curative  in  cases  of  subacute  and  chronic 
rheumatism  with  constipation.  Pathogenetic  effects  on  patients  taking 
it  for  constipation  have  been  recorded  :  Vomiting,  severe  griping, 
haemorrhage ;  in  one  case  temporary  insanity  (from  a  home-made 
decoction  of  the  bark).  In  two  cases  choleraic  symptoms  were  pro- 
duced.   Only  material  doses  have  been  used. 


Gasoarilla. 

Croton  deuteria.    N.  O.  Euphorbiaceae.    Tincture  of  bark. 


-Anaemia.    Anns,  bleeding  from.    Constipatiou.    Cough.    Diarrhoea. 
Dropsy.    Haemoptysis.    Haemorrhages.    Intermittents. 

Ghanotaristios.— Coscan/la  has  a  family  resemblance  to  the 
other  Euphorbians.  It  acts  prominently  on  the  digestive  tract.  Its 
leading  symptoms  are  :  Sensation  of  swelling  deep  down  in  throat. 
Accumulation  of  mucus  in  throat.  Hunger  after  meals  and  feeling 
of  emptiness.  Aversion  to  smell  of  tobacco  smoke.  The  concussion 
of  every  step  is  felt  painfully  in  stomach.  Griping  preceding  morning 
stod.  The  abdominal  symptoms  are  >  by  warm  drinks,  Movings 
about  in  abdomen  as  if  hot  water  undulating  there.  Boils  in  inguinal 
region.  Diarrhoea  with  backache  and  lassitude.  Lassitude  and 
muscular  weakness  are  marked  throughout    Constant  alight  urging 


426  CASTANEA  VESCA 

with  gnawing  pain  high  up  in  rectum.  Constipation,  stools  hard,  in 
pieces,  covered  with  mucus.  Passes  bright  blood  with  or  without 
stool,  in  large  quantities,  causing  weakness.  Short,  dry  cough  from 
tickling  in  trachea.  Haemoptysis.  Stitch  upward  in  1.  side  of  chest 
Backache  and  weakness.  Inclination  to  lie  down.  Sleep  with  clear 
consciousness.     Heat  with  thirst  for  warm  drinks  (intermittents). 

Relations. — Compare :    Crot.  t.  (>   from  warm  drinks) ;   Chi. 
(effects  of  loss  of  blood  ;  intermittents) ;  Graph,  (mucus  with  stools). 

8THPT0H8. 

4.    Ears. — Buzzing  in  the  ears. — Internal  and  external  heat  of  the  ears. 
8.    Mouth.— Roughness  of  the  tongue. — Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  and 
of  tobacco  smoke,  for  which  a  repugnance  is  felt. 

g.    Throat. — Sore  throat  on  swallowing,  as  if  from  an  internal  swelling. 

11.  Stomach. — Heat  with  thirst  and  desire  for  hot  drinks. — ^Aversion 
to  smell  of  tobacco  smoke.-— Abortive  risings .'— Pressure  on  the  stomach,  as  if 
from  fulness.— Pain  in  the  stomach  as  from  concussion. — Heat  in  the  stomach 
and  burning  pain  in  the  epigastrium. 

12.  Abdomen. — ^Tension  and  pressure  on  the  hypochondria. — Move- 
ment in  the  abdomen  as  if  hot  water  were  undulating  there. — Flatulent, 
aching  colic. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Evacuations  difficult,  hard,  broken,  and 
covered  with  mucus,  preceded  by  pinchings  in  the  abdomen. — Discharge 
of  clear  blood  from  the  rectum,  with  the  evacuations,  during  and  after  hard, 
brown  stool  in  large  lumps ;  and  without  stool. — Diarrhcsa  alternating  with 
hard,  lumpy  stool. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — ^After  the  emission  of  urine,  pain  resembling 
excoriation  in  the  glans. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs. — HaBmopt3rsis — Stitch  upwards  on  1.  ade. 
20.    Back. — Backache  and  weakness  ;  muscles  pained  violently. 


Castanea  Vesca. 

Chestnut.  N,  0.  Cupuliferae.    Tincture  of  leaves  gathered  in  summer. 
ClinloaL — Diarrhosa.    Whooping-cough. 

Oharaoteristios. — Castan.  has  been  proved  by  Dr.  H.  C.  Houghton 
and  three  others.  The  following  are  the  principal  symptoms 
observed :  Slight  acrid  feeling  in  throat.  Desire  for  warm  drinks. 
Abdominal  walls  sensitive.  Soft  stools  of  short,  small  pieces  hke 
chopped  tape  ;  accompanied  with  severe  pain  and  rumbling  ;  pain 
>  by  stool.  It  has  ciu-ed  whooping-cough,  early  stage,  violent, 
spasmodic  ;  very  dry  ringing  cough.     Very  free  sweat  after  drinking. 

Relations.— C<>m^ard  ;  Am.  bro.,  Mephit.,  Naphthal. 


CASTOREUM  427 

Castor  Equi. 

The  Radimentary  Thumbnail  of  the  Horse.  A  small,  Hat,  oblong- 
oval  horn,  wrinkled  on  surface,  breaking  off  in  scales,  darker 
than  the  hoof,  growing  on  inner  side  of  leg  above  fetlock. 
Scales  triturated. 

OlfBlttl.— Coccygodynia.  Epilepsy.  Nails,  affections  of.  Nipples,  cracked; 
ulcerated.    Warts. 

Charaoteristios.— This  is  a  very  ancient  remedy,  and  was  proved 
and  introduced  into  homoeopathy  by  Hering.  It  especially  acts  on 
the  nipples,  the  nails,  and  bones,  especially  causing  pains  in  right  tibia 
and  coccyx.     Burnett  has  cured  with  it  a  case  of  wart  on  forehead. 

Relatioiis. — Hep.  relieves  the  sore  nipples  ;  Thuja  has  removed 
warts  caused  by  Cast,  eq.  Compare :  Calc.  oxal.,  Hippoman.,  Cas- 
toreum,  Moschus. 

SYMPTOMS. 

J.    Mind. — Unusual  laughter  about  things  not  funny. 

8.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  headache,  and  nausea  in  mornings,  sour  stomach, 
and  lack  of  appetite. 

la    Appetite. — Desire  to  smoke  tobacco. 

la,  13. — Abdomen  and  Stool. — Colic  with  urging  wakes  him  in  the 
morning,  followed  by  a  very  thin,  watery,  somewhat  burning  stool;  with 
passage  of  offensive  flatus. — Pain  in  1.  inguinal  region. 

z6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Cracked,  sore  nipples  in  nursing  women, 
excessively  tender,  cannot  bear  touch  of  clothing ;  even  in  neglected  cases, 
ragged,  nipples  almost  hanging. — Breasts  swollen,  sensitive ;  itching  inter- 
nally; painful  on  descending  stairs. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs. — Disagreeable  sick  feeling  in  larynx. 

19.  Heart.—Peculiar  sensation  about  heart  as  of  something  alive 
struggling. 

ao.    Back. — ^Weak  spine. — Pain  in  coccyx  <  every  evening  while  sitting. 

23.   Lower  Limbs. — Repeated  pain  in  r.  tibia. 

84.   Generalities. — Sjmoope.— Epilepsy. 

25.    Skin.— Warts.— Nails  drop  o£F.— Brittle  nails. 


Gastoreom. 

The  Beaver.     N.  0.  Rodentia.     Tincture    of  secretion,  found  in 
preputial  sacs  of  beaver. 

Clfa^imlt — Chorea.  Convulsions.  Digestion,  disordered.  Dysmenorrhoea. 
Eclampsia.  Flatulence.  Hernia.  Hysteria.  Ileus.  Paralysis.  Pregnancy, 
vomiting  of.  Reaction,  deficient.  Sexual  organs,  inflammation  of  ;  spasms  of. 
Sycosis.  Tetanus.  Typhoid,  lack  of  recuperation  after.  Typhus.  Warts. 
Yawning. 

Ctharaoteristios. — Castoreum  resembles  Ambra,  Moschus,  Ignatia, 
and  Valerian.    It  is  suited  to  nervous  women,  with  pains,  cramps, 


428  CASTOREUM 

weakness  after  severe  illness;  hysterical  individuals;  abdominal 
soreness ;  nervous  attacks  when  the  aura  starts  from  abdomen. 
The  pains  are  >  by  pressure.  Menstrual  coUc,  with  pallor  and 
cold  sweat.  Prostration  is  a  leading  feature  in  the  effects  of  the 
drug.  There  is  also  a  feeling  of  fulness  in  the  stomach  as  if  too 
much  had  been  eaten. 

Casiareum  when  fresh  is  yellow  and  of  the  consistence  of  syrup ; 
when  dry  it  is  dark  red  or  brown  and  of  the  consistence  of  hard  wax 
Teste  remarks  that  it  has  been  regarded  as  a  resinous  substance,  and 
he  observes,  moreover,  that  the  beaver  feeds  almost  entirely  on  the 
resinous  bark  of  pine-trees.  In  Siberia  beavers  feed  on  the  bark  of  the 
birch,  which  may  make  a  difference  in  the  e£Fects  of  Castoreum  from 
different  countries.  Caspari  proved  Russian  Castor.^  Nenning  that 
of  Southern  Europe.  Teste  concluded  from  analogy  that  Castor. 
would  be  an  antisycotic,  and  he  proved  his  point  by  initiating  with 
it  the  cure  of  a  case  of  pedunculated  vegetations  around  the  anus  in 
a  hysterical  young  woman.  Thuja  completed  the  cure.  Teste  places 
Castor,  in  the  Thuja  group  with  Plat,  and  Bism.  He  quotes  from 
Trousseau  and  Pideux  the  following  indications,  which  he  con- 
firms :-— (i)  ''  Amenorrhoea,  accompanied  with  painful  and  tympanitic 
swelling  of  the  abdomen.  We  mean  the  cases  where  oxily  a  few 
drops  of  blood  escape  from  the  uterus,  with  a  sort  of  uterine  tenesmus" 
{2)  *^  The  cases  of  colic  to  which  Castoreum  seems  to  be  principally 
adapted  are  of  the  nervous  kind,  that  seem  to  be  particularly  seated  in 
the  small  intestine.  They  are  accompanied  with  paleness  and  cold 
sweats,  a  sudden  sinking  of  strength,  as  if  the  very  principle  of 
life  had  been  struck  down.  They  are  without  any  alvine  evacua- 
tions, come  suddenly,  after  lively  emotions,  a  cold  on  the  bowels  or 
by  the  feet,  as  after  long  exposure  to  a  cold  rain ;  they  constitute 
a  sort  of  that  passion  termed  by  authors  miserere.**  Castor,  causes 
jerking  in  small  groups  of  muscular  fibres ;  a  sensation  of  heaviness 
of  whole  body  ;  trembling  of  Umbs. 

BelatioiiB. — Compare :  Ambra,  Mosch.,  Nux  v. ;  in  lack  of  re- 
action, Pso.  ;  Thuja  (sycosis).    Antidoted  by :  Colch« 


BTHPTOHB. 

I.  Mind. — Peevish ;  indisposed  to  talk,  very  sensitive  to  all  kinds  o£ 
impressions. — Irritable  in  morning  and  cheerful  abandon  in  evening. — Great 
sadness  and  excessive  susceptibility,  with  easily  provoked  lachrymation. 

8.  Head. — Headache  with  giddiness  and  fainting;  headache  leaving 
head  very  sensitive  to  touch.  Pain  at  the  vertex  and  throbbing  in  the  head 
as  if  there  were  an  ulcer  in  the  brain,  aggravated  by  contact  and  external 
pressure. — Fulness  and  heaviness  of  the  head  as  if  it  were  going  to  burst — 
Acute  drawing  pains  in  the  forehead  and  eyes. 

3.  Eyes. — Pressure  in  the  eyes,  on  viewing  fixedly  a  distant  object. — 
Nocturnal  lachrymation  and  agglutination  of  the  eyes. — Stars,  clouds,  and 
on  viewing  fixedly  a  distant  object,  mist  before  the  sight — ^Susceptibility 
of  the  eyes  to  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  to  that  of  candles. 


CASTOREUM  429 

4.  Ears.— Acute  dragging  in  the  ears.-— Tinkling,  bozzing,  and  gargling 
in  the  ears,  dispersed  by  boring  the  ear  with  the  finger. 

5.  Nose. — Obstruction  of  the  nose. — Flow  of  aqueous^  acrid,  corrosive 
mucns  from  the  nose. 

7.  Teeth. — Toothache  when  eating,  provoked  by  cold  and  mitigated 
by  hot  things. — Odontalgia,  with  acute  drawing  pains,  or  successive  pollings, 
provoked  or  aggravated  by  the  touch. — Swelling  of  the  gums  at  night,  with 
acute  pulling  in  the  temples. 

Sw  Mottth. — Fetid  odour  from  the  mouth,  perceptible  to  the  patient — 
Palling  and  quivering  in  the  tongue. — Swelling  of  tongue. — Rounded  eleva- 
tion in  centre  of  tongue  size  of  pea,  surrounded  by  angry,  suspicious-looking 
base,  size  of  a  5-cent  piece,  extremely  sensitive  to  touch  or  food,  with  drawing 
sensation,  as  if  a  string  were  pulling  centre  of  tongue  towards  hyoid  bone, 
with  burning  in  tongue. 

gb  Throat. — Dryness  of  oesophagus. — Burning  pain  in  the  throat,  as 
from  pyrosis. 

10^  II.  Appetite  and  Stoniach. — Burning  thirst.^-Thirst  so  violent 
that  she  could  not  drink  enough  water  after  dinner. — Bitter  risings. — 
Regurgitation  of  a  bitter  acidity. — Repugnance  to  food  and  constant  nausea. — 
Vomiting  of  white,  bitter  mucus. — Weight,  griping;  tenesmus  with  con- 
stricting pains  under  sternum. — Sensation  in  stomach  as  though  it  would 
go  to  sleep. — Sensation  of  contraction,  and  pain  of  ulceration,  in  the 
epigastrium. 

ifl:  Abdomen. — Pressure  in  region  of  liver  from  within  outwards. — 
Flatulent  colic,  painful  inflation,  esp.  after  a  meal. — Colic,  redness  of  face, 
and  yawning  in  abdominal  complaints,  >  by  external  heat  and  by  bending 
oneself  double. — Umbilical  hernia  with  ulcer,  in  a  screaming  infant. — Pain 
and  soreness  in  1.  side  of  abdomen. — Constant  violent  rollings  in  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Urgent  inclination  to  evacuate. — ^Diarrhoea 
accompanied  by  shivering  and  by  yawning,  with  burning  in  the  anus,  and 
preceded  by  pain  in  the  abdomen,  with  grumbling  and  borborygmi. — 
Evacuations  of  sanguineous  mucus. — Stools:  whitish,  watery;  greenish 
mucus ;  contain  pus ;  patient  is  compelled  to  sit  bent ;  feels  gagged  when 
lying  down. — Before  stool :  cutting  or  pinching  colic ;  painful  rumbling ; 
dragging  in  groin. — ^During  stool :  fetid  flatus,  burning  at  anus. — ^After  stool : 
burning  at  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  emission  of  urine,  with  burning  thirst, 
day  and  night. — ^After  the  emission  of  urine  desire  to  vomit,  and  disgust 

15.  Male  SesRial  Organs, — Seminal  emissions  with  great  excitability. 
lO.    Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menstruation  premature,  pains  in  head 

and  Idns,  pale,  sickly  complexion. — Pain  commences  in  middle  of  thighs, 
extending  over  limbs  and  more  or  less  over  whole  body. — Uterine  tenesmus, 
with  scanty  flow. — Leucorrhcea  watery  or  thick;  burning. — Nausea  and 
vomiting  of  pregnancy. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— -Hoarseness,  with  disposition  to  clear  throat. 
—Breathing :  short,  difficult ;  short  breath  when  ascending  ;  very  deep  with 
heat  in  Imeart  and  in  face ;  slow,  deep  inspiration  with  short  expiration. — 
Stitches  BO  chest ;  heat  as  if  fire  were  burning  in  it. — On  taking  deep  breath 
sensation  as  though  something  heavy  lay  under  sternum. 


430  CAULOPHYLLUM 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Pain  as  from  excoriation,  in  the  sacral  r^ion 
and  back. — Drawing  pains  in  nape  of  the  neck. 

21.  Limbs.— -Nocturnal  dragging  in  shoulders  and  arms. — Spasms  of 
hands  and  feet. — Hands  hot  with  swelling  of  veins. — ^Weakness  of  the  lower 
limbs. 

24.  Generalities.— -Jerking  of  small  groups  of  muscular  fibres. — Chorea; 
epilepsy ;  cramps  in  various  parts. — Prostration  after  dinner,  and  anno3ring 
sensation  as  if  she  had  eaten  too  much.— Internal  restlessness. 

26.  Sleep. — Restless  sleep  at  night,  with  anxious  agitation  and  starts 
with  fright. — ^Angry  exclamations  during  sleep. — ^Jerking  of  the  limbs  while 
asleep. — ^Anxious  and  frightful  dreams. 

27.  Fever. — Predominance  of  cold  and  shuddering.— Fits  of  shivering 
with  icy  coldness  in  the  back. 


Caulophyllam. 


Caulophyllum  thalictroides.     Blue  Cohosh.     Squaw  Root     N.  O. 
Berberidaceae.    Tincture  or  trituration  of  root 

Clinioal.— Abortion,  threatened.  After-pains.  Amenorrhoea.  Barrenness. 
Bearing-down  pains.  Chloasma.  Cholera  morbas.  Dysmenorrhoea.  False  con- 
ception. Feetf  affections  of.  Gonorrhoea.  Hands^  affections  of,  Inframammary 
pain.  Labour^  abnormal ;  false  pains  of.  Leucorrhoea.  Menstruation,  disorders  of. 
Ovarian  neuralgia.  Pityriasis.  Pregnancy,  disorders  of  Rheumatic  gout.  Rheu- 
matism.   Uterine  spasm.    Uterine  atony. 

Gharaoteristios. — Caulophyllum^  ''the  Blue  Cohosh,"  is  closely 
related  to  Actea  racem.,  ''the  Black  Cohosh/'  in  its  action,  though 
belonging  to  a  different  family  of  plants.  It  acts  most  markedly  on 
the  femsde  generative  organs  and  on  rheumatic  states.  It  has  only 
had  one  proving,  that  by  Dr.  Burt,  the  majority  of  the  indications 
having  been  derived  from  tradition  and  clinical  experience.  It  has 
been  given  with  success  for  chloasma  or  pityriasis  versicolor,  curing 
incidentally  dysmenia  at  the  same  time.  Reflex  symptoms  having  a 
uterine  origin ;  headache ;  vomiting';  hoarseness ;  rheumatism ;  cramps 
and  spasms.  No  other  drug  produces  uterine  spasms  so  markedly 
except  Secale.  Bearing-down  pains.  Paraplegia  from  disorders  of  the 
uterus.  Left  ovarian  and  left  inframanunary  pains.  Leucorrhoea  in 
httle  girls.  The  pains  are  intermittent  and  paroxysmal,  and  fly  about 
from  place  to  place ;  generally  <  at  night  Great  nervous  excite- 
ment ;  tremulous  weakness  over  whole  body.  Can  scarcely  speak. 
Sleepless,  restless,  nervous ;  recalling  the  effects  of  coffee,  which  is 
incompatible  with  it.  In  rheumatic  affections  the  special  sphere  of 
Caulo.  is  the  small  joints  and  muscles.  Its  action  on  the  muscular 
tissue  of  the  uterus  (whether  gravid  or  not)  is  to  cause  intermittent 
spasms  or  contractions  (differing  from  the  continuous  contractions  of 
Secale),  Its  special  sphere  in  labour  is  :  (i)  when  pains  do  not  come 
regularly ;  (2)  when  they  disappear  from  exhaustion ;  and  (3)  when 
they  are  too  painful.    Nash  prescribed  Caul.  3  for  a  lady  of  forty, 


CAULOPHYLLUM  431 

seven  months  pregnant,  who  was  attacked  with  severe  pain  and 
sweUing  of  all  the  finger- joints ;  wrapping  them  in  mustard  was  the 
only  thing  that  reliev^  her  sufficiently  to  allow  her  to  get  sleep. 
Caul,  relieved  the  finger  pains,  but  caused  such  severe  labour-like 
pains  that  it  had  to  be  discontinued  for  fear  of  causing  miscarriage. 
The  bearing-down  then  ceased,  and  the  finger  pains  returned  and 
continued  till  delivery,  when  they  ceased  for  a  few  days.  Then 
the  lochia  increased  to  a  flooding — ^passive,  dark,  liquid  ;  with  great 
weakness  and  internal  trembling  (not  visible  externally) ;  and  now  the 
terrible  finger  pains  returned.  Afraid  to  give  Caulo.y  other  remedies 
were  tried,  but  in  vain.  At  last  Nash  gave  Caulo,  200,  which  rapidly 
cleared  up  the  whole  case.  Nash  regards  "  internal  trembUng  "  as  a 
strong  characteristic  when  associated  with  the  weakness ;  he  has  cured 
long-continued  passive  haemorrhage  associated  with  these  symptoms. 

EelatioilB. — Compare:  Gels,  in  dysmenia  (it  is  like  Gels.,  and 
follows  it  well) ;  Puis,  in  labouii-pains,  but  the  mental  condition  is 
opposite ;  Act.  r. ;  Bell,  in  intermittent  and  paroxysmal  pains  ;  Calc. 
(leucorrhoea  in  little  girls) ;  Lil.  t.,  Lach.,  Sul.,  Ustil.,  and  Vib.  o.  in 
left  ovarian  and  inframammary  pains  ;  Mag.  mur.  in  uterine  spasms  ; 
Bry.  in  rheumatism ;  Secale,  Sep.,  Gossyp. 


STMPTOMS. 

I.    Mind. — Fretful ;  irritable ;  apprehensive. 

8.  Head. — Headache  ;  from  uterine  or  spinal  troubles ;  over  1.  eye ; 
pressure  behind  eye  ;  severe  by  spells  ;  <  stooping  ;  from  light ;  from  noon 
tin  night 

6.    Face. — "  Moth  spots  "  on  forehead ;  with  leucorrhoea. 
II.    Stomach. — Frequent  gulping  of  sour,  bitter  fluid  with  vertigo; 
spasmodic  vomiting. — Spasms  of  stomach  from  uterine  irritations. 

13.  Stool. — Stool,  soft  white. — ^Watery  stools,  great  quantity,  runs  a 
perfect  stream  from  bowels,  but  no  pain  ;  i  a.m. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Every  few  minutes  sharp,  stinging  pains  in 
glans  penis. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.~Tension  and  fulness  in  hypogastrium ; 
sensation  as  if  uterus  congested. — Spasmodic  pains  in  uterus. — Painful  men- 
struation; spasmodic,  intermittent  pains  in  bladder,  stomach,  groins,  even 
chest  and  limbs ;  congestion  and  irritability  of  uterus ;  scanty  flow. — Before 
menses :  pain  in  small  of  back ;  great  aching  and  soreness  of  lower  limbs ; 
had  breath ;  bitter  taste ;  vertigo ;  chilliness ;  flow  very  scanty ;  blood  very 
light;  with  intense  nausea  and  vomiting  of  yellow  bitter  matter;  pain 
unremitting  for  several  hours;  habitual  cold  feet  became  warm  under  the 
remedy.-— Amenorrhcea,  spasms,  cramps  or  great  atony. — Hysteric  convul- 
sions daring  dysmenorrhoea. — Leucorrhoea  sharp,  acrid,  very  weakening; 
with  heavy  eyelids ;  of  profuse  bland  mucus ;  in  little  girls ;  with  forcing- 
down  pains ;  with  sterility. — ^Threatened  abortion ;  spasmodic  bearing-down ; 
severe  pain  in  back  and  loins,  but  uterine  contractions  feeble. — Habitual 
abortion  from  uterine  atony. — Spasmodic  rigidity  of  os ;  pain  like  pricking 
needles  in  cervix. — Labour-pains  short,  irregular,  spasmodic,  patient  very  weak 


434  CAUSTICUM 

cold,  <  in  morning.  Aphonia :  paralysis  of  vocal  cords.  Dry,  hollow 
cough  with  mucus  on  chest;  patient  cannot  expectorate,  must 
swaSow  phlegm  raised.  A  characteristic  is :  "  Cannot  cou^  deep 
enough  for  reuef."  Rawness  and  burning  down  throat  and  trachea. 
Rheumatism  tends  to  stiffen  joints  and  contract  limbs.  Warts  are  a 
notable  feature  in  Caus/.— on  hands,  on  face,  and  especially  on  margins 
of  eyelids.  When  on  hands  they  are  usually  found  on  finger-tips  or 
close  to  nails.  Nails  are  crippled.  Old,  large,  inflamed  and  induiated 
warts.  Burning  itching  on  face,  discharging  acrid  fluid  which  forms 
crusts.  Guernsey  commends  Caust  in  the  aiter-effects  of  bums  and 
scalds.  Patients  say,  "  I  have  never  been  well  since  that  bum."  Its 
caustic  properties  may  be  its  "  signature  "  here.  "  Burning,"  indeed, 
is  one  of  the  notes  of  Caust.  Guernsey  gives  "  sensation  as  if  lime 
were  being  slaked  in  the  stomach."  "  Soreness  "  or  ''  rawness  "  are 
also  very  characteristic,  appearing  in  piles  and  anal  affections  « 
walking  or  sitting),  in  which  Caust.  is  in  the  very  first  rank  among 
remedies.  Soreness  and  rawness  accompany  cough  svmptoms  and 
urinary  symptoms.  Malcolm  Macfarlan  confirms  the  following  symp- 
toms :  "  Forearms  in  front  very  sore  to  touch  and  pressure  ;  muscles 
of  extremities  sore  generally."  "  Sudden  severe  pain  commences  in 
left  hip-joint ;  lasts  a  ^ort  time  ;  feels  as  if  it  had  been  injured ;  legs 
very  sore,  or  rather  the  lower  extremities  ache  and  feel  tired."  CausL 
is  a  remedy  to  be  remembered  in  intermittent  fevers.  One  peculiar 
symptom  is,  ''  sweat  coming  after  the  chill  without  intervening  heat." 
Teste  places  Caust.  at  the  head  of  a  group  (including  CoccuL,  Coff. 
c,  CoralLf  Nux  v,y  Staph.,  Ars.)  the  common  characteristic  being 
according  to  him  :  "  Two  series  of  successive  and  opposite  pheno- 
mena ;  the  former  of  short  duration,  consisting  in  a  soil  of  universal 
exaltation  of  all  the  functions  ;  the  latter,  whidti  succeed  the  former 
more  or  less  rapidly,  consist  in  a  general  depression  of  the  vital  f  orces, 
and  constitute  the  real  and  permanent  action  of  the  drugs  of  this 
group."  Among  instances,  he  gives  mirthfulness  followed  by  ill- 
humour  ;  sleeplessness  followed  by  yawning  and  drowsiness ; 
moisture  of  skin  followed  by  dryness  ;  flow  of  saliva  followed  by  dry 
mouth  and  throat ;  coryza  fluent,  then  dry.  Teste  found  Caust.  of 
great  efl&cacy  in  small-pox  in  alternation  with  Merc.  cor.  Periodicity 
is  marked  :  Periodic,  paroxysmal  attacks  ;  twice  a  day  to  every  two, 
three,  or  four  weeks  an  attack  ;  at  new  moon.  Symptoms  are  <  at 
night  (great  restlessness  of  body,  especially  legs).  <  Early  morning 
(cramp).  <  On  waking.  <  In  morning :  hoarseness.  <  Evening  : 
6  to  8  p.m.  heat.  Causticum  is  one  of  Grauvogl's  hydrogenoid  reme- 
dies, hence  is  a  chilly  medicine;  <  washing,  bathing,  open  air, 
draught,  becoming  cold,  after  wetting  ;  <  every  change  of  weather. 
Heat,  especially  getting  warm  in  bed  >  (rheumatism  ceasing  on 
getting  warm  in  bed,  but  beginning  again  as  soon  as  he  gets  up.)  C^ 
the  other  hand  cold  water  >  face  and  eruptions,  and  a  swallow  of 
cold  water  >  cough  ;  headache  is  <  entering  a  warm  room  ;  damp 
weather  >  pains  in  scalp,  ulcers  ;  rhinitis.  Heat  <  eruptions.  <  In 
dark  ;  fear  of  darkness.  <  From  coifee.  <  After  stool.  <  From 
walking.  <  From  taking  hold  of  anything.  <  In  clear,  fine 
weather.  Suited  to  dark-haired  persons  with  rigid  fibre  ;  de^cate 
skins ;  lymphatic,  torpid  temperament. 


CAUSTICUM  435 

BdatiailS. — Caust.  is  antidotcd  by:  Asal.,  Coff.,  Coloc,  Dulc, 
Guaj.  (rheumatic  contractions) ;  Nit.  spin  dulc,  Nux.  Is  antidote  to  : 
Asaf.,  Chi.,  Coloc,  Euphras.,  Plumb,  (lead  poisoning)  ;  type-poisoning  ; 
abuse  of  Merc,  and  Sulph.  in  scabies.  Incompatible :  Acids,  CofiF., 
Pho.  Compatible:  Before — Calc;  Kali  i.  (facial  paralysis  from  an 
abscess) ;  Lye,  Nux,  Rhus,  Ruta,  Sep.,  Sil.,  Sul.  Intercurrently — Ars., 
Cupr.,  Ign.,  Pod.,  Puis.,  Rhus,  Sep.,  Stan.  After — Calc,  Coccul., 
Coloc,  Cup.,  Hyo.,  Ign.,  Petrol.,  Petrosel.,  Rhus,  Sep.,  Stram.,  Sul. 
Complementary  :  Petrosel.  Merc  cor.  assists  the  action  of  Caust.  and 
vice  versa  (in  small-pox,  according  to  Teste).  Compare :  Nit.  ac  is  like 
Caust.  in  being  at  once  antipsoric,  antisycotic,  and  antisyphilitic  Phos. 
touches  Caust.  at  many  points,  and  is  too  near  it  to  be  compatible  with 
it.  (This  only  applies  to  cases  in  which  either  of  the  two  has  done 
good ;  if  one  has  been  given  without  any  result  the  other,  if  indicated, 
will  very  likely  succeed.)  Both  Caust.  and  Phos.  are  taciturn  and  dis- 
trustful, or  inclined  to  fits  of  anger  ;  both  are  <  at  twilight ;  both 
have  sensations  of  tension.  The  hoarseness  of  Phos.  (like  that  of  Carb. 
V.)  is  <  in  evening.  Phos.  has  extreme  sensitiveness  of  larynx  and 
dreads  to  cough  or  talk.  The  Caust.  cough  is  >  by  cold  drinks. 
Carb.  V.  has  rawness  and  burning  down  throat  (like  Cans.)  and 
hoarseness  from  damp  evening  air.  Compare  also :  Calc  (images  on 
dosing  eyes)  ;  Nat.  m.  and  Sep.  (spurting  of  urine  with  cough)  ;  Rhus 
(rheumatism  from  damp  and  cold  ;  but  with  Rhus  there  is  restlessness 
and  >  from  motion  always — Cans,  has  restlessness  at  night  only) ; 
Eup.  perf .  (hoarseness  <  in  morning  ;  influenza  with  aching  all  over 
body ;  has  more  soreness  on  chest  than  Caust.)  ;  Salic  ac,  Chi., 
Carbo.  suL  (Meniere's  disease) ;  Coloc  (colic)  ;  Lye  (sweat  and  heat 
<  6  to  8  p.m.)  ;  Bar.  c  (mental  weakness,  paralysis  ;  <  damp 
weather) ;  Sep.  (enuresis  in  first  sleep  ; — in  deep  sleep.  Bell.,  Sul.)  ; 
Calc  (sodding  urine)  ;  Sars.  (urine,  especially  in  women,  passed  with- 
out patient's  knowledge) ;  Bell.,  Hyo.,  Ign.,  Lach.,  Lye  and  Pho. 
(difficult  swallowing  of  Uquids)  ;  Calc,  Carb.  an.,  Stro.  and  Stram.  (fear 
of  darkness) ;  Tarentula  (restlessness) ;  Gels,  (ptosis,  paralysis,  faint- 
like weakness  and  trembling,  blindness)  ;  Ant.  t.  (laryngeal  anections) ; 
Lye.  (contraction  of  brow  with  pain  in  head)  ;  Cepa  ^sore  heel) ;  Sep. 
(^ness,  especially  before  menses.  Face  yellow) ;  Am.  c  (rawness 
and  burning  in  chest)  ;  Aco.  (paralysis  from  cold) ;  Puis,  (cystitis  ; 
failure  of  milk  after  labour)  ;  Euphorb.  (ptosis  from  cold^  ;  Nat.  c 
SuL  and  Sul.  ac  (falls  easUy) ;  Kali  bi.  (blindness  with  neadache  ; 
—Kali  bl  has  blindness  >,  as  headache  <). 

CauBation. — Burns  or  scalds.     Fright.    Grief  or  sorrow.     Night- 
watching.    Suppressed  eruptions.    Ulcers  maltreated  with  lead. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.    Mind. — Mirthf ulness  sometimes,  and  soon  after,  ill-humour. — Melan- 
choly and  vexatious  thoughts,  day  and  night,  with  tears. — Hypochondriacal 
sadness.— Restlessness,  apprehension,  and  great  anguish. — ^Anxiety  of  heart. — 
¥eariuhiess,  esp.  at  night— Afraid  at  night  (in  the  dark  room  ;  the  child  does 
not  ^rant  to  go  to  bed  alone). — Mistrust  of  the  future. — Discouragement. — 
tosdbility  and  passion,  with  great  sensitiveness  of  disposition. — Quarrelsome 


436  CAUSTICUM 

and  wrangling  spirit — Indisposition  to  labour. — Disposition  to  be  frightened 
— Weakness  of  memory. — Absence  of  mind, — ^Tendency  to  make  mistakes 
when  speaking. 

2.  Head. — Confusion  in  the  head,  as  if  it  were  compressed. — Peeling  of 
intoxication,  and  as  if  momentarily  on  the  point  of  falling. — ^Vertigo,  with 
sensation  of  weakness  in  the  head,  and  anxiety. — ^Attacks  of  headache,  with 
nausea. — Headache  in  the  morning,  sometimes  on  waking,  with  sensation,  as 
from  a  bruise,  in  the  brain. — Nocturnal  pain  in  the  head,  as  if  from  an  abscess 
in  the  brain. — Dull  and  pressive  headache,  which  occasions  gloominess,  and 
is  felt  chiefly  in  the  forehead  or  in  the  occiput. — Shooting  pains,  esp.  in  the 
temples. — Digging,  with  sudden  shocks  in  the  head. — Congestion  in  the  head, 
with  ebullition  and  noise  internally. — ^Tensive  or  compressive  pains  in  the 
head. — ^The  headache  sometimes  exhibits  itself  only  on  one  side  (1.). — Heat  and 
sensation  of  burning  in  the  head. — ^Tightness  and  shootings  in  the  head- 
Tension  and  tightness  in  the  head,  and  of  the  scalp  (forehead  and  temples).— 
Sensation  of  torpor  in  the  occiput. 

3.  Eyes.— Pain  in  the  eyes,  as  if  the  eyeball  were  dilating. — ^Aching  in 
the  eyes,  as  if  from  sand,  sometimes  aggravated  by  the  touch. — Itching,  smart- 
ing, and  burning  pain  in  the  eyes. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  with  burning 
and  itching  of  the  eyes  and  eyelids. — Ulceration  of  the  eyes. — Lachrymation. 
— Difficulty  in  opening  the  eyes,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  eyelids  were 
swollen. — ^Visible  quivering  of  the  eyelids. — Obscuration  of  the  eyes,  often 
sudden,  and  sometimes  as  if  the  eyes  were  covered  by  a  skin. — Sight  con- 
fused, as  if  a  gauze  or  mist  were  before  it — Ophthalmia  where  there  is  opacity 
of  the  cornea  which  has  spread  over  the  pupil. — Movements  before  the 
eyes,  as  of  a  swarm  of  insects. — Dark  nets,  which  seem  to  dance  before  the 
eyes. — Lights  and  sparks  before  the  eyes. — Photophobia. — ^Warts  of  old- 
standing  in  the  eyebrows ;  on  the  upper  eyelid  (and  nose). 

4.  Ears. — Otalgia,  with  pressive  pain  outwards,  as  if  the  inner  parts 
were  pressed  out — Shootings,  and  pain,  as  of  excoriation,  in  the  ears. — Swell- 
ing of  the  ears,  externally,  with  shooting  and  burning  pain. — Stitches  in  the 
(r.)  ear. — Discharge  of  fetid  pus  from  the  ear. — ^Itching  in  the  lobe  of  the  ear, 
as  if  from  a  tetter. — ^Words  spoken  and  steps  re-echo  in  the  ear. — ^Tinkling  in 
the  ears. — Loud  resounding  noises  in  the  ear,  with  hardness  of  hearing.— 
Rumbling  and  buzzing,  rolling  and  murmuring  in  the  ears,  and  in  the  head. — 
Sensation  of  stoppage  in  the  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Itching  at  the  point,  and  the  alae  nasi. — Scaly  nose,  externally 
and  internally,  with  burning  and  itching. — Eruption  at  the  point  of  the  nose. 
— ^Warts  of  long  standing  on  the  nose  (orbits,  upper  eyelids). — Blowing  of 
blood  from  the  nose,  every  morning. — Epistaxis. — Loss  of  smell. — Obstruction 
of  the  nose. — Dry  chronic  coryza. — Coryza  with  hoarseness  preventing  loud 
speech. — Fluent  coryza,  with  nocturnal  cough,  rough  hoarseness  and  head- 
ache.— Discharge  of  fetid  mucus  from  the  nose. — Sneezing  in  the  morning. 

6.  Face.— Yellow  colour  of  the  face,  esp.  in  the  temples,  with  bluish 
lips. — Burning  sensation  in  the  cheeks,  and  esp.  in  the  cheek-bones. — 
Arthritic  and  tensive  pains  in  the  bones  of  the  face,  in  the  cheek-bones,  and 
in  the  jaws.— Swelling  of  the  cheeks,  with  pulsative  pains.— Sensation  of 
tension  and  of  swelling  under  the  jaw,  which  impedes  its  opening. — Itching 
eruption  on  the  face.— Eruption  of  red  pimples  on  the  face. — Semi-lateral  (r.) 


CAUSTICUM  437 

paralysis  of  the  face,  from  the  forehead  to  the  chin. — Cramps  in  the  lips. — 
Excoriation  and  eruption  on  the  lips,  and  at  the  commissures  of  the  lips. — 
Tetter  on  the  lower  lip. — ^Tensive,  dragging  pain  in  the  jaws,  with  difficulty 
in  opening  the  mouth. — Inflammatory  swelling  of  the  chin,  with  burning 
pain. 

7.  Teeth. — Odontalgia,  provoked  by  the  introduction  of  air  on  opening 
the  mouth. — Pain,  as  from  excoriation,  or  tractive  pains,  and  acute  pulling, 
throbbings,  or  shootings  in  the  teeth  ;  in  the  under  jaw,  in  the  lower  teeth, 
(particularly  on  the  (1.)  side). — Painful  loosening  and  elongation  of  the  teeth 
(incisors).— Fistula  in  the  gums. — Prolonged  ulceration  of  the  gums. — Painful 
sensibility,  swelling,  and  ready  bleeding  of  the  gums. 

&  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth  and  tongue. — ^Accumulation  of  mucus 
in  the  mouth. — Pain,  as  of  excoriation  and  burning  in  the  mouth,  in  the 
palate,  and  at  the  point  of  the  tongue. — Stuttering,  embarrassed,  wheezing, 
and  very  indistinct  speech. — Paralysis  of  the  tongue. — Swelling  of  the  inner 
side  of  tiie  cheek ;  he  bites  it  when  chewing. — Distortion  of  the  mouth  and  of 
the  tongue,  when  speaking. — ^Burning  ulcer  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  upper 
lip. 

9.  Throat. — Sore  throat  on  using  exertion,  as  if  it  were  lacerated  inter- 
naUy.--Pain  as  of  excoriation,  roughness,  scraping,  and  burning  pain  in  the 
throat— footing  pain  in  the  throat  on  swallowing. — ^Audible  cracking  in  the 
throat— Constant  urging  to  swallow,  with  sensation  of  swelling  or  of  contrac- 
tion of  the  gullet—Difficulty  in  swallowing,  from  paralysis  of  the  organs  of 
deglutition. — Sensation  of  cold  which  ascends  to  the  throat. — Dryness  of  the 
throat,  without  thirst — ^Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  throat,  and  behind  the 
palate,  with  expectoration  by  hawking. 

10.  Appetite. — Putrid,  greasy,  rancid,  or  bitter  taste. — Burning  thirst  for 
coM  drinks  and  for  beer.— Sensation  as  if  lime  were  being  slaked  in  the 
stomach. — Dislike  to  sweet  things. — ^At  the  commencement  of  a  meal,  loss  of 
appetite  and  disgust. — Fresh  meat  causes  nausea;  smoked  meat  agrees. — 
Sensation  of  suffering  as  from  indigestion. — Pressure  in  the  stomach,  after 
eating  bread. — After  every  meal,  pressure  on  the  whole  abdomen,  or  on  the 
stomach,  or  dse  nausea  and  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  or  else,  again,  shivering 
or  heat  in  the  face. 

11.  Stomach. — Empty  risings,  with  a  taste  of  undigested  food. — ^Abor- 
tive risings,  with  strangulation  in  the  gullet. — Nausea,  esp.  after  a  meal,  or 
during  one,  or  else  in  the  morning. — Sensation  of  f aintness,  as  though  about 
to  swoon. — Water-brash.— Vomiting  of  acidulated  water,  followed  by  acid 
risii^— Vomiting  of  food. — Nocturnal  vomiting  of  coagulated  blood. — Pains 
in  the  stomach  with  heat  in  the  head,  increased  by  every  quick  movement, 
mitigated  by  a  recumbent  posture,  and  shuddering  when  the  pains  are 
a^ravated. — Pressive  squeezing,  as  if  from  claws,  constriction  and  cramp- 
like pains  in  the  stomach,  and  in  the  epigastrium. — Shooting  pains  in  the 
epigastrium. 

13.  Abdomen. — Pressure  of  the  clothes  on  the  hypochondria  painful. 
—Tension  and  shootiAgs  in  the  hepatic  region. — ^Pains  in  the  abdomen  in  the 
morning. — Pressure  on  the  superior  and  inferior  part  of  the  abdomen. — Pain« 
fnl  and  tensive  inflation  of  the  abdomen.— Violent  distension  of  the  abdomen 
after  a  meal  (breakfast). — Swelling  of  the  navel,  which  is  painful  on  being 


438  CAUSTICUM 

touched. — Enlargement  of  the  abdomen  in  children. — Contractive  pains  in 
the  abdomen. — Susceptibility  to  cold  in  the  abdomen,  whence  results  diarrhoea, 
or  pressure  at  the  stomach. — Incarceration  of  flatus,  with  hard  fasces. — Fre- 
quent expulsion  of  offensive  flatus,  in  small  quantities. 

13.  Stool  anld  Anus. — Chronic  constipation.— Frequent  and  ineffectual 
efforts  to  evacuate,  with  pains,  anxiety,  and  redness  of  the  face. — ^The  faeces 
are  passed  more  easily,  in  an  erect  posture. — Faeces  knotty,  or  of  a  very  small 
size. — Faeces  hard,  tough,  covered  with  mucus ;  viscid,  and  shining,  as  if  with 
fat,  or  of  a  bright  and  whitish  colour. — Diarrhoea  in  the  evening  and  at  night 
— Diarrhoea,  with  tenesmus  and  burning  in  the  rectum. — Diarrhoea,  after  the 
abdomen  has  been  chilled. — Flow  of  blood  and  incisive  pains  in  the  rectum, 
during  the  evacuation. — After  the  evacuation,  anguish,  with  palpitation  of  the 
heart  and  burning  in  the  anus. — Itching  in  the  anus. — In  the  anus,  appearance 
of  haemorrhoidal  tumors,  which  are  hard,  swollen,  painful,  and  which  impede 
evacuation. — ^Walking  and  meditation  aggravate  the  haemorrhoidal  pains,  so 
as  to  render  them  insupportable. — ^Varices  of  the  rectum,  hindering  stool ; 
large ;  painful ;  stinging ;  burning  when  touched. — Pressure  in  the  haemor- 
rhoidal tumors  of  the  rectum,  so  as  to  cause  them  to  protrude. — Pulsation  in 
the  perineum. — Fistula  in  the  rectum. — ^Abscess  in  the  anus. — Pain  of  excoria- 
tion, and  moisture  in  the  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  inclination  to  urinate,  with  thirst  and 
scanty  emission. — More  copious  emission  of  urine. — Emission  of  urine  at 
night,  and  wetting  the  bed. — Involuntary  emission  of  urine  (as  in  cases  of 
children  who  wet  the  bed  at  night ;  in  women,  when  urine  spouts  from  them 
in  walking,  coughing,  &c.),  day  and  night. — Acrid  and  corrosive  urine,  or 
pale,  aqueous,  of  a  deep-brown,  or  reddish  colour. — Stringy  mucus  in  the 
urine. — ^The  urine  becomes  turbid,  after  settling. — Sensation  of  burning  in 
making  water. — Itching  of  the  orifice  of  the  urethra. — Flow  of  blood  from  the 
urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Increase  of  sexual  desu-e. — ^Absence  of 
erections. — Frequent  pollutions. — Escape  of  prostatic  fluid  after  a  stool. — 
Emission  of  sanguineous  semen,  during  coition. — Pressure  and  shooting  in 
the  testes. — Ulcers  and  itching  scabs  on  the  interior  part  of  the  prepuce. — 
Red  spots  on  the  penis. — Copious  secretion  of  smegma  behind  the  glans  penis. 
— Itching  at  the  scrotum,  glans,  and  prepuce. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Catamenia  retarded,  but  more  copious, 
with  flow  of  blood  in  large  clots. — Difficult  first  menstruation. — During  the 
menses  no  blood  is  passed  at  night. — Before  the  catamenia,  melancholy,  sacral 
pains,  and  colic. — Catamenia  too  feeble ;  sexual  desire  too  weak. — During  the 
catamenia,  pains  in  the  loins,  cuttings,  and  paleness  in  the  face ;  yellowness 
of  the  face ;  vertigo. — Excoriation  between  the  legs,  at  the  vulva. — Dislike  to 
coition. — Cramps  of  the  matrix. — Profuse  leucorrhoea,  having  the  smell  of  the 
catamenia,  or  which  flows  in  the  night. — Leucorrhcea  flows  at  night  and  not 
during  the  day. — Nipples  excoriated,  cracked,  and  surroimded  with  tetters. — 
Want  of  secretion  of  milk. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Rough  hoarseness,  morning  and  evening. 
— Prolonged  hoarseness,  with  voice  weak  and  stifled. — Aphonia  from  weak- 
ness of  the  muscles  of  the  larynx. — Sensation  of  excoriation  in  the  lar3mx, 
when  not  swallowing. — Hawking  up  of  abundant  mucus,  esp.  in  the  morning. 


CAUSTICUM  439 

--Coogh,  with  short  breath,  and  difficulty  of  respiration. — Cough,  excited  by 
speech  and  by  cold. — Cough  is  worse :  in  the  evening  till  midnight,  from 
exhaling;  drinking  coffee;  cold  air;  draught  of  air;  when  awaking  from 
sleep.-— Cough  is  relieved  by  a  swallow  of  cold  water. — ^Matutinal  or  nocturnal 
coEigb.^Short  cough,  provoked  by  a  tickling  and  a  sensation  of  excoriation  in 
the  throat — Cough,  dry,  hollow,  shaking,  with  sensation  of  burning,  and  pain 
as  of  excoriation  in  the  chest. — Rattiing  in  the  chest  while  coughing. — Pains 
in  the  hips  while  coughing. — Cough  with  involuntary  passage  of  some  drops 
of  urine. — Inability  to  expectorate  the  mucus,  which  is  detached  by  coughing 
(the  expectoration  comes  up  far  enough  apparentiy,  but  it  cannot  be  spat  out ; 
greasy  taste  of  the  expectoration.  The  inability  to  expectorate  is  found  in 
e?ery  species  of  cough,  whooping-cough,  &c.). 

i8.  Chest. — Breath  short. — ^Attacks  of  spasmodic  asthma. — ^Asthma,  esp. 
when  sitting  or  lying  down. — Fits  of  suffocation  on  speaking  and  walking 
quickly. — Oppressiveness  of  clothes  on  the  chest. — Pressure  on  the  chest. — 
Shootings  in  the  chest  and  thorax,  on  making  a  full  inspiration,  and  during 
corporeal  exertion.— Burning,  stitches,  and  soreness  in  the  chest. — ^Attacks  of 
cramp-like  compression  and  of  constriction  in  the  chest,  with  feeling  of 
suffocation. 

ig.  Heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  languor. — Oppression  of  the 
heart,  with  melancholy. — Shootings  in  the  heart. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  and  tension  in  the  nape  of  the  neck. — 
Pain,  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Miliary  eruption  at  the  nape 
of  the  neck,  between  the  shoulder-blades.— Itching  and  humid  tetters  at  the 
nape  of  the  neck. — Goitre-like  swelling  of  the  cervical  glands. — Pains  in  the 
loins  which  render  the  least  movement  exceedingly  painful. — ^Aching  pains  in 
the  loins  when  seated. — Painful  stiffness  (between  the  scapulae  and)  in  the 
back,  esp.  on  rising  from  a  chair. — PuUing  and  acute  drawing  pains  in  the 
shoulder-blades. — Itching  and  tingling  in  the  back. 

as.  Upper  Umbs. — Pains  in  the  arms  at  night. — Drawing  pains  and 
acute  pulling,  in  the  arms  and  hands. — Convulsive  movements  and  shocks  in 
the  arms. — Itching  and  eruptions  on  the  arms. — Warts  on  the  arms. — Pressure 
on  the  shoulders. — Shooting  psuns  in  the  front  part  of  the  arms,  from  the 
fingers  to  the  elbow. — Paralytic  feeling  in  the  r.  hand. — Sensation  of  fulness 
in  the  hands,  on  grasping  an  object. — Tearing  in  r.  wrist-joint. — Drawing 
pains  in  the  hands,  and  the  joints  of  the  fingers. — Spasmodic  weakness  and 
trembling  of  the  hands. — Paleness  and  painful  torpor  of  the  fingers. — ^Tension 
of  the  posterior  joints  of  the  fingers  when  bending  them. — Contraction  and 
indoFstion  of  the  tendons  of  the  fingers. — Itching  tetters  on  the  fingers. 

Q.  Lower  Limbs. — Pain  as  from  dislocation  in  the  coxo-femoral 
jcnnt,  with  inaibility  to  walk  and  to  continue  standing. — Pain  as  from  a  bruise 
in  the  thighs  and  legs,  whilst  in  bed,  in  the  morning. — ^Tensive  stiffness  in  the 
joints  of  the  legs,  and  of  the  feet.— Contraction  and  tension  in  the  heel  and 
tendo  AchiUis. — Drawing  pains  and  acute  pulling  in  the  thighs,  the  legs,  the 
knees,  and  the  feet,  with  swelling  of  the  parts. — Unsteady  walk,  and  tendency 
to  fall  in  children. — Skin  marbled,  on  the  thighs  and  on  the  legs. — ^Tension 
and  cramp-like  pain  in  the  legs  and  calves  of  the  legs. — Cramps  in  the  feet 
—Pains  in  the  instep,  in  the  ankle  bones,  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  and  in  the 
toes,  on  walking. — Neuralgic  pains  in  the  soles  of  the  feet. — Contraction  in 


440  CAUSTICUM 

the  instep,  with  tensive  pain  when  stepping. — Coldness  of  the  (ect — SweUing 
of  the  feet — Pains  in  the  varices. — ^Tingling  in  the  soles  of  the  feet — ^Festering 
vesicles  and  ulcerations  on  the  heels. — ^Whitlow  on  the  great  toe. 

S4.  Generalities. — ^Arthritic  and  rheumatic  drawing  and  tearing  pains, 
esp.  in  the  limbs. — ^Acute  and  violent  pulling  in  the  joints  and  the  bones, 
mitigated  by  the  heat  of  a  bed. — Contraction  of  the  tendons,  and  stiffness  in 
the  flexor  muscles  of  the  limbs. — Cramp-like  contraction  of  several  limbs. — 
Torpor  and  paleness  of  some  parts,  or  of  the  entire  1.  side  of  the  body. — 
Paralysis. — ^Jerkings  and  convulsive  movements. — St  Vitus*  dance. — Convul- 
sive attacks,  with  cries,  violent  movement  of  the  limbs,  grinding  of  the  teeth, 
smiles  or  tears,  eyes  half -closed,  fixed  look,  and  involuntary  emission  of  urine ; 
the  fits  are  reproduced  by  cold  water,  and  are  preceded  by  pain  in  the 
abdomen  and  in  the  head,  frequent  emission  of  urine,  irascibility,  and  tears ; 
after  the  fit  the  eyes  are  closed. — Epileptic  convulsions  (at  night  during  sleep). 
—Aggravation  of  the  symptoms,  generally  in  the  evening,  or  in  the  open  air, 
while  those  which  have  appeared  in  the  open  air  disappear  in  a  room. — Coffee 
seems  also  to  aggravate  ail  the  symptoms. — Semi-lateral  sufferings. — ^Insup- 
portable uneasiness  in  the  whole  body  in  the  evening,  and  when  seated,  with 
anxiety  in  the  region  of  the  heart. — In  the  evening,  great  dejection  and 
oppression  of  the  whole  body. — Paralytic  weakness,  with  trembling  and 
tottering  of  the  limbs. — Paralysis  (one-sided). — Great  sensibility  to  currents  of 
air,  and  to  cold. 

85.  Skin.— Violent  itching,  esp.  in  the  back,  and  in  the  calves  of  the  legs. 
— Itching  of  the  whole  body  at  night  (Itch). — Injuries  of  the  skin,  which  had 
been  healed,  become  sore  again. — Itch  suppressed  by  mercury  or  sulphur ; 
burning  itch. — ^Tingling  (or  stinging)  swelling  (sometimes  called  "buzzing" 
swelling)  (Guernsey). — Eruptions  resembling  scabies. — Miliary  eruptions  and 
nettle-rash. — Itching  and  humid  tetters. — Ulcerative  vesicles. — Burning  ulcers, 
with  yellowish-looking  skin  ;  ulcers  burning,  with  corroding  pus,  with  thin  or 
watery  pus,  suppurating ;  jerking  pains  running  through  the  ulcers. — ^Excoria- 
tion in  children. — Painf id  corns  in  the  feet — ^Warts,  also  with  pain  and 
inflammation. — Panaris. — Painful  varices. 

86.  Sleep. — Drowsiness  in  the  day,  like  coma.— Nocturnal  sleeplessness, 
caused  by  anxiety,  inquietude,  dry  heat,  and  other  annoyances,  with  frequent 
starts. — Starts  on  going  to  sleep. — Frequent  movements  of  the  arms  and  legs 
during  sleep.— Anxious  dreams,  about  grievous  things,  or  about  quarrels,  or 
confused  and  voluptuous,  with  talking  and  laughter.— At  night,  vertigo,  head- 
ache, dryness  of  the  mouth,  and  painful  heaviness  of  the  legs. 

87.  Fever. — Pulse  only  accelerated  towards  evening. — ^Much  shivering. 
— Chilliness  predominating,  frequently  with  coldness  of  the  1.  side.— Internal 
chilliness,  followed  by  perspiration,  without  previous  heat — Nocturnal 
shivering,  with  pains  in  the  back,  and  followed  by  general  sweat — Heat  in 
the  evening,  from  6  to  8  p.m. — Flushes  of  heat,  followed  by  chilliness. — 
Copious  sweat  while  walking  in  the  open  air. — Nocturnal  sweat,  sometimes  of 
an  acid  smell. — Morning  sweat  (smelling  sour). 


CEANOTHUS  AMERICANUS  441 

Ceanothus  Amerioanus. 

New  Jersey  Tea,  or  Red-root    N.  O.  Rbamnacese.    Tincture 
of  fresh  leaves. 

GUnicAl. — Diarrhoea.    Heart,  disordered.    Intermitiemt  fever.  Jaundice.    Lea- 
corrfacea.    Ltucocytkasmia,    Menses,  suppressed.    Side^  pain  in.    SfUcn^  affections 

Ghaneteristfos. — Burnett,  following  Hale,  is  our  chief  authority 
for  Ccanoihus.  It  has  been  recently  proved  by  I.  C.  Fahnestock 
{Ham.  News,  March,  1900),  but  its  place  had  already  been  made 
clear  by  clinical  use  ;  and  definite  clinical  symptoms  have  been 
observed.  Ceanothus  is  a  spleen  remedy  far  excellence ;  deep- 
seated  pain  in  left  hypochondrium ;  pain  and  fulness  in  left  side; 
catting  pain.  Pain,  inflammation,  enlargement  of  spleen,  either  alone 
or  with  other  affections,  indicate  its  use  ;  chilliness,  principally  down 
back ;  shivering ;  rigors ;  must  sit  over  fire ;  <  in  cold  weather. 
Low  spirits  with  splenic  affection.  Headache,  right  side,  with 
spleen  pain.  Diarrhoea  and  dysentery  (compare  Cascara  and  other 
Rhamneas)  have  been  frequently  observed  in  patients  taking  Cean.  for 
spleen  affections.  Leucorrhoea,  profuse,  thick,  yellow,  with  pain  in 
left  side  ;  (I  have  frequently  confirmed  Burnett's  experience  in  this 
last  particular,  as  in  most  others,  with  this  remedy.)  P.  C.  Majumdar 
cured  vidth  Cean.  32  a  case  which  had  been  diagnosed  as  one  of 
heart-disease  (there  was  palpitation  and  dyspnoea  on  exertion). 
Majumdar  found  the  spleen  enormously  large.  R«  K.  Ghosh  has 
cored  ynth  it  many  cases  of  suppression  of  menses  and  leucorrhoea 
in  patients  from  malarial  districts.  Menses  too  profuse  and  too  early 
with  pain  in  left  side.  Cannot  lie  down  for  pain  in  left  side.  Fahne- 
stock's  two  provers  took  repeated  doses  of  the  ^  tincture,  and  both 
had  severe  symptoms.  One  had  had  malaria  five  years  before,  treated 
with  Quinine  allopathically.  This  prover  suffered  more  acutely  than 
the  other,  and  in  the  end  had  to  be  treated.  Nat.  m.  30  soon  put 
an  end  to  his  symptoms.  The  other  prover  had  practicsdly  identical 
mnptoms  but  less  severe.  The  symptoms  of  the  provers  are  marked 
(F.)  in  the  Schema. 

Bdltioiis. — Ceanothus  is  followed  well  by :  Berberis,  Conium, 
Myrica  cerif.,  Quercus.  Compare :  Ced.,  Agar.,  Chi.,  Nat  m.,  Oxal.  ac. 
(pain  in  left  side).    Cascara  (diarrhoea.    Syphilis).     Antidote :  Nat.  m. 

STMPTOHS. 

I.  Mind. — Low-spirited,  fears  he  will  become  unfit  for  work. — Great 
nervous  excitement,  with  chilliness  and  loss  of  appetite ;  felt  as  if  nerves  were 
shaken ;  at  dinner  could  scarcely  hold  knife  and  fork. — Don't-care  feeling  all 
the  time,  and  cannot  work  (F.) 

a.  Head. — Headache,  r.  side,  with  pain  in  region  of  spleen. — Head 
seems  to  move  with  every  beat  of  the  heart  (F.).— Head  feels  as  if  the  brain 
were  too  large  (F.).— Dull  frontal  headache,  >  lying  down  (P.). 


442  CEANOTHUS  AMERICANUS 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  feel  too  large  ;  lids  swollen ;  dry  sensation  of  oomea; 
with  a  dull  pain  in  orbital  region  (F.). 

6.    Face. — Cheeks  and  ears  feel  hot,  with  cold  fingers  (P.). 

8.  Mouth.— Aphthous  afiFections  of  mouth  and  fauces. — Mouth  dry  (F.). 
—Tongue,  white  coat  down  centre  (F.).— Food  tasteless,  unless  highly 
seasoned  (F.). 

9.  Throat. — Throat  dry ;  raw  sensation  on  swallowing  (F.). 

10.  Appetite. — Loss  of  appetite  (F.).— Craving  for  something  soar  (P.). — 
Thirst  for  water,  but  it  made  him  sick  (F.).— Cannot  eat  pastry  (very  unusual)  (F.). 

11.  Stomach. — ^Wanted  to  drink  water  but  it  made  him  sick  (F.). 

12.  Abdomen. — Deep-seated  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium. — Pain  and 
fulness  in  1.  side,  with  inability  to  lie  on  it. — Severe  pain  in  region  oi  spleen, 
with  low  spirits.— Pain  in  1.  side,  for  a  long  time,  with  leucorrhcea  and  chilli- 
ness.— Pain  in  1.  side,  headache  r.  side ;  severe  pain  r.  side,  with  inability  (for 
years)  to  lie  on  it.— dwelling  in  1.  side,  with  cutting  pain,  <  in  cold  weather, 
with  constant  chilliness,  must  sit  over  a  fire. — Chronic  h3rpertrophy  of  spleen. 
— Dull  pain  in  region  of  spleen  (F.). — Immediately  after  dinner,  duU  pain  in 
region  of  liver  (F.).— Full  feeling  in  region  of  liver  (F.). — Pain  in  liver  < 
lying  on  r.  side  (F.). — Sensitiveness  in  umbilical  region  with  desire  to  rdax 
abdominal  muscles  (F.). — ^Whole  abdomen  moves  with  beat  of  heart  (F.). 
— Bearing-down  in  abdomen  <  after  eating  (F.). 

13.  Stool  and  Rectum. — Diarrhoea. — Dysentery. — Stool  light  brown, 
with  loud  flatus  (F.). — Continual  bearing-down  in  rectum  with  constricting 
sensation  (F.). 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Sharp  pain  above  pubes,  in  region  of  bladder, 
before  urination  (F.). — Urine  :  alkaline  ;  increased  phosphates ;  high  specific 
gravity;  trace  of  sugar  (F.). — After  urinating  feeling  as  if  all  had  not 
passed  (F.). — Urine  :  quite  green  ;  contains  bile  ;  strong  odour,  frothy  (F.). — 
Pain  in  back  and  irritation  of  urethra  (F.). — Constant  urging  to  urinate  (F.) 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Syphilitic  complaints. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Leucorrhcea,  profuse,  thick,  yellow, 
with  pain  under  1.  ribs. — Menses  ten  days  too  early,  and  very  profuse. — 
Metrorrhagia  with  spleen  pain. 

18.  Chest. — Congested  feelings  in  lungs ;  chest  sore  internally,  <  deep 
inspiration  (F.). — Soreness  behind  sternum  (F.). — Constricted  feeling  in  chest 

ig.  Heart. — Palpitation  and  dyspnoea,  with  enlarged  spleen. — Pulse  full 
and  very  strong,  heart's  pulsations  visible  through  the  clothes  (F.). — Heart 
beat  so  hard  it  shook  him  all  over  (F.). — Chest  feels  too  small  for  heart  (F.). 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Carotids  throbbing  in  neck  (P.). — Pain  under  r. 
scapula  (P.). — Chilliness  down  back. — ^Weakness  in  small  of  back  and  legs  (F.). 
— Dull  pain  in  lumbar  region  (F.) — Constant  dull  pain  in  kidneys  and  up 
back  (F.). 

22.    Upper  Limbs. — Pains  down  forearms  and  fingers  (F.). 

2Q.  Lower  Limbs.— Weakness  of  knees ;  must  lie  down  (F.). — Dull 
pains  in  anterior  part  of  thighs  (F.) 

24.  Generalities.— Aversion  to  move;  feels  too  weak  (F.). — Great 
weakness,  walking  or  standing  (F.). — Lost  several  pounds  in  weight  (F.). 

26.  Sleep.— Awake  all  night  (F.). — ^Dreamed  all  night  (unusual) ;  of 
snakes ;  of  robbers  (F.). 


CEDRON  443 

27.  Fever. — Shivering;  loss  of  appetite,  and  nervous  excitement. — 
Rigors  at  frequent  intervals. — Intermittents  with  splenic  enlargements. — 
Cheeks  and  ears  hot,  with  cold  fingers  (F.). — At  4  p.m.,  six  chills  in  succession, 
with  constant  chilliness  up  and  down  back ;  after  chill  very  hot ;  fever ; 
pulse  120 ;  throbbing  carotids  (P.). 


Gedron. 

Simaba  cedron.    N.  O.  Simarubaceae.    Tincture  of  seeds. 

Cllwleal, — Brow  ague.  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.  Ciliary  neuralgia.  Chorea. 
Coitus,  complaints  after.  Epilepsy,  menstrual.  Glaucoma.  Gout.  Hydrophobia. 
Hysteria.  Intermittent  fever.  Neuralgia.  Neuritis.  Rheumatism.  Snake-bites. 
Toothache. 

Chamoterirtios. — Petroz  and  Teste  introduced  Cedr.  into  homce- 
opathic  practice,  having  received  the  seed  from  Panama,  with  an 
account  of  its  powers  of  antidoting  snake-bite  when  chewed  imme- 
diately after  being  bitten  ;  and  also  of  its  traditional  reputation  in 
intermittent  fevers.  Hellert  was  bitten  by  a  coral  snake.  "  During 
the  few  seconds  which  it  took  him  to  take  the  antidote  out  of  the 
little  bag  which  he  wore  suspended  round  his  neck,  he  was  siezed 
with  violent  pains  at  the  heart  and  throat ;  but  he  had  scarcely 
chewed  and  swallowed  a  small  portion  of  Cedron^  of  the  size  of  a 
small  bean,  when  the  pain  ceased  as  by  magic.  An  oppression  and 
general  prostration  remained.  He  chewed  another  portion  of  the 
same  fruit,  and  applied  it  to  the  wound  externally,  and  in  another 
quarter  of  an  hour  all  he  felt  was  a  slight  colic,  which  disappeared 
aiter  eating  a  little.  This  colic  was  followed  almost  immediately  by 
a  copious  evacuation  of  a  substance  that  looked  like  curdled  milk, 
white,  with  a  slightly  yellowish  tint ''(Teste).  Other  cases  were  re- 
ported. The  great  characteristic  of  Cedron  is  a  clock-like  periodicity 
in  the  recurrence  of  the  symptoms  ;  accurately  periodic  neuralgias  ; 
intermittent  fever  commencing  the  same  hour  every  day  or  every  other 
day.  In  fever  there  is  :  Red  face  in  hot  stage  ;  thirst  with  desire  for 
warm  drinks.  Profuse  perspiration.  "  Excitement  before  chill "  is 
peculiar  to  Cedr.  Fevers  of  low,  marshy  regions  in  warm  seasons 
and  tropical  countries.  General  debility,  languor,  and  fainting. 
Malaise.  Trembling.  Complaints  after  coition  (chorea  in  women  ; 
neuralgia  in  men).  Epileptiform  convulsions  during  catamenia. 
Swollen  sensations  ;  numbness  of  whole  body.  Adapted  to  persons 
of  a  voluptuous  disposition,  and  of  an  excitable  nervous  temperament ; 
especially  to  females.  <  After  sleep  ;  lying  down  ;  night ;  (objects 
appear  red  at  night,  yellow  by  day) ;  in  open  air ;  before  a  storm  ; 
dulls  in  persons  returned  from  tropical  climates.  >  Standing  erect. 
Halbert  relates  a  case  of  malarial  fever  in  a  soldier*  Chills  and 
fever  were  clodc-like  in  regularity  of  recurrence.  Liver  and  spleen 
were  much  enlarged.    Anaemia  was  extreme ;   and  there  was  this 


444  CEDRON 

additional  peculiarity:  intermittent  gastralgia  occurring  with  the 
febrile  crises.  In  conjunction  with  these  conditions  there  was  a 
manifestation  of  choreic  symptoms,  involving  face  and  shoulders 
mostly,  the  twitchings  being  troublesome  in  the  interfebrile  state  ; 
often  there  were  debilitating  hysterical  spasms ;  the  heart  became 
irritable  and  sometimes  irregular.  After  other  remedies  had  failed 
to  make  any  impression,  Cedr.  cured  in  three  weeks,  the  improvement 
setting  in  immediately.  Rapidity  of  action  appears  to  be  a  charac- 
teristic as  with  Bell,  The  great  predominance  of  nervous  symptoms 
will  be  evident  in  the  symptoms  of  Cedr.,  also  the  strong  sexual 
excitement  it  causes.  Numbness  ;  enlarged  sensation  ;  malaise  ; 
sensation  as  if  paralysed.  A  large  number  of  symptoms  appear  on 
1.  side,  but  r.  side  of  head,  face,  r.  elbow,  and  r.  deltoid  are  affected. 

Relations. — Compare  :  Chi.,  Ars.,  Aran,  d..  Bell.,  Cedr.  removes 
roaring  in  ears  of  Chi.  Bell,  removes  "  Objects  appear  red  at  night, 
and  yellowish  by  day  "  of  Cedr. ;  Ars.  and  Sabad.  (complaints  return 
same  hour  every  day) ;  Aran,  (ague — ^Aran.,  chill  predominates). 
Teste  includes  Cedr.  in  the  Bell,  group,  with  Agar.,  Lach.,  Stram., 
Op.,  Ruta,  Can.  i.,  Hyo.,  &c.  (action  on  brain  ;  red,  hot,  face ;  febrile 
excitement).  Ced.  is  antidote  to:  Lach.  Is  antidoted  by:  Lach., 
BeU. 

STMPT0H8. 

1.  Mind. — Nervous  excitement,  followed  by  depression.— Restlessness, 
as  driven  from  place  to  place ;  urine  dark  yellow,  increased  quantities. — 
Lectophobia. — Body  heavy,  mind  depressed. — Mental  symptoms  <  at  night 

2.  Head. — Slight  dizziness  1 1  a.m. — On  rising  from  bed,  dizzy,  could 
not  see  to  light  a  candle,  and  could  not  tell  when  it  was  lighted. — Intense 
frontal  headache ;  sharp  pains  from  above  eyes  to  temples  and  occiput,  < 
before  a  storm. — Pain  across  eyes  from  temple  to  temple. — Sick  headache 
every  other  day  ii  o'clock. — Bending  the  head  backwards,  with  pressure  on 
occiput  and  parietal  regions  as  if  they  were  going  to  burst — Headache :  < 
during  night;  <  in  open  air. — Head  feels  as  if  swollen. 

3.  Eyes.--Severe  shooting  pains  over  1.  eye.— Tic-like  pain  over  1.  eye, 
only  after  coitus. — Objects  seem  red  at  night,  yellow  by  day  (Bell,  cured). — 
Vision  dim. — Flashes  of  light  before  eyes. — Loss  of  sight  with  dizziness. 

4.  Ears. — Tinnitus. — Hardness  of  hearing  at  night. 

5.  Nose. — Point  of  nose  cold ;  with  chilliness  and  yawning,  9  a.m. 
Secretion  profuse. — Glassy-looking  mucus ;  or  thin,  clear,  acrid. 

6.  Face.— Animated  red  face. — Flying  heat  of  face  alternating  with 
chills. — Prosopalgia  (r.),  wandering  pains,  spasmodic. distortion  of  muscles. — 
Tumid  face,  pupils  much  dilated. — Lips  cold,  bluish,  dry ;  during  menses. 

7*  Teeth. — ^Toothache  every  night  during  catamenia ;  bleeding  gums. 
— Sudden  toothache  in  1.  upper  molars ;  on  inspiration,  sensation  as  if  cold 
air  touched  the  teeth. 

8.  Mouth.— Prickling  itching  of  tongue.— Painful  pricking  of  tongue 
with  sensation  of  heat  (during  catamenia).— Feels  paralysed.— Difficulty  of 
speech, — Stammering  after  coitus  (woman). — During  catamenia :  mouth  and 
tongue  dry ;  breath  fetid,— After  catamenia :  profuse  ptyalism. 


CEDRON  445 

9.  Tbroat.— Burning  and  constriction ;  difficult  swallowing. — Prickling 
and  tingling  in  throat  and  fauces,  extending  some  way  down  oesophagus. — 
Psun  on  small  spot  next  root  of  tongue,  as  of  a  foreign  body,  <  from 
pressure. 

xol  Appetite. — ^Longing  for  cold  drinks  in  some,  for  warm  in  others. — 
Great  thirst  during  menses. — Loss  of  appetite. 

II.  Stomach. — Sensation  as  of  a  stone  on  stomach. — Nausea,  with  dis- 
tension of  stomach. 

IS.  Atxtomen. — Abdomen  hard  and  distended. — Stitches  in  spleen  and 
li?cr. — ^Flatulence,  colic,  and  cramp. — Borborygmi  (1.  side). 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Involuntary  stool  (in  choreic  attack). — Inef- 
fectual urging. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pain  in  kidneys. — Burning  along  ureter  and  in 
urethra. — Feeling  as  if  a  drop  of  urine  in  urethra,  or  a  constant  dripping 
from  it. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — ^After  coitus  pain  over  1.  eye. — Gonorrhoea- 
like discharge,  lasting  three  days. — Gleet  with  formication  over  whole  body. — 
Desire  with  firm  erections ;  all  night ;  on  waking. 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Many  symptoms  appear  after  coitus, 
and  during  the  catamenia.— Leucorrhoea  in  place  of  catamenia. — Profuse 
ptyalism  and  leucorrhoea  after  catamenia. — Genital  excitement  at  daybreak, 
with  discharge  like  leucorrhcea,  and  swollen  mammae,  with  some  pain. — 
Menstrual  epilepsy. — Puerperal  eclampsia. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Larynx  constricted  and  tender. — Inter- 
mittent laryngitis. — Difficult  respiration,  with  partial  loss  of  voice,  recurring 
at  difFerent  intervals. — Suffocative  fits  recurring  regularly  every  day  ten  to 
twelve  o'clock. — Suffocating  fits ;  <  after  coitus ;  <  after  sleep ;  >  by 
eating.— Troublesome  cough  every  morning  at  six,  lasting  two  hours. — 
Respiration  much  affected  after  coitus. — Breath  cold. 

jL  Chest. — Oppression. — Sharp,  darting-cutting  pains  under  floating 
ribs  and  scapula  (r.). 

10-  Heart. — Palpitation  and  hurried  breathing ;  with  headache. — ^Action 
irregular. — Pulse  quick  and  full,  with  animated  red  face. — Pulse  uncountable. 

so.  Neck  and  Back.— Stiff  neck,  pains  all  along  spine. — Pain  in  neck 
and  loins  on  rising  in  morning. — Pain  under  scapula  and  in  pelvis. 

ss.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  at  insertion  of  r.  deltoid  and  rheumatic  pain 
in  r.  side. — Sharp  cutting  pain  in  both  elbows, — ^Numb,  dead  feeling  in  r.  hand 
and  forearm. 

S3.  Lower  Limbs.— Numb,  dead  feeling  in  legs  ;  they  feel  enlarged. — 
Lancinating  pains  in  joints. — Cramps ;  contracting  pains ;  bruised  sensations. — 
Twitching  in  tendons ;  of  tendo  Achillis. — Icy  coldness  of  extremities. 

s6.  Sleep. — ^Yawning  and  stretching. — Drowsy;  sometimes  very  pro- 
fomid  sleep. — Restless;  frequent  waking.— <  After  sleep.— Dreamed  (he 
sekk3m  dreamed)  of  pleasant  social  interviews  with  female  acquaintances. — 
Dreamed  of  a  quarrelling  with  a  dead  sister  and  other  dead  friends ;  cried 
about  it  and  awoke  with  a  nightmare,  with  sensation  of  a  stone  in  the 
stomach. 

>7.  Fever  .^-Chilliness  and  yawning ;  point  of  nose  cold. — Prodrome  : 
For  ao  to  40  minutes  mental  excitement ;  exaltation  of  vital  energy ;  florid. 


446  CENCHRIS  CONTORTRIX 

animated  countenance  ;  sensation  of  general  heat. — Chill  4  sun.,  followed  by 
sweat ;  at  4  p.m.,  after  washing  in  cold  water,  chill  alone. — Shivering  and 
chill,  followed  by  profuse  perspiration  every  evening. — Chill,  with  congestion 
to  head  ;  hands,  feet,  and  nose  remain  icy  cold. — Regular  parozyms  of  fever, 
coming  at  same  hour,  commencing  every  day  6  p.m.  by  chills  in  back  and 
limbs,  or  cold  feet  and  hands. — Hot  stage  :  dryness ;  heaviness  of  head ; 
redness  of  face ;  burning  heat  in  hands ;  pulse  full  and  accelerated ;  thirst, 
with  desire  for  warm  drinks. — Profuse  perspiration. — During  sweat :  coldness 
and  heat,  and  heat  and  coldness  irregularly  intermingle. — Bluish-red  face ; 
forearm  to  elbow  and  hands  and  feet  cold ;  sweat  beneath  axilla  and  on  chest. 
— Quotidian  or  tertian  fever  with  marked  regularity. 


Genchris  Gontortrix. 

Ancistrodon  contortrix.    Copperhead  snake  of  North  America. 
N.  0.  Ophidians.    Solution  of  venom. 

OliDieaL— Amaurosis.  Catarrh.  Diarrhoea.  Eyes,  swelling  over.  Headache. 
Heart,  affections  of.  Leucorrhoea.  Menorrhagia.  Nightmare.  Ovary,  pain  in. 
Throat,  affections  of.    Vulva,  throbbing  in  ;  eruption  on. 

ChaFaoteriBtioB. — Cenchris  has  the  main  features  of  all  the  serpent 
poisons :  Coma ;  semi-consciousness ;  insensibility  of  cornea  ;  swelling 
of  upper  lip ;  general  swelling  ;  paralysis  ;  cold,  clammy  sweat  Dis- 
tinctive symptoms  are  :  a  marked  alternation  of  moods ;  and  dreamy 
absent-nundedness.  The  dreams  of  Cenchris  are  very  vivid  and 
horrible,  cannot  be  shaken  off  during  waking  hours ;  often  lascivious. 
Swelling  above  eyes,  below  brow,  like  an  over-hanging  bag  of  waters. 
Diarrhoea  has  been  cured  having  the  following  characters  :  ''  Pain 
before  stool ;  stool  papescent ;  cold  but  not  chilly."  Yellow 
leucorrhoea  ;  pain  in  right  ovary  ;  herpetic  eruption  on  labia.  Hard, 
dry  tickling  cough,  <  3  p.m.  Restlessness  and  sense  of  suffocation  ; 
palpitation  ,*  sensation  of  dying.  Must  lie  with  head  drawn  back,  she 
chokes  so.  Tight  clothing  unbearable.  Chill  or  fever  beginning  in 
afternoon.  Feeling  as  if  whole  body  were  enlarged  to  bursting ;  <  in 
region  of  heart.  *^  Awoke  with  throbbing  in  vulva  and  anus,  followed 
by  a  dull  aching  in  the  sacral  region,  >  by  walkingabout."  Symptoms 
<  lying  down  ;  <  afternoon  ;  <  evening  and  all  night ;  <  on 
waking. 

BelatioilB. — Laches,  is  nearest,  but  affects  left  ovary  more  than 
right ;  Cench.  has  difficult  empty  swallowing  with  easy  swallowing  of 
solids  and  liauids ;  Loch,  can  swallow  solids  but  not  liquids  ;  Crotal. 
(lost  sense  of  position  and  direction) ;  Crocus  (alternating  moods) ; 
Kali  c.  (swelling  of  upper  lids).  Antidoted  by:  Cham,  (internal 
haemorrhage) ;   Am.  c.  (general  symptoms).    Antidote  to :    Puis. 


CENTAUREA  TAGANA  447 

SYMPTOMS. 

!•  Mind. — Memory  lost. — Lethargy. — ^Anxiety,  feels  she  will  die  sud- 
denly.— ^Alternating  moods. — Dreamy,  absent-minded.— Took  the  wrong  car 
without  realising  where  she  was  going. — ^When  riding  in  the  car  rode  past  the 
place  she  intended  to  get  off  at.— Suspicious,  thinks  her  husband  is  going  to 
put  her  in  an  insane  asylum ;  every  day,  3  to  8  p.m.,  for  ten  days,  yet  she 
knew  it  was  a  deluaon. 

8.  Head. — Hard  aching  pain,  commencing  1.  frontal  eminence,  spread- 
ing down  L  side  to  teeth,  thence  to  r.  frontal  eminence,  then  to  teeth  r. 
side. 

3.  Eyes. — Swelling  like  bags  over  eyes  and  under  brows. — Aching  and 
itching  in  eyes;  dim  vision,  redness  of  margins  and  twitching. — L.  eye 
waters ;  from  concussive  cough. 

5.  Nose. — Catarrh ;  scabs  ;  obstruction. 

6.  Face. — Expression  bloated,  besotted. — Face  sallow.— Burning  face. 
—Blue  circles  round  eyes. 

9b  Throat.— Accumulation  of  mucus;  glossy,  thick,  tough. — Difficult 
empty  swallowing,  but  easy  swallowing  of  solids  and  liquids. — ^Warm  drinks 
^eful. 

u.    Stomach. — Nausea  >  by  iee ;  <  by  water  which  ^  vomiting. 

12.  Abdomen. — Intolerance  of  tight  clothing. 

13.  Stool. — Diarrhcea  early  in  morning,  on  waking. — Stool,  gushing, 
froqoent,  watery,  at  first  without  pain ;  after  several  hours,  great  pain  before 
the  motions. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Violent  sexual  desire. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Increased  desire. — ^Yellow  leucorrhoea. 
—Pain  in  r.  ovary. — Herpetic  eruption  on  labia. — Menstrual  flow  very 
profuse;    li^t  with  dark  clots. 

19.  Heart. — Feels  as  if  heart  were  distended,  or  swelled  to  fill  the  whole 
diest— Strongly  conscious  of  heart. — Hard  aching  and  sudden  sharp  stitching 
in  heart— Throbbing  or  fluttering  under  1.  scapula.— At  3  p.m.  sensation  of 
flattering  followed  by  feeling  that  heart  fell  down  into  abdomen ;  then  pulse 
became  feeble,  with  heat  lasting  until  after  midnight. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Hard,  dry,  tickling  cough,  <  3  p.m.,  even 
causing  escape  of  urine. 

27.    Fever. — Chill  or  fever  beginning  in  afternoon. 


Centaorea  Tagana. 

Centaurea  tagana.    N.  0.  Compositae.    Tincture  of  root. 

fiH»*it^> — Coryza.  Diarrhoea.   Eyes,  inflammation  of.  Fevers.    Home-sickness. 
Inflnenza.    Intermittents.    Sight,  vanishing  of. 

Gharaoteristtos.— The  Centaureas  are  allied  to  the  Thistles.  Dr. 
Chagon,  Due  de  Sorentino,  experimented  with  the  root  of  Cent,  t. 
The  symptoms  of  congestion  are  very  marked  : ''  Blood  surges  pain- 


448  CENTAUREA  TAGANA 

fully  at  every  movement."  A  bright  servant-girl  who  took  it  seemed 
stupefied  for  several  days.  "The  earliest  symptoms  appeared  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  after  taking  the  medicine,  viz.,  those  of  the  arms 
together  with  dull  pains  in  the  hypogastrium,  shiverings  and  general 
heat,  especially  on  forehead,  which  was  covered  with  sweat.  These 
were  followed  by  a  stupefying  pain  in  temples,  frontal  protuberances, 
orbital  arches  and  eyes.  Next  came  the  following  symptoms  :  Dim- 
ness of  sight ;  appetite  alternating  with  nausea ;  increase  of  saliva  and 
vomiting  ;  running  of  the  nose ;  lachrymation ;  eructations  ;  rapid 
sinking  of  strength  ;  general  uneasiness  ;  confusion  of  mind  ;  weari- 
ness ;  dull  sunken  eyes  ;  spasmodic  sweating ;  itching,  and  pricking 
in  the  skin  ;  drowsiness  ;  and  thirst  A  state  of  reaction,  after  four  or 
six  hours  brought  some  quiet.  Next  day,  in  the  forenoon  or  towards 
evening,  the  abK)ve  symptoms  reappeared  but  with  less  violence,  and 
some  of  them  assumed  a  periodic  form.  Then  ensued  coryza,  colic, 
diarrhoea,  fevers  of  various  types,  pains  in  the  arms,  dry  cough,  &c. 
The  action  ended  with  the  symptoms  of  catarrh,  of  angina,  and 
of  fever  in  the  forenoon,  and  with  confusion  and  pain  in  the  fore- 
head "  (Allen),  The  above  gives  a  general  idea  of  the  action  of 
this  remedy.  The  symptoms  are  <  at  night ;  in  the  morning  on 
waking ;  by  movement ;  during  and  after  urinating.  >  By  eating. 
Relations. — Compare :  BeU.,  Cedron,  Card,  b.,  Card.  m. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind.—- Home-sick. — Easy  temper,  alternating  with  contrary  mood. 
— Hilarity.— Absent-minded. — Idiocy.  —  Confusion  of  mind. — Stupefied  for 
several  days. 

8.  Head. — Stupefying  confusion  towards  forehead. — Stupefying  pain 
in  temples,  frontal  protuberances,  orbital  arches  and  eyes. — Uneasiness  in 
brain. — Deep-seated  extensive  pain  in  forehead. — Pain  in  and  under  occiput 
— Pain  in  forehead  preceded  by  sweat ;  <  by  walking. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Wandering  look. — Eyes  sunken  and  dim.— Pain  in  L  eye; 
burning  above  eyebrows;  in  lids;  in  sclerotica. — Lids  heavy. — Smarting, 
itching,  inflammation. — Lachrymation. — Sight  vanishes  entirely  for  a  moment 

4.  Ears. — Itching  and  tingling  in  ears. — Pricking  behind  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Sneezing  and  coryza ;  almost  complete  loss  of  smell. 

6.  Face.— Face  looks  earthy  ;  with  a  stupid  expression. 

8.  Mouth. — Red  streak  along  middle  of  tongue.— White  streak  1.  side 
of  tongue. — Dry  mouth  not  relieved  by  drinking. — Mouth  bitter  in  morning. — 
Taste  impaired. — Continual  salivation. — Increase  of  saliva  alternating  with 
dry  mouth. 

9.  Throat. — Uvula  and  tonsils  inflamed.  —  Raw  pain  preventing 
swallowing. 

11.  Stomach.— Appetite  alternating  with  nausea.— Thirst :  not  allayed 
by  drinking ;  with  dry  throat ;  before  and  during  fever. — DifBcnlt  eructations, 
which  stop  in  the  chest,  with  burning. — Nausea :  with  cold  sweat — ^Vomiting. 
— Pricking  and  burning  in  epigastrium. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  r.  hypochondrium. — Griping  at  night  with 
continual  discharge  of  flatus.— Colic— Dull  burning  in  hypogastrium. 


CEREUS   BONPLANDII  449 

iji  Stool. — Diarrhoea  on  waking  in  morning.— Yellowish  diarrhoea  at 
flight— Copious  stools. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pain  in  bladder,  <  by  movement— When 
urinating:  pain  in  bladder;  weight  in  bladder. — ^Ardor  urinae. — Burning  in 
urethra  after  urinating. — Urine  :  at  first  scanty,  afterwards  abundant ;  deposits 
a  flaky  mucous  sediment. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Firm  nocturnal  erections. — Desire  without 
erection. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Dryness  of  vagina.— Itching  and  heat 
in  labia  noajora  and  minora. — ^Whitish  leucorrhoea. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Tickling  in  larynx;  in  throat  causing 
cou^— Cough  :  on  waking  in  morning ;  dry,  in  evening  or  at  night. 

18.  Chest. — Pain  in  r.  clavicle. 

19.  Heart. — Lancination  as  from  a  thorn  in  heart. — Sensation  of  dilata- 
tion of  heart,  with  anxiety. — Pulse  slower. — Pulsation  stronger  in  some  arteries 
than  others. 

90.    Back. — Burning  pain  in  1.  scapula. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Inclination  to  stretch  out  the  arms. — ^Arms  so 
weak,  can  hardly  lift  them. — In  bed,  arm  lain  on  becomes  numb. — Extensor 
muscles  seem  too  short. — Pain  all  through  arms. — Swelling  of  veins  of  hands. 
—Thumb  cannot  be  clenched. 

2^  Lower  Limbs.— Wants  to  stretch  legs. — Paralytic  weakness  of  legs, 
walking  difficult. — Pain  in  hips  and  thighs  when  walking. 

24.  Generalities. — Remains  for  an  instant  as  if  thunderstruck  ;  staggers 
as  if  drunk. — Prostration,  rapid  sinking  of  strength. — General  uneasiness. 

25.  Skin. — Miliaria.~Sudden  eruptions  on  loins. — Violent  itching  and 
pricking  all  over  :  nose ;  hypogastrium  ;  backs  of  hands,  chiefly  fingers ;  loins 
and  thighs;  preventing  sleep. 

26.  Sleep. — Drowsy  night  and  day ;  cannot  keep  eyes  open. — ^Voluptuous 
dreams. 

27.  Fever. — General  or  partial  coldness. — Shiverings  and  general  heat, 
csp.  on  forehead. — ^Warmth  with  sexual  excitement.—- Heat :  internal ;  with 
or  without  subsequent  sweat ;  with  pain  and  fulness  in  forehead. — Sweat : 
profuse ;  cold  ;  cold  on  forehead ;  at  night 


Cereas  Bonplandii. 

A  variety  of  Cactus  grandiflorus.    N,  O.  Cactaceae.    Tincture 

of  stems. 

^H*f^^- — ^Eczema.    Emaciation.     Eyes,  neuralgia  of.     Heart,  affections  of. 
Insanity.    Kidneys,  affections  of.    Neuralgia. 

CSlwaateiiBtiOB. — ^The  principal  symptoms  of  Cer.  bon,  are  in 
connection  with  the  heart,  as  in  the  case  of  Cactus,  with  which  it 
must  be  compared.    The  symptoms  are  <  at  night ;  <  from  pressure 

VOL.  I.  30 


450  CEREUS   BONPLANDII 

of  clothing,  >  undressing.  Cer.  ban,  was  proved  by  John  H.  Fitch 
in  substantial  doses  (H.  P.,  xii.  533).  The  prover  lost  7i  lbs.  in  weight 
He  felt  weighed  down  by  an  incubus.  When  mental  symptoms 
subsided,  bodily  symptoms  increased  and  vice  vend.  Could  not  bear 
contact  of  clothes;  felt  better  on  undressing.  Among  the  marked 
symptoms  were  :  Wants  to  be  at  work  ;  on  something  useful.  Pains 
through  globe  of  eyes  and  orbit.  Pain  through  heart ;  in  left  great 
pectoral  muscle;  left  side  of  chest.  Expanding  sensation  in  chest 
followed  by  sudden  collapse.  The  effect  on  the  nervous  system 
passed  off  in  four  or  five  days.  The  pains  of  Cer,  b.  have  a  tendency 
to  spread  to  other  parts.  Most  appear  on  left  side.  "  Itching  in  right 
popliteal  space  "  lasted  eight  or  nine  years  after  the  proving.  "  Itch- 
ing with  roughness  of  the  skin  like  eczema  above  left  knee  anteriorly." 
"  Itching,  with  eruption  like  herpes  below  left  scapula  remained 
permanent."  Fitch  (who  regards  Cer.  b,  as  an  "  antipsoric  of  remark- 
able power ")  cured  with  it :  (i)  a  case  of  eczema  of  both  hands 
extending  up  to  elbows.  (2)  Deposits  in  urine.  (3)  Dropsy  of  cardiac 
and  rensJ  origin.  (4)  Left  intercostal  neuralgia.  (5)  Anterior  crural 
neuralgia.  Also  two  cases  of  insanity — (6)  one  in  a  young  woman, 
gloomy,  restless,  incUned  to  curse,  swear,  and  throw  things  at  persons, 
if  resisted ;  (7)  the  other  in  a  married  woman  who  had  spiritual 
delusions — that  she  had  committed  the  unpardonable  sin,  &c.  This 
came  on  originally  after  confinement 

Relations. — Compare: — ^Cact.,  Anhalon.  (visions  of  colours), 
Graph,  j  Anac.  (tendency  to  swear). 

SYMPTOMS. 

X.  Mind. — Desire  to  engage  in  work  ;  to  have  all  time  employed ;  to 
be  engaged  in  something  useful. — Desire  to  be  dissolved.^ Disposition  to 
pray. — ^Apathetic ;  difficult  to  keep  attention  fixed. — Irritable ;  inclined  to 
curse  and  swear. — ^Time  seems  to  pass  slowly. — Spiritual  delusions;  thinks 
she  has  committed  the  unpardonable  sin. 

2.  Head. — Feeling  as  if  head  suspended  from  some  support  under 
skull  and  base  of  brain. — Head  felt  drawn  to  1.  backward. — Pain  extending 
throughjforehead  (1.)  to  occiput. — Painful  stunning  feeling  in  r.  frontal  bone. 
— Sensation  as  of  a  board  bound  to  back  of  head,  more  1. — Severe  pain  in 
occiput ;  running  through  to  brain ;  <  walking  or  descending  steps. — Profuse 
falling  off  of  hair. 

3.  Eyes. — Heavy  feeling  in  eyes ;  soreness. — Pains  through  globe  of 
r.  eye ;  of  1.  eye  and  orbit. — Strong  light  painful. — Perception  of  a  cluster 
of  orange-coloured  spots,  round  and  symmetrical. 

4.  Ears. — Pain  behind  1.  mastoid  process  extending  upward  and  back- 
ward ;  through  ear  and  head. 

5.  Nose. — Sneezing. — Discharges  hardened  mucus,  greenish. 

6.  Face. — Haggard  look. — Pain  along  r.  malar  bone,  running  to  temple, 
through  to  occiput. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  :  red ;  deep  purple. — Watery  sensation  In  mouth. — 
Sahvation. 

9.  Throat. — Persistent  mucus  in  throat,  pale  greenish  or  clear. 


CEREUS  SERPENTINUS  45^ 

n.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  1.  groin  sharp  and  cutting  as  from  calculus  in 
ureter. 

13.  Stool. — Copious  urgent  evacuation. — Felt  very  well  after. — Ineffectual 
urging. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pain  in  kidneys ;  as  from  calculus. — Sticking 
pain  r.  ureter. — Deep-coloured,  strong-smelling  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — ^Priapism  in  presence  of  opposite  sex. — 
Axuesthesia  of  genitals. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Clearing  the  larynx  of  mucus. — Breath 
fetid^Long,  deep,  uneasy  respirations,  <  before  rising. — Cough  on  throwing 
off  outer  gannents. 

18.  Chest. — Chest  expands  itself  seemingly  to  its  utmost  capacity,  in  an 
instant  collapsing,  to  be  repeated. — Deep  inspiration  at  intervals ;  as  from 
oppression. — Intercostal  neuralgia. — Somewhat  persistent  pain  in  cartilages 
of  lower  1.  false  ribs. — Chest  feels  empty. 

10-  Heart.^Irritable  heart. — Heart  symptoms  <  lying  1.  side. — Pains 
in  chest  1.  side  and  through  heart — Pains  in  left  pectoralis  major. — Convulsive 
pains  at  heart  on  going  to  bed  at  night.  Sensation  as  of  a  great  stone  laid  oh 
heart;  soon  after  as  if  chest  broken  out  just  in  front  of  heart.-^As  if  heart 
transfixed  by  a  bolt— Pricking  pain. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Pain  on  1.  side  of  neck ;  and  along  clavicle ; 
at  ni^t — Pain  in  upper  portion  of  spine  and  medulla,  running  upwards  and 
opanding  to  surface  of  brain,  <  stooping  or  bending  head  forward. — Pains 
mnning  along  back  down  to  arms. — ^Vertebral  spines  tender  to  touch. — Pain 
in  r.  scapula. 

23.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  in  both  upper  arms. — Pain  with  numbness  in 
arms  and  hands. 

Q.  Lo^nrer  Limbs. — Pain  in  r.  hip. — Pain  inner  side  1.  knee.— Itching 
in  r.  popliteal  space. 

H'  Generalities.— Lost  7J  lbs.  in  weight—  111  at  ease,  restless.-— When 
mental  symptoms  subside,  bodily  ones  are  <,  and  conversely. 

25,  Skin. — Pustules  on  body,  esp.  on  nates.— Intolerable  itching.— (The 
skin  symptoms  persisted  for  nine  years.) 

s6l  Sleep. — Fits  of  yawning. — Drowsy;  slept  all  night  without  un- 
dressing.— Dreamed  :  of  large  assemblies ;  of  forgotten  scenes. — Re-dreamed 
old  dreams. 


Cereas  Serpentinas. 

N.  0,  Cactaceae.    Tincture  of  stems. 

BUmlit^. — ^Anger,  fits  of.    Enuresis.    Epistaxis.    Heart,  pains  in.    Impotence. 

Chanusteristios. — ^The  heart  was  less  prominently  affected  by 
Cer,  serp.  than  by  the  other  Cacti ;  but  pains  in  head  and  a  paralysed 
feeling  were  experienced.    A  voluptuous  feeling  ;  dwindling  of  sexual 


452  CERIUM   OXALICUM 

organs ;  mental  irritations  were  prominent.  <  On  exposure  to  cold, 
to  which  there  is  great  sensitiveness.  J.  H.  Fitch  proved  Cer.  s.,  as 
well  as  Cer,  h.    Kunze  also  proved  Cer.  s. 

Relations* — Compare : — Cact.  g.,  Cereus  bon.,  Coni. ;  Pso.  (sensi- 
tiveness to  cold),    Anac.  (inclined  to  swear). 

SYMPTOMS. 

z.  Mind.— Angry  at  trifles. — Fits  of  sudden  ungovernable  rage. — Inclined 
to  swear.— Prays  all  night. — Makes  mistakes,  reading  or  writing. 

3.  Head. — Dizzy  in  morning,  with  mucus  in  throat — ^Tensive  pain  in 
head  and  brain. — Feeling  as  if  back  part  of  brain  were  detached  from  front, 
and  rotten. 

5.    Nose.— Epistaxis. 

8.  Mouth. — ^At  dinner  bites  inside  mouth,  r.  cheek. 

9.  Throat. — Much  tenacious  mucus  in  throat  and  back  of  nose. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pain  in  region  of  r.  kidney. — Urging  to  urinate. 
—Enuresis. — Urine  yellowish  ;  or  pale  tea-green. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Genital  organs  small  and  dwindled. — Excited 
genital  condition. — Emission,  seems  as  if  pass6d  in  a  lump. — Emission  followed 
by  cutting  pain  first  in  one,  then  in  other  testicle. 

zg.  Heart. — Paralysed  f eeUng  in  heart — Pain  after  exertion,  followed  by 
short  breath,  >  by  full  breath. — Afterwards,  short  sharp  pains  through  heart. 
— ^Thrusting  pains  at  heart  followed  by  sighing  respiration. 

S7.    Fever. — Very  sensitive  to  cold. 


Gerinm  Oxalicam. 

Oxalate  of  Cerium.    Cea(C,0j3  gHaO.    Trituration. 

(Uinioalt— Cough,  reflex.     Dysmenorrhoea.     Pregnancy,  vomiting  of.      Sea- 
sickness.   Vomiting. 

Charaeteristios. — Originally  introduced  by  Sir  James  Simpson 
as  a  remedy  for  the  morning  sickness  of  pregnancy  and  chronic  cases 
of  vomiting,  which  he  supposed  to  be  due  to  some  eruption  on  the 
mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach,  Cer,  ox.  has  fairly  maintained  its 
reputation.  Hale  found  it  of  most  use  in  cases  of  vomiting  of  half- 
digested  food.  It  has  mostiy  been  given  in  the  lower  triturations  by 
homoeopaths,  and  in  five  to  ten  grain  doses  by  allopaths.  In  the 
latter  doses  it  has  produced  decidedly  narcotic  eflfects  in  two  cases. 
Some  have  obtained  great  success  with  it  in  sea-sickness.  Spasmodic 
coughs  of  nervous  or  reflex  origin  have  been  successfully  treated  with 
it ;  and  dysmenorrhoea  in  fleshy  and  robust  women,  scan^  flow,  pain 
coming  before,  or  at  commencement,  with  feeling  of  tenesmus, 
>  when  the  flow  is  established  (like  Lack,). 


CHAMOMILLA  453 

GerYus. 

Cervns  campestris.    Cervus  brasilicus.    Brazilian  deer.    Triturations 
of  the  fresh  hide  covered  with  hair. 

QHbIimJ.— Sciatica.    T^te,  altered.    Tongue,  painful. 

Charaot6riBti08« — Mure  proved  this  substance,  and  one  symptom 
appears  to  be  peculiar  :  "Taste  of  doughy  bread  in  the  mouth." 
Halations. — Compare : — Carb.  an.  ^^harred  ox-hide). 

SYMPTOMS. 

3.    Eyes. — Sensitive  to  light,  esp.  sunlight. 

«.    Face.— Face  mottled. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Taste  of  doughy  bread. — Coppery  taste  with  heat  in  throat 
when  taking  the  drug. 

18.  Abdomen. — Pricking  in  navel  when  lying. — Needle-like  pain,  inter- 
mitting in  r.  groin,  in  direction  of  joint,  after  walking. 

tt.    Upper  Limbs. — Numbness  of  arm  on  which  he  lies ;  of  hand  and 

t).    Lower  Limbs. — Frequent  pain,  now  in  1.  buttock  now  in  thigh. 
a6.    Sleep. — Drowsiness  and  yawning. 

Getraria  Islandica. 

Iceland  Moss.    N,  0.  Lichenes.    Decoction  and  tincture. 

GUnlcal.— Atrophy.  Catarrh.  Diarrhoea.  Phthisis.  Scrofulous  emaciation. 
Scorvy.    Ulcers. 

GhaFaoteristios. — Cetraria  has  been  used  in  decoction  and  as  a 
food,  and  has  been  found  curative  empirically  in  the  diseases  named 
above.  Symptoms  indicating  its  use  are  :  Bitter  slimy  taste.  Feels 
foil  and  satisfied  after  eating  a  little.  Habitual  vomiting.  Chronic 
diarrhoea  (of  consumptives).  Frequent  catarrhs.  Tickling  and 
spasmodic  feeling  in  windpipe  on  waking.  Copious  expectoration. 
Fetid  taste  and  smell  causing  nausea.  All  kinds  of  bloody  expectora- 
tion.   Weak  lungs.    Emaciated  people. 

RelatUuuu— Com^ard :  Sticta  pul. 

Chamomilla. 

Uatricaria  chamomilla.    N.  0.  Compositae.    Tincture  of  whole  fresh 

plant. 

CHulcsir— Acidity.  Anger.  Asthma  (from  anger).  Blepharospasm.  Catarrh. 
CoflFee,  efifects  of.  Colic,  Convulsions.  Cough.  Cramp.  Croup.  Dentition. 
Diankouk    Dysmenorrhoea.    Dyspepsia.    Earache.    Eyes:  blepharitis;  ophthal- 


454  CHAMOMILLA 

mia.  Eructations,  t  Erysipelas.  Excitement.  Excoriation.  Fainting  fits.  Fevers. 
Flatulence.  Flatulent  colic.  Gout  Gum-rash.  Headache.  Hemia.  Hysterical 
joint  Influenza.  Jaundice.  Lienteria.  Labour :  disorders  of ;  after-pains. 
Mastitis.  Menstruation^  disordered.  Miliary  eruption.  Milk-fever.  Miscarriage. 
Mumps.  Neuralgia.  Parotitis.  Perichondritis.  Peritonitis.  Pregnancy^  disorders 
of.  Red-gum.  Rheumatism.  Salivation  (nocturnal).  Sciatica.  Screaming.  Sensi- 
tiveness.  Spasms.  Speech^  affections  of.  Toothache.  Ulcers.  Uterus^  diseases  off. 
Wakings  screaming  on.    Whooping  cough. 

Gharaoteristios. — '^  There  is  in  Chamomilla  a  little  thread  of 
symptoms,  and  nearly  always  found  running  through  it.  This  is  a 
spiteful^  sudden^  or  uncivil  irritability^^  (Guernsey).  Teste  puts  Chant. 
at  tne  head  of  one  of  his  groups,  which  includes  Grat.^  VioL  t.  Hell.  n. 
The  common  feature  of  this  group  is  :  "A  particular  derangement  of 
the  cerebral  functions  and  even  of  the  whole  nervous  S3rstem ;  a 
painful  increase  of  the  sentient  action,  followed  by  a  considerable 
depression  of  the  vital  forces^  and  a  certain  disorder  of  the  mental 
faculties."  In  spite  of  its  obvious  analogies  with  Pul$,y  Ipec.,  Aeon., 
and  Coni.f  it  has  marked  and  exclusive  characteristics  of  its  own.  '^  It 
increases  the  general  nervous  sensibility,  and  stimulates  the  cerebral 
functions :  a  property  that  seems  to  give  rise  secondarily  to  the 
various  organic  alterations  that  Cham,  is  capable  of  producing,  and 
for  which  it  has  so  often  been  given  with  success."  "  It  appears," 
says  Hahnemann^  quoted  by  Teste,  "  to  diminish "  [i.e.,  curatively] 
*'  in  a  great  degree,  the  excessive  sensitiveness  to  pain  and  the  violent 
derangements  which  pain  occasions  in  the  moral  condition  of  the 
patient.  This  is  the  reason  why  it  appeases  a  multitude  of  sufferings 
to  which  coffee-drinkers,  and  persons  who  have  been  treated  with 
narcotic  palliatives  are  subject.  And  this  is  likewise  the  reason  why 
it  ought  not  to  be  given  to  those  who  bear  pain  patiently  and  with 
resignation.  I  mention  this  rule  here,  for  it  is  of  very  great  im- 
portance." Teste  remarks  on  this  that  Cham,  antidotes  not  only 
Coffea,  but  also  Causticum,  and  most  of  the  members  of  the  Causticum 
group.  Oversensitiveness,  with  great  irritability  and  crossness,  is  the 
leading  note  of  the  Chamomilla  effects.  The  pains  are  unbearable 
and  drive  to  despair;  the  patient  insists  that  the  doctor  shall  cure 
them  at  once.  Prostrating  debility  as  soon  as  the  pains  begin.  The 
senses  are  too  acute.  Bad  temper  {Nux  is  malicious).  Peevishness  ; 
ill-humour ;  anger,  with  rage,  violence  and  heat  Cannot  bear  to 
be  looked  at.  Cannot  be  civil  to  doctor.  Impatience.  Cham. 
also  corresponds  to  the  effects  of  anger :  colic,  diarrhoea,  jaundice, 
twitchings,  and  convulsions.  Child  cries,  and  must  be  carried  about 
to  be  quieted.  There  is  hot  sweat  on  head.  Stopped  up  colds,  with 
dripping  of  hot  water  from  nose.  One  cheek  red,  the  other  pale. 
Face  sweats  after  eating  or  drinking.  The  patient  is  hot  and  thirsty 
with  the  pains.  Cham,  is  almost  typical  of  the  dentition  state.  The 
toothache  of  Cham,  comes  on  when  entering  a  warm  room  or  from 
drinking  anything  warm.  There  is  fetor  of  breath,  and  of  discharges 
in  general.  Biliousness  preceded  by  anger.  Gastralgia,  food  eaten 
lies  like  a  load  on  stomach,  hypochondria  distended.  Tongue  yellowish 
white.  Bitter  taste.  Colic  >  by  drinking  coffee.  The  diarrhoea  of 
Cham,  is :  stool  hot,  yellowish  green  ;  like  chopped  egg ;  offensive  ; 


CHAMOMILLA  455 

exccMiation  round  anus.  Intertrigo  of  children.  Wind  colic ;  belching 
of  wind  <  the  condition  (this  is  characteristic).  Menorrhagia  dark 
dots ;  fetid  ;  temper  always  <  before  and  during  flow  (Nux  also,  but 
Nux  is  conscious  of  it,  Cham,  is  not).  Threatened  abortion  caused 
by  anger.  The  pain  of  labour  or  at  menses  is  centred  in  the  womb, 
bearing  down,  painful  contractions,  unbearable;  they  extend  down 
thiols  and  are  felt  in  the  back.  Leucorrhcea  is  acrid,  watery,  corro- 
sive, smarting.  Cham,  has  inflammation  of  the  parotid  glands, 
nocturnal  salivation.  Rheumatism  compelling  to  get  up  and  walk 
about;  thirsty,  hot,  almost  beside  himself.  Muscles  of  face  and 
hands  twitch.  Insomnia  of  children  ;  start  in  sleep ;  twitching  of 
hands  and  face  ;  hot  sweat  of  head  and  face  ;  one  cheek  red.  Puts 
feet  out  of  bed  ;  soles  burn.  Aggravation  by  heat  is  one  of  the  most 
prominent  features  of  Cham,  <  By  warm  food.  Cham,  may  be  the 
remedy  in  croup,  or  croupy  cough,  if  mental  symptoms  and  time 
conditions  correspond.  W.  H.  Baker  (Rochester)  has  recorded  such 
a  case.  A  chubby  boy,  light  hair,  blue  eyes  had  a  croupy  cough. 
Acoru  and  Spong,  at  first  controlled  it,  but  afterwards  failed.  The 
cough  became  a  loose,  rattling,  suffocating  cough  ;  the  mucus  came 
up  in  the  throat  and  nearly  suffocated  him.  Paroxysms  at  midnight. 
During  the  day  he  was  hoarse ;  ever  impatient,  nothing  seemed  to 
suit  him.  Cham,  c.  m.  cured,  improvement  setting  in  within  two  hours. 
"Chamomile  tea"  has  removed  the  night-sweats  of  phthisis.  Dr. 
Anderson,  of  Dover,  Delaware,  relates  the  case  of  a  man  who  had  to 
change  three  to  five  times  every  night.  A  cup  of  weak  chamomile 
tea  was  ordered  every  night.  The  second  night  there  was  slight 
diminution,  the  third  he  only  had  to  change  twice,  the  fourth 
once,  and  after  that  there  was  no  more  trouble.  The  plant  in  this 
case  was  probably  Anihemts  cotulaj  or  wild  chamomile  of  U.S.  Dr. 
Anderson  learned  its  use  from  "  an  old  woman."  But  the  sweats  of 
Chatnmnilla  are  also  very  marked.  Nash  mentions  a  characteristic 
in  the  association  of  numbness  or  alternation  of  it  with  pains.  He 
relates  the  case  of  a  man  who  had  very  painful  rheumatism  of  left 
shoulder,  and  who  got  no  better  from  the  usual  remedies,  but  was 
speedily  cured  by  Cham.^  the  indication  being :  "  Numbness  with 
the  pains."  Nash  differentiates  the  restlessness  of  Aco.  and  Ars. 
from  that  of  Cham,  by  the  absence  in  the  case  of  the  last  of  fear 
of  death.  The  Cham,  patient  "would  rather  die  than  suffer  so.'' 
Lying   in    bed   <.    Walking   >   backache    and    rheumatic    pains. 

>  Being  carried  about.  Touch,  and  even  looking  at  the  patient,  <. 
Covering  <.  Pains  recur  in  evening  and  are  <  before  midnight. 
Symptoms   generally  <  night.    Warmth  <  most  symptoms.    Cold 

>  ulcers ;  a  finger  dipped  in  cold  water  and  apphed  to  the  part  > 
toothache.  <  From  music.  Heaviness  and  fulness  of  whole  body 
from  playing  piano.  There  is  desire  for  open  air,  and  yet  over- 
sensitiveness  to  open  air,  especially  about  ears.  Damp  cold  weather 
<.  Windy  weather  <.  Great  dread  of  wind.  Cham,  is  particularly 
suited  to  diseases  of  pregnant  women,  nurses,  and  little  children, 
light  or  brown-haired  persons.    Arthritic  diathesis. 

RelatlonB. — Cham,     antidotes :     Coffee,    and     the     narcotics. 
Especially  opium  as  it  corresponds  to  its  secondary  effects  (useful  in 


456  CHAMOMILLA 

nerve  storm  when  morphia  is  discontinued) ;  the  nightly  headaches  of 
Thuja.  It  is  antidoted  by :  Aco.,  Alum.,  Borax,  Camph.,  Coccul.,  Coff., 
Coloc,  Coni.,  Ign.,  Nux  v.,  and  especially  Puis.  Puis,  and  Cham, 
antidote  one  another,  and  precede  and  follow  each  other  well.  Com- 
patible :  Merc,  sol.,  Sul.,  Puis.  Complementary :  BelL  in  diseases  of 
children  (Cham,  acts  more  on  nerves  of  abdomen,  Bell,  more  on 
cranial  nerves.)  Compare :  in  dentition,  Bell.,  Borax,  Calc,  Tereb. ; 
in  oversensitiveness,  Aco.,  Coff,,  Hep.,  Hyo.,  Ign. ;  diarrhoea,  parotitis, 
toothache,  Merc.  (Merc,  has  hard,  pale  swelling  of  face,  Cham,  red 
and  hot) ;  sour  breath,  constrictive  gastralgia  in  co£fee  drinkers,  Nux 
(Cham,  has  bad  temper  during  menses  ;  Nux  has  malicious  temper)  ; 
toothache  <  in  bed  at  night ;  <  from  warmth,  Sul.,  Merc.,  Puis. ; 
distension  of  abdomen  unrelieved  by  eructation,  Chi. ;  indignation 
and  its  effects,  Coloc,  Staph.,  Nux,  Bry. ;  aversion  to  be  looked  at, 
Ant.  c,  Chi.,  Stram. ;  >  by  moving  about,  Rhus.,  Fer.,  Verat.,  (Ver. 
has  maddening  pains  compelling  to  walk  about,  but  there  is  none  of 
the  feverishness  and  excitement  of  Cham.) ;  stopped  catarrh,  Nux, 
Samb.,  Sticta. ;  nocturnal  salivation,  Nux.,  Pho.,  Rhus. 
Oaoaatioil. — Dentition.    Anger.    Indigestion.    Pain. 

SYMPTOMS. 

z.  Mind. — ^Attacks  of  great  anguish,  as  if  the  heart  would  break,  with 
complete  discouragement,  excessive  inquietude,  agitation  and  tossing,  groans 
and  tears,  accompanied  often  by  drawing  colic,  and  pressure  at  the  pit  of  the 
stomach. — Disposition  to  weep,  and  to  be  angry,  with  great  sensitiveness  to 
o£Fence. — Crying  and  howling. — The  child  cries  and  wants  to  be  carried  on 
the  arm. — Quarrelsome  and  choleric  humour. — Mischievous  disposition  in 
children. — Mental  excitement,  with  sb-ong  tendency  to  be  frightened.— 
Hypochondriacal  humour. — Patients  neither  endure  to  be  addressed  by 
others,  nor  to  be  interrupted  when  conversing. — Peevishness,  ill-humour, 
absence  of  mind,  taciturnity  and  repugnance  to  conversation. — State  of 
mental  abstraction  and  inadvertence,  as  if  plunged  in  meditation,  with 
diminished  comprehension. — ^A  sort  of  stupidity,  and  apathy  to  pleasure 
and  to  external  objects. — Desire  for  difFerent  things,  which,  when  once 
possessed,  are  no  longer  cared  for. — Tendency  to  misapply  words  when 
speaking  or  writing. — Frantic  and  furious  delirium. 

2.  Head. — Intoxication  and  staggering,  on  getting  up  in  the  morning.— 
Vertigo,  with  fainting. — ^Vertigo,  with  obscuration  of  the  eyes. — ^Vertigo  chiefly 
in  the  morning,  or  in  the  evening,  or  after  a  meal,  or  after  taking  cofiFee.— 
Headache  on  waking  in  the  morning,  or  while  asleep,  sometimes  with  a 
sensation  as  if  the  head  were  going  to  burst. — Pain  as  if  caused  by  a  bruise, 
and  pressive  heaviness  in  the  head. — Pullings,  shootings,  and  beatings  in 
the  head,  often  only  semi-lateral,  with  one  red  cheek ;  worse  at  night ;  in 
the  open  air ;  in  the  wind  ;  better  from  warm  coverings  and  when  walldng 
about. — Cracking  in  one  side  of  the  brain. — Hot,  clammy  sweat  on  the 
forehead,  and  on  the  scalp. — Starting  pain  in  the  forehead,  chiefly  after  a 
meal. 

3.  Eyes* — Pain  as  of  a  wound,  in  the  corners  of  the  eyes. — Shootings, 
burning,  and  heat  in  the  eyes. — Eyes  inflamed,  and  red,  with  pressive  pains^ 


CHAMOMILLA  457 

chiefly  on  moving  the  eyes  and  on  shaking  the  head. — Great  dryness  in  the 
margin  of  the  eyelids. — Inflammation  of  the  margin  of  the  eyelids  (esp.  of  the 
lower,  \riiich  are  swollen),  with  mucous  secretion,  humour  in  the  eyes  and 
nocturnal  agglutination. — ^Yellow  colour  of  the  sclerotica. — Ecchymosis  in  the 
eye,  and  haemorrhage  of  the  eyes. — Spasmodic  closing  of  the  eyelids. — 
Quivering  of  the  eyelids.— Distortion  of  the  eyes. — Pupils  contracted. — 
Sparkling  before  the  eyes. — Confused  sight,  more  frequently  in  the  morning 
than  in  the  evening. — Semi-lateral  obscuration  of  the  sight,  on  looking  at 
anything  white. — ^Aversion  to  bright  light. 

4«  Ears. — Otalgia,  with  drawing  and  tensive  pains. — Shootings  ex- 
tending to  the  ears,  chiefly  on  stooping,  with  disposition  to  be  angry  at  trifles, 
and  to  take  everything  in  bad  part. — ^Tinkling  and  buzzing  in  the  ears. — 
Sensation  as  if  the  ears  were  stopped,  and  as  if  a  bird  were  scraping  and 
fluttering  in  them. — Sensibility  of  hearing ;  music  appears  insupportable. — 
Inflammatory  swelling  of  the  parotids,  as  well  as  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands, 
and  those  of  the  neck. — Discharge  of  thin  pus  from  the  ears. 

5.  Nose. — ^Wrinkled  skin  of  the  nose. — Coryza,  with  obstruction  of  the 
nose.~Ulceration  and  inflanmiation  of  the  nostrils. — Epistaxis.— Coagulated 
Uood  from  nose ;  viscid  nasal  secretion. — ^Very  acute  smell. 

0.  Face. — Face  hot,  red,  burning  or  redness  and  heat  of  one  cheek, 
with  coldness  and  paleness  of  the  other ;  or  face  pale,  hollow,  with  distortion 
of  features  from  pain. — Heat  of  the  face,  while  the  rest  of  the  body  is  cold. — 
Swelling  of  the  face. — Erysipelas  in  the  face,  with  hard  and  bluish  swelling 
of  one  cheek. — Swelling  of  one  temple,  with  pain  on  being  touched. — Shoot- 
ing, drawing,  and  pulsative  pains  in  one  side  of  the  face. — Red  miliary 
eniptton  on  the  cheeks. — ^Yellow  colour  of  the  skin  on  the  face. — Convulsive 
movements  of  the  muscles  of  the  face  and  of  the  lips. — Lips  cracked,  ex- 
coriated, and  ulcerated.—  Spasms  in  the  jaws,  with  compression  of  the  teeth. 
—Wrinkles  on  the  forehead. 

7.  Teeth. — Odontalgia,  most  frequently  semi-lateral,  and  chiefly  at 
night,  when  warm  in  bed,  with  insupportable  pains  which  almost  induce 
despair,  swdling,  heat,  and  redness  of  the  cheek,  swelling,  burning  of  the 
gams,  and  painful  swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands.— The  toothache 
recommences  when  entering  a  warm  room. — ^Toothache,  after  a  cold  and 
soppressed  perspiration. — ^Affects  teeth  on  1.  lower  side ;  under  jaw. — ^The 
pains  are  commonly  drawing  and  pulling,  or  pulsative  and  shooting,  or 
searching  and  gnawing,  in  the  hollow  teeth,  appearing  frequently  after 
drinking  or  eating  anything  hot  (or  cold),  and  chiefly  after  taking  coffee- 
Toothache  >  by  dipping  finger  in  cold  water  and  applying  it  to  affected 
part.— Loosening  of  the  teeth. — Dentition,  with  convulsions, 

8.  Mottth. — Dryness  of  the  tongue  and  mouth  (with  thirst),  or  flow  of 
frothy  saliva.— Putrid  smell  of  the  mouth.— Tongue  red  and  cracked,  or 
k»ded  with  thick  and  yellowish  coating. — Blisters  on  the  tongue  and  also 
under  it,  with  shooting  pains. — ^Aphthae  in  the  mouth. — Convulsive  move- 
ments of  the  tongue. 

9.  Throat. — Sore  throat,  with  swelling  of  the  parotids,  of  the  tonsils, 
and  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands. — Inflammation  of  the  soft  palate  and  tonsils, 
with  dark  redness. — Pains  in*  the  pharynx,  shooting  and  burning,  or  a  sensation 
as  if  there  were  a  plug  in  the  throat. — Inability  to  swallow  solid  food,  esp. 


458  CHAMOMILLA 

when  lying  down.— Burning  heat  in  the  throat,  from  the  mouth  to   the 
stomach. — Deep  redness  of  the  parts  affected. 

10.  Appetite. — Putrid  or  clammy  taste. — ^Acid  taste  in  the  mouth,  and 
of  rye-bread. — Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  (early  in  the  morning),  and  of  food. 
— ^Want  of  appetite,  and  dislike  to  food.~Aliments  cannot  descend. — ^Aversion 
to,  or  great  longing  for  coffee,  sometimes  with  nausea,  or  even  vomiting,  and 
attacks  of  suffocation,  after  having  partaken  of  it. — ^After  eating,  heat  and 
sweat  of  the  face,  inflation  and  fulness  of  the  stomach,  and  of  the  abdomen, 
risings  and  inclination  to  vomit. — Excessive  thirst  for  cold  drinks. 

11.  Stomach. — Risings,  which  aggravate  the  pains  of  the  stomach  and 
of  the  abdomen. — Acid  rising  (the  existing  pain  is  aggravated  by  eructations). 
— Regurgitation  of  food. — Nausea  after  eating,  and  chiefly  in  the  morning. — 
Uneasiness,  and  a  sort  of  flabbiness  in  the  stomach,  as  if  the  patient  were 
about  to  faint. — ^Vomiting  of  food,  and  of  sour  substances,  with  mucus. — 
Bitter,  bilious  vomiting. — Excessively  painful  pressure  on  the  precordial 
region,  as  if  the  heart  were  going  to  be  crushed,  with  cries,  sweat,  and 
anguish. — Pressive  gastralgia,  as  from  a  stone  on  the  stomach,  with  difficulty 
of  respiration,  chiefly  after  eating,  or  at  night,  with  inquietude  and  tossing, 
either  renewed  or  mitigated  by  coffee. — Burning  pain  in  the  pit  of  the 
stomach,  and  in  the  h3rpochondria. — After  eating  or  drinking,  heat  and 
perspiration  of  the  face. 

12.  Abdomen. — ^Tension  and  anxious  fulness  in  the  hypochondria,  and 
in  the  epigastrium  (in  the  morning),  with  a  sensation  as  if  everything  was 
ascending  towards  the  chest. — Colic,  after  anger. — Flatulent  colic,  with 
inflation  of  the  abdomen,  and  accumulation  of  flatus  towards  the  hypo- 
chondria, and  the  inguinal  ring. — Excessively  painful  colic,  pullings  and 
cuttings  in  the  abdomen,  sometimes  in  the  morning,  at  sunrise.--Sensation  of 
emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  with  constant  movement  in  the  intestines,  and 
blue  circles  round  the  eyes. — Burning  cuttings  in  the  epigastrium,  with 
difiiculty  of  respiration,  and  paleness  of  the  face. — Shooting  in  the  abdomen, 
principally  on  coughing,  on  sneezing,  and  on  touching  it. — Painful  sensibility  of 
the  abdomen  to  the  touch,  with  sensation  of  ulceration  in  the  interior. — 
Pressure  towards  the  inguinal  ring,  as  if  hernia  were  about  to  protrude. — 
Abdominal  spasms. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation,  as  from  inertia  of  the  rectum. — 
Diarrhoea  during  dentition  (green  mucus). — Diarrhoea  from  cold,  from  anger, 
from  chagrin. — Diarrhoea  chiefly  at,  night,  with  spasmodic  colic,  mostly  with 
slimy,  and  whitish  or  watery,  or  yellowish  and  greenish  faeces,  or  mucus 
mingled  with  excrement,  like  eggs  when  beaten  up  ;  or  hot  corrosive  faeces, 
of  a  fetid  odour,  like  rotten  eggs ;  or  evacuation  of  undigested  substances.— 
Haemorrhoids,  with  very  painful  fissures  and  ulcerations  in  the  anus. — 
Excoriation  about  anus  (intertrigo). 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Inclination  to  make  water,  with  amdety. — On 
making  water,  itching  and  burning  in  the  urethra. — Urine  hot  and  yellowish, 
with  fleecy  sediment ;  or  turbid  urine,  with  yellowish  sediment. — Involuntary 
or  feeble  emission  of  urine. — Excoriation  at  the  edge  of  the  prepuce. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Itching  stinging  pain  in  the  margin  of 
the  prepuce. — Swelling  of  prepuce  (Sycosis). — Excited  sexual  desure. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Catamenia  suppressed,  with  swelling 


CHAMOMILLA  459 

and  pressive  pains  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  in  the  abdomen. — Pains  like 
those  of  labour,  and  general  dropsy. — Menstrual  colic,  before  the  catamenia. 
—Pressure  towards  the  uterus,  as  if  from  the  pains  of  child-birth. — Pains  may 
occur  by  which  the  foetus  is  forced  up  instead  of  down. — ^The  labour-pains 
are  not  sufi&cient,  but  cause  great  restlessness  and  anguish  (over-sensitive  to 
the  pains). — Violent  after-pains. — Metrorrhagia,  with  discharge  of  deep-red 
blood,  and  of  clots,  accompanied  by  labour  pains. — Discharge  of  blood 
between  the  regular  catamenia. — Burning  pains  and  smarting  in  the  vagina. 
—Corrosive  leucorrhoea,  with  smarting.  —  Scirrhous  induration  of  the 
mammary  glands. — Suppression  of  milk  (milk  is  cheesy  or  mixed  with  pus ; 
milk  fever). — Puerperal  fever. — Erysipelas  of  the  mammae  and  soreness  of 
the  nipples. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Catarrh  and  hoarseness,  with  accumulation 
of  tenacious  mucus  in  the  throat. — ^Stitches  and  burning  in  the  larynx,  with 
hoarseness. — Burning  pain  in  the  larynx. — Spasmodic  constriction  in  the 
gullet.— Dry  cough,  produced  by  a  constant  titillation  in  the  lar3mx,  and 
under  the  sternum,  chiefly  in  the  evening,  and  at  night  in  bed,  continuing 
during  sleep,  and  sometimes  accompanied  by  a  fit  of  suffocation. — ^Wheezing 
and  rattling  in  the  trachea. — ^Anger  provokes  the  cough  (in  children). — 
Expectoration  of  mucus  of  a  bitter  or  putrid  taste. 

18.  Chest. — Respiration  short,  croaking,  or  wheezing  and  stertorous. — 
Deep  respiration,  with  sensible  rising  of  the  thorax. — Fit  of  suffocation, 
as  if  from  constriction  of  the  larynx  or  of  the  chest. — ^Attacks  of  flatulent 
asthma,  with  anxiety  and  fulness  in  the  precordial  region. — Oppression  of  the 
chest.— Shootings  in  the  chest,  chiefly  on  breathing. — Burning  in  the  chest, 
with  dizziness  and  anxiety. — Shooting  in  the  regions  of  the  heart,  with 
difficulty  of  respiration. 

10.  Neck  and  Back.— Tensive  stiffness  of  neck  muscles.— Glands 
swollen,  often  very  sensitive;  painful  when  turning  neck. — Aching  pain  in 
the  sacrum,  chiefly  at  night. — Pain  as  of  a  bruise  in  the  sacrum,  vn\h  pulling 
pains,  like  those  of  labour,  extending  to  the  thigh. — Shooting,  pulling,  tearing 
pain  in  the  back. — Panful  stiffness  in  the  loins,  after  having  been  seated  some 
time.— Insupportable  pain  in  the  loins  and  in  the  hip,  in  the  morning,  on  the 
side  opposite  to  that  on  which  the  patient  is  reclining. — Convulsions  in  the 
back,  with  a  throwing  backwards  of  the  head,  and  stiffness  of  the  body  as  in 
tetanus. 

ii.  Limbs. — Cracking  in  joints,  with  pain  in  them  as  if  bruised. — Pain 
in  periosteum  of  limbs  with  paralytic  weakness. — ^Convulsive  single  jerks  in 
limbs. — ^All  joints  sore  as  if  bruised  and  tired  out ;  there  is  no  power  in  hands 
or  feet,  though  without  corresponding  weariness. 

tt.  Upper  Limbs. — Numbness  and  stiffness  of  the  arms  on  grasping  an 
object — Convulsions  of  the  arms,  with  clasping  in  of  the  thumb. — Nocturnal 
pains,  with  paralytic  weakness  in  the  arms. — Swelling;  or  coldness;  and 
paralytic  stiffness  of  the  hands ;  with  cold  perspiration  in  the  palms  of  the 
hands. — Numbness  or  convulsive  movements  of  the  fingers. — Finger-joints 
red  and  swollen. — Retraction  of  thumbs. 

S3.  Lo'wer  Limbs. — Paral3rtic  and  drawing  pain  in  the  hip  and  in  the 
thigh,  extending  to  the  feet,  chiefly  at  night — ^Tension  of  the  muscles  of  the 
thighs,  and  of  the  legs. — Cramps  in  the  calves  of  the  legs,  chiefly  at  night. — 


46o  CHAMOMILLA 

Tearing  sensation,  with  a  paralytic  condition  of  the  feet,  at  night — Cramp. — 
Cracking  of  the  knee  during  motion. — Burning  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  (at 
night,  he  puts  his  feet  out  of  bed). — Sensation  of  numbness  in  the  toes. — 
Burning  and  itching  in  the  feet,  as  from  chilblains. — Swelling  of  the  foot  and 
of  the  sole  of  the  foot. 

24.  C3reneralities. — Rheumatic,  drawing  pains,  chiefly  at  night  in  bed, 
with  paralytic  state,  and  sensation  of  torpor  in  the  parts  a£Fected,  and 
inclination  to  move  them  continually;  mitigated  by  external  heat — Pain 
with  thirst,  heat,  and  redness  (of  one)  of  the  cheeks,  and  hot  sweating  of  the 
head. — Pulsative  pains,  as  from  an  abscess. — Over-excitement,  and  excessive 
sensibility  of  the  nervous  system,  with  great  sensibility  to  pain,  which  appears 
insupportable  and  induces  despair. — Over-sensitiveness  of  the  senses  (esp. 
from  coffee  and  narcotics). — Great  sensibility  in  the  open  air,  and  principally 
to  wind.— The  extremities  feel,  as  it  were,  stiff  and  paralysed. — Great  weak- 
ness and  inclination  to  fall,  with  prostration  of  strength  to  fainting  as  soon 
as  the  pain  commences. — Syncope,  with  sensation  of  sinking  and  faintness 
in  the  precordial  region. — ^Attacks  of  catalepsy,  with  hippocratic  face,  ex- 
tremities cold,  eyes  half-closed,  pupils  dilated  and  dull. — ^Attacks  of  spasms 
and  of  convulsions,  with  face  red  and  bloated,  and  convulsive  movements  in 
the  eyes,  the  eyelids,  the  lips,  the  muscles  of  the  face,  and  of  the  tongue. — 
Epileptic  convulsions,  with  retraction  of  the  thumbs,  and  foam  before  the 
mouth,  preceded  by  colic,  or  followed  by  a  lethargic  state. — Urgent  inclina- 
tion to  remain  lying  down ;  a  child  will  neither  walk  nor  be  carried  in  the 
arms. — Cracking,  and  pain  resembling  a  bruise,  in  the  joints. 

25.  Skin. — Miliary  eruption,  with  itching  and  nocturnal  tickling. — Un- 
healthy skin;  every  injury  tends  to  ulceration. — In  the  ulcers,  tingling, 
itching,  burning,  and  jerking  shootings,  with  excessive  sensibility  to  the 
touch. — Itching  pimples  form  around  the  ulcer,  covered  with  scurf,  and 
suppurating. — ^Yellow  colour  of  the  skin  (over  the  whole  body). — Rash  of 
infants  and  during  nursing. — Red  rash  on  the  cheeks,  on  the  forehead. — 
Inflammatory  swelling  of  the  glands. 

116.  Sleep. — ^Yawning  and  stretching. — Sleepiness,  during  the  day,  with- 
out being  able  to  sleep,  on  lying  down. — Coma,  and  coma-vigil,  with  pulling 
pain  in  the  head,  and  nausea,  or  with  feverish  restlessness,  short  respiration, 
and  thirst — Nocturnal  sleeplessness,  with  attacks  of  anguish,  visions,  and 
illusions  of  the  sight  and  hearing. — Snoring  breathing  when  asleep. — On 
sleeping,  starts  with  fright,  cries,  tossing,  tears,  talking,  raving,  groans, 
snoring,  and  constant  separating  of  the  thighs. — Fantastical,  lively,  quarrel- 
some and  vexatious  dreams,  with  morose  and  sullen  aspect. — Nocturnal 
delirium. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse  small,  tense,  accelerated. — Constant  alternation  of 
cold,  or  of  partial  shuddering,  with  partial  heat,  in  different  parts  of  the 
body. — ChUiiness  and  coldness  of  the  forepart  of  the  body,  while  the  back 
part  is  hot,  or  vice  vend, — General  heat,  esp.  in  the  evening,  or  at  night  in 
bed,  with  anxiety,  thirst,  redness  of  the  cheeks,  hot  perspiration  of  the  head, 
at  the  forehead,  and  the  scalp ;  and  sometimes,  chiefly  on  uncovering  the 
body,  mixed  with  shivering  or  shuddering.— After  or  during  the  heat,  sour 
sweat,  which  causes  an  itching  on  the  skin. — Burning  heat  and  redness  (often 
only  in  one)  of  the  cheeks,  chiefly  at  night,  with  groans,  tossing,  and  cold  or 


CHAPARRO  AMARGOSO  461 

heat  in  the  rest  oi  the  body. — ^Intermittent  fever,  with  nocturnal  aggravation, 
pressure  on  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  nausea  or  bilious  vomiting,  colic,  diarrhcea, 
and  painful  emission  of  urine.^Ohilliness,  with  internal  heat. — ^Chill  and 
coldness  of  the  body,  with  burning  hot  face  and  hot  breath. — Nocturnal 
sweat,  when  asleep. — Continuous  burning  heat,  with  violent  thirst,  and  starts 
during  sleep,  and  furious  delirium. 


Ghaparro  Amargoso. 

Chaparro  Bush.  Goat-bosh.  Bishirandi  Amargoso.  Castila  Nicholsoni. 
N.  O.  Simarubaceas.    Fluid  extract  from  bark  of  stem. 

CUaieaL— Diarrhoea.    Dysentery. 

CharaotariBtics.— Dr.  M.  J.  Bleim,  of  San  Antonio,  Texas,  com- 
municates to  the  North  American  journal  of  Homosopaihyy  of  March, 
1899,  an  article  in  praise  of  this  Mexican  plant,  a  small,  thorny  bush, 
three  to  five  feet  high,  with  a  small,  saffron-coloured  flower.   Dr.  Bleim 
reports  the  following  cases  cured :    (i)  Mr.  A.,   of  New  Orleans, 
eighteen  months  ill  with  dysentery,  was  sent  to  Dr.  Bleim  under  sus- 
picion of  tuberculosis.    Before  seeing  the  doctor  he  met  a  stockman 
who  said  he  could  cure  him,  having  been  himself  cured  with  the 
remedy  after  a  like  experience.    Chapar.  was  the  remedy,  a  teaspoon- 
ful  of  the  extract  three  times  a  day.    After  three  doses  there  was  con- 
siderable improvement.    He  took  no  more  medicine,  and  had  no 
further  trouble.    (2)  Boy,  12,  had  been  treated  for  several  months  by 
Dr.  Bleim  with  indifferent  results.    Chapar.,  half  a  teaspoonful  three 
times  a  day.     In  forty-eight  hours  the  discharge  ceased,  and  the 
bowels  became  normal.    (3)  An  acute  case  had  improved  rapidly 
under  Merc.  cor.  and  colon-douches,  but  came  to  a  standstill  at  a 
certain  point :   three  or  four  stools  a  day,  more  or  less  pain ;  no 
appetite  ;  very  weak.  Chapar.  was  ordered,  a  teaspoonful  three  times 
a  day ;  immediate  general  improvement ;  in  forty-eight  hours  the 
bowels  were  normal;  within  a  few  weeks  strength  was  entirely 
restored.     Dr.  R.  T.   Knox,  of  Gonzales,  narrates  his  own  case: 
Dysentery  three  years.    Nottiing  gave  more  than  temporary  reUef. 
Discharge  after  discharge  of  quantities  of  bloody  matter  accom- 
panied with  much  pain.     Ravenously  hungry  all  the  time  in  a  land  of 
plenty.    Under  the  advice  of  a  farmer  he  was  persuaded  to  drink 
freely  of  a  tea  made  of  the  shrub,  before  each  meal.    The  infusion 
had  the  appearance  of  sparkling  beer,  and  was  most  intensely  bitter. 
In  three  days  there  was  great  improvement.    In  two  weeks  the 
bowels  were  under  control,  stools  consistent,  partly  moulded,  sleep 
good.    Recovery  was  perfect.    Chaparro  is  prized  by  Mexican  doctors 
as  a  tonic  and  antiperiodic. 

fiala^iUk — Compare :  Cedron,  Merc,  Nux,  Nit.  ac,  Caps. 


462  CHELIDONIUM 

Gheiranthus  GheirL 

Common  Wallflower.    N.  0.  Cruciferae.    Tincture. 
GUbIoaI.— Deafness.    Wisdom-teeth,  e£fects  of  cutting. 

GharaoteriBtics.  —  Our  knowledge  of  the  medicinal  use  of 
Cheiranth.  is  due  to  Dr.  Cooper.  The  cases  cured  with  it  are  as 
follows  :  (i)  Young  man,  deafness  and  otorrhoea  left  side.  Is  cutting 
three  wisdom  teeth.  Cured  by  two  doses  of  ^  given  at  six  weeks* 
interval.  (2)  Girl,  22,  deaf  after  measles,  cutting  wisdom  teeth. 
Greatly  improved.  (3)  Girl,  20,  used  to  taking  purgative  pills,  had 
pain  in  lower  back,  jaundiced  appearance,  bilious  feeling,  sickness  of 
stomach.  Cheir.  ch.  removed  the  symptoms  at  once.  Cooper  con- 
siders as  a  keynote  of  the  remedy,  "  Nose  stopped  at  night  from 
irritation  of  cutting  wisdom  teeth." 

Rolations. — Compare :  (Botan.)  Armor.,  Sinap.,  Brassica,  Raphan.  ; 
(wisdom  teeth)  Mag.  c,  Fer.  pic. 

OauBation. — Cutting  wisdom  teeth. 


Ghelidonium. 

Chelidonium  majus.  Greater  Celandine.  N.  0.  Papaveraceae.  Tincture 
of  entire  fresh  plant,  at  time  of  flowering. 

OinluA.'-'Antrunt  of  HighmorCy  inflammation  of.  Cancer.  Chesty  affections  of. 
Chorea.  Constipation.  Cough.  Diarrhoea.  Dyspepsia.  Gall-stones.  Gonorrhoea. 
Haemoptysis.  Haemorrhoids.  Headache.  Influenza.  Jaundice.  Lachiymal 
fistula.  Laryngismus.  Livcr^  affections  of  Nephritis.  Neuralgia.  Nose-bleed. 
Pleurodynia.  Pneumonia.  Rheumatism.  Scald-head.  Stiff-neck.  Taste,  altered. 
Tumours.    Warts.    Whooping-cough.    Yawning. 

GharaoteriBtios. — Chelidonium  is  a  poppy  and  therefore  allied  to 
opium  and  Sanguinariay  with  both  of  which  it  has  many  features  in 
common.  But  its  closest  analogue  is  Lycopodium,  with  which  it  holds 
a  complementary  relation.  I  have  often  cured  with  Chel.  when  Lye. 
was  apparently  indicated  and  failed  to  act  well.  The  juice  of  CfUl. 
causes  vesication  when  applied  to  the  skin.  An  extract  injected 
locally  in  cancer  cases  has  gained  a  reputation  in  the  old  school  The 
juice  is  yellow,  resembling  bile.  Probably  on  the  "  signature  "  of  the 
bUe-like  juice  it  was  recommended  as  a  remedy  in  jaundice  by  Galen 
and  Dioscorides.  Given  on  the  broad  ground  of  organ-homceopathy, 
in  material  or  semi-material  doses,  it  has  achieved  notable  results  in 
cases  of  liver  disease.  But  it  has  also  fine  indications.  The  chief 
"  keynote  "  for  its  employment  is  a  continued,  bruised,  aching  pain 
at  the  inferior  angle  of  the  right  scapula.  CheL  acts  on  spleen  and 
kidneys  as  well  as  liver.  It  is  also  a  venous  medicine.  Paralytic 
symptoms  are  prominent.  There  is  great  debility  and  drowsiness 
after  eating  and  on  waking.    Prefers  hot  things.    Desire  to  lie  down 


CHELIDONIUM  463 

after  a  meal.    Aversion  to  move,  feels  tired  on  least  exertion.    There 
is  the  Opium  sleepiness  and  yawning.    Yellowness  of    the    skin  ; 
ulceration.    ChcL  is  a  predominantly  right-side  medicine  (like  Sang, 
and  Lye.),  and  besides  the  right  infra-scapular  pain  and  the  action  on 
the  liver  it  has  neuralgia  over  the  right  eye  and  in  right  malar  bone, 
and  also  an  action  on  the  caecum  and  right  ovary  ;  and  on  the  base  of 
the  right  lung.     In  pneumonia  with  bilious  symptoms  it  is  one  of  the 
chief  remedies.    Chel,,  like  Lye,  has  fan-like  movement  of  alae  nasi  in 
chest  affections.    There  may  be  either  constipation  (clay-coloured 
stools),  or  diarrhoea  with  bright  yellow  stools.    There  is  nausea  (of 
pregnancy)  with  desire  for  food  >  by  drinking  milk.     Desire  for  hot 
drioks,  only  water  almost  boiUng  will  stay  on  stomach.     Chills  or 
creeps  accompany  the  headache  or  the  jaundice.    The  dirty  yellow 
complexion  produced  by  Chel.y  with  other  signs  of  cachexia,  strongly 
suggest  cancer,  and  the  action  of  Sang.,  its  relative,  in  cancer  of  the 
breast  is  well  known.  Also  Opium,  in  addition  to  its  naicotic  influence, 
is  believed  by  Snow  to  have  a  retarding  effect  on  cancerous  growth. 
A  somewhat  typical  Chel,  case,  simulating  cancer,  is  recorded  by 
C  M.  Foss.    A  man,  45,  had  catarrh  of  the  nose,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  of  the  stomach  :  had  been  told  he  had  cancer  of  the  stomach. 
Tenderness  over  stomach  with  sinking,  gone  feeling,  at  times  reaching 
a  state  of  painful  anguish  ;  sickness  at  stomach,  all  symptoms  >  by 
eating.  Chel.  6x  ciu-ed  at  once.    "Aversion  to  cheese  "  is  an  indication 
lovCkcl.  in  many  gastric  conditions.    Teste,  who  proved  CheU,  places  it 
at  the  head  of  a  group  which  includes  Caps,  and  Viola,  od.    He  men- 
tions  the   analogy  between    the  juice  of  Cliel.  and  the  juice  of 
Gardnia  marella,  Gamboge.    Both  are  bright  yellow  and  pass  to 
orange  and  brown  on  drying.     Some  old-school  authorities  have 
recommended  the  juice  of  ChcL  as  a  substitute  for  gamboge  as  a 
hydragogue  cathartic.    Among  its  ancient  external  uses  was,  as  an 
application  in  eye  affections,  to  chronic  ulcers,  and  to  warts.     In 
Teste's  proving  he  emphasised  the  following  symptoms  :  '^  1.30  p.m. : 
dull  and  heavy,  deep-seated  pain  in  whole  right  side  of  chest  and 
right  shoulder,  without  cough,  but  with  embarrassed  respirations. 
This  pain,  which  is  at  times  accompanied  by  dull  beatings  in  the 
chest,  does  not  allow  him  to  draw  a  long  breath  ;  it  is  not  perceptibly 
aggravated  by  the  motions  of  the  arm.  The  pain  is  particularly  felt  in 
the  axilla  and  under  the  shoulder-blade  ;  a  sort  of  numbness  of  the 
muscles  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  and  in  the  whole  right  side  of  the 
neck,  face,  and  head ;  apprehension  of  threatening  pneumonia ;  great 
anxiety ;  constant  desire  to  stir  and  change  one's  position  (lasts  an 
hour  and  decreases  gradually)." — "  Extremely  profuse  emission  of  a 
whitish  and  foaming  urine." — "  2  p.m.  :    drowsiness  which  is  so 
marked,  even  in  the  open  air,  that  she  is  near  falling  asleep  while 
walking  ;  lasts  half  ^n  hour."    According  to  Rademacher  CheL  acts 
on  the  centre  of  the  Uver.    CheL  has  a  strong  action  on  the  respiratory 
sphere.    A  characteristic  cough  is  caused  by  a  sensation  of  ^*  dust "  in 
the  air  passages.    St  Clair  Smith  relates  a  case.    A  yotmg  lady  had 
had  for  several  weeks  a  dry,  racking,  fatiguing  cough  night  and  day, 
<  nigbtf  no  expectoration  and  no  pain.    She  looked  completely  worn 
oat.    The  cough  was  excited  by  a  sensation  as  if  throat  and  larynx 


464  CHELIDONIUM 

were  full  of  dust.    CheL  3,  a  powder  every  two  hours,  was  given.    She 
only  took  three  when  the  "  dust "  left  the  throat  and  with  it  the  cough, 
and  never  returned.    Carleton  Smith  cured  this  :  "  Dry  cough  through 
day  with  pain  and  stitches  right  side  ;  severe  hoarseness  5  p.m.,  voice 
scarcely  audible."    In  rheumatic  affections  CheL  has  a  large  field. 
OBdema,  heat,  tenderness  and  stiffness  are  the  leading  indications. 
Here  is  a  case  :  A  baby  girl  had  had  rheumatism  of  bo&  ankles  for  a 
week,  when  it  settled  in  the  right  one,  which  became  greatly  swollen, 
very  tender,  painful  and  hot.    Constipated  for  two  months  previous, 
whitish  stools.    CheL  improved  in  twelve  hours,  and  entirely  cured  in 
a  week.    In  another  case  of  acute  rheumatism  of  feet  and  ankles, 
supervening  on  a  slow,  remittent  fever,  CheL  cured  after  the  failure  of 
Rhus   and  Bry,    The  patient  was  a  girl  of  six.    Both  ankles  were 
affected,  feet  much  swollen  and  extended.    The  slightest  movement 
or  touch  extorted  screams.    The  only  relief  was  constant  bathing 
with  hot  water.    W.  A.  Burr  cured  a  case  of  right  sciatic  rheumatism, 
of  ten  years'  history,  in  a  very  corpulent  woman,  set  55.    In  her  case 
there  were  aggravations  coming  on  in  the  afternoon  and  evening  of 
each  day,  and  lasting  into  the  middle  of  the  night.    During  the 
paroxysms  the  outer  ankle  and  lower  leg  became  cyanotic,  sweUing 
around  ankle,  constriction  above,  great  sensitiveness  to  touch  and 
motion.    Very  nervous  during  the  spells.    Great  external  sensitive- 
ness ;  aversion  to  touch,  and  <  from  it.    Pressure  >  some  symptoms 
and  <  others.     Bating  >  stomach  symptoms  :  all  complaints  lessen 
after  dinner.    Change  of  weather  <  ;  warmth  <  ;  cold  water  >. 
Open  air  <  headache  ;  pain  in  right  eye  ;  and  causes  chill ;  and 
drowsiness.    Motion  <  most  symptoms.    Coughing  and  blowing  nose 
>  headache.    Rest  >.    Lying  on  face  >  pain  in  kidneys  and  bladder. 
Lying  on  left  side  >  pain  in  stomach.     Many  symptoms  are  <  4 
a.m. ;  also  4  p.m.  and  afternoon. 

Relations. — Aniidoted  by :  Aeon. ;  acids  ;  wine  and  coffee  ; 
Camph.  (Teste).  It  is  antidote  to :  Bry.  Compatible :  Ars.,  Bry., 
Coral,  r.  (whooping-cough)  ;  Led.,  Sul.  (hepatised  lung) ;  Ipec. 
(spasm  of  glottis).  Connate :  In  pain  below  angle  of  scapula, 
Juglans  cin.,  Chenop.  flower  than  angle  and  nearer  spine).  Ran.  b. 
(edge  of  left ;  througn  to  chest),  Lob.  cerul.  (inside  edge  right 
scapula),  August,  (cutting  from  just  beneath  right  scapula  to  breast, 
near  nipple),  Bry. ;  Bry.  is  a  close  analogue  in  many  symptoms — 
yellow  tongue,  swelling  of  liver  ;  Lye.  is  complemented  by  CheL 
(some  differences  are :  Lye.  has  sour  taste,  Chel.  bitter.  Lye.  has 
rumbling  in  left  hypochondrium,  and  fulness  after  a  small  qusmtity  of 
food.  Lye.  and  Bell,  have  symptoms  beginning  and  ending  suddenly ; 
Chel.  has  headache  ceasing  suddenly).  Merc,  fbilious  pneumonia. 
Sharp  pains  through  right  lung  to  back ;  Merc,  nas  slimy  stool  and 
great  uneasiness  before  and  after,  the  stool  of  Chel.  being  free) ; 
Kali  c.  (pneumonia  in  later  stages,  copious  exudation  into  lungs, 
rattling  with  cough,  <  2-3  a.m.) ;  Colch.  (nausea  with  desire  for 
food)  ;  Carb.  an.  (leucorrhoea  staining  yellow)  ;  Act.  r.  (waving 
sensation  in  brain) ;  Aco.,  Ars.,  Bell.,  Bry.,  Calc,  Caps.,  Chi.,  Gamb., 
Graph.,  Ign.,  Nit.  ac,  Nux,  Pho.,  Pod.,  Puis.,  Rhus,  Sep.,  Spi.,  Sul., 
Viol.  o. 


CHELIDONIUM  465 

STHPT0H8. 

X.  Mind. — Remarkable  tranquillity  of  mind  for  two  or  three  days,  fol- 
lowed after  a  while  by  ill-humour. — Low-spirited,  desponding,  with  inclination 
to  weep. — Forgetful,  absent-minded. — Restlessness  and  uneasiness  of  con- 
science; felt  she  had  committed  the  unpardonable  sin. 

8.  Head. — Confusion. — ^Whirling  vertigo ;  with  shivering ;  with  nausea ; 
with  vomiting  of  bUe  ;  on  awaking ;  from  6  to  9  p.m. — Rush  of  blood  to  head 
and  face,  throat  and  upper  chest. — Heaviness  of  head,  extending  to  r.  side  of 
head,  whence  a  rheumatic  drawing  extending  into  r.  side  of  neck,  wrist,  and 
chest— Headache  in  afternoon,  disappearing  suddenly. — Headache  >  closing 
eyes ;  >  after  eating  (severe  on  rising,  >  after  breakfast).— Headache,  throb- 
bing in  temples ;  pressing  from  within  outwards  esp.  towards  forehead,  <  open 
air ;  coughing ;  blowing  nose ;  stooping ;  >  while  eating. — Waving  sensation 
in  brain. — ^Waving  in  brain  and  heaviness  in  forehead  and  vertex,  extending  to 
temples,  and  very  unpleasant  after  drinking  white  beer. — Pressure  in  forehead 
extending  to  orbits,  which  are  painful  as  if  sore  on  moving  the  eyes. — Pressing 
pain  r.  side  of  forehead. — Band  sensation  across  forehead  and  temples,  > 
dosing  eyes. — ^Tearing  in  forehead  above  eyes,  extending  into  the  (1.)  eye,  into 
the  lids,  and  root  of  nose. — Pressive  pain  in  r.  temple,  r.  parietal  bone,  and  at 
last  over  r.  e^'e. — Beating  in  temples  synchronous  with  pulse  on  lying  down 
in  bed  at  night. — Stitches  in  vertex,  esp.  when  walking  fast. — Occiput  heavy 
as  if  it  could  not  be  raised  from  pillow  at  night ;  with  drawings  in  neck  from 
above  downward. — Sensation  of  coldness  in  occiput  ascending  from  nape ; 
<  moving ;  >  at  rest. — Soreness ;  sensitiveness ;  itching ;  tingling ;  crawling 
on  scalp. — Hair  falls  out,  esp.  on  occiput. — Scald-head. 

3.  Eyes. — Painful  pressure  on  upper  eyelid. — ^Tearing  pain  in  and 
above  ejrcs. — ^Neuralgic  pain  above  r.  eye. — Stitches  between  eyebrows. — 
Pressive,  burning  headache  between  eyebrows  which  presses  lids  together  ;  > 
after  eating,  but  returning  after  three-quarters  of  an  hour. — Margins  of  eyelids 
red. — Clonic  spasms  of  lids. — Redness  of  conjunctiva. — Whites  dirty  yellow. 
—Aching  in  eyeballs  on  moving  them. — Pupils  contracted. — ^Vision  dim. — 
Mistiness  of  sight  of  r.  eye,  morning  on  waking. — A  blinding  spot  seems  to  be 
before  the  eyes,  and  if  he  looks  at  it  the  eye  waters. 

4.  Ears. — Pain  behind  r.  ear. — ^Tearing  from  r.  cheek-bone  to  ears  and 
around  ears  extending  to  upper  part  of  occiput  along  lamboidal  suture. 
—Sensation  in  both  ears  as  if  wind  were  rushing  out. — Loss  of  hearing  during 
cough. — Roaring  as  of  a  distant  wind-storm. 

5.  Nose. — ^Tip  swollen  and  red. — Dry  coryza  with  (one-sided)  stoppage. 
—Fluent  CGryza. — Discharge  of  black  blood  with  mucus  on  waking  in  morn- 
ing.—Obstrnction  with  liver  complaints. — Hallucinations  of  smell  (on  stooping). 

0.  Face. — Red  without  heat. — Remarkably  yellow,  esp.  forehead,  nose, 
and  cheeks. — ^The  usual  red  has  a  mixture  of  dark  yellow. — ^Tension  and  draw- 
ing in  (1.)  malar  bone. — Sensation  of  swelling  in  r.  cheek-bones. — Burrowing- 
tearing  in  antrum. — Itching  in  face  and  on  forehead. — Herpes  on  face,  esp. 
chin. — Lips  swollen  ;  dry,  cracked,  crusty,  feeling. 

7.    Teeth. — ^Tearing  pains  r.  ear  to  r.  teeth,  afternoons. — ^Toothache  with 
facial  neuralgia  ;  <  warmth ;  and  in  bed  at  night ;  >  cold  water ;  1.  lower 
molar,  jerking,  tearing  in  antrum.-^ums  bleed. 
vou  I.  31 


466  CHELIDONIUM 

8.  Mouth.— Taste :  mucous,  P^PPy  >  bitter ;  food  tasting  natural. — ^Bitter 
taste  when  not  eating. — ^Tongue :  nervous,  pointed ;  thickly  coated,  yellow 
with  red.  margin ;  teeth — ^indented. — Mouth  dry. — Salivation :  bitter  ;  oozing 
of  blood. — Bad  odour. — Mucus  flies  from  mouth  when  coughing. 

g^  Throat. — Sensation  as  if  larynx  were  pressed  on  oesophagus  imped- 
ing deglutition. — Sensation  of  choking  in  throat,  as  if  too  large  a  morsel  had 
been  swallowed. — Fauces  red ;  swelling  of  uvula  and  tonsils ;  shooting  in 
tonsils ;  burning  and  scraping  in  throat. 

10.  Appetite. — Appetite  lost. — ^Thirst  with  dry  mouth  and  throat. — 
Desire  for  milk,  which  agrees  ;  for  sour  things. — ^Aversion  to  cheese  ;  to  meat 
— Prefers  hot  drinks,  which  >. — ^AU  complaints  >  after  dinner. 

IX.  Stomach. — Hiccough. — Frequent  belchings. — Eructations  tasting 
like  juniper  berries. — Nausea  with  sensation  of  heat  in  stomach. — Bilious 
vomiting. — Gnawing  in  stomach  relieved  by  eating. — Sensation  of  coldness  in 
stomach. — Cutting  pain  in  stomach  when  yawning ;  soon  after  eating. 

12.  Abdomen. — Colic,  navel  drawn  in. — Stitches  in  liver  and  spleen. — 
Shooting  stitching  through  liver  to  back ;  crampy  pain  inner  angle  of  scapula. 
— R.  (and  1.)  hypochondrium  and  scrobiculus  cordis  tense  and  painful  on  pres- 
sure.— Pains  across  umbilicus  as  if  abdomen  constricted  by  a  string. — ^Abdo- 
minal plethora ;  distension,  rumbling. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Mucous  diarrhoea  at  night. — Stools  white, 
bright  yellow;  like  clay. — Constipation,  stool  hard,  in  hard  lumps. — Some 
blood  with  stool. — Periodic  straining  and  pressing  on  rectum,  as  if  before  a 
stool  without  result. — Burning;  cutting;  drawing;  crawling  and  itching; 
sticking  and  itching  in  rectum  and  anus  (haemorrhoids). 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pressure  in  bladder  with  scanty  emission. — 
Spasmodic  pain  in  r.  kidney  and  liver. — Burning,  darting  and  cutting  in 
urethra.  —  Frequent  desire  and  urging  to  micturate. — Urine :  profuse, 
whitish,  foaming;  red  and  turbid;  dark. — (Diabetes.) 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Drawing  pains  in  spermatic  cord;  in 
testicles. — Eczematous  excoriation  on  male  parts  and  anus. — Painful  swelling 
r.  testicle  with  tension  and  drawing  in  spermatic  cord. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  too  late ;  too  profuse ;  lasting 
too  long. — Pain  in  r.  ovary. — Milk  diminished. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness. — Spasm  of  glottis. — ^While 
coughing  pain  in  larynx  and  sacrum. — Pricking ;  sticking ;  tickling ;  constric- 
tion in  larynx. — Pressure  as  if  air  could  not  pass  through  ;  as  if  swollen  (r.). — 
Pressure,  heat  or  irritation  in  trachea. — Short  breath  and  tight  chest- 
Nightly  attacks  of  asthma  with  sense  of  constriction  in  region  of  diaphragm. 
— Cough  in  paroxysms ;  throws  up  lumps  of  mucus. — Cough  after  waking  and 
on  rising,  with  sensation  of  dust  under  sternum. — Paroxysms  of  cough  with 
copious  expectoration ;  with  pain  behind  sternum,  esp.  at  night — Paroxysms 
of  dry  cough  4  p.m. 

18.  Chest. — Stitches  beneath  r.  ribs ;  1.  side  of  chest. — Deep-seated  pain 
in  whole  r.  side  of  chest. — Soreness  of  lower  ribs  r.  side. 

19.  Heart. — Stitches  and  lancinating  pains  in  cardiac  region  and  heart ; 
in  pectoral  muscles. — Periodic  palpitation. — ^Violent  palpitation  with  tightness 
of  chest. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Drawing  in  nape  and  occiput. — Stiff-neck,  head 


CHELONE  467 

drawn  to  left — Stitches  beneath  r.  scapula  (hindering  motion  of  arm). — Fixed 
pain  under  inner  and  lower  angle  of  r.  scapula. — ^Violent  pains  at  lower  angle 
of  L  scapula. — When  bending  forwards  or  backwards,  tearing,  pressing  pain 
in  back  as  if  vertebrae  were  being  broken  asunder. — Drawing  from  sacrum 
to  r.  side  of  scrobiculus. 

21.  Limbs. — ^Twitching  in  arms  and  legs. — Neuralgia  in  limbs. — Rheu- 
matism.— Least  touch  anywhere  is  exceedingly  painful ;  sweat  without  relief. 
—Limbs  feel  heavy,  stiff,  and  lame  ;  flabby ;  trembling. 

28.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  in  r.  shoulder ;  in  1.  shoulder. — Inalnlity  to 
use  r.  (also  1.)  arm  and  forearm  with  freedom,  sometimes  attended  with  tear- 
ing pain. — Stiffness  in  wrist. — Stiffness,  stitches  in  wrists. — ^Tips  of  fingers 
cokL 

83.  Lo^^er  Limbs. — ^Shooting  in  r.  hip. — Drawing  pains  in  hips,  thighs, 
legs,  and  feet,  more  r.  side. — ^Weight  in  lower  limbs. — Swelling  of  feet,  most 
round  ankle. — ^Toes  feel  dead. — Intolerable  pains  in  heels,  as  if  they  had  been 
pinched  by  too  narrow  a  shoe. 

25.  Skin. — ^Yellow,  yellowish-grey  shrivelled  skin. — Itching. — Burning 
like  nettles,  preceding  eruption  like  measles. — Red  painful  pimples  and 
pustules  on  various  parts. — Red  miliary  eruption  on  neck,  chest,  and  arms. — 
Eczema. — Old,  putrid,  spreading  ulcers. 

26.  Sleep. — Frequent  3rawmng. — Lethargic. — Sleepy,  wants  to  lie  down 
but  cannot  sleep. — Sleep  dreamful,  unrefreshing. — Dreams  of  corpses  and 
funerals. 

27.  Fever. — ^Yawning  and  shivering  before  attacks. — Icy  coldness  of  r 
foot — ^Violent  shivering  fit,  3  p.m.  daily. — Rigor  followed  by  heat  and  sorrowful, 
anxious  mood. — Heat  of  head,  dark  red  cheeks,  pulsation  in  arteries ;  full 
poise ;  faintness ;  difficulty  of  speech  ;  nausea  ;  short  breath ;  cold  feet. — 
Homing  heat  of  hands,  spreading  thence  over  body. — Moist,  burning  skin. — 
Sweat  daring  the  night,  esp.  towards  morning, — Sweat  on  least  exertion. 


Ghelone. 


Chelone  glabra.    Balmony.    Snake-head  or  Turtle-head. 
N.  0.  Scrofulariaceae* 

OHwlol* — Debility.     Dumb-ague.     Jaundice.     Liver,  diseases   of.     Quinine 
(arhnia    •Worms. 

Ciharaoteristics. — Chelone  has  been  used  by  old-school  prac- 
titioners and  eclectics  as  a  cholagogue  and  vermifuge.  Burnett  has 
used  it  as  an  organ-remedy  in  liver  affections.  His  indication  is 
"pain  or  soreness  of  the  left  lobe  of  the  liver  and  extending  down- 
wards." This  I  can  confirm.  Chelone  acts  in  a  line  between  the 
hilus  of  the  liver  and  the  fundus  of  the  uterus.  According  to  some 
observers  it  antidotes  the  Quinine  cachexia;  and  is  a  remedy  for 
"  dumb-ague,"  ue.^  ill-defined  paroxysms  of  aching  and  fever  follow- 
ing severe  malarial  fevers.  ''  Soreness  of  external  parts,  as  if  the  skin 
were  off,  especially  about  elbow,"  has  been  confirmed  as  an  indica- 


468    CHENOPODIUM   ANTHELMINTICUM 

tion.  "  Debility  from  loss  of  tone  of  digestive  organs,  or  liver,  or 
from  exhausting  diseases"  (Hale).  One  to  five-drop  doses  of  the 
tincture  have  been  given. 

Relations.— Com^ar^  :  Chi.,  Chenop.,  Cina,  Helon.,  Hydrast.,  and 
(according  to  Burnett),  especisdly  Carduus  mar.  (left  lobe  of  liver). 
Compare  also  other  Scrofularias,  Grat.,  Dig.,  Tabac,  Scrof.  nod. 


Chenopodium  Anthelminticum. 

Worm-seed.    N.  0.  Chenopodiaceae.    Tincture  of  fresh  plant. 
Solution  of  oil  of  seed. 

CllnloaL — ^Aphasia.  Apoplexy.  Asthma.  Cerebral  deafness.  Convulsions. 
Dropsy.  Epilepsy.  Headache.  Hemicrania.  Hemiplegia.  Leucorrhcea.  Menses, 
suppressed.    Paralysis.    Scapula,  pain  in.    Tinnitus.    Tonsillitis. 

Charaoteristios. — ^The  most  characteristic  pain  of  Chenopodium 
is  a  dull  pain  below  the  angle  of  right  scapula,  and  nearer  the  spine 
than  the  analogous  pain  of  Chelidonium.  Chenopodii  glauci  Aphis  (see 
Aphis)  has  a  similar  pain  below  angle  of  left  scapula.  Several  cases 
of  poisoning  have  been  reported  in  which  all  the  symptoms  of 
apoplexy  and  consequent  right  hemiplegia  with  aphasia  were  repro- 
duced. Stertorous  breathing,  with  a  very  peculiar  rattle  as  of  a  ball 
rolling  loose  in  the  trachea.  Heavy  breathing  with  flapping  of 
cheeks.  Other  symptoms  are  :  Vanishing  of  sight  and  roaring  in  ears 
with  (right)  hemicrania.  Roaring  in  ears  as  of  cannons  going 
off,  also  ringing  ;  deafness.  Subacute  and  chronic  enlargement 
of  tonsils  in  pale,  scrofulous  children.  Caseous  deposits  with 
painful  inflammation  of  tonsils.  Rough,  furry  feeling  in  throat 
Menses  suppressed  ;  leucorrhcea  instead.  Pains  through  heart ; 
under  right  scapula,  and  in  right  shoulder.  Fever  after  a  fright 
In  three  cases  of  poisoning  reported  by  Allen  the  following 
symptoms  were  produced  :  (i)  Insensible,  convulsed,  foaming  at 
the  mouth.  All  remembrance  of  taking  the  poison  was  lost  on  his 
recovery.  (2)  Deep,  heavy,  stertorous  breathing  accompanied  by 
a  very  peculiar  rattle,  as  if  there  were  a  ball  rolUng  loose  in  the 
trachea  ;  pulse  small,  weak,  frequent  and  feeble ;  eyes  insensible  to 
light  or  external  objects  ;  convulsive  movements  of  right  half  of 
body ;  extremities  cold  ;  any  attempt  to  swallow  threatened  instant 
suffocation.  (3)  (This  patient  took  i\  oz.  of  worm-seed  oil  and  30 
drops  of  turpentine.)  Disagreeable  eructations  ;  nausea  ;  staggering 
like  a  drunken  man  ;  deafness  to  the  sound  of  the  voice, 
but  exauisite  sensitiveness  to  the  sound  of  passing  vehicles,  they 
sounded  like  cannons  in  his  ears  ;  also  annoying  buzzing.  In 
smoking  he  would  scarcely  light  his  cigar  before  he  would  lay 
it  down  again  and  take  a  fresh  one,  arguing  perversion  of  taste. 
By  afternoon  the  mantelpiece  was  strewn  with  cigars  only  partly 
used.      No   disposition  to    engage  in  conversation.      Aphasia  :   he 


CHENOPODIUM   ANTHELMINTICUM    469 

dearly  wanted  his  attendant  to  get  or  do  something  but  could  not 
make  him  understand.  The  attendant  wrote,  "  Don't  understand," 
showed  it  to  him,  and  gave  him  paper  and  pencil.  After  great 
efiforts  he  wrote  distinctly  words  with  no  meaning.  Voice-hearing 
became  progressively  worse,  but  he  heard  the  tea-bell  three  storeys 
below  promptly,  and,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  family,  got  up  and 
walked  deUberately  into  the  dining-room.  He  did  not  seem  to  know 
his  accustomed  seat,  and  sat  in  the  wrong  place.  During  the 
afternoon  became  completely  aphasic.  Finding  himself  unable  to 
express  his  ideas,  this  seemed  to  amuse  him  much,  and  he  laughed 
heartily.  Whatever  he  did  he  would  keep  repeating.  When  the 
doctor  entered  he  arose  and  shook  him  heartily  by  the  hand,  and  then 
sat  down.  In  about  a  minute  he  arose,  solemnly  came  forward  and 
again  shook  hands.  This  he  repeated  twenty  times  in  as  many 
minutes.  He  then  went  through  the  performance  of  washing  his 
hands  in  an  empty  basin  and  repeated  this  many  times.  Sitting  at 
tea  he  ate  with  apparent  relish,  taking  singly  tea  and  bread.  While 
grasping  a  piece  of  bread,  there  was  a  distinct  spasm  of  right  forearm 
and  hand  ;  fingers  firmly  clenched,  hand  forcibly  flexed  on  forearm. 
Assisted  to  his  room,  his  walk  was  entirely  natural ;  when  put  to  bed 
showed  some  resistance,  striking  at  the  doctor.  He  at  once  com- 
menced to  groan,  tossed  from  side  to  side  of  the  bed,  suggesting 
abdominal  distress.  Soon  became  unconscious  ;  right  arm  paralysed  ; 
dragging  helplessly.  Next  day  continued  impairment  of  motion  and 
sensation  right  side  ;  right  eyeball  insensitive  to  touch.  Third  day, 
frequent  twitching  and  stiffness  of  right  limbs,  culminating  in  a 
one-sided  convulsion  in  early  morning  of  fourth  day.  At  noon  of 
third  day,  copious  involuntary  urination  in  bed.  This  continued  to 
the  end,  except  when  drawn  off.  In  afternoon,  heavy  breathing  and 
flappmg  cheeks  of  apoplexy  appeared.  More  or  less  constant 
reguigitation  of  yellow  frothy  material  from  mouth,  smelling  of  worm- 
seed,  as  also  did  the  perspiration.  This  material  was  at  times  so 
profuse  as  to  embarrass  respiration.  During  one  of  the  attacks  of 
dyspnoea,  and  while  in  a  drenching  sweat,  which  suggested  dissolu- 
tion, he  was  gently  turned  in  bed  ;  immediately  a  general  convulsion 
set  in,  markedly  opisthotonic,  lasting  ten  minutes,  despite  the  use  of 
chloroform.  By  this  time  jaundice  appeared,  having  been  only 
noticed  the  day  before.  Five  days  from  taking  the  dose  he  died  in 
profound  coma  with  high  temperature.  The  significance  of  these 
symptoms  needs  no  pointing  out.  The  peculiar  deafness  corresponds 
nearly  to  the  "  cerebral  deafness  "  described  by  Cooper  in  which  the 
watch-hearing  is  good  whilst  the  voice-hearing  is  bad  or  absent. 
Hemiplegia  with  contractions  of  limbs,  and  certain  epileptic  seizures 
are  strongly  portrayed  in  the  poisoning.  When  given  as  a  vermifuge 
it  frequently  produces  progressive  and  long-lasting  deafness.  Linnell 
has  cured  with  it  two  cases  in  which  there  was  deafness  to  voice-hearing 
bat  sensitiveness  to  other  sounds.  In  one  case  there  was  implication  of 
left  labyrinth  with  slight  chronic  otitis  media  of  both  ears  ;  deafness 
left  ear  several  years ;  no  tinnitus ;  consciousness  of  the  ear ; 
sensitive  to  musical  sounds ;  deaf  for  watch  and  voice ;  perosseous 
hearing  diminished.    He  has  also  cured :  Roaring  tinnitus  synchronous 


470    CHENOPODIUM   ANTHELMINTICUM 

with  heart.    Sensitiveness  to  cold.    Hearing  better  for  high-pitched 
than  low-pitched  sounds.    (H.  W.j  xxxii.  295.) 

Rolations.— Com^ard ;  Aphis,  Chel.,  Chen.  v.  In  apoplexy  and 
puffing  respiration,  Chi.,  Op.,  Lye.  In  deafness,  Chi.,  Chi.  sul.,  Chi. 
salicyl.,  and  Salicylates  in  general. 

STHPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — ^Weeping  mood. — Insensible,  convulsed,  foaming  at  month. 
— Complete  aphasia  (poisoning  by  the  oil). — Loss  of  memory  of  attack  after  it 
is  over. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo  with  transient  vanishing  of  sight — Pain  in  whole  r. 
side  of  head  with  roaring  in  ears,  dim  sight,  or  complete  loss  of  vision. — Dull, 
pressive  pain  in  vertex  extending  through  head. 

3.  Eyes. — Impaired  movements  of  r.  eyebaU ;  loss  of  sensitiveness. — 
Vanishing  of  sight. 

4.  Ears. — Roaring  in  ears  as  of  cannons;  deafness. — Progressive 
deafness  to  human  voice,  extreme  sensitiveness  to  other  sounds  (cerebral 
deafness  ?). — ^Tinnitus  synchronous  with  heart-beats. 

6.    Face. — Flapping  cheeks  with  stertorous  breathing. 
9.    Throat. — Chronically  enlarged  tonsUs ;  caseous  desposits. — Furry 
feeling  in  throat. 

iz.  Stomach. — Perversion  of  taste. — Disagreeable  eructations ;  nausea.  — 
Constant  profuse  regurgitation  of  yellow  frothy  material  smelling  of 
worm-seed. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Slight  pain  in  region  of  kidneys. — Involuntary 
urination,  very  copious. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  suppressed  ;  has  leucorrhoea 
instead ;  rough  furry  feeling  in  throat. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Stertorous  breathing ;  flapping  cheeks  ; 
dyspnoea ;  peculiar  rattle  as  of  a  ball  rolling  loose  in  trachea. — Respiration 
embarrassed  by  quantity  of  yellow  frothy  material  which  he  constantly 
regurgitated. 

18.  Chest. — Pains  through  heart,  under  r.  scapula,  and  in  r.  shoulder. — 
Pain  throughout  r.  chest,  beginning  at  attachment  of  6th  rib  to  its  cartilage, 
and  extending  to  front  of  r.  scapula. 

80.  Back. — Pain  beneath  point  of  r.  scapula,  with  giddiness  in  forehead, 
ringing  in  ears  and  pale  face.— ^ght  dull  pain  a  little  lower  down  than  point 
of  r.  scapula,  but  nearer  spine. 

21.  Limbs. — Twitching  and  stiffness  in  r.  limbs. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Paralysis  and  spasm  of  r.  forearm  and  hand  in 
flexion. 

84.  Generalities. — Staggering  gait. — Constantly  repeats  an  action. — R.- 
sided  convulsion  and  paralysis. — Frequent  twitching  and  stiffness  of  r.  limbs. 
— Hemiplegia  with  contraction  of  limbs. 

25.    Skin.—Jaundice. 


CHENOPODIUM  VULVARIA  471 

Chenopodinm  YnlYaria. 

Stinkender   Gansefuss.    N,  0.  Chenopodiaceae.    Tincture  of 

fresh  plant 

GUBfoaL— Constipation.    Enuresis.    Scapula,  pain  under.    Spleen  pain. 

GharaoterifltiOB.— CA^no/.  v.  has  an  odour  of  decaying  fish,  and 
contains  Trimethylamene.  It  constantly  gives  off  ammonia.  It  has 
been  proved,  and  seems  to  a£Fect  the  left  side  more  than  the  right,  but 
the  following  recalls  the  characteristic  of  Chen,  anih. :  Pain  in  middle 
of  back  on  right  side  of  spinal  column,  increasing  gradually  to  a 
pressing  wedge-Uke  pain,  beneath  right  scapula,  <  when  sitting. 
There  is  also  a  pain  over  spine  of  left  scapula.  Pressure  on  the  left 
side  of  the  head.  Constipation  with  external  piles.  Nocturnal 
enuresis.  Sensations  of  dulness  and  fulness  appear  in  many  parts. 
Cold  saliva ;  cooling  sensation  in  abdomen.  There  is  restlessness 
caused  by  pricking  pains.  Sitting  <  pain  in  back  ;  this  is  >  by 
bending  txackwards.  Walking  <  stitches  in  spleen  and  pain  in  right 
knee. 

Belations.— Coin^ard :  Am.  c,  Trimeth.,  Chen,  a.,  Aphis. 

SYMPTOMS. 

s.  Head. — Feeling  of  duinesSi  beginning  both  sides  of  head  behind  ears, 
going  opward;  in  upper  occiput;  returning  in  waves. — ^Tenderness  left 
parietal  region. 

4.    Ears. — Dull,  muffled,  obstructed  feeling  in  ears. 

8.  Mouth. — Peculiar  sensation  in  tongue,  as  if  enveloped  by  saliva. — 
Constant  cold  saliva. — Saliva  feels  cold,  esp.  left  side  of  mouth. 

II.  Stomach. — Unusual  thirst. — Dulness  and  yawning,  >  after  eating.— 
Better  after  drinking  wine. — ^Acidity  with  pain  in  stomach  and  epigastrium, 
extending  to  1.  side  into  chest. 

13.  Abdomen. — Stitches  in  upper  part  of  region  of  spleen  while  walk- 
ing.—Cooling  sensation,  felt  first  in  mouth,  then  hypochondriac  region,  then 
abdomen. — Twitching  in  1.  abdomen,  extending  toward  groins,  followed  by 
pain  in  1.  forearm. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Urging  to  stool ;  stool  softer  than  usual.— (Con- 
stipation improved.) — Constipation  for  three  or  four  days  and  then  with 
difficulty ;  external  piles. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  increased,  offensive. — Urging  to  urinate. 
—{Nocturnal  enuresis  improved  the  first  night.) 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Increased  desire,  followed  by  diminished 
desire  and  erectile  power,  but  undiminished  secreting  power. 

ift.    Female  Sexual  Organs.— Amenorrhcea. 

iS.  Chest. — Fulness  in  chest,  in  region  of  last  ribs. — Feeling  in  lower 
lobe  r.  lung  as  if  some  fluid  wanted  to  discharge  itself  into  region  of 
dnodenmn. 

flo.    Neck  and  Back. — Severe  stitching-pressing  r.  side  of   back,  > 


472  CHIMAPHILA   MACULATA 

bending  backward. — Sensitive  spot  in  back,  region  1.  hypochondrinm,  soon 
after  having  eructated. — Pain  directly  over  spinous  process  of  1.  scs^ula,  as  if 
pressed  by  two  or  three  fingers. — Pain  middle  of  back  r.  side  spinal  column, 
increasing  gradually  to  a  pressing,  wedge-like  pain  beneath  r.  scapola,  < 
when  sitting. — Painful  weariness  and  weakness  in  lumbar  and  lower  dorsal 
region. 

32.  Upper  Limbs.— Weakness  in  hands  and  arms.— Twitching  in  L 
forearm  while  sitting  still. — ^Jerking  pain  like  electric  shocks  through  L 
forearm,  from  forearm  to  fingers,  but  without  muscular  contraction. — Pain 
deep  in  inner  side  1.  forearm. — Pain  in  middle  of  1.  radius,  particularly  severe 
in  small  spot. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Pricking  here  and  there  in  legs  and  other  places, 
compelling  him  to  move. 

26.    Sleep.— Yawning ;  preceding  lassitude  and  heaviness. — Somnolence. 


Ghimaphila  Macolata. 

Spotted  Wintergreen.  N.  0,  Pyroleae,  a  tribe  of  the  Ericaceas.  Tincture 
of  root  and  leaves,  or  of  fresh  plant  in  flower. 

GUnloaL— Angina  pectoris.  Diarrhoea.  Headache.  Sore-throat  Tongnev 
stiffness  of.    Toothache.    Worm-fever. 

Gharaoteristics. — Chim.  mac.  has  been  proved  independently  of 
Chim.  urnb.  Some  symptoms  of  Chim.  rotund,  are  included.  An 
intense  gnawing  hunger  is  a  leading  symptom.  Burning  fever  ; 
blood  feels  heated.  The  throat  and  tonsils  are  strongly  affected. 
Headache  <  on  lying  down.  Feels  better  in  warm  room.  Suited  to 
mild,  amiable,  reiined,  sensitive,  intellectual  persons. 

Relations. — Compare :  Puis.,  Chim.  umb. 

STHPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — Becomes  partially  unconscious,  feels  like  fainting,  as  if  brain 
paralysed,  mind  gone  {Chim.  rotund.). 

2.  Head. — Sudden  headache  above  eyes ;  with  dim  vision ;  light-headed ; 
lying  down. — Frontal  headache  with  fulness  in  stomach  and  belching; 

with  pain  in  bowels ;  wants  head  pressed  on. 

7.  Teeth.— Hollow  teeth  ache,  <  eating. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  feels  stifF  and  thick  in  middle,  cannot  raise  it 
Chim.  rotund), 

g.    Throat. — ^Tensive  pain  in  throat  on  swallowing ;  swollen  tonsils. 

10,  zz.  Appetite  and  Stomach.— Extreme  gnawing  hunger. — Feeb 
drunk ;  as  if  stomach  burnt  up  with  liquor ;  as  if  hard,  dry,  and  tough,  and  as 
if  rennet  would  be  good  for  it  {Chim.  rotund.). 

Z3.    Stool. — Diarrhoea,  with  worm-fever. 

14.    Urinary  Organs.— Rises  in  night  to  urinate. 

ZQ.    Heart.— Angina  with  stupor. 


CHIMAPHILA   UMBELLATA  473 

n.  Limbs. — ^Limbs  feel  full,  as  if  distended. — Sensation  of  swelling  in 
annpits ;  pain  from  annpits  to  scapdlae. 

«7.  Fever. — Fever  with  burning  hot  skin  and  thirst. — Blood  as  if  heated 
with  prickling. — Cold,  damp  feet  in  evening. 


Ghimaphila  Umbellata. 

Pipsissewa.  Prince's  Pine.  Ground  Holly,  N.  0.  Pyroleae,  a  tribe  of 
the  Ericaceas.  Tincture  of  root  and  leaves,  or  of  fresh  plant  in 
flower. 

GUaieaL— Acne.  Breast,  atrophy  of ;  cancer  of ;  tumour  of.  Cataract.  Cystitis. 
Diabetes.  Dropsies.  Fevers.  Glands,  enlarged.  Gleet.  Gonorrhoea.  Inter- 
mittents.  Jaundice.  Kidneys,  disorders  of.  Lactation,  disorders  of.  Liver  dis- 
orders. Nephritis.  Proctitis.  Prostatitis.  Pterygium.  Ringworm.  Scrofula. 
Strictnre.    Syphilis.    Toothache.   Ulcers,  malignant.   Urinary  disorders.    Whitlow. 

Charaoteristiofl. — Ckimaph,  umb.  is  a  medicine  used  by  many 
North  American  Indians  in  gravel  and  urinary  disorders.  It  has  also 
been  used  as  a  vulnerary.  Among  the  eclectics  it  is  used  as  an 
"alterative"  in  skin  affections,  e,g.f  acne,  herpes,  eczema,  in  enlarged 
lymphatic  glands,  in  articular  rheumatism.  It  is  said  by  them  to  act 
mainly  as  an  ellminative  through  the  bowels  and  kidneys.  They  use 
it  in  cases  of  chyliferous  urine,  cystitis,  strangury,  smarting,  burning 
pains  on  urination,  turbid  urine  and  frequent  micturition,  ana  diabetes. 
Also  in  passive  renal,  uterine  and  intestmal  haemorrhages,  leucorrhoea 
and  gonorrhoea.  From  its  property  of  increasing  the  renal  secretion 
they  give  it  in  cases  of  calculus  and  prostatic  irritation.  Catarrhal 
states,  with  mucus,  muco-pus,  pus  and  blood,  offensive  or  not, 
indicate  its  use.  Chim.  u,  has  been  proved  by  Jeanes,  G.  Bute,  and  H. 
P.  GatcheU.  It  causes  flushing  of  cheeks  with  some  general  heat  and 
accelerated  pulse.  Toothache  <  after  eating,  and  from  exertion  ;  > 
by  cold  water.  Cannot  close  jaws  at  night ;  jaws  feel  stiff ;  sleeps 
with  mouth  open.  Palate  sore  ;  very  sensitive  to  warm  drink  or  food  ; 
rawness  of  upper  and  back  part  of  palate.  Increase  of  appetite.  It 
has  been  used  with  success  in  cases  of :  inflammation  of  liver  with 
ascites ;  abdominal  and  renal  dropsies  ;  enlarged  mesenteric  glands  ; 
obstinate  constipation  and  haemorrhoids.  A  peculiar  symptom  is : 
shooting  pain,  deep-seated,  left  side  of  anus.  The  symptom  :  "  Sensa- 
tion of  swelling  in  perineum  on  sitting,  as  if  a  ball  was  pressing  against 
it,"  shows  its  appropriateness  in  prostatic  disorders.  There  is  also  loss 
of  prostatic  fluid.  Constant  pain  in  region  of  kidneys,  as  if  something 
fluttering  in  kidney  region,  first  one  side,  then  the  other.  Pressing 
fahess  in  region  of  bladder.  Vesical  tenesmus ;  strangury.  Constant 
desire  to  urinate ;  must  rise  several  times  in  the  night.  Great 
quantities  of  thick,  ropy  mucus  in  urine.  Blood  in  luine.  Smarting 
pain  (also  painful  irritation)  from  neck  of  bladder,  whole  length  of 
urethra  to  meatus.  Bruised  pain  in  testicle  is  a  leading  indication  in 
stricture.    Leucorrhcea.    Rapid   atrophy  of   breasts ;    or   tumours. 


474  CHIMAPHILA  UMBELLATA 

Acute  rheumatism  of  shoulder.  (Edema  of  arms  (right).  Inward 
trembling  without  mental  disturbance.  In  homoeopathic  practice 
Cobum  reports  the  following  cures  :  (i)  Stricture  :  Man,  30,  dysana^ 
severe  pain,  scalding  and  burning.  At  times  urine  voided  in  a  large 
gush  ;  at  others  in  thready  stream,  and,  towards  the  end,  drained  off 
drop  by  drop.  (After  Merc.  c.  and  Canth.  had  relieved  temporarily.) 
(2)  Prostatitis  after  sitting  on  cold  stone  :  Pain  and  a  sensation  in  the 
parts,  as  if  he  had  bruised  one  of  the  testicles.  (3)  Cancer  of  breast  : 
Patient,  21.  Tumour  in  left  breast,  hard,  movable ;  sharp  pains  at 
site.  For  four  months,  under  Am,f  Ars.,  CicuLf  Thuj,,  the  tumour 
increased,  sldn  became  contracted,  nipple  drawn  in.  In  eight 
months  it  broke  out  into  an  irregular  ulceration  with  lacerated 
edges,  fetid  discharge.  Axillary  glands  swollen.  Chim.  umb.  f  gtt.  z. 
every  four  hours  was  given,  and  the  same  locally  applied.  The  pains 
diminished,  swelling  decreased,  and  in  six  months  the  patient  was 
well.  The  symptoms  of  Chim.  u,  are  <  In  damp  weather  ;  after 
washing  in  cold  water  ;  from  sitting  on  a  cold,  wet  stone.  (Though 
evergreens  and  ''  winter-lovers '' — whence  the  name — ^the  Chimaphilas 
are  generally  <  by  cold).  Suited  to  cachectic,  scrofulous  individuals 
and  broken-down  constitutions. 

RelatioilB. — Compare :  Chim.  mac. ;  Apocy.  (dropsy)  ;  Agnus 
(gonorrhoea,  lactation)  ;  Con.  ;  Coff.  (toothache  >  by  oAA  water)  ; 
Led.,  Rhod.,  Kalm.,  Uva  ursi,  Sabsd.  In  pterygium  Calc,  Zn.  Ball 
in  perineum,  Can.  ind.    In  kidney-ache,  Santalum. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2.  Head. — ^Tinea  capitis. 

3.  Eyes. — Halo  round  lamp  flame. — Stabbing  shooting  in  1.  eyeball. — 
Itching  and  smarting  of  edges  and  insides  of  lids. 

6.  Face. — Flushing  of  cheeks  with  some  general  heat  and  quickened 
pulse. 

7,  8.  Teeth  and  Mouth. — Toothache,  <  after  eating  and  from 
exertion  ;  cannot  close  teeth  at  night,  jaws  feel  stiff,  sleeps  with  mouth  open. 
— Toothache  >  by  cold  water. — Tongue :  smarting ;  sore,  full  of  vesicles, 
great  thirst  and  desire  to  cool  the  tongue;  furred,  more  towards  root,  no 
appetite. — ^Vesicular  ulcers  in  mouth. 

9.  Throat. — Palate  sore,  very  sensitive  to  warm  drink  oc  food. — Raw- 
ness of  upper  and  back  part  of  palate. 

11.  Stomach. — ^Agreeable  sensation  in  stomach  soon  after  taking  the 
drug,  followed  sometimes  by  an  extraordinary  increase  of  appetite. 

12.  Abdomen. — ^Aching  pain  below  r.  hypochondrium  whUe  writing. — 
Organic  disease  of  liver  with  ascites. — ^Abdominal  and  renal  dropsies  in 
broken-drown  constitutions  and  intemperate  subjects. — ^Ascites. — Scrofulous 
mesenteric  glands. — ^Worms. 

13.  Stool  and  Rectum.— Griping  after  stool. — Sticking  pain  in  1.  side 
rectum,  deep  in. — Bloody  mucous  stools. — ^Diarrhcsa. — Inclination  to  stool, 
either  ine£Fectual  or  attended  with  great  pain. — Obstinate  constipation ;  with 
haemorrhoids. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — ^Acute  prostatitis  with  dysuria  and  retention ; 


CHINA   BOLIVIANA  475 

sensation  in  perineum  as  if  sitting  on  a  ball. — Constant  pain  in  region  of 
iddneys ;  urine  scanty,  dark,  fetid,  thick,  with  copious  sediment. — Strangury  ; 
constant  desire  to  urinate.— Cutting,  scalding  pain,  divided  stream  ;  stricture. 
—Urethritis  with  purulent  or  profuse  mucous  discharge. — Great  quantities  of 
thick,  ropy,  bloody  mucus  in  urine. — Greenish-black  urine. — Urine  scanty  ; 
frequently  voided,  pressing  pain  before,  burning  prickling,  scalding  and 
smarting  during  and  after,  and  vesical  tenesmus ;  <  sitting,  >  walking  about. 
—Albuminuria, ;  haematuria,  from  long-lasting  gonorrhoea ;  clots  of  coagulated 
blood  pass  with  urine. — Renal  dropsy. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Smarting  from  neck  of  bladder  the  whole 
length  of  urethra  to  meatus  ;  excessive  itching. — ^Atrophy  of  testicles. — Sensa- 
tion as  if  he  had  bruised  one  of  testicles. — Sensation  of  swelling  in  perineum, 
as  if  sitting  on  a  ball. — Gonorrhoea ;  gleet ;  syphilis ;  prostatorrhoea. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Prolapsus  and  slight  uterine  leucorrhoea. 
—Vaginal  prolapsus. — Rapid  atrophy  of  breasts. — ^Tumours  (scirrhous)  of 
breasts. — Painful  tumour  of  breast  in  young  unmarried  women. — Undue 
secretion,  cm-  suppression  of  milk. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — ^Uncommon  sensation  in  region  of  kidneys,  some- 
times one  side  the  spine,  sometimes  the  other,  as  if  something  were  fluttering 
within,  without  pain  or  uneasiness. 

82.  Upper  Limbs. — Acute  rheumatism  of  shoulder.— Pain  in  r.  arm, 
about  upper  half  of  biceps  and  shoulder- joint. — Fistulous  ulcer  on  r.  forearm, 
with  stinging  and  crawling. — Paronychia. 

23.  Lovrer  Limbs. — Opening  and  shutting  pain,  slow,  pulsating,  in 
mkidle  of  anterior  part  of  thigh,  leaving  a  severe  aching  and  tenderness  on 
pressure,  whilst  lying  down. 

8$.  Skin. — Redness,  vesication  or  desquamation. — Eruption  of  dark  red 
spots  without  sensation. — Malignant  ulcers. — Scarlet  fever. 

s6.  Sleep.— Would  have  slept  well,  if  he  had  not  been  constantly  waked 
by  calls  to  make  water. 

27.  Fever. — Hectic  fever  and  night  sweats.— Flushing  of  cheeks  with 
general  heat 

China  BoliYiaiia. 

Cinchona  Boliviana  (a  variety  of  Cinchona  calisaya  growing  further 
north).    N.  0,  Rubiaceae.    Tincture  of  bark. 

GliaicaL— Aphthae.    Corns.    Coryza.    Hands,  red.    Mouth,  commissures  ulce- 
rated.   Pneumonia.    Wry-neck. 

Gharaoteristios. — China  BoL  was  proved  by  Modiedo,  and  the 
proving  is  accepted  by  Hering.  It  presents  the  main  features  of 
Chi.  off.^  but  some  are  peculiar  and  deserve  separate  mention.  Among 
these  are  :  Ulceration  of  commissures  of  mouth.  Cough  with  dagger- 
like pains  in  base  of  right  lung.  Rigidity  of  nape  of  neck.  Hands 
red ;  hot ;  or  cold  and  sticky.  There  is  also  sticky  sweat  about  anus. 
Flatulence,  disturbed  and  dreamful  sleep,  and  sensitiveness  to  touch 
are  common  to  both. 


476  CHINA  OFFICINALIS 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Cowardice. — Gloom  alternating  with  serenity. — ^Alternation 
of  bad  and  good  humour. — Fits  of  rage,  blasphemes. 

2.  Head.— Vertigo  as  after  a  drunken  fit,  voracious  appetite. — Head- 
ache in  morning  on  awaking ;  leaves  during  the  day,  or  lasts  all  day  and 
leaves  diu-ing  sleep. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Violent  pains  like  a  stab  in  1.  eye,  followed  by  itching  and 
tears. 

4.  Ears. — Detonation  as  of  a  cannon  in  r.  ear. — Ringing,  humming, 
whistling  sounds. 

5.  Nose. — Much  sneezing  on  awaking  with  smell  of  fresh  pus. — Sensa- 
tion of  incipient  cold  with  tight  feeling  and  pain  in  throat. — ^Violent  cold  in 
head. — Mucus  from  posterior  nares. 

6.  Face. — ^Aphthae  on  inner  surface  of  lips  j  ulceration  of  commissures. 

8.  Mouth. — Mouth  bitter,  morning  on  waking. 

9.  Throat. — Constriction  and  burning  in  throat. 

10.  Appetite. — Hunger,  or  lack  of  appetite ;  repugnance  to  meat — After 
eating :  weight  in  stomach ;  cold  ;  sneezing ;  sleepy  and  desire  to  sleep  in 
evening. 

11.  Stomach. — Much  gas  rises  from  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  both  hypochondria  and  under  ribs  on  waking 
in  the  morning. — Pain  in  splenic  region. 

13.  Anus. — Biting  in  anus  as  from  worms ;  excoriated  sensation. — ^Vis- 
cous sweat  on  anus. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Pollutions  exceedingly  weakening. — Ex- 
coriation on  inner  and  lower  part  of  prepuce. — Gleet  and  ulceration  of 
prepuce. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Cough  with  pain  in  r.  lung,  as  from  a 
dagger  buried  there ;  at  times  makes  breathing  laborious ;  burning  in  eyes ; 
extremities  cold. — Unbearable  pain  in  r.  lung,  extends  to  region  of  liver, 
sensitive  to  touch. 

30.  Neck  and  Back. — ^Nape  of  neck  rigid,  cannot  turn  head  to  r. ;  any 
sudden  movement  causes  a  snap  or  crack. — ^Wry-neck. — Pain  in  :  1.  shoulder  ; 
in  1.  buttock,  and  also  in  r.  hip-bone  oh  sitting  up  in  bed. 

23.  Upper  Limbs. — Hands  red  ;  vessels  distended. — Hands  hot,  even  in 
cold  and  rainy  weather. — Hands  cold,  sticky. 

2^,  Loiter  Limbs. — Legs  and  feet  icy  cold,  as  if  blown  on  by  wintry 
wind. — Painful  corns. 

26.  Sleep. — Dreams :  of  sea ;  of  fishes ;  of  swimming ;  of  bathing ;  of 
journeys  by  land  and  sea ;  of  vomiting  worms. 


China  Officinalis. 


Cinchona  officinalis.    Cinchona  calisaya.    Peruvian  bark.    AT.  0. 
Rubiacese.    Tincture  of  the  dried  bark. 

OlinieaL— i465C«ss.    Alcoholism.    Amblyopia.    Atugmia,     Aphthae.     Apoplexy. 
Appetite,  disordered.    Asthma.    Back,  weakness  of.    Bilious  attack.    Catarrhal  affco- 


CHINA  OFFICINALIS  477 

tio^  ConuL.  Constipation,  Cough.  Debility,  Delirium.  DiarrhoBa,  Dropsy. 
Dyspepsia.  Ears,  deafness ;  noises  in.  Emissions.  Empyaema.  Erysipelas,  Fadal 
D^ualgia.  Gall-stone  colic.  Haemorrhages.  Haemorrhoids.  Headache.  Hectic 
fever.  Hip-joint  disease.  Ichthyosis.  Impotence.  Influenza.  Intermittent  fever. 
Jaundice.  Labonr.  Lactation.  Leucorrhoea.  Lienteria.  Liver,  diseases  of; 
cirrhosis  of.  Mcnihre*s  disease.  Menstruation^  disordered.  Mercury,  effects  of. 
Musae  voliiantes.  Neuralgia.  Peritonitis,  Peroration,  excessive.  Pleurisy.  Pro- 
sopalgia. Psoriasis.  Pylorus^  disease  of.  Rheumatism.  Self-abuse,  Sleep,  dis- 
ordered. Spermatorrhoea,  Spleen,  affections  of.  Suffocation,  fits  of.  Taste^  dis- 
ordered. Teoy  effects  of.  Thirst.  Tinnitus.  Tobacco  habit.  Traumatic  jever. 
Tympanitis.    Varicose  veins.    Vertigo. 

Charaeteristics,— £imi  is  the  Peruvian  name  for  ''  bark,"  and 
I'Kina-Kina"  is  the  "Bark  of  barks."  The  story  of  its  introduction 
into  European  medical  practice  is  one  of  the  romances  of  the  Healing 
Art ;  as  the  story  of  its  frightful  abuse  is  one  of  its  many  tragedies. 
"According  to  Humboldt,"  writes  Teste,  "about  500,000  lbs.  of  this 
bark  are  annually  exported  to  Europe  for  the  purpose  of  being  con- 
verted into  sulphate  of  quinine."  Well  may  Teste  add  the  exclama- 
tion, "  Poor  patients  !  "  As  with  almost  every  other  good  thing  that 
comes  into  its  hands,  allopathy  has  contrived  to  do  an  infinity  of 
harm  with  quinine  to  make  up  for  the  good.  Some  forms  of  inter- 
mittent fever  it  will  cure,  if  too  much  of  it  is  not  given  ;  others  it 
will  suppress  or  change  from  intermittent  to  continuous.  The  result 
of  suppression  is  thus  sketched  by  Hahnemann's  master-hand : 
"  True,  he  [the  patient]  can  no  longer  complain  that  the  paroxysms 
of  his  original  disease  occurs  any  more  on  regular  days  and  at 
regular  hours ;  but  behold  his  livid  earthy  complexion,  his  bloated 
countenance,  his  languishing  looks !  Behold  how  difiBcult  it  is  for 
him  to  breathe,  see  his  hard  and  distended  abdomen,  the  swelling 
of  the  hypochondria  ;  see  how  his  stomach  is  oppressed  and  pained 
by  everything  he  eats,  how  his  appetite  is  diminished,  how  his 
taste  is  altered ;  how  loose  his  bowels  are,  and  how  unnatural  and 
contrary  to  what  they  should  be  ;  how  his  sleep  is  restless,  unrefresh- 
ing,  and  full  of  dreams.  Behold  him  weak,  out  of  humour  and  pros- 
trated, his  sensibility  morbidly  excited,  his  intellectual  faculties 
weakened  ;  how  much  more  does  he  suffer  than  when  he  was  a  prey 
to  bis  fever  ! "  (M .  A/.  P.)  The  number  of  patients  who  have  been 
consigned  to  an  early  grave  by  quinine  probably  falls  short  only  of 
the  number  that  mercury  can  claim.  When  first  introduced  it  was 
(as  chloral  and  hundreds  of  other  poisons  have  been  since)  declared 
on  the  highest  authority  to  be  incapable  of  harm  "  in  whatever  dose 
it  may  be  taken."  It  is  only  at  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century 
that  some  allopathists  are  discovering  that  it  is  more  deadly  than 
the  deadliest  West  African  fevers.  Every  homoeopath  knows  from 
experience  how  true  is  Hahnemann's  picture  of  quinine  effects  from 
the  victims  of  it  he  has  been  called  upon  to  treat. 

China  is  placed  by  Teste  in  the  Ferrum  group  with  Plumb,,  Phos,, 
Carb.  an.y  Puis,,  Zinc,  and  others,  which  "  have  the  property  of  re- 
making the  altered  blood,  or  increasing  for  the  time  being,  in  a 
healthy  person,  the  relative  amount  of  haematin,  globulin,  fibrin,  &c.," 
but  also,  "  after  a  certain  lapse  of  time,  they  produce  opposite  results 
—impoverishment,  discoloration,  and  liquefaction  of  the  blood.   From 


478  CHINA  OFFICINALIS 

this  antagonism  arise  their  characteristic  effects :  Short-lasting,  san- 
guineous congestions  (primary  effect),  and  later,  discoloration  of 
tissues ;  fulness  of  veins  ;  torpor  of  all  functions  ;  dryness  of  mucoos 
membranes ;   mucous  or  purulent  discharges  ;   engorgement  of  the  | 

glands  which  are  immediately  connected  with  the  circulatory  appa-  | 

ratus,  as  spleen  and  liver  ;  passive  haemorrhages  ;  inertia  of  involun-  j 

tary  muscles  (bowels,  uterus) ;  oedema,  atonic  ulcers,  &c.  ;  finally,  I 

more  or  less  obstinate  nervous    disorders,  from   derangement    of  j 

sympathetic  rather  than  the  cerebro-spinal  axis."    And  it  is  in  cases  I 

presenting  just  such  phenomena  as  these,  that  China   proves   its  | 

greatest  efficacy,  as  Hahnemann  was  the  first  to  point  out.     The  | 

glory  of   Hahnemann  and  the  interest  of  homoeopathists  are   in-  | 

separably  bound  up  with  the  history  of  this  drug.    It  was  the  first  I 

medicine  Hahnemann  proved  ;  and  the  one  that  opened  up  to  his  | 

mind  the  idea  of  homoeopathy.  Cinchona  Bark  was  to  Hahnemann 
what  the  falling  apple  was  to  Newton,  and  the  swinging  lamp  to 
Gallileo.  Dissatisfied  with  the  explanations  of  the  action  of  Bark  in 
curing  ague  that  were  current  in  his  time,  Hahnemann  took  the 
powdered  Bark  himself,  being  in  health,  and  lo  I  an  ague  attack 
ensued.  A  repetition  of  the  experiment  produced  the  same  result. 
Further  experiments  revealed  that  action  of  Bark  which  is  the  oppo- 
site of  "  tonic" — positively  debilitating,  in  fact — already  referred  to.  i 
It  is  useful  to  remember  that  Ipecac,  (as  well  as  GaUum  and  ! 
Miichclla)  belongs  to  the  same  natural  order  of  plants  as  China,  and 
the  relation  of  the  two  to  intermittent  fever,  haemorrhages,  and  gastro- 
enteric disturbances  is  very  similar.  Coffca  also  ^longs  to  the 
Rubiaceaif  and  is  nearly  allied  in  many  of  its  nervous  symptoms  to 
China.  The  tincture  of  China  is  antiseptic,  destroying  amaeboid 
motion  and  retarding  tissue  change.  It  weakens  the  heart  and 
impairs  the  circulation,  produces  congestions  and  haemorrhages, 
anaemia  and  complete  relaxation  and  collapse.  The  debiUty  in 
which  China  is  particularly  indicated  is  such  as  is  caused  by  an 
excessive  drain  of  animal  fluids,  as  great  loss  of  blood,  excessive 
suppuration,  loss  of  semen  ;  also  after  prolonged  strain  of  over- 
work, mental  or  bodily.  A  "pumped-out"  condition,  and  the 
sensitive,  irritable  state  of  mind  that  accompanies  such.  The  typical 
fever  of  China  is  the  intermittent  from  marsh  miasm,  tertian,  or 
quartan  in  type.  Chill  and  heat  without  thirst,  thirst  occurring 
either  before  or  after  chill.  The  chill  is  followed  by  long-lasting 
heat,  generally  with  desire  to  uncover  ;  face  fiery  red,  often  delirium  ; 
profuse  and  debilitating  sweat  following.  In  the  apyrexial  i>eriod 
the  face  is  a  sallow  dingy  yeUow,  the  spleen  is  enlarged  and  painful, 
the  appetite  is  totally  lost ;  or  else  there  is  canine  hunger ;  the  feet 
swell,  and  as  soon  as  the  patient  closes  his  eyes  for  sleep  he  sees 
figures.  Hectic  fever  is  also  characteristic  of  the  drug.  Typhoid  and 
gastric  fever.  Periodicity  is  a  leading  characteristic  both  in  fever  and 
neuralgias.  '*  <  Every  other  day  "  is  characteristic.  Nash  cured  a 
case  of  acute  rheumatism  with  Chi,  on  this  modality.  Haemorrhages 
occur  from  every  orifice  of  the  body.  Koch  and  others  have  attributed 
the  haematuria  of  African  intermittents  to  c^uinine.  There  is  terrible 
irritability  always  <  at  night.     Loss  of  sight,  deafness,  ringing  in 


CHINA  OFFICINALIS  479 

the  ears.    Great  sensitiveness  to  touch.    Even  a  current  of  air  blow- 
ing on  the  part = great  pain  (compare  Plumb.).    Everything  tastes 
bitter,  even  water  (everything  except  water,  Aeon,).    Chi.  is  suited  to 
persons  of  thin,  dry,  bilious  constitution  ;    or  to  leucophlegmatic 
persons  with  a  disposition  to  dropsical  affections,  to  catarrhs  or 
diarrhoea ;    to  affections  of  women.    The  mental  state  shows,  in 
addition  to  the  irritabihty,  the  following  among  other  symptoms : 
"Aversion  to  be  looked  at"    "Pumped  out"  (Sf/.),  unable  to  think. 
DeUrium  from  loss  of   fluids  (as    hydrocephaloid).      Fixed   ideas. 
There  is  a  desire  for  suicide  :  **  Intolerable  anxiety  about  8  p.m. 
and  2  a.m. ;  he  springs  out  of  bed  and  wishes  to  take  his  own 
life,  but  does  not  go  near  the  window  or  take  a  knife  (compare 
Alum.) ;  with  heat  of  the  body  without  thirst."    The  sensitiveness 
accompanies  the    headache,  which   is    congestive,   throbbing,  like 
many  hammers  hammering  on  temples,  ringing  in  the  ears,  <  by 
slightest  contact  (>  by  hard  pressure) ;  by  draught  of  air  ;  by  open 
air.    Weak  eyes  and  ringing  in  ears,  such  as  follows  depletion.    The 
nose,  ears,  and  chin  are  cold,  complexion  sallow,  dingy,  yellow. 
Neuralgia  is  generally  infra-orbital.    Thick  dirty  yellow  coating  on 
tongue  ;  bitter  taste  on  waking.    Aphthae  of  weakly  people.    Canine  . 
hanger,  especially  at  night.    Hunger  after  meals  with  feeling  of 
emptiness.    If  a  meal  is  late,  he  is  sure  to  suffer  from  it.    Total  loss  of 
appetite.     Full  feeUng  after  the  least  food,  but  belching  only  >  tem- 
porarily.    After  eating,  a  lump  under  mid-sternum.     After  fruit, 
diarrhoea.     Dyspepsia  after  loss  of  fluids.    Nausea  <  on  sitting  up. 
Stomach  so  weak  it  cannot  tolerate  any  food  at  all.    Very  sour 
stomach.    The  digestion  of  Chi.  is  slow.    Chi.  is  one  of  the  most 
flatulent  of  medicines.    Guernsey  describes  it  thus  :  ''  Uncomfortable 
distension  of  abdomen  with  a  wish  to  belch  up,  or  a  sensation  as  if 
the  abdomen  were  packed  full,  not  in  the  least  >  by  eructation.'' 
Gastric  troubles  of  children  who  are  always  wanting  dainties  ;  irritable 
on  waking,  bad  taste,  white  tongue.    Tympany  coming  on  early  in  a 
case.    S{^een  aching,  sore.    Liver   swollen,   sensitive.    Feeling  of 
subcutaneous  ulceration.    Gall-stone  colic  ;  duodenal  catarrh  ;  jaun- 
dice.  Fermentation  in  bowels,  frothy,  sour  diarrhoea.  Yellow,  watery, 
undigested  diarrhoea  with  much  flatus  and  no  pain.     Diarrhoea  of 
dark,  inky  fluid  ;  stools  frequent  at  night,  only  after  food  during  the 
day.    (It  is  useful  in  cases  where  purgatives  have  been  abused  if  Nux 
faik  to  cure.)    Excessive  seminal  losses.    Menorrhagia ;  metrorrhagia ; 
post-partum   haemorrhages.      Leucorrhoea   before    period ;    painful 
pressure  towards  groins  and  anus,  fetid  or  bloody  leucorrhoea  before 
period  ;  with  contractions  in  inner  parts.    The  breathing  has  important 
characters  :  Asthma  ;  wheezing  ;  suffocative  catarrh  and  paralysis  of 
lungs  in  old  people.    Respiration  laboured,  loud  and  stertorous,  with 
puffing,  blowing  out  of  cheeks  on  each  expiration.     [E.  Carleton 
relates  the  cure  of  a  case  of  spasm  of  the  glottis  in  a  middle-aged  man. 
Attacks  sudden,  3  a.m.,  suffocation  seemed  imminent.    At  length  with 
one  tremendous  effort,  whilst  sitting  bent  forward,  a  httle  air  would 
be  forced  into  the  lungs  in  spite  of  the  epiglottis  with  a  noise  audible 
at  a  distance.    After  each  succeeding  expiration  the  inspiration  would 
become  less  dfficult.    Chi.  200  cured.    Among  this  patient's  other 


48o  CHINA  OFFICINALIS 

symptoms  were  :  Unhappy,  idea  that  he  is  pursued  by  enemies  in 
business.  Scalp  sensitive.  Humming,  throbbing  in  ears.  Thirst  for 
cold  water.  Saliva  found  on  pillow  in  morning.  Stomach  sore  to 
touch.  Flesh  sore  to  touch.]  The  sleep  also  should  be  carefully 
noted,  especiallv  the  dreams :  he  cannot  get  rid  of  his  dreams  even 
after  waking ;  the  impression  continues.  He  cannot  get  wide  awake ; 
head  remains  confused  and  stupid.  Chi,  corresponds  to  hectic  and 
to  many  conditions  of  the  lungs  which  are  attended  with  hectic 
Suppuration  of  the  lungs,  especially  in  drunkards.  Weakening  night- 
sweats.  Prostration,  chilly,  wants  to  be  wrapped  up  but  cannot  bear 
the  fire.  A.  Villers  cured  with  Chi,  30  a  girl,  twenty,  who  had,  after 
a  chill,  a  pain  in  right  hip,  <  by  every  movement,  and  which  she 
could  only  describe  as  being  like  the  pain  in  the  legs  which  occurred 
before  the  menses.  She  was  pallid  and  had  had  much  hard  nursing 
work.  The  catamenia  were  scanty  and  she  was  weak.  Three  days 
after  taking  Chi,  the  pain  was  gone,  after  having  persisted  for  five 
months.  With  Chi.  I  removed  the  dropsy  and  reheved  all  the  other 
symptoms  of  a  case  of  cirrhosis  of  the  hver  in  a  hard  drinker.  He 
remained  at  his  work  for  many  months  ;  but  in  the  end  his  old  habits 
proved  too  much  for  him,  and  he  died  from  an  acute  illness  foUowing 
a  cold.  In  this  connection  may  be  mentioned  the  e£Fect  of  the 
tincture  of  China  {Cinchona  rubra  especially)  in  removing  the  craving 
for  alcohol  in  drunkards  who  wish  to  reform.  Ten  to  thirty  drops 
two  or  three  times  a  day  is  the  usual  dose  for  this,  though  where 
the  general  symptoms  correspond  the  potencies  would  probably  do 
better.  I  have  confirmed  P.  Jousset's  reconunendation  of  Chi.  ^  in 
cases  of  facial  erysipelas  without  vesication.  The  rheumatism  of 
Chi.  is  characterised  by  soft  swelhng,  pale  red,  very  tender  to  touch. 
C.  M.  Boger  had  such  a  case  in  second  and  third  metatarso- 
phalangeal joints  of  left  foot.  The  patient  said  :  "  With  my  slippers 
on  I  am  in  agony ;  but  if  I  put  on  tight  shoes  the  feet  feel  pretty 
comfortable."  The  Chi.  symptoms  are  generally  <  from  hghtest 
touch  ;  whereas  hard  pressure  >.  <  Periodically:  i  am.  to  10  or 
12  or  I  p.m. ;  from  8  a.m.  to  2  or  3  p.m.  Every  other  day ;  every 
fourteen  days  ;  every  night  at  midnight ;  during  increase  of  moon  ; 
every  three  months  ;  in  autumn.  Rest  <  pains  in  Umbs.  Colic  > 
by  bending  double.  Motion  >  pains  in  limbs ;  <  vertigo  ;  headache ; 
nausea.    Moving  eyes  <  headache.    Open  air  or  draught  of  air  <. 

<  During  and  after  stool.  >  In  room  or  from  warm  applications. 
Want  to  be  near  a  stove  ;  but  this  <  the  chill.    Neuralgic  headache 

<  from  anything  cold  in  mouth.  Summer  =s  diarrhoea.  Sun  < 
headache.  Windy,  foggy,  or  wet  weather  <.  Autumn  <.  After 
a  meal :  fulness  of  stomach.  During  and  after  dinner  :  prosopalgia 
>.  Effects  of  eating  :  fish  ;  fruit ;  bad  meat  or  fish.  Effects  of 
drinking  :  beer ;  sour  wine ;  new  beer ;  impure  water ;  milk.     Drinking 

<  the  chill.    Warm  drinks  impede  digestion.     <  From  smoking. 

RelatioilB. — Botanical,  Coffea,  Ipec,  Galeum,  Mitcheila.  Anti- 
doted  by  :  Ferr.,  Ars,,  Nat.  m.,  Carb.  v.,  Aran,  d.,  Eup.  perf.,  Ipec., 
Merc,  Nux,  Puis.,  Rhus,  Sep.,  SuL,  Ver.  Antidote  to:  Ars.,  Calc, 
Cham.,  Coff.,  Fer.,  Hell.,  lod.,  Merc,  Sul.,  Ver.  Is  useful  in  bad 
effects  of  tea-drinidng  and  after  abuse  of  chamomile  tea  (uterine 


CHINA  OFFICINALIS  481 

haemorrhage).  Compatible :  Calc.  phos.,  Fer.  Incompatible :  After 
Dig.,  Selen.  Complementary  :  Fer.  Compare :  Ars.  (prostration  with- 
out pain,  black  stools)  ;  Carb.  v.  (flatulence,  diarrhoea,  great  weakness ; 
Chi.  stool  is  caused  by  every  attempt  to  eat  and  drink) ;  Coloc.  (beer 
intoxicates  easily) ;  Cedr.,  Caps.,  Cupr.  acet  (black,  thin  stools) ;  Pso. 
(rapid  exhaustion  following  acute  diseases ;  Pso.  has  despair  of 
recovery)  ;  Puis,  (bitter  taste.  <  Eating  at  night.  As  if  food  lying 
in  oesophagus) ;  Caust.  (Meniere's  disease) ;  Salic,  ac.  (Meniere's  dis- 
ease) ;  Phos.  ac.  (lientery ;  seminal  emissions  ;  diarrhoea — ^but  this 
does  not  exhaust  with  Phos.  ac.)  ;  Merc,  (chronic  salivation) ;  Stram. 
(black  stools)  ;  Sul.  and  Sul.  ac.  (sensation  as  if  brain  were  balancing 
to  and  fro  and  striking  against  skull,' occasioning  the  pains).  In 
aversion  to  be  looked  at  (Ant.  c,  Cham.,  Stram.) ;  <  from  brandy 
(Ars.,  Carb.  v.,  Nux) ;  diarrhoea  immediately  after  eating  (Ars.,  Alo., 
Lye,  Pod.,  Staph.,  Tromb. — Fer.  whilst  eating)  ;  hepatitis  with  great 
tenderness  (Aco.,  Ars.,  Lye,  Merc.) ;  hunger  after  meals  with  empty 
feeling  (Lauro.,  Calc). 

CansatioiL — Fluids,  loss  of .  Onanism.  Chill.  Anger.  Coryza, 
suppressed.    Tea.    Alcohol.    Mercury. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Apathy  and  moral  insensibility. — Hypochondriacal  dejection. 
— Great  anxiety. — Disposition  too  scrupulous. — Disposition  to  be  alone. — Dis- 
couragement.— Ill-humour,  with  disposition  to  hurt  other  people's  feelings. — 
Discontent ;  the  patient  deems  himself  unfortunate,  and  ill-used  by  the  whole 
world. — Excessive  irascibility,  with  pusillanimity,  and  inability  to  bear  the 
least  noise.— Disobedience. — Contempt  for  eveiything ;  everything  appears 
insipid. — Slovenliness,  with  easily  provoked  tears,  or  with  irritability. — Fear  of 
dogs  and  of  other  animals,  esp.  at  night. — Nervous  irritation,  with  slowness  of 
ideas. — Great  abundance  of  ideas,  and  of  projects,  with  slow  progress  of 
thought  (esp.  in  the  evening  and  at  night). — Dread  of  labour. 

2.  Head. — Dull  confusion  of  the  head,  as  from  prolonged  watching. — 
Sensation  of  emptiness  in  head. — ^Vertigo  after  losses  of  fluids ;  with  fainting ; 
ringing  in  ears ;  loss  of  sight ;  cold  surface. — ^Vertigo  on  raising  the  head, 
esp.  in  the  occiput,  as  if  the  head  were  going  to  sink  backwards. — ^Vertigo 
with  nausea. — ^Attacks  of  headache,  with  nausea  and  vomiting. — Headache 
as  from  suppressed  coryza. —  Heaviness  in  the  head  with  faintness. — 
Cephalalgia  in  the  forehead,  on  opening  the  eyes.  —  Pain,  as  from  a 
bruise  in  the  brain,  with  pressive  piercing  in  the  crown  of  the  head,  aggra- 
vated by  meditation  and  conversation. — Pressive  headache,  esp.  at  night, 
with  sleeplessness ;  or  by  day,  and  <  in  the  open  air. — ^Acute  starting,  or 
pressive  pains  in  the  head. — Headache,  as  if  the  head  were  going  to  burst, 
with  sleeplessness  at  night ;  ameliorated  in  the  room,  and  when  opening  the 
eyes. — Shooting  pains  in  the  head,  with  strong  pulsations  in  the  temples. — 
—Congestion  in  the  head,  with  heat  and  fulness. — Movements  and  painful 
throbbings  of  the  brain,  compelling  movement  of  the  head  up  and  down. — 
Headache,  increased  by  touch,  movement,  and  walking,  also  by  a  current  of 
air,  or  by  walking  against  the  wind. — Headache  often  attacks  only  one  side. — 
Sensibility  to  the  touch  of  the  exterior  of  the  head,  and  even  of  the  roots  of 

VOL.  I.  32 


482  CHINA  OFFICINALIS 

the  hair. — Headache,  as  if  the  hair  were  torn  out,  or  the  scalp  were  con- 
tracted.— Shooting  pressure  in  the  frontal  protuberances. — Sweat  on  the  scalp. 

3.  Eyes. — Pressure  in  the  eyes,  as  from  drowsiness. — Pains  in  the  eyes, 
as  from  pressure  on  the  margins  of  the  socket — Pain,  as  if  a  grain  of  sand 
were  introduced  into  the  eye,  during  movement — P^unf ul  smarting  in  the 
eyes. — ^Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  with  heat,  redness,  burning  and  presstve 
pains,  and  aggravation  in  the  evening. — Eyes  dull. — Prominent  eyes. — Cornea 
dull,  as  if  there  were  smoke  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  eye, — ^Yellowish  colour 
of  the  sclerotica. — Weeping,  with  tingling  on  the  internal  surface  of  the  eye- 
lids.— Weakness  of  sight,  permitting  only  the  outline  of  proximate  objects  to 
be  seen. — On  reading,  confusion  of  the  characters,  which  appear  |Xile  and 
surrounded  by  a  white  edge. — Pupils  dilated,  and  deficient  in  sensibility. — 
Blindness,  as  if  from  amaurosis. — Sparkling,  black,  dancing  spots,  and  obscu- 
ration before  the  eyes. — Sensitiveness  of  the  eyes  to  the  bright  sunlight- 
Photophobia. 

4*  Ears. — ^Tearing  in  the  ears,  mostly  in  the  external  ear. — Intolerance 
of  noise. — Shootings,  buzzing,  and  tinkling  in  the  ears. — Hardness  of  hearing ; 
humming  and  roaring  in  ears. — Ringing  in  ears,  with  headache  in  temple& — 
Redness  and  heat  of  the  external  ear,  and  esp.  of  the  lobes. — Eruption  in  the 
concha  auris. 

5.  Nose. — Nose  hot  and  red. — ^Tearing  in  the  dorsum  of  the  nose. — 
Bleeding  of  the  nose ;  after  blowing  it. — Bleeding  of  the  nose  and  of  the 
mouth. — Dry  coryza,  with  toothache  and  lachrymation. — Coryza,  with  sneezing. 
— Suppressed  coryza  (headache  from  it). 

6.  Face. — Heat  and  redness  of  the  face,  esp.  of  the  cheeks  and  of  the 
lobes  of  the  ears. — Complexion  pale,  earth-like  (face  sunken),  sometimes  of  a 
blackish  yellow. — Face  dejected,  with  the  eyes  sunk  and  surrounded  by  a 
livid  circle,  and  nose  pointed. — Face  bloated. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  face. 
— Lips  dry,  blackish. — Lips  cracked. — Swelling  of  the  lips. — Burning,  itching 
pustules  on  the  lips  and  on  the  tongue. — Pain  and  swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary 
glands. 

7.  Teeth. — Odontalgia,  with  starting  or  drawing  pains  (in  the  upper 
molax  teeth),  provoked  by  the  open  air,  or  by  a  current  of  air. — Dull  and 
distressing  pains  in  carious  teeth. — ^Throbbing  toothache  >  by  external 
warmth. — The  toothache  manifests  itself  chiefly  after  a  meal,  and  at  mght « 
by  smoking),  and  is  mitigated  by  strong  pressure,  or  by  dosing  the  teeth ; 
a  slight  touch  aggravates  it  excessively. — Loose  teeth  painful  only  when 
masticating. — Teeth  covered  with  a  black  coating. — Swelling  of  the  gums. 

8.  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth. — Clanmiy  mouth  with  insipid 
watery  taste. — ^Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  mouth. — Putrid  taste  of  the 
mouth. — ^Tongue  cracked,  black,  or  loaded  with  a  yellow  or  white  coating. — 
Thick,  dirty  coating  of  the  tongue. — Burning  shootings  in  the  tongue. — 
Burning  biting,  as  from  pepper,  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  succeeded  by 
ptyalism. — Ptyalism  (with  nausea,  from  the  abuse  of  mercury). — ^Painful 
swelling  of  the  tongue  towards  the  root.— Failure  of  speech.— Flow  of  blood 
from  the  mouth. 

9.  Throat. — Dryness  of  the  throat — Shootings  in  the  throat,  esp.  on 
swallowing,  provoked  by  the  least  current  of  air.— Swelling  of  the  palate  and 
of  the  uvula. 


CHINA  OFFICINALIS  483 

10.  Appetite. — Sickly,  mucous,  or  watery  taste,  esp.  after  drinking. — 
Aliments  appear  insipid  or  too  salt — Sweetish  taste  in  the  mouth. — ^Acid,  or 
bitter  taste  in  the  mouth ;  also  of  food  and  drink. — Repugnance  to  food  and 
drink,  with  a  sensation  of  fulness. — Sour  taste  of  co£Fee  and  of  rye-bread. — 
Bitter  taste  of  beer,  and  of  wheaten  bread  (beer,  tobacco). — ^The  food  tastes 
too  salt — Dislike  to  butter,  beer,  and  coffee. — Great  desire  for  wine  ;  for  acid 
fnrit — Dislike  to  water,  with  desire  for  beer. — Burning  thirst;  the  patient 
drinks  often,  but  little  at  a  time. — Bulimy,  with  sickly  taste  in  the  mouth, 
nausea,  and  inclination  to  vomit. — ^Voracity. — No  desire  for  eating  and  drink- 
ing.—Appetite  only  while  eating,  with  indifference  to  all  food. — Desire  for  a 
variety  of  food,  and  confused  longing  for  dainties,  without  knowing  exactly 
which.— Violent  thirst  for  cold  water  (drinks  but  little  at  a  time,  but  often). — 
After  each  draught  of  liquid,  shuddering  or  shivering,  with  corrugated  skin, 
shootings  in  the  chest,  or  colic. — ^Acid  risings,  and  derangement  of  the 
stomach,  after  drinking  milk. — Great  weakness  of  digestion  ;  after  the  most 
moderate  meal,  uneasiness,  drowsiness,  great  fulness  in  the  stomach,  and  in 
the  inferior  part  of  the  abdomen,  lassitude  and  indolence,  insipid  taste  in  the 
mouth,  hypochondriacal  humour  and  headache. — ^Weakness  of  digestion  ;  the 
food  is  not  digested,  if  taken  too  late  in  the  day. — Bitter,  acid,  or  tasteless 
risings,  esp.  after  eating. — ^Indigestion  after  a  late  supper. 

XI.  Stomach. — Risings,  esp.  after  a  meal,  mostly  bitter,  acid,  or  tasteless. 
—Risings,  with  taste  of  food. — Pyrosis,  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth, 
mctination  to  vomit,  and  pressure  on  the  stomach  after  eating  the  least  thing. 
—Vomiting  of  acidulated  slimy  matter,  of  water  and  of  food. — ^Vomiting  of 
blood. — Pressure  at  the  stomach  and  cramp-like  pains,  esp.  after  having 
eaten. — Sensation  of  excoriation  and  pressure  on  the  epigastrium,  esp.  in  the 
morning. 

zs.  Atxtomen. — Pains  in  the  hypochondria. — Shooting  and  pressive 
pains  in  the  hepatic  region,  esp.  when  it  is  touched. — Hardness  and  swelling 
of  the  liver. — Swelling  (inflammation)  and  hardness  of  the  spleen. — Shootings 
in  the  spleen  when  walking  slowly. — Cuttings  in  the  umbilical*  region,  with 
shuddering. — ^Pulsations  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.-=-Strong  pressure,  as  if 
from  a  hard  body,  and  fulness  in  the  abdomen,  esp.  after  a  meal. — Fermenta- 
tkm  after  eating  fruit — Dropsical  swelling  of  tiie  abdomen  (meteorism),  with 
asthmatic  su£Eerings  and  fatiguing  cough. — Partial  swelling  of  the  abdomen, 
as  from  encysted  ascites. — Excessive  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  as  from  a  kind 
of  tympanitis. — Hardness  of  the  abdomen,  as  from  induration  of  the  viscera. 
-— Cotic,  with  insatiable  thirst — Excessively  painful  colic;  cramp-like  and 
constrictive  pains  in  the  abdomen.— ^Inflammation  and  ulceration  of  the 
abdominal  viscera. — Pressive  shooting  colic  (under  the  navel)  esp.  on  walking 
quickly. — Incarceration  of  flatus,  which  escapes  neither  upwards  nor  down-' 
wards. — Flatulent  colic  in  the  depth  of  the  abdomen,  with  contraction  of  the 
intestines,  and  pressing  forward  of  flatus  towards  the  hypochondria. — Escape 
of  fetid  flatus. — Pressiure  towards  the  inguinal  ring,  as  if  a  hernia  were  about 
to  protrude. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Fa&ces  small,  and  evacuated  slowly. — Di£Eicult 
evacuation  of  soft  faeces,  as  if  from  inactivity  of  the  intestines. — Frequent 
evacuations  of  the  consistence  of  pap,  or  frothy. — Putrid  or  bilious  evacua- 
tions—Slimy, watery,  yellowish  diarrhoea, — Diarrhoea  after  eating  fruit. — 


484  CHINA  OFFICINALIS 

Diarrhoea,  particularly  after  meals,  at  night,  involuntary. — Loose  evacuations, 
with  excretion  of  all  the  undigested  food. — Painless  diarrhcea,  accompanied 
by  great  weakness. — Blackish  evacuations. — ^White  faeces,  sometimes  with 
urine  of  deep-red  colour. — ^The  loose  evacuations  take  place  chiefly  after  a 
meal  or  at  night. — Involuntary,  liquid  and  yellowish  evacuations. — Discharge 
of  mucus  from  the  rectum. — Pressure  and  shootings  in  the  rectum  and  the 
anus. — In  the  rectum,  stitches,  also  during  stool. — Bleeding  of  the  haemor- 
rhoidal  tumours. — Crawling  in  the  anus,  as  of  worms. — Discharge  of  lumbrici. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  and  almost  ineffectual  urging  to  make 
water,  followed  by  pressure  on  the  bladder. — Urine  :  turbid,  dark,  scanty ; 
white,  turbid,  with  white  sediment. — Urine  scanty,  greenish-yellow,  with  sedi- 
ment like  brickdust. — Slow  emission  of  urine,  with  feeble  stream  and  frequent 
inclination  to  urinate. — Wetting  the  bed. — Haematuria. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Excitement  of  sexual  desire,  with  lascivious 
ideas,  day  and  night. — Impotence,  with  excited  lascivious  fancy. — Swelling  of 
the  testes  and  of  the  spermatic  cord. — Drawing  pains  in  the  testes. — Pollutions 
frequent,  with  too  ready  an  emission,  followed  by  great  weakness. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Congestion  in  the  uterus,  with  fulness 
and  painful  bearing-down,  esp.  when  vt^king. — Constant  discharge  of  clotted 
blood  from  the  vagina. — Catamenia  scanty. — Painful  induration  of  the  neck 
of  the  matrix. — During  the  catamenia,  startings  with  cramps  in  the  chest,  and 
in  the  abdomen,  or  congestion  in  the  head,  with  pulsation  in  the  carotid 
arteries,  face  puffed,  eyes  prominent  and  watery,  convulsive  movements  of 
the  eyelids,  and  loss  of  consciousness. — Metrorrhagia,  with  discharge  of  black 
blood ;  with  fainting  and  convulsions. — Leucorrhcea,  even  before  the  cata- 
menia, and  sometimes  with  cramp-like  contraction  of  the  uterus,  and  painful 
sensation  of  bearing-down  towards  the  groins  and  the  anus. — Watery  and 
sanguineous  flux  from  the  vagina,  with  clots  of  blood  or  of  fetid  pus ;  itching 
and  excoriation  in  the  thighs. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness,  indistinct  speech,  and  low 
voice  when  singing,  in  consequence  of  mucus  difficult  to  detach  from  the 
larynx. — Shootings  and  scrapings  in  the  larynx. — Sensation  of  soreness  in  the 
larynx  and  trachea. — Short,  dry  cough,  as  if  produced  by  the  vapour  of 
sulphiu-,  in  the  morning,  after  rising.-- Suffocating,  nocturnal  cough,  with 
pains  in  the  chest  and  in  the  shoulder-blades,  so  as  to  extort  cries. — ^The 
cough  is  <  in  the  evening,  or  after  midnight ;  from  laughing ;  from  con- 
tinued talking ;  from  lying  with  the  head  low ;  from  slightiy  touching  the 
larynx  ;  from  a  draught  of  air,  after  awaking ;  from  loss  of  fluids. — Cough, 
with  difficult  expectoration  of  viscid  mucus  of  a  clear  colour,  painful  shocks 
in  the  shoulder-blades  and  vomiting  of  bile. — ^Violent  convulsive  cough,  some- 
times even  with  inclination  to  vomit. — Cough,  provoked  by  laughing,  drinking, 
eating,  speaking,  and  by  breathing  deeply,  as  well  as  by  movement. — Expec- 
toration of  whitish  mucus,  mixed  with  blackish  particles. — Suppuration  of  the 
lungs,  after  haemoptysis  (or  frequent  venesections)  with  stitches  in  the  chest, 
which  are  <  by  pressure. — On  coughing,  expectoration  streaked  with  blood. — 
Expectoration  of  purulent  matter  on  coughing. — During  the  cough,  pressure 
on  the  chest,  and  pains  as  of  excoriation  in  the  larynx. — Spasm  of  the  glottis. 

18.  Chest. — Breathing,  wheezing,  crowing,  rattiing,  tight,  oppressed  and 
painful. — Di£Eicult  inspiration  and  quick  expiration. — Inclination  to  take  a 


CHINA  OFFICINALIS  485 

deep  breath. — Difficulty  of  respiration  and  great  oppression  on  the  chest, 
with  excessive  anguish,  as  if  from  fulness  of  the  stomach,  or  as  if  excited  by 
too  long  a  conversation. — Fits  of  su£Focation  from  mucus  in  the  larynx,  esp. 
in  the  evening,  and  at  night  on  waking. — Respiration  difficult,  and  possible 
only  when  lying  with  the  head  very  high. — Wheezing  and  groaning  respira- 
tion. — Breathing  laboured,  loud  and  stertorous,  with  puffing,  blowing  out  of 
cheeks. — Respiration  short  and  quick. —Pressure  on  the  ct\est,  sometimes  as 
from  a  hard  body,  esp.  on  the  sternum,  and  after  a  meal. — Stitches  in  the 
chest ;  diaphragm. — Nightly  suffocative  cough,  with  stitches  in  chest. — Shoot- 
ings in  the  chest,  on  coughing  and  on  breathing. — Cough,  with  pain  in  the 
larynx  and  sternum. — Stitches  in  the  side  ;  with  great  heat,  pulse  strong  and 
hard,  and  fixedness  of  look. — Great  congestion  in  the  chest,  and  violent 
I>alpitation  of  the  heart. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — ^Tension  in  the  muscles  of  the  nape,  and  of  the 
neck. — Pains,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  back  and  sacrum,  on  the  least  move- 
ment.— Pain  in  the  loins  at  night,  when  lying  on  the  back. — Pulsative,  shoot- 
ing pains  in  the  back. — Readily  excited  perspiration,  at  the  back  and  the  nape 
of  the  neck,  on  the  least  movement. — Pressure  between  the  shoulder-blades, 
as  from  a  stone. — ^Tractive  and  starting  tearings  in  the  loins,  the  back,  the 
shoulder-blades,  and  the  nape  of  the  neck,  with  pains  on  moving  the  parts, 
provoked  by  the  least  movement. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Paralytic,  starting  tearings,  in  the  muscles,  and  in 
the  bones  of  the  arms,  the  hands,  and  the  fingers,  provoked  by  the  touch. — 
Tension  and  weakness  in  the  arms  and  the  hands. — ^Trembling  hands  (when 
writing). — Icy  coldness  of  one  hand,  while  the  other  is  warm.— Extension  of 
the  arms,  with  contraction  of  the  fingers. — Swelling  of  the  dorsum  of  the  1. 
hand. — Swelling,  stiffness,  and  pains  in  the  joints  of  the  fingers. — Blue 
coloured  nails. 

23.  Loiter  Limbs. — Paralytic  starting,  tearings  in  the  muscles  and  in 
the  bones  of  the  legs,  the  thighs,  the  knees,  the  feet  and  the  toes,  esp.  on  the 
parts  being  touched  (rheumatic  pains,  not  worse  from  motion). — ^The  legs 
become  soon  benumbed  when  seated. — ^Weakness  and  want  of  stability  in  the 
coxo-f emoral  joint,  the  knees,  and  the  ankle-bones,  which  yield  when  walking. 
— Red  and  hard  swelling  of  the  thigh,  painful  on  being  touched. — ^Arthritic 
swelling  of  the  knees,  and  of  the  feet,  with  heat,  and  painful  sensibility  to  the 
touch. — Hot  swelling  of  r.  knee,  painful  to  the  touch. — Hard  abscess,  of  a 
deep-red  colour,  in  the  calf  of  the  leg. — Uneasiness  in  the  legs ;  it  is  found 
necessary  to  move  them  constantly;  to  curve  them  and  draw  them  up. — 
Swelling  of  the  feet,  sometimes  with  red  spots,  hardness,  tension,  and  deep- 
coloured  urine. — Soft  swelling  of  the  soles. — Paralysis  of  the  feet. 

24.  Generalities. — ^Tensive  pullings,  or  starting  and  shooting  tearings, 
esp.  in  the  large  bones  of  the  limbs,  with  paralytic  pains,  and  weakness  of  the 
parts  afEected. — ^Tearing  rheumatic  pains  in  the  limbs,  on  beginning  to  walk. 
— Pains  and  sufferings  provoked  or  aggravated  by  touch,  at  night,  or  after  a 
meal. — Uneasiness  in  tiie  parts  affected,  which  obliges  the  patient  to  move 
them. — Sensation  of  torpor  in  different  parts. — Numbness  of  the  parts  which 
are  pressed,  on  lying  down. — ^Arthritic  swelling,  which  is  hard  and  red  in 
some  parts. — Dropsical  swelling  of  some  parts,  or  of  the  whole  body. — Ery- 
sipelatous swelling   of   the  whole   body. — Great  general   weakness,   with 


486  CHINA  OFFICINALIS 

trembling,  difficulty  in  walking,  and  great  tendency  to  perspiratioa  during 
movement  and  sleep. — More  than  ordinary  vivacity,  with  fixedness  of  the 
eyes. — ^Convulsive  movements  of  the  limbs. — Over-sensitiveness  of  the  nerves 
(from  loss  of  fluids). — Congestions. — ^Veins  are  much  enlarged. — Emaciation. 
— Over-excitability  of  the  whole  nervous  system. — ^Aversion  to  mental  and 
bodily  exertion. — Fainting-fits ;  esp.  if  resulting  from  loss  of  animal  fluids. — 
Attacks  of  asphyxia. — ^Atrophy  and  emaciation,  esp.  of  the  arms  and  legs. — 
Great  sensibility  to  a  current  of  air,  and  sufferings  on  being  exposed  to  it  even 
slightly. — Heaviness  of  the  whole  body. — Spermatorrhoea. — Nasal  secretion 
bloody,  mucous. — ^Aff  ections  of  the  shoulder-blades,  bones  of  the  arm  ;  thighs ; 
knee-joints. — ^There  may  be  bleeding  from  every  internal  part  of  the  body ; 
coldness  and  passive  haemorrhage. — Newly-born  children  lose  much  blood 
during  parturition  ;  the  mucous  membrane  looks  very  bloody  if  there  is  only 
a  slight  bleeding  going  on  ;  deficiency  of  blood ;  congestion  of  single  parts  ; 
distension  of  blood  vessels  (Guernsey). — Contraction  of  inner  parts;  also 
dropsy  of  inner  parts. — Induration  after  inflammation. 

85.  Skin. — Excessive  sensibility  of  the  skin  of  the  whole  body. — Yellow 
colour  of  the  skin  (jaundice). — Skin  flabby  and  dry. — Piercing  shootings  and 
beatings  in  ulcers. — Burning,  itching,  or  gnawing  sensation,  esp.  in  the 
evening  in  bed,  sometimes  with  eruption  of  pimples,  or  prominent  spots,  as  if 
from  the  sting  of  nettles. — Rheumatic,  hard,  red  swellings. — Humid  gangrene 
(of  external  parts). — Swelling  of  the  limbs. 

26.  Sleep. — Drowsiness  during  the  day  (and  after  eating),  often  with 
palpitation  of  the  heart. — Frequent  yawning,  with  stretching. — Retarded 
sleep,  and  sleeplessness,  caused  by  a  great  influx  of  ideas. — Confused  dreams 
when  falling  asleep. — Sleeplessness  with  pressive  pain  in  the  head,  or  bulimy. 
— Disturbed,  unrefreshing  sleep. — Starting  with  fright,  on  going  to  sleep. — On 
sleeping,  the  patient  lies  on  the  back,  with  the  head  turned  back,  and  the 
arms  extended  over  the  head,  with  slow  respiration,  and  with  full  and  quick 
pulse. — Groans,  snoring,  and  blowing  expiration  during  sleep,  even  in  children. 
— Painful,  frightful  dreams,  which  continue  to  produce  agitation  after  waking. 
— Disordered,  senseless  dreams,  after  midnight,  with  a  sort  of  stupidity  on 
waking. — Dreams  of  falling  from  a  height. 

27.  Fever. — Shiverings,  with  shuddering,  or  feverish  trembling,  com- 
monly without  thirst. — Cold  in  the  body,  with  congestion  in  the  head,  heat 
and  redness  of  the  face,  and  forehead  hot. — General  increase  of  heat,  with 
veins  swollen,  without  thirst. — ^Af  ter  the  heat,  violent  thirst. — Shiverings  with 
headache,  nausea,  adypsia,  vertigo,  congestion  in  the  head,  paleness  of  the 
face,  cold  in  the  hands  and  in  the  feet,  and  vomiting  of  mucus. — Shivering 
more  violent  after  drinking. — Heat,  with  dryness  of  the  mouth,  and  of  the 
lips,  which  are  burning,  redness  of  the  face,  headache,  morbid  hunger, 
delirium,  pulse  full  and  quick. — Heat,  with  prickings  here  and  there,  and 
burning  thirst. — Heat,  with  strong  inclination  to  be  uncovered,  or  shivering 
as  soon  as  one  is  uncovered. — Quotidian  fever,  or  every  two  days,  or  tertian, 
commencing  chiefly  in  the  evening  or  in  the  afternoon,  or  in  the  morning,  by 
shivering  with  trembling,  followed  by  heat  and  nocturnal  sweat — Internal 
violent  chill  with  icy  cold  hands  and  feet,  and  congestion  to  the  head. — In  the 
evening,  in  bed,  he  cannot  get  warm. — Fever,  with  pressive  pain,  and  conges- 
tion in  the  head,  soreness  and  swelling  of  the  liver  and  of  the  spleen,  iMtter 


CHININUM   ARSENICOSUM  487 

and  bilious  risings  and  vomitings,  yellowish  colour  of  the  skin  and  of  the 
lace,  short,  convulsive  cough,  great  weakness,  pains  in  the  limbs,  and  painful 
stitches  in  the  chest.— The  attacks  of  fever  are  often  preceded  by  sufferings, 
such  as  palpitation  of  the  heart,  sneezing,  anguish,  nausea,  excessive  thirst, 
bnHmy,  headache,  pressive  colic,  &c.— Chilliness  over  the  whole  l>ody. — ^The 
thirst  is  generally  felt  only  before  or  after  the  shiverings,  or  during  the  sweat, 
rarely  during  the  heat  (or  only  desire  for  cold  drink),  and  scarcely  ever 
during  the  shiverings.— Pulse  small,  weak,  hard  and  rapid,  less  frequent  after 
eating ;  irregular. — Ready  perspiration  during  sleep,  during  movement  (and 
from  exercise  in  the  open  air). — Perspiration  very  profuse,  and  very  debili- 
tating.— Perspiration  on  the  side  on  which  he  lies. — Suppressed  perspiration. 
—Nocturnal  debilitating  sweats.— Oily  sweat  in  the  morning. 


Ghininom  Arsenicosnm. 

Araenite  of  Quinine.  {C^U^U^Oa)  3H3  As  O4  2H.O.    Trituration  or 

solution. 

GUnfeal.— Angina  pectoris.  Asthma.  Blight's  disease.  Diarrhoea.  Diph- 
theria. Epilepsy.  Gastralgia.  Hectic  fever.  Hemicrania.  Intermittent  fever. 
Kera^tis.  Ophthalmia.  Scarlatina.  Sore-throat,  malignant.  Spinal  irritation. 
Syphilis.    Tobacco,  effects  of.    Tuberculosis. 

Gharaetaristios. — ^The  Arscnite  of  Quinine  combines  many  of  the 
properties  of  its  two  components,  but  having  been  proved  it  can  be 
treated  as  a  separate  individuality.  The  periodicity  is  intensified,  and 
this  is  especially  noted  in  the  neuralgias.  An  irritable  mood  precedes 
the  headache,  which  is  <  by  mental  and  bodily  exercise.  The  gas- 
tralgia of  Chi,  ars,  is  pressure  in  solar  plexus  with  tender  spine  just  at 
back  of  it.  Nausea  and  vomiting  are  followed  by  sleep.  Bonino 
(H.  /?.,  iv.  210),  who  gave  it  a  prolonged  proving,  found  the  symptoms 
<  at  rest ;  in  the  morning ;  and  when  the  stomach  was  empty. 
TTiey  were  >  by  motion  (vertigo) ;  and  by  eating  (gastralgia).  The 
chief  e£Fects  were  manifested  on  the  stomach,  solar  plexus,  ligaments 
and  skin.  According  to  him  it  corresponds  to  tobacco  intoxication 
and  its  effects  ;  indigestion  from  unripe  fruits ;  gastralgia  from  coarse 
food  or  ill-baked  bread;  chronic  rheumatism  of  joints  without 
swelling ;  tertiary  syphilis  of  periosteum ;  colic  from  incarcerated 
flatus ;  intermittent  fever  with  predominating  chills,  little  thirst  and 
continuous  almost  convulsive  yawning ;  effects  of  severe  and  depress- 
ing influences  on  the  mind  ;  to  convalescence  from  long-lasting 
sidmess.  The  circulation  was  slow,  and  limbs  relaxed.  Weakness, 
prostration,  and  disinclination  for  mental  exertion  were  marked  in 
several  provers. 

BalaiionB. — Compare  :  Apis  (diphtheria) ;  i£thusa  (sleep  after 
vomiting) ;  Cact  (constricting  sensations). 

Cansation.— Tobacco. 


488  CHININUM   ARSENICOSUM 

STMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Dislike  of  mental  occupation  in  spite  of  clear-headed  light- 
ness about  head  and  feeling  of  exhilaration. — Memory  impaired. — ^Anxiety. — 
Child  sits  up  in  bed  lamenting. — Irritable  mood  precedes  headache. 

2.  Headw — Sudden  attacks  of  vertigo,  <  by  looking  up. — Severe  darting, 
tortuous  pains,  running  up  into  head  and  preventing  sleep. — Head  full  as  if 
it  would  burst. — On  sitting  down,  head  seems  to  be  covered  with  an  iron 
cap. — Hemicrania  (1.)  from  fright ;  flickering  before  1.  eye  and  lachrymation, 
ringing  in  ears,  pain  tearing,  boring. — Penetrating  pain  in  region  of  L  temple. 
—Dull,  heavy  headache, frontal  and  occipital;  in  cerebellum,  <from  slightest 
motion. 

3.  Eyes. — Intense  photophobia  and  orbicular  spasm  gushing  hot  tears, 
ulcers  attacking  each  eye,  <  from  midnight  to  3  a.m.  (Keratitis.) — Flickering 
before  1.  eye,  with  pain  and  lachrymation.    (Hemicrania.) 

4.  Ears. — Ringing  in  ears  like  bells ;  with  congestion  towards  head. — 
Noise  in  ears  and  dulness  of  hearing. 

5.  Nose. — Profuse  coryza  >  erect  position  and  out  of  doors. — Post- 
nasal catarrh  <  1.  side. — Copious  epistaxis. 

6.  Face. — ^Trembling  of  facial  muscles,  esp.  orbicularis  palpebrarum 
(immediately). — Dull  pain  in  1.  temporal  region  at  articulation  of  lower  jaw. — 
Face  pale,  sallow,  bloated. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  thickly  furred ;  appetite  bad — ^Yellow,  slimy  coat- 
ing on  tongue,  with  bitter  taste. — Fetid  breath. — Dryness  in  roof  (A  mouth, 
gnawing  and  nausea. — Metallic  bitter  taste,  without  changing  taste  of  victuals. 

9.  Throat. — ^Throat  feels  sore  and  raw,  <  coughing  and  sneezing. — 
Diphtheria. 

11.  Stomach.— Appetite  gone. — ^Violent  thirst  for  cold  water. — Desire 
for  sweets. — Empty  sensation. — Hiccough  and  belching ;  followed  by  m-ging 
to  stool. — Sudden,  indescribable  general  nausea,  with  flying  heat  and  waning 
strength,  esp.  of  lower  limbs. — Nausea  and  vomiting  followed  by  sleep. — 
Eggs  or  fish  cause  painless  diarrhoea  at  once. — Gnawing  and  nausea  as  before 
vomiting  as  at  beginning  of  tobacco-poisoning. — Pain  in  stomach  as  if  it  had 
contracted  itself  round  an  uneven  stone.— Disturbed  in  night  by  severe  pain 
in  stomach  as  if  it  were  pressed  against  spinal  column ;  >  by  eating,  for  a  few 
moments ;  repeated  several  mornings.— Xi^ontracting  gastralgia,  as  if  pushed 
up  ;  >  only  for  a  moment  by  tasteless  eructations. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  epigastrium  as  from  foul  stomach. — Pain  as 
from  flatus  wedged  into  flexure  of  colon. — ^Aching  around  navel  and  in  ilium. 
— In  evening  severe  colicky  pains  >  by  pressure. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — ^Violent  urging  to  stool,  evacuated  in  prolonged 
rush  till  bowel  empty;  stool  thin,  brown,  painless. — Diarrhoea,  morning, 
hardly  had  time  to  dress,  brown,  liquid  with  jelly-like  lumps  :  pain  in  1.  iliac 
region,  quite  severe  when  walking. — ^Towards  morning,  frequent,  t)ad-smelling 
flatus. — Stool  pappy ;  watery,  fetid. — Stool,  fecal,  with  mucus  and  blood,  pre- 
ceded and  followed  by  tenesmus.— Stool  hard,  voided  with  difficulty ;  aided 
by  pressing  finger  on  coccyx. — Could  eat  no  breakfast,  but  took  some  dinner, 
and  immediately  thereafter  great  urging  to  stool,  which  was  watery  and 
blackish;  some  pain  in  hypogastrium. 


CHININUM  ARSENICOSUM  489 

14.  Urinary  Organ8.~Urine  scanty;  frequent  urging. — Urine  in- 
creased, urging  tiresome. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— A  peculiar  burning  ache  about  sphincter 
vesicae  and  tliroughout  urethra. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Breathing  unsatisfactory,  wants  more  air 
than  he  can  take  into  his  lungs. — Respiration  very  free,  as  if  thorax  were 
hollow. — Suffocative  attacks  beginning  in  morning  and  lasting  till  noon ;  > 
sittmg  bent  forward  at  open  window,  <  every  other  position. — Senile  sub- 
acute bronchial  catarrh  with  periodical  fever,  generally  <  at  night. 

A,  Chest. — Severe  stitching  pains  in  chest ;  later  in  precordia ;  <  on 
inspiration. — ^Asthmatic  breathing  on  ascending. — Tightening  sensation  in 
mediastinum,  in  front  at  1.  of  breast-bone. — Peculiar  pain,  dull  with  pressure, 
as  if  caused  by  flatulence,  base  of  1.  chest,  coming  and  going  rapidly  and 
frequently  repeated. 

19.  Heart. — ^Angina  pectoris. — Palpitation  on  leaning  against  back. — 
Sensation  as  if  heart  had  stopped. — Heart  began  to  tremble,  with  a  rumbling 
ndse;  I  was  unable  to  distinguish  the  pulsations  (lasted  one  hour). — Slow 
pulse.— L.  intercostal  neuralgia  as  if  torn  with  hot  tongs. 

90.  Back. — Pain  in  muscles  between  1.  shoulder  and  neck,  as  if  sprained, 
on  rising  from  sleep,  4  p.m. — Back  feels  weak  as  after  a  long  journey. — 
Pressure  in  solar  plexus  (usually  only  felt  after  eating  tough  meat  or  hard 
nuts,  of  which  I  had  not  partaken)  extended  toward  the  back,  when  it 
changed  to  a  pinching  sensation ;  spine  painfully  sensitive  to  touch  at  this 
point 

tt.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  in  1.  wrist,  stiffness  of  1.  arm. — Pain  of  fatigue 
in  r.  wrist — Burning  pain  as  in  periosteum  of  1.  elbow. — ^Annoying  feeling  of 
fatigue  in  r.  shoulder,  as  if  humerus  were  torn  out  of  its  socket — Sore,  tired 
aching  in  joints,  bones  and  muscles;  in  1.  biceps  for  some  hours. 

^  Lo^xrer  Limbs. — Dull  pain  in  r.  temporal  region,  at  articulation  of 
jaw  and  r.  hip. — Pain  in  r.  astragalo-tarsal  joint  as  if  bones  drawn  in  opposite 
directions ;  >  walking. — Pressure  on  tuberosity  of  tibia,  which  is  somewhat 
swollen. — Pain  in  r.  knee  as  from  a  fall. — Cramp  in  calf. — Pains  back  of  r. 
thigh  and  in  calf. — Numbness  of  legs  after  hardly  having  lain  down. — ^Weak- 
ness of  lower  limbs. 

24.  Greneralities. — In  different  parts  of  body  burning  fluttering  beats, 
as  from  electricity. — Stiffness  of  all  bones,  even  while  walking. — Burning  pains 
deep  in  joints. — Burning  pains  as  in  periosteum. — Nervous  restlessness,  unable 
to  remain  in  the  house. — ^While  walking,  dizziness  and  collapse. — Desire  to  lie 
down. — Complete  relaxation  of  muscles  as  from  tobacco-poisoning. 

25.  Skin. — Gooseflesh,  esp.  of  lower  extremities. — Periodical  furuncles, 
which  relieve  the  head. — Burning  erysipelatous  redness  and  violent  itching 
<  by  warmth  >  by  cold. 

afi.  Sleep. — ^Night  full  of  visions;  heavy  sleep  till  morning. — Nervous 
restlessness,  anxious  dreams. — Sleep  frequently  interrupted. 

97.  Fever. — General  chill  and  cold. — ^After  the  feverish  cough  in  the 
chill,  no  reaction  of  warmth. — Flying  heat  with  nausea. — Cold,  clammy  sweat. 


490  CHININUM   MURIATICUM 


Ghininum  Muriaticum. 

Muriate  of  Quinine.    {C^U^^^O^  HCl  3H«0.)    Trituration  or 

solution. 

OUideal.— Alcoholism.  Eye :  neural^a  of.  Gastritis.  Headache.  Intermittents. 
Iritis.   Keratitis.   Neuralgia.   Pannus.  Sclerotitis.   Tobacco,  effects  of.    Trachoma. 

GhaFaoteristios.-— C/21.  mur,  resembles  Chi,  ars.  very  closely.  An 
excellent  proving  by  old-school  authorities  was  published  in  Virchow's 
Archiv.j  and  is  translated  in  C.  D.  P.  It  has  been  used  in  eye  a£Fections, 
especially  when  accompanied  by  severe  neuralgic  intermitting  pains 
in  and  around  eyes,  with  chills ;  lachrymation,  photophobia,  ulcera- 
tion of  cornea  of  malarial  origin.  Intermittent  fever  following 
broncho-pneumonia  ;  shaking  chill  5  a.m.  accompanied  by  fatiguing 
cough,  rattiing  in  bronchi  without  expectoration.  In  one  prover  it 
caused  an  exaggerated  sensitiveness  to  alcohol  and  tobacco.  Two 
glasses  of  beer  make  him  tipsy.  Prostration  and  weakness  are  marked 
in  all  provers  and  accompany  the  headaches  and  other  symptoms. 
There  is  a  feeling  of  enlargement — in  eyeballs,  in  tongue,  head  symp- 
toms are  >  after  a  walk. 

BttMoRB^— Compare :  Chi.  sul.,  Chi.  ars.,  Nat.  m.  (headaches). 
Antidotcd  by:  Fer.  oxid. 

STMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Exhausted,  apathetic,  listless. — ^Anxiety  and  excitement,  with 
increased  heart-beat. — Depressed. — Restlessness  increased  to  anxiety;  startled 
by  every  step  on  the  stair  or  knock  on  the  door. — Disinclination  to  work. — 
Irritable,  depressed.— Weakness  and  stupidity. 

2.  Head. — Confused  head,  pressure,  vertigo;  <  on  looking  at  bright 
objects. — Great  thirst,  noise  in  ears,  vertigo  on  rising. — Headache  recurs  every 
morning,  esp.  severe  over  1.  supra-orbital  border. — Slight  l.-sided  headache 
every  morning  lasting  till  noon. — Headache  reappeared  at  same  hour,  with 
flashing  before  eyes. — Feeling  of  weight  about  head,  extreme  drowsiness. — 
Violent  raking  pains  in  head,  only  slightly  >  by  a  walk. — Orbital  pain 
recurred  regularly  3  p.m.  to  5  p.m. — Numbness  and  fatigue  in  head. — Head- 
ache >  by  beer. 

3.  Eyes. — Conjunctivae  injected,  lids  adherent ;  feeling  as  if  eyeball  too 
big  for  orbit ;  as  if  sand  in  eye. — Fatigued  by  reading. — Eyes  feel  as  if  not 
open  enough ;  as  if  something  pinched  upper  lids  down  preventing  distinct 
vision ;  flickering  before  eyes. — Intense  pain  in  and  around  eyes,  periodic, 
accompanied  by  chills. — Lachrymation,  photophobia,  violent  paroxysms  of 
pain  daily  5  p.m. — Ulceration  of  cornea  from  malaria,  or  anaemia. — ^Trachoma, 
with  and  without  pannus. — Eyelids  heavy.— Weight  in  eyes. 

4.  Ears. — Noise  in  ears  with  dulness  of  hearing. — Roaring  in  ears  with 
itching  of  skin  of  back. — ^After  dinner,  sensation  in  ears  as  if  stopped  with 
cotton  wool. — Shooting  pains  in  r.  meatus. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis. 

6.  Face. — Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  face  red  and  bloated,  as  from 


CHININUM  SALICYLICUM  491 

alcohol. — ^Neuralgia  of  fifth  pair  of  nerves ;  agonising  3  to  6  a.m. ;  the  pains 
began  in  teeth^  spread  over  head  and  ended  in  nape ;  increased  rapidly  in 
intensity^  and  were  only  >  by  acupuncture  and  cold  water. 

8.  Mouth. — Rheumatic  toothache  in  sound  teeth,  <  by  cold,  or  cold 
food — Pain  in  teeth  recurs,  <  by  closing  jaws. — ^Tongue  thickly  furred, 
appetite  bad,  all  food  disrelished. — ^Tongue  furred  and  pale ;  too  large  for 
mouth. — Great  fetor  from  mouth. — Gums  sensitive,  bleed  from  least  touch. 

u.  Stomach. — ^Voracious  appetite  ;  completely  satisfied  by  a  little  piece 
of  bread. — Extremely  sensitive  to  alcohol  and  tobacco. — Easily  made  drunk. 
—Inability  to  smoke  (in  a  great  smoker). — Half  a  cigar  made  him  feel  ex- 
tremely ill;  cold  perspiration  broke  out;  inclination  to  vomit. — Fulness  in 
epigastrium,  colicky  pains  in  abdomen,  flatulence. — ^Appetite  very  bad, 
inclination  to  vomit. — Inclination  to  vomit,  >  after  dinner. — ^Thirst,  satisfied 
vith  a  very  little  drink. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea  three  times  a  day  (probably  caused  by 
too  new  beer). — After  dinner  liquid  stool. — Bowels  irregular  ;  every  other  day 
opened  two  or  three  times. — Flatulence,  constipation. — ^At  noon,  very  hard 
stool,  transient  cutting  in  bowels. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  urging,  but  urine  not  very  copious ; 
turbid,  deposits  sediment. — Constant  urging ;  quantity  markedly  increased. — 
No  desire  to  urinate,  but  forced  himself  to  do  so,  and  passed  a  litre  of  dark 
urine  of  intensely  sour  smell. 

15.  Male  siezual  Organs. — Inclination  to  erections ;  mucous  secretion 
in  m-ethra. — Strong  erections. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Fatiguing  cough  with  rattling  in  bronchi 
until  exhaustion. 

19.  Heart — During  dinner  transient  palpitation. — Severe  palpitation  after 
dinner. — Pressure,  anxiety,  and  palpitation  in  afternoon. 

24.  Generalities. — Intolerable  restlessness;  driving  him  out  of  the 
house. — Extensive  prostration. — Symptoms  reciured  at  regular  periods ;  re- 
tamed  long  after  drug  was  discontinued. 

85.    Skin. — Itching  of  skin  of  chest  and  back. 

26.  Sleep. — Sleep  disturbed  by  confused  dreams.  —  Anxious  dreams, 
woke  in  fright — Dreams  of  worms,  lice,  vermin. — Strange,  confused  dream, 
then  great  fear. — Sleep  disturbed  by  pain  in  head  and  teeth. 

27.  Fever. — Disagreeable  chilliness  all  over  body. — ^About  8  a.m.,  pro- 
fuse perspiration  of  disagreeable  sour  smell  broke  out  and  lasted  tiU  11  a.m. 

Ghininmn  Salicylicum. 

Salicylate  of  Quinine.    (CaoHa4Na09)a  CyH^Oj.    Trituration  and 

solution. 

itHniitAl — Deafness.    Meniere's  disease.    Tinnihis. 

CharaoterifltiOB. — "Of  all  the  preparations  of  Quinine  the 
Salicylate  is  the  most  injurious  to  the  structures  of  the  internal 
ear"  (CozzoUno)  ;  and,  therefore,  in  all  likelihood,  the  most  powerful 
homoeopathic  curative.    It  is  unproved. 


492  CHININUM   SULPHURICUM 

Ghininam  Sulpharicum. 

Sulphate  of  Quinine.    (CaoHa4NaOa)a  H.SO4  isHaO.    Trituration. 

OlinieaL — ^Angina  pectoris.  Asthma.  Brow  ague.  Cancerous  ulcers.  Cholera. 
Delirium.  Diarrhcea.  Dropsy.  Dysmenorrhoea.  Ear  affections.  Gangrenous 
and  fetid  suppurations.  Gravel.  Haematuria.  Haemoglobinuria.  Haemorrhages. 
Headache.  Intermittent  fever.  Meniere's  disease.  Neuralgia.  Noises  in  the  head. 
Parotitis.  Pruritus  vulvae.  Puerperal  convulsions.  Pycemia.  Rectum,  prolapse  of. 
Remittent  fever.  Rheumatism.  Scarlatina.  Spinal  irritation.  Spleen,  enlarged. 
Typhus  fever.    Urticaria.    Varicose  veins.    Variola. 

GharaoteristioB. — Sulphuric  acid  and  Sulphur  are  themselves  in 
the  first  rank  of  periodic  remedies,  and  combined  with  the  chief 
alkaloid  of  China  they  enhance  the  powerful  periodic  properties  of 
that  drug.    In  old-school  practice  the  Sulphate  of  Quinine  has  almost 
entirely  taken  the  place  of  the  crude  Bark  as  a  remedy*    Chin.  sul. 
closely  resembles  China  in  its  effects,  but  as  it  has  been  proved 
separately,  and  as  observations  of  the  effects  of  over-dosing  have 
supplied  many  additional  symptoms,  the  homceopathist  has  plenty  of 
guidance  in  the  selection  of  one  in  preference  to  the  other.     Chi.  sul, 
is  even  more  powerful  as  an  antiseptic  than  China^  and  it  is  probable 
that  it  is  in  virtue  of  its  property  of  antagonising  the  malarial  poison 
that  it  suppresses  intermittent  fever  when  it  does  not  cure.     It  only 
cures  when  the  fever  corresponds  to  its  own  type.    When  a  fever  is 
"  suppressed  "  there  is  generally  an  unholy  alliance  between  disease- 
force   and    drug-force,  which  is  expended  on  some   part  of    the 
organism,  resulting  at  times  in  lifelong  ill-health.     The  "Quinine 
cachexia"  is  well  known — sallow  complexion,  emaciation,  deafness 
and  singing  in  the  ears,  enlarged  spleen,  disposition  to  shiver,  and 
great  debility.    Periodicity  is  extremely  well  marked,  the  attacks 
returning  at  the  same  hour  each  day.     In  intermittents  the  onset  may 
anticipate.     Skin  flaccid  and  sensitive  to  touch.    Red  rash  over 
whole  body,  with  severe  stinging,  followed  by  desquamation.    Other 
prominent  symptoms  are  :  Headache  extending  from  occiput  to  fore- 
head.   Whirling  in  the  head  like  a  mill-wheel.    Twitching  of  left 
eyelid,  <  in  the  evening.    Aphthae  in  weakly  people.    Tartar  on 
teeth.     Hunger  at  night.     Prolapse  of  rectum,  especially  in  children. 
Haematuria  and  haemoglobinuria.    ("  Black- water  fever"  has  been 
developed  through  administering  Chi.  sul.  in  intermittents.      Koch 
deserves  much  credit  for  showing  that  the  worst  features  of  African 
fevers  are  due  to  over-dosing  with  Quinine  and  not  to  the  disease). 
E.  W.  Sawyer  {Med.  Advance^  1887)  relates  this  instructive  history :  He 
learned  from  his  cook  that  her  brother  (aet.   16)  could  not  take 
a  particle  of  Quinine  without  causing  a  profuse  flow  of  blood  with  the 
urine,  sometimes  within  half  an  hour,  always  without  pain.    This  had 
followed  every  time  his  doctors  had  tried  to  "  break  his  ague  "  with 
Quinine.    A  year  later  a  farmer's  wife,  aet.  60,  came  to  Dr.  Sawyer 
to  be  treatecl  for  bloody  urine  unattended  with  pain  or  uneasiness. 
She  attributed  it  to  strain  from  walking  two  miles  on  a  slippery  road. 
She  had  been  for  months  under  Hygienist  treatment  without  benefit, 


CHININUM   SULPHURICUM  493 

and  was  alarmingly  weak  from  loss  of  bloo4.  Rhus  200,  Ham,  1  Xy 
Erig,  IX,  Chi,  i  x,  Fer.  mur,  2x  were  given  in  succession  in  vain.  At  last, 
calling  to  mind  Uie  case  of  the  youth,  he  gave  Chi,  sul,  in  -^  gr.  doses 
three  times  a  day,  and  a  prompt  cure  was  effected.  Chi.  sul,  causes 
painfulness  and  swelling  of  varicose  veins  during  a  chill.  (Julius  E. 
Schmitt  cured  a  case  on  this  last  indication.)  Great  sensitiveness  to 
external  influences.  All  discharges  debilitating.  Weak  and  nervous ; 
a  little  exercise  =s  sweat  from  least  exertion.  Head  gradually  breaks 
into  sweat  when  perfectly  quiet.  Chi.  sul.  is  one  of  the  medicines 
which  have  the  "  sinking  sensation."  Tyrrell  had  a  patient  in  whom 
in  any  potency  it  caused  her  to  become  "  deathly  sick  and  faint, 
thought  she  would  die,  could  not  raise  her  head,  felt  she  would  sink 
ikrough  the  bed"  Sacch,  alb, produced  in  her  the  same  symptoms, and 
she  accused  the  doctor  of  having  given  her  Quinine.  {Arsen,  has 
"sinking  sensation,"  "as  if  bed  had  gone  from  under  her  and  she  had 
alighted  on  the  floor."  Bell.,  Dulc,  Rhus,  Lach.,  have  "sinking 
through  the  bed.")  Palpitation.  Touch  <  ;  pressure  >.  Wants  to 
lie  down.  Motion  si  chilliness.  Stooping  s=  giddiness.  Bending 
forward  >.  Sleeplessness  and  over-stimulation  of  nervous  system. 
Ralatioiuu — See  China.  It  is  antidoied  by :  Arn.,  Ars.,  Carb.  v., 
Ferrum,  Hep.,  Lach.,  and  especially  Nat.  mur.,  which  antidotes  effects 
of  over-dosing  with  Quinine ;  Puis.  Compare :  Cinchon  sul..  Apis. 
(chill  3  p.m.) ;  Ars.  (pyaemia,  spinal  irritation,  periodically  returning 
neuralgias) ;  Bry.  (sweat  from  least  exertion)  ;  Carb.  an.  (all  dis- 
charges debilitating) ;  Eup.  perf.  (sweat  relieves  all  symptoms  but 
headache) ;  Nux  (blue  lips  and  nails  with  chill) ;  Puis,  (rheumatic 
erratic  pains) ;  Stann.  (supra-orbital  neuralgia) ;  Staph,  (head  gradually 
breaks  into  sweat  while  perfectly  quiet).  In  headache  from  before 
backward  (Gels.,  Lac.  c,  Sang.,  Sil.). 

STHPTOMS. 

X.  Mind.— Fits  of  anxiety ;  great  anguish,  sometimes  in  the  morning 
while  in  bed,  obliging  the  patient  to  get  up  sooner  than  he  would  otherwise 
wish,  or  soon  after  midnight,  with  cries,  and  a  necessity  for  getting  up. — Great 
moral  depression ;  speechless  melancholy ;  discouragement ;  inclination  to 
weep  and  to  despair. — Moroseness  and  ill-humour,  with  3rawning  and  extreme 
dislike  to  labour. — Great  indolence  with  lassitude. — Excitement  like  that 
which  follows  taking  cofifee,  or  wine. — Great  liveliness. — Feeble  apprehension ; 
with  weakness  which  induces  falling,  great  heat  of  the  skin,  dryness  of  the 
mouth  and  of  the  throat,  and  constipation. — Inability  to  pronounce  sub- 
stantives, and  slowness  of  reflection. 

2.  Head. — Sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  head,  with  heat  in  the  face, 
thirst,  or  tinkling  in  the  ears  ;  head  confused,  with  humming  in  the  interior, 
with  a  feeling  of  intoxication  and  dulness,  stupor  with  cephalalgia  in  1.  side  of 
the  forehead  ;  a  sort  of  furor  in  the  head,  almost  preventing  walking,  with  loss 
of  power  to  guide  the  limbs. — Delirium. — Great  exaltation,  with  a  kind  of 
dementia. — ^Vertigo  :  on  stooping ;  whirling,  as  if  the  head  were  falling  back- 
wards, aggravated  by  motion ;  least  felt  when  lying  down ;  as  if  intoxicated,  with 
buzzing  in  the  ear,  heat  of  the  skin  and  accelerated  pulse  ;  with  cephalalgia 


494  CHININUM   SULPHURICUM 

and  giddiness. — Cephalalgia,  esp.  in  the  evening,  or  else  on  walking  in  the 
sunshine,  with  lassitude,  yawning,  drowsiness,  and  moroseness. — Dull  pain, 
with  deafness,  anguish,  sweating,  trembling  of  the  limbs,  and  slowness  of 
pulse,  on  1.  side  esp.,  with  pulsation  of  the  temporal  arteries. — Great  bodily 
excitement,  paleness  of  face,  violent  thirst,  nausea,  weakness  of  the  feet,  and 
general  perspiration  in  1.  temple,  with  necessity  for  lying  down,  and  amelio- 
ration on  pressing  the  head  against  cold  things. — Frontal  cephalalgia  :  in  the 
morning  on  awaking ;  esp.  in  the  evening  ;  in  the  afternoon,  with  heaviness 
of  the  head,  and  heat  in  the  face ;  with  tingling  in  the  ears,  and  general  heat ; 
or  else  on  the  1.  side,  with  vertigo,  increase  of  appetite,  thirst,  nausea, 
flatulency,  and  great  lassitude. — ^Aching  of  the  head,  in  the  occiput,  on 
awaking  in  the  night,  and  disappearing  on  getting  up ;  in  the  forehead  and 
orbits,  <  on  turning  the  head  or  the  eyes,  from  morning  till  evening, 
with  heat  in  the  forehead. — Expansive  pain,  esp.  in  the  temporal  region, 
<  by  motion  and  in  the  open  air,  as  well  as  at  night,  with  disturbed  sleep. — 
Pulsation  in  the  head. — Bubbling  towards  the  head  in  the  evening,  esp. 
with  pulsation  of  the  arteries. — Pain  as  though  the  head  were  bursting. — 
Heat  in  the  face. — ^Vertigo,  tinkling,  and  buzzing  in  the  ears. — Hardness  of 
hearing. — Sparks  before  the  eyes. — Pulse  quickened  and  rapid. — Sleep  dis- 
turbed and  full  of  dreams,  and  escape  of  wind  above  and  below. — Sensitive- 
ness of  the  scalp. 

3.  Eyes.— Sensibility  of  the  eyes,  with  lachrymation. — Sight  dimmed  as 
by  a  fog,  with  dr)Tiess  of  the  eyes. — Sparks  befere  the  eyes ;  black  spots ; 
sometimes  only  one  side  of  an  object  is  seen.—Obscuration  of  the  sight,  esp. 
when  looking  fixedly  at  an  object. — ^Transient  amaurosis. 

4.  Ears. — ^Tinkling  in  the  ears. — Buzzing,  esp.  in  1.  ear,  sometimes 
occasioning  deafness  on  that  side. — Hardness  of  hearing,  sometimes  with 
violent  headache. 

5.  Nose. — Frequent  bleeding  at  the  nose. — Frequent  sneezing. 

6.  Face. — Pale  colour,  sickly  look,  air  of  su£Fering,  with  sunken  eyes. — 
Earth-coloured  face. — ^The  white  of  the  eyes  discoloured  and  eyes  dull. — 
Complexion  icteric. — Redness  of  the  face,  sometimes  with  heat  round  the 
eyes,  and  lachrymation  on  looking  at  the  light. — Heat  of  the  face,  esp.  in 
the  evening,  also  after  taking  coffee. — Bluish-coloured  lips. — Eruption  on 
the  upper  lip. 

8.  Mouth. — Dryness,  with  heat,  thirst,  flesh-like  smell  in  the  mouth, 
and  sensation  of  constriction  in  the  oesophagus,  of  the  mouth  and  gullet,  with 
constipation  and  weakness  of  intellect. — Great  paleness  of  the  buccal  cavity. — 
Erosion  of  the  gums,  and  of  the  wall  of  the  buccal  cavity,  with  violent  pain 
and  gangrenous  crusts. — ^Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  mouth,  with  nocturnal 
angina,  augmented  secretion  of  saliva. — Salivation. — Tongue  coated  vtrith 
white  mucus. — ^Yellow  mucus  at  the  posterior  part. — Thick  coating  of  a 
yellowish  white. — ^Yellowish  coating,  esp.  at  the  root,  or  else  with  dryness  of 
tongue. 

9.  Throat. — Pains  in  the  throat :  in  swallowing,  in  the  morning  on 
getting  up ;  in  swallowing,  and  on  moving  the  neck,  violent  in  the  morning.— 
Tickling  in  the  gullet  and  the  larynx. — Scraping  in  the  throat,  sometimes  with 
dartings,  or  else  with  hoarseness  (afternoon). — Sensation  of  dryness  in  the  pit 
of  the  throat,  with  a  feeling  as  though  a  foreign  body  were  lodged  there.— 


CHININUM   SULPHURICUM  495 

Burning  in  the  throaty  accumulation  of  viscid  mucus  in  the  throat,  sometimes, 
esp.  at  night,  awakening  the  patient  and  exciting  coughing. 

la  Appetite  and  Taste. — Taste :  bitter,  sometimes  with  a  clean 
toagoe;  clammy,  sickly;  earthy;  empyreumatic. — Bread  appears  bitter. — 
Want  of  appetite,  sometimes  for  many  days. — IndifEerence  for  food  and 
drink. — ^Want  of  appetite,  with  increased  hunger. — Great  appetite,  with  dis- 
agreeable taste  of  food;  also  with  much  thirst  (sometimes  chiefly  in  the 
evening). — Hunger  with  faintness,  as  from  fasting,  with  good  appetite,  or 
want  (rf  appetite. — Great  hunger,  sometimes  after  a  full  meal,  succeeded  by 
insipidity  of  taste,  and  nausea. — Hunger  after  supper,  accompanied  by  nausea. 
—Bulimy,  sometimes  at  night. 

11.  Stomach. — Risings  :  after  a  meal,  with  pressure  in  the  abdomen 
and  stomach,  and  oppression  of  the  chest ;  empty,  sometimes  with  nausea. — 
Bitter  hiccough  and  retching. — Nausea  with  risings  (empty  or  bitter). — Move- 
ment in  the  abdomen,  and  emission  of  wind,  after  a  meal,  with  violent  risings. 
—Disgust,  with  headache. — Disgust  before  a  meal,  with  nausea,  vomiting, 
cephalalgia,  sleeplessness,  nocturnal  bulimy,  diminished  appetite,  and  tongue 
loaded,  yellowish,  dry,  after  a  meal,  with  vomiting  and  increased  bitterness  in 
the  mouth. — Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit. — ^Vomiting :  during  an  inter- 
mittent fever,  with  pressure  on  the  stomach  ;  with  disgust,  pyrosis,  sensation 
of  constriction  in  the  stomach,  and  swelling  of  the  abdomen,  which  remains 
many  days ;  insipid  vomiting  in  the  afternoon.— Fulness  in  the  stomach,  and 
tension  of  the  abdomen. — Pressure  on  the  stomach  :  with  retching,  bor- 
borygmi  in  the  abdomen,  and  Uquid  stools ;  after  every  kind  of  food,  even  the 
lightest,  causing  restlessness  at  night ;  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  widi  diminu- 
tion of  appetite.  —  Cardialgia  (cramp  in  the  stomach),  sometimes  with 
inclination  to  vomit. — Pulling  pain  in  the  oesophagus,  borborygmi  in  the 
abdomen,  and  emission  of  wind. — Sensation  of  heat  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach, 
and  the  precordial  region,  extending  to  the  duodenum,  with  empty  risings. — 
Heat  in  the  stomach,  throughout  the  cardiac  region,  and  extending  to  the 
abdomen  and  chest 

12.  Abdomen. — In  the  hypochondria,  tension,  aching  in  the  precordial 
region. — In  the  hepatic  region,  pains  sometimes  increasing  towards  evening ; 
aching  reheved  by  pressure ;  sensation  as  of  subcutaneous  ulceration,  swell- 
ing.— In  the  region  of  the  spleen  :  dull  pain,  dissipated  by  pressure ;  aching 
pain,  tightness  which  compels  the  loosening  of  the  clothes  (sometimes  in  the 
two  hypochondria) ;  lancinations,  swelling,  with  darting  pains  while  walking, 
and  on  pressure.-— Swelling  and  hardness  of  the  splenic  and  hepatic  regions, 
with  lacinations,  esp.  on  breathing  deeply,  sneezing,  &c. — Pains  in  the 
superior  part  of  the  abdomen,  from  the  stomach  to  the  umbilical  region, 
aggravated  by  pressure. — ^Violent  colic. — Colic  in  the  morning  near  the  region 
of  the  stomach. — Tearing  pains  in  the  abdomen,  with  frequent,  small,  irritable 
pulse. — Cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen,  without  evacuation  in  the  superior  part 
ol  the  abdomen,  sometimes  with  great  lassitude,  in  the  superior  part  of  the 
abdomen  and  umbilical  region ;  sometimes  in  the  evening  with  flatus,  and 
movement  in  the  abdomen,  with  loose,  fetid  stools,  like  pap,  and  emission  of 
fetid  wind,  sometimes  chiefly  in  the  morning,  on  rising. — Inflation  of  the 
abdomen,  sometimes  with  tension,  risings,  and  emission  of  wind. — ^Tension  of 
the  abdomen,  vnfh  pain  on  pressing  upon  it ;  sometimes,  esp.  in  the  evening, 


49<5  CHININUM   SULPHURICUM 

with  incarceration  of  flatus,  or  else  with  emission  of  fetid  wind. — ^Flatulent 
colic,  meteoric  swelling. — Movements  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  caused  by 
diarrhoea,  with  emission  of  wind. — Great  movement  in  the  precordial  region, 
with  inflation  of  the  abdomen. — Borborygmi  in  the  abdomen  ;  emission  of 
wind. — Protracted  inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  intestines. — 
Intestinal  phthisis,  with  nausea,  retching,  want  of  appetite. — ^Abdomen  tense. 
— Continuous  aching  in  the  umbilical  region.— Constipation. — Emaciation. — 
Hectic  fever  and  alienation  of  mind. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Obstinate  constipation,  with  great  heat  of  the  sidn. 
— Falling  in  the  street,  momentarily,  alternating  with  frequent  stools. — Stools 
white  and  pap-like. — Stools  hard,  insufficient,  indolent,  sometimes  in  small  frag- 
ments.— Stools  soft,  difficult  to  eject,  sometimes  with  urgent  want  to  evacuate, 
or  else  with  a  sensation  as  of  something  passing  up  from  the  hand  to  the 
shoulder. — Urgent  inclination  to  evacuate,  sometimes  fruitiess,  or  else  with 
cutting  pains,  followed  by  an  evacuation. — Evacuation  copious,  soft,  sometimes 
with  borborygmi  in  the  abdomen,  and  abundant  emission  of  wind  ;  pap-like, 
loose,  with  cuttings,  sometimes  with  abundant  emission  of  wind,  or  else  (in  the 
morning  after  getting  up)  with  fetid  stools. — Many  stools  during  the  day. — 
Diarrhoea,  sometimes  with  drawing  and  incisive  pains  in  the  small  intestines. 
— Involuntary  diarrhoeic  stools. — ^At  the  anus,  sensation  of  heat,  extending 
to  the  other  intestines. — Increase  of  haemorrhoidal  phenomena,  itching  at  the 
rectum,  and  tenesmus;  flowing  of  arterial  blood  from  the  anus;  bloody 
flux  by  the  rectum. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pressing  inclination  to  urinate,  with  copious 
emission  of  urine  like  water.— Increased  secretion  and  emission  of  urine; 
saturated,  deposits  crystals;  like  whey;  pale,  clear,  with  urgency  to 
urinate,  preceded  by  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  with  difficulty  of  respiration. — 
In  dropsical  cases,  copious,  saturated,  cloudy ;  or  else  with  a  very  strong 
smell. — Diminution  of  urine,  which  is  sometimes  saturated,  and  with  crystal- 
lisations.— Urine  turbid,  red,  or  else  with  a  strong  urine-like  smell,  readily 
becoming  turbid,  with  mucous  flocks,  sediment  clay-coloured  and  fatty; 
decomposing  readily,  with  sediment  of  yellow  sand  and  crystals.  —Like  water, 
sometimes  crystallising.— Frothy  urine,  with  a  fine  yellowish-whitjB  sediment, 
on  taking  cold.— Sediment  yellowish- white,  of  a  strong  odour,  clay-coloured, 
from  urine  clear  as  water;  reddish  yellow,  in  copious  urinations. — Brick- 
dust  sediment. — Gravel. — Crystals  in  the  urine,  which  is  copious ;  clear  as 
water ;  with  clay-coloured  sediment,  precipitated  in  urine  as  clear  as  water ; 
with  sediment  of  a  reddish  yellow,  and  urine  more  copious ;  in  urine  saturated, 
and  more  scanty. — Contractive  smarting  at  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  after 
passing  water  in  the  evening. — Profuse  haemorrhage. — Haematuria  and 
haemoglobinuria. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Suppression  or  diminution  of  sexual 
desire. — Forcing  pain  in  the  direction  of  the  groins. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Premature  catamenia. — During  the 
catamenia,  violent  shocks  and  squeezing  in  the  abdomen,  extending 
upwards  from  the  umbilical  region  to  the  chest,  with  forcing  pain 
in  the  direction  of  the  groins. — Flow  of  blood  from  the  vagina,  with  great 
heat  and  turgid  condition  of  that  part,  following  leucorrhoea  during 
menstruation. 


CHININUM   SULPHURICUM  497 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness  every  afternoon  (4  o'clock), 
vith  constriction,  or  else  swelling  which  closes  the  throat. — Irritation  which 
provokes  coughing. — ^Tickling  at  bifurcation  of  trachea. — Cough  caused  by  a 
small  painful  spot  in  the  throat — Irritation  in  the  throat,  which  provokes 
coughing,  sometimes  with  difficulty  of  expectoration. — ^Violent  cough,  during 
the  day,  or  else  at  night,  difficult  to  loosen,  both  in  the  day  and  night — 
Dry  cough. — Xx)ose  cough. — On  coughing  expectoration  of  gelatinous  mucus. 

i&  Chest. — Respiration  short  and  difficult,  on  taking  much  exercise, — 
Oppression  of  the  chest. — Respiration  laboured,  with  swelling  of  the  abdomen, 
disappearing  quickly  after  making  water. — Fits  of  nocturnal  suffocation 
towards  midnight,  with  swelling  of  the  throat,  which  is  almost  closed. — 
Respiration  difficult,  rumbling,  panting. — ^Calm  'Sleep  after  the  fit,  and 
tendency  ci  the  symptoms  to  be  reproduced  by  a  prolonged  cough. — Pains 
in  the  chest,  on  the  r.  side,  all  the  morning. — Pain  across  the  chest — 
Pressure  on  the  1.  side  of  the  chest,  painful,  esp.  on  breathing  deeply, 
and  on  throwing  the  arms  back ;  mitigated  on  leaning  upon  the  arm,  and 
bending  the  body  forward. — Sensation  as  of  being  grasped  by  the  hand 
behind  the  sternum. — Lancinations  in  the  chest,  in  the  direction  of  the  heart, 
immediately  after  a  meal ;  in  the  1.  side  of  the  chest,  preventing  a  deep 
in^iration ;  which  seem  endeavouring  to  pass  out  of  the  chest,  esp.  on  lying 
or  sitting  down,  disappearing  while  walking  or  standing  upright ;  in  the  r.  side 
of  the  chest,  extending  upwards  towards  the  shoulder,  cutting  short  the 
breath,  mitigated  by  bending  forward. — Lancinating  pains  above  the  sternum, 
on  breathing  deeply,  and  moving  quickly. — Palpitations  of  the  heart. — ^At  the 
exterior  of  the  chest,  pricking  dartings  on  the  skin  (sometimes  of  the  back 
and  thi^,  at  night)  in  walking  in  the  open  air,  followed  by  perspiration  on 
the  chest  and  back. 

90.    Neck  and  Back.— At  the  neck,  pains  on  both  sides  of  the  lateral 
muscles,  extending  to  the  larynx,  with  sensibility  to  pressure. — Indolent  swel 
ing  in  the  neck. — Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  dorsal  vertebrae  to  pressure,  in 
lying  down,  esp.  during  the  shivering  stage  of  fever. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — In  the  arm,  after  every  stool,  as  if  drops  glided 
from  the  hand  to  the  arm-pit — Paralysis  of  the  superior  extremities ;  cracking 
of  the  shoulder-joint ;  tearings  and  shootings  in  the  hand. 

23.  Lo^xrer  Limbs. — Paralysis  of  the  inferior  extremities;  tearings  in 
the  legs. — Painful  sensitiveness  in  the  malleoU,  and  trembling  of  the  limbs. — 
(Edematous  swelling  of  the  feet. 

24.  Generalities. — It  acts  primarily  on  the  nutritive  system,  afterwards 
on  the  other  parts ;  affects  chiefly  the  intestinal  canal,  then  the  brain,  the 
genital  and  urinary  organs,  and  finally  the  extremities  and  the  skin. — ^Aching 
pains. — Darting  and  incisive  pains. — Pulsative,  tensive,  burning  and  expansive 
pains.— Tractive  or  jerking  tearings. — Cracking  of  the  joints. — ^Tearing  pains, 
esp.  in  the  legs. — ^Jerkings  in  the  limbs,  drawing  pains  in  the  hands,  the  feet, 
the  forehead,  &c. — Increase  of  symptoms  every  second  day,  or  else  every  day 
at  the  same  hour. — Every  second  day,  there  occur  (amongst  other  S3rmptoms) 
traction  in  the  forehead,  with  anorexia,  and  stools  of  the  consistence  of  pap ; 
frontal  pain  at  night,  or  rather  in  the  afternoon,  with  heat,  thirst,  and 
per^iration. — Nervous  crises ;  over-excitement  of  the  nerves,  with  anxiety, 
Jassitude,  and  even  hysterical  symptoms. — Spasms  in  the  limbs ;  convulsions 

VOL.  I.  33 


498  CHININUM   SULPHURICUM 

in  the  1.  side,  with  vomiting  of  bile ;  diarrhoea,  congestion  in  the  head,  and 
very  severe  cephalalgia.— Paralysis,  at  first  of  one  side,  afterwards  generaL — 
Lassitude,  with  continual  yawning,  attended  by  incapacity  for,  and  extreme 
dislike  to  labour ;  and  trembling  of  the  limbs.— Oreat  weakness  and  shattered 
condition  of  the  system. — Wasting  of  the  body,  also  with  hectic  fever, 
anorexia,  constipation. — ^Abdomen  tense,  pressure  in  the  umbilical  r^on, 
nausea,  vomiting,  and  dementia. — Falling  away  of  flesh,  and  dropsy. — 
Trembling  of  the  limbs,  esp.  of  the  feet,  with  painful  affection  of  the  malleolL 
—Trembling,  with  general  coldness. 

35.  Skin. — Skin  flaccid,  or  very  sensitive  to  the  touch.— Red  rash  over 
whole  body  with  severe  stinging,  followed  iby  desquamation. — Gangrenous 
inflammations ;  livid  redness  of  the  skin,  with  formation  of  a  gelatinous 
membrane,  or  of  scabs,  on  the  surface. — Formation  of  a  thick  scurf,  livid  and 
humid,  which  becomes  black  and  dry  ;  now  red  and  moist  at  the  edges  of  the 
scabs,  afterwards  yellowish  and  softened. — Urticaria  ab  ingestis. 

s6.  Sleep. — Frequent  yawning,  e^.  at  night,  or  with  stretching,  shiver- 
ing, oppression. — ^Arm  as  though  bruised. — Pain  in  the  back  and  tenderness 
to  the  touch  of  the  cervical  and  dorsal  vertebrae. — Drowsiness  during  the  day. 
— Sleep  profound  and  unref reshing,  agitated,  with  debilitating  sweats,  tossings, 
and  extravagant  dreams. — At  night,  in  bed,  much  heat,  with  great  thirst,  head- 
ache and  tinkling  in  the  ears. — Sleeplessness,  sometimes  with  copious  sweat, 
also  with  dry  heat,  pricking  in  the  skin,  and  sweat  on  the  face. 

87.  Fever. — Coldness  of  the  limbs,  sometimes  with  trembling. — Sensation 
of  coldness  with  internal  tremblings,  paleness  of  the  face,  urgent  inclination 
to  urinate,  with  paleness  of  the  urine  in  the  evening. — Shiverings,  even  in  a 
warm  temperature. — Shivering  in  the  afternoon,  with  heat  in  the  face  and 
urine,  which  deposits  crystals. — Shivering  and  trembling  in  the  evening,  with 
accelerated  rapid  pulse,  dryness  of  the  mouth,  thirst,  disturbed  sleep,  and 
brick-coloured  deposit  in  the  urine. — Febrile  attacks,  v^ith  vertigo,  dizziness, 
frontal  pain,  bitter  taste  of  bread,  nausea,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  colic,  violent 
shivering,  much  heat,  yawning,  sneezing,  and  copious  sweat ;  violent  attacks 
with  trembling  and  shivering,  copious  sweats,  hasmorrhage,  and  pains  in  the 
left  hypochondrium. — ^Attacks  of  one  hour  in  duration,  characterised  by  pallor, 
shivering  and  shuddering,  with  lips  and  nails  of  a  bluish  colour,  and  pulse 
spasmodic  and  small ;  afterwards  general  heat  and  redness  of  the  face,  pulse 
more  marked  (than  before)  and  thirst,  ending  with  a  gentle  perspiration. — 
During  the  shiverings,  paleness  of  the  face,  cephalalgia,  tinkling  in  the  ears, 
thirst,  increased  appetite,  difiicult  and  painful  evacuations,  v^ith  great  mental 
dejection ;  painful  swelling  of  varices. — External  heat,  with  dryness  of  the 
mouth  and  the  gullet,  obstinate  constipation,  and  tendency  to  fall  while 
walking  in  the  street ;  also  with  perspiration  on  the  chest,  redness  of  the 
face,  convulsive  movements  of  the  muscles,  and  rapidity  of  pulse. — Heat, 
which  gives  place  to  perspiration,  chiefly  in  the  evening. — Pulse  :  slow,  esp.  in 
the  afternoon,  or  while  the  attack  continues ;  full  or  small,  but  yielding  and 
slow ;  frequent,  like  palpitations  of  the  heart ;  quickened,  esp.  in  the  morn- 
ing, or  an  hour  after  dinner  {ue.,  after  dinner  taken  at  noon,  as  the  custom  is 
in  Germany,  where  this  medicament  was  tested). — Sweat  easily  provoked, 
viscid,  running  down  the  chest,  with  speedy  exhaustion  after  every  exertion. 
— Sweat  over  the  whole  body,  with  general  shivering  (esp.  at  the  back). 


CHIONANTHUS  VIRGINICA  499 

Ghionanthns  Virginioa. 

Fringe  Tree.    Oleaceae.    The  bark,  which  is  the  part  employed,  con- 
tains Saponin.    Tincture. 

CUliaaL— Constipation.  Debility.  Emaciation  with  liver-disorder.  Gall-stone 
colic  Headache.  Jaundice.  Liver,  disease  of ;  hypertrophy  of.  Malaria.  Neuras- 
Uicnia.    Nursing  women,  complaints  of. 

CSiuumoteilfltiOB^ — Ckian.  acts  powerfully  on  the  liver  and  is 
indicated  in  hypertrophy ;  obstructed  liver  in  malarious  districts.  The 
following  are  ihe  leading  indications :  Enormous  liver,  constipation, 
clay-coloured  stool,  jaundice,  and  high-coloured  urine.  Liver  region 
sore.  Chronic  jaundice.  Jaimdice  recurring  every  summer.  Sensa- 
tion of  contraction  of  stomach  as  if  something  alive  moving  in  it ; 
with  uneasy  sensation  in  liver  and  spleen.  Rheumatic  pains  in  left 
ankle  and  tarsal  bone.  A  proving  of  Chionanth,  was  made  by  Dr. 
John  Z.  Lawshe,  and  was  communicated,  with  additions,  to  the 
Southern  Journal  of  Homoeopathy  by  H.  C.  Morrow.  Chion,  is  suited  to 
so-called  bilious  temperaments.  One  observer  (H.  Recorder,  xii.  369), 
who  gave  Chio.  to  a  nursing  woman  who  had  liver  disorder  with 
jaundiced  tint,  noticed  that  whilst  rapid  improvement  of  the  liver 
symptoms  occurred,  at  the  same  time  the  miUc  disappeared  and  the 
menses  returned.  The  medicine  was  stopped  and  Sahal,  serr,  given 
and  the  milk  returned.  Six  weeks  later  Chio.  was. again  given  and 
identically  the  same  result  took  place.  ''Jaundice  with  arrest  of 
menses"  should  be  a  strong  indication. 

Sherbino  cured  a  case  of  neurasthenia  in  a  clergyman  who  com- 
plained of :  Perspiration  all  summer.  Weakness  in  arms  and  legs. 
Prostrated  after  preaching  :  mind  ran  on  sermon  and  kept  him  awake. 
Stupid,  drowsy  sdl  the  time  ;  appetite  poor ;  all  food  gave  distress. 

Belatloilfl. — Compare  :  Bi^.,  Chi.,  Carduus  m.,  Euonymus,  Chel., 
Here,  Pod.  In  bilious  vomiting,  Bry.,  Eup.  perf.,  Iris',  Nux ;  in 
green  frothy  stools,  Elat,  Grat,  Kali  bi.,  Mag.  c.  Iris.,  Merc,  v ;  in 
weakness,  bruised  and  sore  feelings,  Arn.,  Bap.,  Bry.,  Eup.  perf.. 
Gels.,  Nux,  Rhus ;  in  headache,  Bell.,  Bry.,  Caps.,  Gels.,  Nux  ; 
sensation  of  something  alive.  Croc,  s.,  Thuj. 

STHPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Feels  "  played  out "  generally. — No  desire  to  do  anything  ; 
wants  to  be  let  alone. — Hypochondriacal,  inclined  to  look  on  the  dark  side. 

«.  Head.— -Very  severe  headache,  chiefly  in  forehead  and  just  over  the 
eyes,  esp.  the  1. — Feels  sore  and  bruised  all  over  and  through  the  head  (after 
severe  sjrmptoms  had  subsided). — Heavy,  dull  feeling  in  forehead. — Sore  con- 
stricting feeling  in  the  temples,  with  throbbing  of  the  temporal  arteries. — Head 
feels  sore  and  bruised  ;  bruised  feeling  seems  to  go  some  way  into  the  brain. 
— ^Evcry  time  he  moves,  coughs  or  laughs  head  seems  as  if  it  would  split  open 
and  fly  in  every  direction. — Drawing  and  pressing  at  root  of  nose  with  head- 
ache—Woke up  many  times  with  pains  in  head,  abdomen,  and  back. — 
Headache  <  by  motion,  coughing,  laughing  or  walking ;  <  after  sleep ; 


50O  CHIONANTHUS  VIRGINICA 

>  by  lying  down,  keeping  quiet  and  pressure. — Forehead  very  hot  and 
dry  ;  seems  like  a  hot  coal  of  fire  to  prover's  hand,  during  fever. — Forehead 
becomes  hotter  from  pressure  of  hand,  although  it  >  headache. — 
Head  feels  very  sore  and  bruised  all  over. — Perspiration  on  head  during 
fever,  while  asleep. — Cold  perspiration  standing  in  beads  on  forehead,  after 
vomiting  and  during  stool. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyeballs  exceedingly  painful ;  feel  sore  and  bruised. — From 
outer  to  inner  canthus,  a  reddish-yellow  streak  about  J  inch  wide  in  whites  of 
eyes. — Blood-vessels  of  sclerotic  very  much  enlarged  and  distinctly  visible. — 
Whites  of  eyes  have  a  yellowish  cast  all  over.— Whites  of  eyes  greenish- 
yellow. 

5.  Nose.-«Drawing  or  pressing  at  root  of  nose  during  headache. — Press- 
ing or  squeezing  sensation  in  bridge  of  nose. 

6.  Face. — Face  has  a  yellowish  appearance. — Skin  of  face  as  yellow  as 
a  mulatto's. — Perspiration  on  face  during  fever,  while  asleep. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  heavily  coated,  of  a  dirty  greenish-yellow  colour. 
— ^Very  heavily  coated  in  the  centre  with  a  thick  yellowish  fur. — Tip  of 
tongue  slightly  red. — On  each  side  of  tip  several  little  places  that  look  as  if 
the  blood  were  about  to  ooze  from  them. — Tongue  feels  drawn  and  shrivelled 
up  in  centre. — Tongue  and  roof  of  mouth  feel  very  dry,  though  usual  quantity 
of  saliva. 

10.  Appetite. — Complete  loss  of  appetite. — ^Tried  to  eat,  but  food 
nauseated. — Eating  and  drinking  relieved  empty,  weak  feeling  in  stomach  to 
some  extent. — Eructations,  nausea,  and  vomiting ;  "  never  before  felt  so  sick 
at  my  stomach." 

11.  Stomach. — Bitter  eructations.— Eructations,  tasting  as  if  food  were 
fermenting  in  stomach. — Eructations  so  bitter  and  sour  that  I  had  to  hold  my 
mouth  open  to  permit  their  escape. — Hot,  bitter,  sour  eructations,  setting  teeth 
oh  edge. — Great  nausea  and  retching  with  desire  for  stool. — ^Very  violent 
attack  of  nausea  and  a  great  deal  of  retching  before  he  could  vomit.— Vomit- 
ing of  very  dark  green,  ropy,  and  exceedingly  bitter  bile  with  a  single  gush. — 
Eructations,  nausea,  and  vomiting. — Sensation  of  a  double  action  in  stomach 
while  vomiting,  one  tr3ning  to  force  something  up,  and  the  other  sucked  it 
back. — ^Vomiting  followed  by  cold  sweat,  standing  in  beads  on  the  forehead, 
and  by  extreme  weakness.--Sensation  of  contractions  in  the  stomach,  as  if 
some  living  thing  was  moving  in  it. — Stomach  feels  weak  and  empty,  some- 
what relieved  by  eating. — Sensation  in  stomach  as  if  food  were  fermenting. — 
At  3  p.m.  sensation  like  spasms  or  palpitation  of  the  heart  in  the  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Cutting  and  twisting  pains  all  through  the  abdomen, 
somewhat  relieved  by  lying  on  it. — Cutting  and  griping  pains  in  and  about 
umbilical  region. — Dull,  sore,  aching  feeling  in  umbilical  and  iliac  regions. — 
Severe  griping  in  umbilical  and  iliac  regions,  relieved  by  emission  of  flatus. — 
Passage  of  offensive  flatus  during  the  day,  but  more  after  retiring  at  night- 
Uneasiness  in  r.  hypochondrium,  extending  to  1.  iliac  region. — Uneasy  sensa- 
sation  in  region  of  sigmoid  flexure,  as  if  caused  by  flatulence. — Uneasy  sensa- 
tions in  region  of  spleen  and  liver. — Griping  and  cutting  pains  in  abdomen 
about  and  below  umbilicus  during  stool. — Heavy,  all  gone  sort  of  feeling  low 
down  in  hypogastrium. — Pains  in  abdomen  after  5  p.m.,  and  all  night- 
Sensation  like  a  string  tied   in  a  slipknot  around  intestines  in  umbilical 


CHIONANTHUS  VIRGINICA  501 

r^ion ;  and  every  once  in  a  while  as  if  it  was  suddenly  drawn  tight,  and 
then  gradually  loosened. — ^Abdominal  pains  somewhat  >  by  lying  on  stomach 
and  abdomen. — Nausea  and  vomiting  of  pregnancy. — Uneasy  sore  feeling  in 
region  of  r.  h3rpochondrium. — Hypertrophy  of  liver. — Obstruction  of  liver  in 
malarious  districts. — Enormous  liver,  constipation,  stools  clay-coloured,  skin 
very  yellow,  urine  very  dark,  almost  black. — Soreness  in  region  of  liver, 
quick,  weak  pulse,  stools  undigested  and  showing  entire  absence  of  bile,  urine 
almost  black. — Chronic  cases  of  jaundice. — ^Jaundice  recurring  every  summer. 
—Bilious  colic. — Gall-stone  colic. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Constipation,  stools  clay-coloured. — Stools  un- 
digested and  showing  an  absence  of  bile. — Diarrhoea. — First  part  of  stool 
watery,  but  last  more  solid  in  appearance,  10.30  a.m. — Stool  copious,  watery, 
dark  brown,  8.50  p.m. — Stools  terribly  offensive,  like  carrion. — Stool  copious, 
watery,  dark  brown,  with  pieces  of  undigested  food  in  it. — Stool  thin,  watery, 
bbckish-brown  and  very  offensive. — Stool  flakey,  thin,  watery ;  flakey  portion 
dark  yellow ;  fluid  portion  dark  green,  with  light  green  foam  or  froth  on  top, 
streaked  with  a  white  mucous-looking  substance. — Emission  of  flatus  during 
stooL — Hot,  scalding  sensation  in  anus  during  stool,  which  continued  fifteen 
or  twenty  minutes  after  stool. — Took  quite  a  while  to  pass  the  stool  and  then 
there  was  only  a  small  quantity  passed. — Evacuation  at  bedtime  of  black 
tarry-looking  faeces.— Desire  for  stool  passed  off  after  vomiting. — Cold 
perspiration  broke  out  on  forehead  and  back  of  hands  during  stool. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine,  orange  yellow  colour ;  reddish. — Urine 
almost  black,  thick,  S3rrupy. 

19.  Heart. — Pulse  markedly  smaller  and  weaker. — Quick,  weak  pulse. — 
Radial  pulse  114,  fever. — Carotid  and  temporal  arteries  pulsate  hard  and 
rapidly. 

ao.  Back. — Sore,  weak,  bruised  feeling  all  over  small  of  back. — Sore 
and  weak  in  sacral  and  lumbar  region,  could  scarcely  walk. — Small  of  back 
exceedingly  weak,  and  feels  when  touched  as  though  the  skin  was  all  off. — 
Pain  from  seventh  to  tenth  dorsal  vertebra,  on  waking. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Cold  perspiration  on  back  of  hands  during  stool. — 
Rheumatic  pain  in  articulations  of  1.  thumb. 

?3.  Lo^xrer  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pain  in  1.  ankle  and  tarsal  bones. — Sore, 
aching,  tired  feeling  in  lower  limbs. 

24.  Generalities. —  <  Motion  and  walking ;  >  sitting  or  lying  down. 
—Abdominal  symptoms  >  lying  on  abdomen. — Every  step  seemed  to  jar  the 
whole  body. — Exceedingly  nervous,  cannot  lie  still. — Feels  very  tired  and 
sore. — Involuntary  jerking  in  various  parts  of  the  body. — Feels  very  sick  and 
weak  all  over  on  waking  at  8  a.m. ;  had  to  sit  down  before  he  could  dress. — 
Weak  feeling,  <  standing  or  walking  about,  >  sitting  or  lying  down. — So 
nervous  he  can  scarcely  keep  still,  and  can  scarcely  write  down  his  symptoms, 
9  a.m. 

25.  Skin. — ^Yellow  all  over  body. — ^Jaundice  of  years'  standing  recurring 
annually. — Jaundice  caused  by  drinking  too  much  cider;  cured  in  three 
days. 

sOl  Sleep. — Could  not  go  to  sleep  before  midnight. — Nervous  and  rest- 
less after  going  to  bed,  woke  up  many  times  before  daylight. — ^Woke  many 
times  with  pains  in  head,  abdomen,  and  back. — ^Feels  very  badly  and  sick  all 


502  CHLORALUM 

over  on  waking  in  the  morning. — Sleepy  during  the  day,  could  hardly  keep 
awake. — Perspiration  on  head  and  face  during  sleep. — Great  emaciation. 

87.  Fever. — Chill  at  12  noon. — Chilly  sensations  darting  through  body 
from  front  to  back,  causing  a  sort  of  shivering  or  involuntary  jerking. — ^Aching 
in  back  or  limbs  before  and  during  fever. — Head  feels  like  a  ball  of  fire  to 
prover's  hand  ;  cheeks  very  hot  and  dry. — ^Wants  to  be  covered  tluring  chill 
and  fever ;  becomes  chilly  if  clothing  is  removed  during  fever. — No  thirst 
during  chill  or  fever. — Slept  during  the  fever ;  profuse  perspiration  on  head 
and  face  while  asleep  during  fever.— Throbbing  of  temporal  and  carotid 
arteries  during  fever. — Headache  and  backache  during  fever  ;  eyeballs  very 
sore. 


Ghloralum. 

Hydrate  of  Chloral.    C.  HClaOHaO.     Solution  ;  trituration. 

llHnlft^l- — ^Anaemia.  Angina  pectoris.  Apoplexy.  Asthma.  Bedsores.  Bron- 
chitis. Chorea.  Conjunctivitis.  Dropsy.  Dysmenia.  Enuresis.  Erysipelas. 
Haunonrhagic  diathesis.  Heart,  hypertrophy  of  ;  paralysis  of.  Hydrophobia.  Kera- 
titis. Labour,  abnormal.  Leucorrhoea.  Night-terrors.  Palpitation.  Ptosis.  Puer- 
peral convulsions.    Purpura.    Urticaria. 

GharaoteristioB* — Introduced  as  a  hypnotic,  Chloral  soon  showed 
that  it  possessed  wide  powers  of  disturbing  the  organism,  and  many 
persons  (including  the  late  Professor  Tyndall)  have  been  fatally 
poisoned  by  overdosing.  The  brain,  eyes,  urinary  and  sexual  organs 
and  skin  are  most  affected.  W.  S.  Gee  cured  with  it  a  terrific 
headache  of  several  days'  duration  :  dull,  heavy  aching  in  forehead  ; 
coming  on  each  morning  8  a.m. ;  <  sudden  motion  ;  <  Ijdng  down ; 
>  in^^open  air.  The  6th  gave  great  relief  though  it  aggravated  at 
first,  the  aggravation  occurring  ten  minutes  after  each  dose.  One 
dose  of  the  25X  cured  permanently.  A  person  under  the  influence 
of  Chloral  hears  voices,  sees  visions  of  arches,  &c.,  when  in  the  dark 
or  when  the  eyes  are  shut.  Night-terrors  in  children  have  been 
cured  with  it.  The  brain  tissue  is  probably  congested  in  the  same 
way  as  the  skin  in  the  urticaria  of  the  drug.  Urticaria  gives  a  good 
illustration  of  the  effect  of  the  drug  on  the  minute  tissues.  The  brain 
is  congested  ;  hard,  full,  pressing  pains  in  head.  Eyes  injected ;  the 
eyeballs  feel  too  large ;  lids  swollen,  heavy,  can  hardly  lift  them. 
Asthma  and  wheezing  respirations  are  probably  due  to  an  urticarioos 
condition  of  the  lung  tissue.  A  symptom  that  is  very  significant  is  this  : 
When  lying  on  back,  inspiration  was  through  the  nose,  while  expira- 
tion viras  blown  from  the  lips  as  in  apoplexy.  The  heart's  action  is 
increased,  with  oppression.  Palpitation,  hypertrophy.  Later  there  is 
paralysis  of  heart.  Heart  dilated  or  weakened,  with  peculiar  fulness 
and  lightness  of  chest  and  sense  of  emptiness  in  stomach.  The  sense 
of  sinking  and  oppression  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  is  marked  and 
shows  a  profound  action  on  the  solar  plexus.     The  insomnia  for 


CHLORALUM  503 

which  Chloral  is  suited  is  that  due  to  over-fatigue.  Snoring  in  sleep. 
Lying  down  <.  Wants  fanning ;  open  air  >.  <  Night  and  evening. 
BalatioiiB. — Antidoted  by :  Ammon.,  Atrop.,  Digit  ^eart),  Moschus, 
Electricity.  Compare:  BeU.,  Chlorof.,  Chi. , and  Opium  in  stertorous 
breathing  and  pumng  out  cheeks  ;  Gels.,  Nux, ;  in  urticaria,  Astac. 

STMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Comatose  for  days,  ending  in  cerebral  congestion. — ^Melan- 
cholia, idiocy,  and  insanity. — Constantly  hears  voices. — Hurried  and  excited, 
^nalking  up  and  down  the  room  conversing  with  imaginary  beings. 

s.  Head. — Hard,  full  pressing  pains  in  head,  long-lasting. — Dull,  heavy 
headache  in  occiput  and  forehead  over  eyes ;  <  moving  about  and  lying 
down,  slightly  >  by  going  into  open  air. — Headache  in  forehead,  extending 
to  ocdpnt. — Headache  over  eyes  running  down  into  eyes ;  <  1.  side ;  eyes 
fed  constricted. 

3.  Eyes. — Retinal  hyperaesthesia. — Dim  sight. — Eyelids  feel  too  large. — 
Burning  in  eyes  and  lids. — Conjunctiva  injected ;  great  pain. — Ulcer  on  cornea ; 
phlyctenae ;  catarrhal  ophthalmia :  intense  itching  of  inner  canthi  and 
edges  of  lids. 

14.  Orinary  Organs. — Enuresis,  passes  water  in  bed  copiously  without 
knowing  it 

i&  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Pruritus  during  pregnancy.— <^horea 
during  pregnancy. — ^Tedious  labour;  nervous,  irritable,  hysterical;  pains 
apparently  forcible  have  no  effect. — Puerperal  convulsions. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Gasping  breathing  and  confusion  of  thought* 
—Dyspnoea  sind  suffocation,  pressure  at  base  of  chest  in  front,  urgent  thirst. — 
Slow  respiration ;  imperceptible  pulse. — When  lying  on  back,  inspiration 
throagh  nose,  expiration  blown  from  lips  as  in  apoplexy. 

19.    Heart. — Increased  action  with  d3rspnoea. — ^Violent  palpitation ;  hyper- 
trophy with  dilatation. — Angina  pectoris. — ^Threatened  paralysis. 
SI.    Limbs. — Foul-smelling  foot-sweat. 

S4*  Generalities. — ^Anaemia  and  emaciation. — Coagulability  of  blood 
destroyed;  haemorrhagic  diathesis. — Bedsores. — Muscular  prostration  and 
somnolence. 

85.  Skin. — ^Violent  stinging-itching  over  whole  body. — Diffuse  inflamma- 
tory redness  like  scarlatina. — Urticaria,  coming  out  at  night,  disappearing  by 
day.— Wheals  come  on  suddenly  from  a  chill ;  so  long  as  she  remains  in  the 
warmth  is  not  troubled  with  them. — Purpura  haemorrhagica. — Desquamation 
in  patches. — Bedsores. — Dropsy. 

«6.    Sleep. — Insonmia  from  over-fatigue.— Night-terrors,  esp.  in  teething 
children. 
87*   Fever. — Sensation  of  heat  all  over  body,  particularly  on  face. 


504  CHLOROFORMUM 

Ghloroformam. 

CHCI3.    Solution. 

OllnkaL — Arachnitis,  Convulsions.  Delirium  tremens.  Gall-stones.  MnscaB 
volitantes.  Paralysis  of  sphincter  vesicae.  Puerperal  convulsions.  Sick  headache. 
Smell,  lost.    Taste,  lost    Tetanus.    Typhus.    Vertigo. 

C]MiJPWOtBvU&iM.—Chhrqform  is  the  well-known  anaesthetic,  the 
general  effects  of  which  in  arresting  sensation  need  no  description. 
Unlike  Ether  and  Nitrous  oxide,  vmich  reauire  to  be  administered 
without  air,  chloroform  vapour  must  have  abundance  of  air  inhaled 
with  it,  or  asphvxia  results.  Its  most  noteworthy  effect  is  complete 
relaxation  of  all  the  voluntary  muscles  of  the  body.  It  may  cause 
death  by  paralysing  the  respiration  or  the  heart  Its  use  is  contra- 
indicated  where  there  is  brain  softening ;  fatty  heart ;  alcoholism ; 
or  albuminuria.  Marcy  cured  with  it  a  case  of  arachnitis  ending  in 
convulsions.  It  is  especially  indicated  in  delirium  where  excite- 
ment and  violence  predominate  ;  desire  to  kiU.  Paralysis  of  voluntary 
and  involuntary  muscles  and  special  senses.  Chloroform  wiU  dissolve 
gall-stones,  and  cases  have  been  treated  by  the  injection  of  Cklorofonn 
into  the  gall-bladder. 

Relatioiis.— Com^ar^ ;  Chloralum.  ArUidoted  by:  AmyL  nit, 
Ipec,  Brandy  ;  Ice  in  rectum.    li  antidotes :  Strychnine. 

SYMPTOMS. 

X.  Mind. — ^Wild  excitement,  followed  by  complete  insensibility. — Sang 
comic  songs;  could  scarcely  be  persuaded  to  leave  the  piano. — Obscene 
language  used  under  its  influence,  in  two  provers. — Desire  to  kill. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  rising  from  spine  into  occiput — ^Whirling  in  head 
as  if  he  would  fall  forward. — ^As  if  ground  waving  on  closing  eyes. — Head 
drawn  down  on  shoulders. — Severe  bursting  headache  in  forehead. — Headache 
with  dizziness ;  with  roaring  in  ears ;  with  excessive  nausea  and  vomiting. 

3.  Eyes. — Conjunctiva  insensible. — Pupils  dilated,  insensible  to  light- 
Eyes  turned  up. — Sight  gradually  went  out  and  returned  gradually.—Dark 
points  and  bright  streaks. — Small  black  points  float  before  eyes. — Large  black 
spots ;  grey  spots ;  float  a  few  inches  before  the  eye ;  follow  the  motion  of 
the  eye. — Bright  and  dark  points  j  sparks ;  flashes  of  light 

4.  Ears. — Roaring  in  ears,  like  boiling  water. 

5.  Nose. — Complete  loss  of  smell  (lasted  two  months). 

6.  Face. — Face  as  if  intoxicated ;  flushed ;  livid. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tecth  smooth,  as  after  acids  (fourth  day). — Soapy  taste.— 
Taste  lost. 

g.  Throat. — Burning  in  throat ;  scraping.— ^Violent  scraping  and  cold- 
ness in  fauces  on  inspiration. 

zz.  Stomach. — Eructations. — Burning  in  stomach;  alternating  with 
chiUiness. — Nervous  hiccough. — Nausea  and  vomiting,  sea-sickness,  or  morn- 
ing sickness,  much  acidity  and  great  distension  of  stomach  and  bowels  with 
gas ;  abdomen  tense ;  rumbling. 


CHLORUM  505 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Paralysis  of  sphincter  of  bladder  (after  par- 
turition). 

17.    Respiratory  Organs.— Stertorous  breathing. 

19.  Heart.— Constantly  increasing  retardation  and  weakening  of  action 
of  heart  and  arteries. 


Ghlornin. 

Chlorine,  the  element    CI.    Solution. 

(Hfiilcal. — ^Aphthae.  Asthma.  Catarrh.  Chlorosis.  Cold.  Convulsions.  Croup. 
Dentition.  Diphtheria.  Gastritis.  Haemoptysis.  Impotence.  Laryngismus.  Phthisis. 
Pleurisy.    Sore-throat    Typhus.    Ulcers. 

CiharaoteristioB. — Chlorum  has  been  proved  in  the  form  of  "  Chlor- 
ine water,"  and  has  been  tested  clinically.  It  produces  spasms  and 
convulsions,  coryza  and  catarrh.  Laryngeal  spasm  is  especially 
pronounced  ;  the  chief  difficulty  is  in  exhaling^  can  draw  in  the  air 
well  enough.  Convulsive  attacks  on  cutting  eye-teeth.  Mouth  in- 
flamed ;  ulcerated.  Rapid  emaciation.  Acute  rheumatic  pains. 
Excessive  sensitiveness  of  skin.  Nettlerash,  with  fever.  Cutis 
anserina.  Skin  dry,  yellow,  shrivelled.  Malignant  pustule  and  car- 
buncle. Typhoid  state.  The  mental  state  is  noteworthy.  Fears  he 
will  go  crazy ;  that  he  won't  be  able  to  make  a  living.  Cannot 
remember  names  of  people  he  sees,  or  if  he  sees  the  names  cannot 
remember  the  person.  E.  Z.  Bacon  has  recorded  (Mul.  Visitor^  Dec., 
1893)  ^^  cases  of  chlorine  poisoning.  The  first  was  in  a  boy  of 
five,  who,  after  passing  through  diphtheria  to  apparent  complete 
recovery,  was  suddenly  seized  with  symptoms  of  croup :  loss  of 
voice,  crowing  inspiration,  prolonged  expiration ;  incessant  dry 
cough ;  great  restlessness,  high  fever,  profuse  perspiration.  The 
symptoms  were  <  lying  on  a  lounge  by  the  fire  ;  >  when  lying 
in  his  mother's  lap,  and  still  more  relieved  by  being  carried  about. 
Daring  the  previous  illness  Piatt's  chlorides  had  been  placed  in 
the  room  as  a  disinfectant,  and  it  occurred  to  the  doctor  that 
chlorine  vapour  is  much  heavier  than  air.  He  himself  lay  down  on 
the  lounge,  and  in  a  few  minutes  felt  the  irritating  vapour,  and  began 
to  cough  and  hack.  This  soon  passed  away  on  sitting  up.  The 
removal  of  the  chlorides  had  a  remarkable  effect  on  the  child ; 
cough  and  respiration  were  greatly  relieved.  But  the  relief  came  too 
late,  as  the  cause  was  not  discovered  for  several  days,  during  which 
time  the  patient  had  become  steadily  weaker,  and  he  died  the  same 
afternoon.  The  other  case  was  that  of  an  old  lady  who  su£Fered 
from  chronic  bronchitis,  and  on  January  2,  1892,  developed  an  attack 
of  laryngitis.  In  three  days  she  was  weU  ;  but  the  two  subsequent 
weeks,  on  exactly  the  same  day,  a  fresh  attack  occurred.  The  fact 
was,  as  the  doctor  discovered,  his  patient  went  to  the  back  room, 
where  chlorides  were  kept,  every  Monday  to  wash  a  few  things  she 
did  not  care  to  send  to  the  laimdry.    The  chlorides  were  banished, 


5o6  CHLORUM 

and  though  the  washing  was  continued  there  were  no  more  attadcs  of 
laiyngitis.  Dr.  Bacon  adds,  that  since  giving  up  the  use  of  disin- 
fectants, other  than  plenty  of  fresh  air,  he  has  never  had  lamygeal 
complications  in  scarlatina  or  diphtheria,  though  his  neighbours  have 
had  plenty.  Whitman  recommends  chlorine  water  as  an  efficient 
palliative  in  a  fit  of  asthma.  He  begins  with  lo  drops,  then  in  five 
minutes  20  more,  and  then  in  another  five  minutes,  half-a-teaspoonful, 
always  in  a  little  water.  It  greatly  facilitates  expectoration.  In 
typhus  fever  Goullon,  senior,  recommends  chlorine  water,  five  drops 
every  two  or  three  hours  until  the  tongue  is  dry.  I  have  had  excellent 
results  from  the  12th  and  30th  in  nasal  catarrh,  and  in  breathlessness 
remaining  after  acute  bronchitis.  The  symptoms  are  <  from  mid- 
night to  7  a.m.  (spasm  of  glottis).  Lying  down  <  nasal  complaints. 
Inclination  to  lie  down,  with  headache.  Restless ;  <  walking  up  and 
down.  Sitting  with  sun  shining  on  back  =  shuddering.  Open  air 
>  chest  affections  ;  s=  running  of  tears.  Damp  air  =  loss  of  voice. 
Relations* — Compare :  Mephitis  (inability  to  exhale) ;  closely 
resembles  Bromine,  and,  less  closely,  Iodine.  Nat.  mur.  (sore-mouth) ; 
and  other  chlorides.  It  is  an  antidote  to :  Hydrocyanic  acid  and 
Sulphuretted  hydrogen.  It  is  antidoted  by :  Sulphuretted  hydrogen, 
Albumen,  Lycopod.  (impotence) ;  Plumb  acet.  (blood-spitting  and 
pleurisy).    It  follows  well:  Phos. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — ^Apprehension.  —  Irritability,  inclined  to  anger.  —  Forgets 
names  and  persons. — Effects  of  excitement. — Coma,  fainting  with  cold, 
viscous  sweats. 

2.  Head. — Painful  aching  in  vertex  and  down  1.  side,  with  inclination  to 
lie  down. — Warm  sweat  breaks  out  on  forehead  while  coughing. 

3.  Eyes. — Running  of  tears  <  in  open  air. — Suddenly  numerous 
fantastic  images  appeared  before  the  eyes,  disappearing  with  lightning-like 
rapidity. 

5.  Nose. — Coryza  with  headache. — Sneezing,  violent;  in  morning.— 
Dryness  in  nose. — Nose  smoky  or  sooty. — Corrosive  feeling  in  comers  of  nose. 
— Sudden  running  in  drops  of  sharp  corroding  fluid,  with  tears  in  eyes,  dry 
tongue,  palate,  and  fauces.>-Thin  coryza,  soon  changing  to  yellow,  copious 
mucus. — Loss  of  smell. 

6.  Face. — Face  swollen,  with  protruding  eyes.  —  Face  pale,  often 
greenish. — Heightened  colour. 

7.  Teeth. — Sensation  as  if  teeth  were  too  full ;  as  if  injured  by  adds.^ 
Teeth  black. 

8.  Mouth.— Tongue  black.— Tongue  as  if  burnt— Mouth  dry.— Very 
acid  saliva. — ^Aphthae. — Putrid  odour  from  mouth. 

g.  Throat. — Dry. — Sore  from  uvula  to  bronchi.— Choking  sensation; 
inability  to  swallow. 

II.  Stomach.— Acid  stomach  and  other  gastric  troubles  (in  workmen 
exposed  to  fumes  of  chlorine,  and  who  eat  chalk  for  it). — Desire  to  vomit 
when  coughing,  without  nausea. 

13.    Stool. — Diarrhoea:  in  the  morning;  with  dry  mouth,  after  the 


CHOLESTERINUM  507 

eruption  appears  in  typhus. — Stools  of  bright  blood. — HaemcMrhage  in  typhus, 
blood  black,  coagulated,  or  thin,  smelling  like  carrion. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sudden  impotence  and  aversion  to  sexual 
intercourse. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.—Aphonia  from  damp  air.>-Great  difficulty 
in  articulating  or  breathing. — Spasms  of  glottis ;  air  enters  easily,  but  cannot 
be  expelled. — Feeling  as  if  rima  glottidis  were  stifiF,  as  if  composed  of  an  iron 
ring. — Sudden  tightness  of  chest. — Expiration  easy,  inspiration  a  little  difficult 
and  accompanied  by  rales  (this  is  less  characteristic  than  the  opposite). — ^Any 
attempt  to  cough  sm  spasm  of  the  glottis. — Desire  to  cough  from  tickling  and 
sensation  of  rawness  behind  thyroid  cartilage,  but  the  cough  is  abortive,  as  he 
cannot  expel  the  air  from  the  chest. — ^A  continuous  little  dry  cough. — ^At  each 
cough  a  spot  in  chest  (region  of  r.  bronchus)  feels  sore,  as  if  the  cough  jarred 
and  hurt  it — Phlegm  raised  with  difficulty ;  soon  collects  again. — ^Cough  with 
spitting  of  blood ;  with  pleuritic  pains. — Sensation  of  warmth  in  respiratory 
organs. — Sensation  in  lower  and  inner  third  of  r.  lung  as  if  it  were  ruptured 
and  as  if  air  escaped  from  lung  into  pleiu*al  cavity  at  each  inspiration. 

19.    Heart. — Heart's  action  much  increased.— Rales  frequent. 

27.  Feyer. — Chilliness  and  crawls ;  lo  a.m.  to  2  p.m.~Burning,  dry  heat, 
with  anxiety  and  raving. — Genial  glow  all  over,  with  night-sweat. — Ck>ld  sweat. 
— ^scous  sweat. — ^Typhus. 


Gholesterinam. 

Cholesterine.    C^  H^  O.    Trituration. 

CifaiiiaK — Gall-stones.     Jaundice.     Liver,  cancer  of ;  diseases  of.     Vitreous, 
opacities  of. 

ChaFaoteristiCB. — Cholesterine  is  a  substance  crystallising  in  leaflets 
with  a  mother-of-pearl  lustre  and  a  fatty  feel.  It  is  soluble  in  alcohol 
and  ether.  It  occurs  in  the  blood  and  brain,  yolk  of  eggs,  seeds  and 
buds  of  plants,  but  most  abundantly  in  the  bile  and  biliary  calculi. 
Ameke,  who  did  much  to  introduce  the  proximate  principles  of  the 
tissues  as  remedies,  anticipating  the  practice  now  so  much  in  vogue  in 
the  old  school,  recommended  Cholesterine  as  a  remedy  in  cancer  of  the 
liver.  Burnett  has  recently  adduced  conclusive  evidence  in  support 
of  the  correctness  of  this  assertion  ;  and  I  have  myself  cured,  mainly 
with  thiSy  a  case  described  to  me  (I  did  not  see  the  patient,  a  man  over 
50)  as  in  the  last  stage  of  liver  disease.  He  had  been  given  up  by  his 
medical  attendant,  who  ordered  him  to  make  his  will  without  delay. 
Burnett  uses  the  3X  or  the  3  trit.  and  substantial  doses.  He  commends 
it  in  "obstinate  hepatic  engorgements,  which  by  reason  of  their 
obstinacy  make  one  think  interrogatively  of  cancer,"  also  in  "  cases  in 
which  there  appears  to  be  a  semi-mahgnant  a£Fection,  involving  the 
left  lobe  of  the  liver  and  what  Ues  between  it  and  the  pylorus  and  the 
pancreas."  In  such  cases  Burnett  gives  alternately  Cholest.  3X  and 
Iodoform  3X.  It  has  been  used  with  success  in  the  removal  of 
opacities  of  the  vitreous. 


5o8  CHROMICUM  ACIDUM 

Ghromicom  Acidum. 

Chromic  acid.    Anhydrous  chromic  acid.    Chromic  anhydride. 
Cr  O3.    Solution. 

with 

Chromium  Oxidatom. 

Chromium  sesquioxide.    Chromic  oxide.    Cra  O3.    Trituration. 

Clialoal.— Angina  pectoris.  Brain,  inflammation  of.  Cough.  Diarrhoea.  Eyes, 
affections  of ;  pains  in.  Gangrene.  Gout.  Haemorrhoids.  Lumbago.  Lupus. 
Phthisis  laryngea.  Ranula.  Rheumatism.  Stiff-neck.  Syphilis.  Throat,  sore. 
Toothache.    Trismus.    Ulcers.    Warts. 

Charaoteristios. — ^The  symptoms  of  these  two  substances  are 
nearly  identical,  and  may  be  taken  together  as  Hering  has  taken 
them.  Symptoms  of  the  Acid  are  distinguished  by  (A.)  after 
each  ;  those  of  the  Sesquioxide  by  (S.).  Symptoms  common  to 
both  are  unmarked.  Chromic  acid  is  a  powerful  antiseptic,  and  has 
been  used  for  disinfecting  purposes,  to  arrest  fetid  discharge,  and 
correct  fetid  odours.  "Foul  smelling,  sanious  lochia"  is  an  indica- 
tion. Allopaths  have  used  it  in  10  per  cent,  solution  for  checking 
excessive  foot-sweat — a  very  dangerous  practice,  but  to  homoeopaths 
it  may  suggest  a  possible  internal  use.  It  causes,  in  strong  solution, 
inflammation  and  destruction  of  epithelium  and  mucous  membranes  ; 
a  false  membrane  ;  gangrene.  On  the  skin  it  has  been  used  to  destroy 
warts.  Cutting  pains  in  eves.  Cough,  hard,  sometimes  deep; 
swallows  sputa.  Vomits  breakfast,  ^mptoms  appear  and  disappear 
suddenly  and  return  periodically.  (The  suddenness  of  many  of  the 
symptoms  is  very  marked.)  Disagreeable  pricking  and  itchmg  here 
and  there,  with  uneasiness  in  limbs.  On  turning  to  right  side,  pain  in 
left  side  goes  off  (S.).  Pains  suddenly  shifting  to  various  parts  of 
trunk,  on  waking  (S.).  Sensation  of  a  vacuum  at  heart ;  of  emptiness 
in  chest  The  rheumatic  symptoms  are  well-marked,  and  I  have 
frequently  obtained  good  results  in  rheumatic  cases  with  both 
preparations.  The  symptoms  are  <  least  draught  of  air  (A.) ;  and 
by  cold  water  (A.).  <  Night  and  early  morning,  2  to  6  a.m.  Pain  < 
left  side. 

RelatioiiB. — Both  should  be  studied  along  with  Kali  bichrom. 
Antidotes :  Daphne  indica  has  cured  the  rheumatic  pains.  Merc  cor. 
in  small  doses  has  counteracted  the  general  efiFects  in  workmen.  The 
restlessness  and  relief  from  motion  suggest  Rhus. 

SYMPTOMS. 

{  ly  a.    Mind  and  Head.--Confusion  for  two  days ;  memory  so  bad  he 

I  did  not  know  how  to  make  several  letters  of  the  alphabet  (S.). — ^At  10  aan., 

whilst  walking,  lightness  in  head  which  inclined  him  continually  to  r.  side 


CHROMICUM  ACIDUM  509 

(AJy^Psdn  extends  into  anterior  portion  of  brain  from  r.  eyeball  and  from 
aching  teeth  (A.).— Shooting  pain  1.  temple  (S.)-— Fulness  in  head,  with  light- 
ness at  heart,  as  if  a  vacuum  there ;  giddiness  going  down  stairs  (A.). — 
Pnlsative,  throbbing  sensation  from  region  of  heart  to  1.  eye  or  I  side  of  head ; 
general  fulness  of  fore  part  of  head,  with  occasional  slight  pains  in  I  hypo- 
chondrium  (A.). — Heavy  pain  along  coronal  suture  (A.^ 

3.  Eyes. — Dull  pain  over  L  eye,  as  if  headache  would  set  in  (A.). — 
Cutting  pains  across  L  eyeball  at  night  in  bed ;  with  flow  of  tears  in  morning 
in  bed ;  smarting  and  heaviness  in  lids  in  evening  (S.). — Sudden  momentary 
jerk  in  both  eyeballs  (S). — Itching  and  smarting  round  eyes,  esp.  in  inner 
canthi  (S.). — Dull,  pressive  pain  over  r.  eye  on  waking  in  morning. 

4.  Ears. — Occasionally  sensation  in  r.  ear,  as  if  water  was  in  it;  it 
appears  and  disappears  suddenly  (A.). — Sudden  jerking  pain  in  1.  ear,  and  a 
oAd  feeling  in  a  small  spot  in  meatus  (S.). — Pain  from  toothache  extends 
into  ear  (A.). 

5.  Nose. — Fetid,  musty  smell  in  posterior  nares,  chiefly  perceived 
during  expiration,  after  breakfast  and  dinner  (A.). — Ozaena« 

6.  Face. — Face  rose-red;  during  coughing  spells  (A.) — Quivering  of 
lower  lip. 

7.  Teeth.— Toothache ;  pain  extending  into  ear;  with  restlessness; 
teeth  feel  too  long ;  <  from  cold  water  ;  in  sudden  attack  ;  <  night  (A.). 

8.  Mouth. — Metallic  taste  in  mouth  before  dinner  (S.). — Prickling  in 
tongue  (S.). 

9.  Throat.— Tough,  white  phlegm  in  throat,  with  hawking  <  morn- 
ings (A.). 

II.  Stomach. — Unusual  hunger  in  middle  of  day  (S.).— While  eating, 
sensation  as  if  expelled  air  smelled  putrid  (A.). — ^Vomiting  of  food,  bUe,  and 
hkxxl  (A.). — Sudden  inclination  to  vomit  in  morning,  while  dressing,  with 
flow  of  water  in  mouth  and  dull  pressure  in  stomach  (S.). — Quick  walking 
about  >  nausea  (A.). 

IS.  Abdomen. — Pressive  pain  r.  hypochondrium  in  morning  on  waking 
(S.>— Abdominal  symptoms  >  after  rising  in  the  morning.— Wakes  early 
morning  (4  to  5  a.m.).  sick  feeling  in  abdomen,  which  is  tender  to  touch,  esp. 
atoi^  <x>lon ;  restless ;  sharp  pains  in  hypogastrium  along  colon ;  >  profuse 
diarrhcea  (A.). — Flatulence  and  rumbling  in  abdomen  (S.).— In  evening,  dis- 
agreeable, violent  pain,  like  flatulence,  r.  side,  from  lumbar  region  down  to 
caecum,  caused  by  any  movement  of  trunk  or  deep  inspiration ;  not  felt  in 
sitting  or  lying  still  (S.). 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Fulness  about  rectum,  and  difficult  evacuation 
of  a  soft,  scanty  stool  (S.). — After  tea,  sudden  pressing  desire  for  stool ;  scanty, 
thin,  lumpy  evacuation  (S.). — Small  stool  of  mucus  and  knotty  faeces  (A.). — 
Fuhiess  and  slight  shooting  pains  about  anus,  morning  (S.). — ^Watery  diarrhoea, 
with  nausea  and  dizziness  (A.). — Blind  piles,  with  costiveness  (A.). — Copious 
discbarge  of  haemorrhoidal  blood;  with  weakness  in  back  (A.). — External 
piles  disappeared,  became  internal  and  bleeding  (A.). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Consumption  of  larynx,  with  very  red  face 
daring  attacks  of  coughing.— {CEdema  of  glottis.) — Cough  hard,  sometimes 
deep,  swallows  sputa,  vomits  breakfast  (A.). — Pains  over  whole  upper  1.  chest, 
with  deep  cough  (A.). 


5IO  CHRYSOPHANICUM  ACIDUM 

l8.  Chest. — In  the  night,  severe  boring  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest  bdow 
axilla,  about  the  fourth  rib,  not  <  by  motion  or  respiration,  >  turning  on  r. 
side  (S.). — Deep-seated  pain  in  back  of  1.  chest  and  corresponding  place  in 
front,  with  a  feeling  on  deep  inspiration  as  if  rest  of  lung  could  not  expand 
and  was  painful  (S.). 

ig.  Heart. — Angina,  waking  at  night,  pains  much,  short  hacking  and 
retching  (A.). — In  evening,  in  bed,  pain  in  region  of  heart,  a  fine  drawing, 
nervous  pain,  at  times  reaching  through  chest  to  shoulder  and  neck ;  on  lying 
on  heart,  a  sort  of  clucking,  painful  sensation  on  deep  inspiration  (S.) — Fixed 
pressive  pain  at  apex  of  heart  (S.). — Pain  under  apex  of  heart  awoke  him  (S.) 
— Suddenly,  a  violent  stitch  in  region  of  heart ;  pain  disappears  gradnaOy 
after  several  minutes  (A.). 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — ^Turning  head  to  left  and  backward  was  im- 
possible (A.) — Cold  sensation  on  back  of  neck,  lo  a.m.  (A.). — Heavy  pains  in 
muscles  of  neck  and  shoulders,  and  various  parts  of  trunk,  soon  went  off,  and 
were  only  slightly  felt  in  back  during  day  (S.).— Pains  in  1.  shoulder  and 
shoulder-blade ;  with  sensitiveness  of  all  muscles  attached  to  scapula ;  pain 
extends  to  occiput ;  later,  moved  to  pelvis ;  lumbar  region  sensitive  (A.) — ^Dull 
pain  at  inner  angle  of  1.  scapula  in  evening,  and  at  inferior  angles  oi  both  in 
morning  (S.). — Rheumatic  pains  in  r.  shoulder  and  various  parts  of  back  (S.). 
— Superficial  burning  pains  about  middle  dorsal  spine  (with  sudden  jerking 
pains  in  1.  ear,  and  cold  feeling  in  small  spot  in  meatus). — Lumbar  pain,  most 
painful  morning  in  bed  (S.) — Shooting  pain  from  small  of  t>ack  into  L  hip-bone. 

21.  Limbs. — Uneasiness,  stiffness  and  dull  pain  in  muscles  in  morning ; 
chiefly  in  shoulder-blades  and  back  of  neck,  also  t>etween  shoulders  and  in 
hips ;  coming  occasionally  during  day  till  evening  (A.). 

22.  Upper  Limb8.^Itching  in  armpits  at  night  (a)— Transitory  pains 
in  either  elbow ;  in  momihg. 

23.  Lower  Limbs.— Pain  in  upper  thigh-bone,  extending  to  1.  hip-joint 
(A.). — Pains  in  knee.~Knee-joints  weak  and  knocking. — Pains  in  balls  of  feet 


Ghrysophanicom  Acidum. 

Chrysophanic  acid.  (CH3  C^^  H5  (OH),  O,).    (An  organic  acid  obtained 
from  rhubarb  and  some  lichens.    A  constituent  of  ^*  Goa  powder.") 

OUnloal* — Ophthalmia.    Psoriasis,    Ringworm. 

ChaFaoterlBtios. — Tried  as  a  local  application  in  the  form  of 
ointment  in  bad  cases  of  psoriasis  on  one  limb  Chry.  ac,  has  caused  the 
disappearance  of  the  eruption  on  the  other  limb  as  weU,  showing 
a  constitutional  action.  It  has  been  used  with  some  success  in  the 
lower  triturations  internally  in  psoriasis,  ringworm,  and  other  skin 
affections,  also  as  a  local  application  in  ringworm.  It  is  a  powerful 
irritant  of  the  skin  and  mucous  membranes.  Given  internally  in 
crude  form  it  has  caused  nausea,  vomiting,  and  purging.  £.  W. 
Beebe,  of  Milwaukee,  relates  the  effect  on  a  professional  friend. 


CICUTA   MACULATA  511 

trtmbled  with  blepharitis,  who  applied  to  his  eyelid  a  one-in-ten 
ointment  ^made  with  vaseline.  The  e£Fect  was  immediate :  marked 
conjunctival  inflammation  of  globe  and  lid,  contraction  of  pupils, 
intense  photophobia,  the  least  ray  of  light  producing  great  pain, 
increased  by  a  throbbing  sensation  synchronous  with  the  pulse.  This 
was  accompanied  with  phosphorescent  flashes  of  Ught.  On  forcing 
^es  to  look  at  objects,  retinal  impressions  remained  some  time  after 
closing  them.  SweUing  of  lids  and  irritation  of  skin  around.  After 
lasting  a  week  there  was  marked  improvement,  and  a  second,  milder 
application  completed  the  cure.  Beebe  regards  the  condition  set  up 
as  one  of  ''  Retinal  asthenopia,''  or,  as  Graafe  called  it,  "  optic^ 
hyperaesthesia."  Physostigtna  and  Pilocarpin  are  its  analogues.  A.  B. 
Norton  has  used  it  successfully,  internally  and  externally,  in  blepha- 
ritis, conjunctivitis  and  keratitis  of  the  phlyctenular  variety ;  also  in 
eczema  behind  ears.  G.  C.  McDermott  confirms  this.  Used  locally 
(gr.  iv.  to  gr.  viii.  with  vaseline  Ji.)  or  internally,  or  both,  it  is  a 
magnificent  remedy  in  eye  and  ear  cases  where  a  filthy,  scabby  con- 
dition exists,  and  a  tendency  to  form  thick  crusts.  Cases  in  which 
the  whole  ear  and  surroundfing  tissue  appeared  to  be  one  great  scab 
from  the  centre  of  which  oozed  the  pus  which  came  from  a  suppura- 
tive otitis  media  cleared  up  in  two  or  three  weeks  under  internal  and 
external  use  of  Chty.  ac, ;  also  cases  where  a  similar  condition  of  eye- 
lids and  skin  of  face  obtained.  I  have  often  seen  a  ringworm  dis- 
appear rapidly  from  a  few  applications  of  the  ointment. 

Cichorium. 

Cichorium  intybus.    Chicory.    Endive.    N.  O,  Compositae.     Tincture 
or  trituration  of  dried  root. 

GliBieaL— Amblyopia.    Constipation.    Headache. 

Gharaoteristios. — Chicory  is  the  well-known  salad,  the  root  of 
which  is  used  for  mixing  with  coffee.  It  has  been  proved,  and  the 
following  symptoms  have  been  observed  :  General  heaviness.  Head- 
ache. Weight  at  stomach  and  great  indisposition  to  bodily  and  mental 
exertion.  Want  of  energy.  Bowels  relaxed.  When  taken  in  infusion 
like  coCFee,  it  acts  as  a  gentle  aperient.  A  chicory-roaster  observed 
that  he  **  could  not  read  at  night,  not  from  any  external  irritation  of 
the  eyes,  but  from  a  feeling  of  deadness  in  them." 

Gicnta  Maculata. 

Cicuta  maculata.     Water  Hemlock.     Spotted  Cow-bane.     Beaver- 
poison.    N.O.  Umbelliferae.    Tincture  of  root  gathered  in  summer. 

GUateL— Epilepsy.    Tetanus. 

GharaoteristiOB. — ^The  effects  of  the  C.  maculata  are  very  like 
those  of  the  Virosa^  the  most  prominent   symptom   being :   Falls 


512  CICUTA  VIROSA 

unconscious,  tetanic  or  clonic  convulsions.    Body  covered  with  sweat 
For  comparisons  see  Cic.  v. 

8THPT0HS. 

z.    Mind.— Fell  on  their  way,  and  were  picked  up  unconscious. 
a.    Head. — Dizziness. — Head  hot. 

3.    Eyes.— Astonishing  mobility  of  eyeballs  and  eyelids  with  widely 
dilated  pupils. 

6.    Face. — Face  bloated  like  that  of  a  drowned  person,  deathly  pale. — 
Face  livid,  even  purple. — ^Jaws  rigid. 

8.    Mouth. — Bloody  foam  from  nose  and  mouth. 
g.    Throat. — Spasm  of  muscles  of  deglutition  on  presenting  anything  to 
mouth. 

II.    Stomach. — Nausea  and  vomiting  ;  frothy,  glairy  fluid. 
IS,  13.    Abdomen  and  Stool. — Pain  in  bowels ;  ine£Fectual  desire  for 
stool. 

30,  21.    Back   and   Limbs. — Falls  backward  in  convulsions. — Every 
muscle  in  the  body  in  powerful  clonic  spasm. — Body  and  extremities  cold. 
86.    Sleep. — During  intervals  of  vomiting  lay  in  deep  sleep. 
27,    Fever. — Head  hot. — Profuse  sweat  over  whole  body. 


Cicuta  Virosa. 


Cow-bane.    Water  Hemlock.    N.  O.  Umbelliferae.    Tincture  of  fresh 
root  gathered  at  time  of  flowering. 

OUaleaL— Bladder,  paralysis  of.  Cancer,  Catalepsy.  Cerebro-spinal  meningitia. 
Coccygqdynia.  Concussions.  Convulsions.  Eczema,  Epilepsy,  Epithelioma. 
Eyes,  inflammation  of.  Fau^  eruption  on.  Hiccough,  Hysteria.  Impetigo,  Meningitis. 
Myelitis,  Numbness,  (Esophagus,  stricture  of.  Paralysis.  Psoriasis.  Puerperal 
convulsions.  Screaming,  Strabismus.  Stuttering.  Tetanus.  Trismus.  Wakingt 
weeping  on.    Worm  complaints. 

Charaoteristics. — Cicuta  v.  is  one  of  the  most  active  of  the  poi- 
sonous Umbelliferae.  Its  chief  influence  is  excited  on  the  medulla 
oblongata,  the  gastro-intestinal  tract,  and  the  skin.  Twitching  and  spas- 
modic jerks  are  a  keynote  of  Cicuta,  ^^  Bending  the  head  backward  " 
is  very  characteristic.  The  remedy  has  cured  many  cases  of  cerebro- 
spinal meningitis,  the  opisthotonos  being  the  leading  indication. 
Violence  is  a  leading  feature  :  violent  spasms  ;  moans  and  howls ; 
great  agitation  ;  makes  gesticulations  ;  odd  motions ;  strange  desires, 
as  to  eat  coal.  ''Head  turned  or  twisted  to  one  side"  is  no  less 
indicative  of  the  drug  in  convulsions  of  children  or  adults.  (See 
cases  referred  to  below.)  It  corresponds  to  falls  and  the  e£Fects  of  con- 
cussions. Utter  prostration  follows  the  convulsive  attacks;  sudden 
rigidity,  then  jerks  and  violent  distortions  ;  then  prostration.  ''  Jerk- 
ing of  the  left  arm  all  day  "  is  a  very  characteristic  symptom.  Tremor 
when   touched.    Trembling   palpitation.     Convergent    strabismus ; 


CICUTA  VIROSA  513 

from  fall  or  blow.  Soporous  sleep,  weeps  on  being  roused,  distorts 
facial  muscles  and  stares  vacantly.  Pupils  dilated.  Shocks  from 
head  down  body.  Face  bluish.  Froths  at  mouth.  Jaws  locked. 
Bites    tongue.     Hiccough.     Hungry    immediately    after    a    meal.  I 

Tearing,  jerking  in  coccyx.  Cicuia  has  a  marked  action  on  the  skin  : 
eruption  of  pustules  which  run   together   with    yellowish    honey-  i 

coloured  scabs,  especially  about  mouth,  and  matting  the  whiskers.  I 

Nash  cured  eczema  capitis  in  a  young  woman  with  Cic.  v, — whole 
scalp  was    covered  as   with  a  solid   cap.     Epithelioma,    growths 
covered  with  honey-coloured  scabs.  Suited  to  old  people  and  children. 
Teste  places  Cicuta  in  the  Sulphur  group.     He  regards  it  as  antipsoric, 
and  considers  that  as  its  eruptions  are  mostly  found  in  the  head  and 
face,  so  its  symptoms,  when  repercussion  of  skin  eruptions  occur,  are 
chiefly  felt  in  the  brain.    Bavista  and  Mthusa  are  like  Cic.  v,  in  this. 
Teste  mentions  the  case  of  a  lady  of  fifty-eight  who  ceased  to 
menstruate  at  thirty  in  consequence  of  a  fright,  and  who  was  "  of 
robust  constitution,  irritable,  nervous,  and  excessively  fanciful  and 
odd."    She  had  a  chronic  swelling  of  the  left  ovary.    Cic.  v.  had  a 
remarkably  quieting  effect  for  several  weeks,  and  during  that  time  the 
swelling  diminished  considerably.    The  patient  had  to  leave  Paris,  so 
the  treatment  could  not  be  foUowed  up.    The  two  following  cases 
illustrate  the  action  of  Cicuta  in  a  striking  way.    The  first,  a  case  of 
acute  meningitis,  is  Quoted  from  N.  A.  y.  H.  by  Amer.  Horn,  of 
January  i,  1898 :  Dr.  H.  von  Musits  treated  J.  N.  R.,  aet.  43  ;  male  ; 
married ;  a  user  of  alcohol  and  tobacco  ;  bookkeeper.    After  the 
intense  summer  heat,  these  symptoms  developed :  Convulsion ;  dis- 
tortion of  limbs ;  head  ttu-ned  backward.     Trismus.    Froth  from 
mouth.     Biting  of  the  tongue.    Oppression  of  breathing.    Entire 
loss  of  consciousness  and  of  power  of  swallowing.     Convulsions, 
followed  by  complete  exhaustion.    Stupor.    Swelling  of  face.     Ina- 
bility to  move  the  tongue.    The  whole  body  seems  to  be  of  enormous 
size.    The  patient  had  three  attacks  of  convulsions  during  twenty- 
four  hours,  followed  by  the    swelling   of    the    tongue  and  body. 
Extreme  trembling  of  the  hands.    Articulation  difficult.    Next  day 
profuse  watery  diarrhoea  stools  <  by  any  noise,  sudden  entrance  of 
any  person  into  the  room  or  loud  talking.     >  By  rest  and  in  a  dark 
room.    Several  times  previously  he  had  had  symptoms  of  nervous 
exhaustion.     His  brother,  a  physician,  died  the  previous  spring  from 
paresis  in  consequence  of  excessive  use  of  alcohol  and  drugging. 
After  two  doses  of  Cicuta  vir.  200  there  were  no  more  convulsions  and 
the  patient  was  perfectiy  cured  in  two  weeks.    There  was  no  relapse. 
The  next  case,  one  of  cholera,  is  quoted  from  the  Indian  Horn.  Rev, 
by  Amer,  Hom.y  December  15,  1890.     Banerjee  records  the  case  :  **  A 
lad,  aged  five  years,  had  an  attack  of  cholera  three  days  before  my 
visit.    Had  been  treated  by  a  homoeopath  from  beginning  of  attack. 
The  patient  was  suffering  from  convulsions,  when  I  first  saw  him  on 
the  fourth  day.    The  convulsive  fits  were  very  severe  since  the  third 
day  of  the  attack  of  cholera.    The  symptoms  were  :  eyes  half  turned, 
head  drawn  toward  the  left  side,  and  the  hands  and  feet  of  the  same 
side  were  contracted.    He  was  given  Bell.y  Hyos.,  Cina,  and  Bryonia 
without  efifect      Cicuta   virosa   was    then    given.    The    first    dose 
VOL.  I.  34 


514  CICUTA   VIROSA 

mitigated  the  severity  of  the  fits,  the  second  dose  put  the  child  to 
sleep,  and  thus  he  was  saved  from  imminent  death."  The  chief 
Conditions  are  :  <  From  concussions,  especially  of  brain  and  spine ; 
from  turning  the  head ;  from  slightest  touch  (renews  the  spasms) ; 
from  cold.  >  From  warmth.  Immediately  after  eating  :  iiXLy^^e 
and  sleepiness.  Immediately  after  commencing  to  eat :  feels  satisfied. 
Soon  after  a  meal :  great  himger. 

Relatioiis. — Antidoted  by :  Arn.,  Op. ;  for  massive  doses,  Tobacco. 
Antidote  to  :  Opium.  Compatible  after  :  Lach  ;  after  Ars.  and  Con. 
(cancer  of  lip) ;  Cupr.  (aphasia  in  chorea).  Compare  :  Con.,  CEthuSi 
OEnanth.  croc. ;  Hyperic.  (spinal  concussion) ;  Hyo.  (twitchings)  ; 
Helleb  ;  Hydrocy.  ac.  (body  thrown  back,  cramps  in  neck) ;  Nux  and 
Strvchnia  (tetanus ;  but  with  Nux  there  is  not  the  utter  prostration 
and  great  oppression  of  breathing  of  Ct'c,  nor  the  loss  of  conscious- 
ness ;  Nux  is  less  epileptiform  and  has  more  excitability). 

STHPTOHS. 

X.  Mind. — Strange  desires,  as  desire  to  eat  coal,  &c. — ^Anxiety,  and 
great  tendency  to  be  deeply  affected  by  mournful  stories. — Groans,  com- 
plaints, and  howling. — Discontent  and  ill-humour. — Suspicion  and  mistrust, 
with  misanthropy. — Disposition  to  be  frightened. — Mania,  with  dancing, 
laughing,  and  ridiculous  gestures ;  with  heat  of  the  body  and  longing  for 
wine. — Forgets  his  own  name. — Dementia. — Giddiness  and  absence  of  mind. 
— He  confounds  the  present  with  the  past. — He  thinks  himself  a  young  child. 
— Want  of  confidence  in  and  dread  of  man,  retires  into  solitude. 

2.  Head.— Vertigo,  and  staggering,  to  the  extent  of  falling. — Giddiness, 
with  falling  forward. — Whirling  vertigo  on  rising  in  the  bed,  with  obscuration 
of  sight. — Feeling  as  of  intoxication. — Headache  above  the  orbits. — Conges- 
tion of  the  brain  with  vomiting  and  purging. — ^Attacks  of  semi-lateral 
cephalalgia,  with  nausea. — ^Semi-lateral  headache,  as  from  congestion  to  the 
head  ;  relieved  when  sitting  erect — Heaviness  of  the  head  with  dizziness. — 
Compression  from  both  sides  of  the  head. — Stupefying  pressure  on  the 
forehead. — Diminution  of  pain  in  the  head  on  rising,  and  on  passing  flatus. — 
Affections  of  the  brain,  from  concussion  of  the  brain. — Headache,  as  from 
commotion  of  the  brain. — Feeling  of  looseness  of  the  brain,  as  if  it  were 
shaken  in  walking ;  early  in  the  morning ;  disappearing  when  thinking  of  the 
pain  intensely. — Severe  headache  in  occiput, like  a  dull  pressure;  as  with 
coryza. — Suppurating  eruptions  on  the  scalp,  with  burning  pain. — Startings 
and  spasmodic  shocks  in  the  head,  with  drawing  backward  of  the  head. — 
Staring  at  an  object,  the  head  inclines  forward ;  is  frequently  bent  back 
again,  with  twitching,  trembling,  and  tension  in  the  neck  while  moving  it — 
Jerking  and  twitching  of  head. 

3.  Eyes. — Burning  pain  in  the  eyes. — Pupils  either  much  contracted  or 
dilated. — Suspension  of  the  sight,  with  vertigo,  on  walking. — Look  fixed, 
sometimes  from  a  sort  of  absence  of  mind. — ^Wavering  of  all  objects  before 
the  sight. — Iris-like  circles  round  candle.  —  Mobility  of  the  characters  on 
reading ;  the  letters  turn,  and  are  surrounded  with  a  coloured  areola,  the 
same  as  round  the  light. — Diplopia,  or  obscuration  of  the  eyes»  sometimes 


CICUTA   VI ROSA  515 

alternately  with  hardness  of  hearing. — The  objects  appear  double  and 
bladL^Luminous  and  coloured  circle  around  all  objects. — Photophobia. — 
Nocturnal  agglutination  of  the  eyelids. — Twitching  of  the  orbicularis  muscle. 

4.  Ears.^ — Sensation  of  excoriation,  and  pain,  as  of  contusion,  behind 
the  ears. — Purulent  eruption  before,  behind,  and  on  the  ears. — Discharge  of 
blood  from  the  ears. — Hearing  indistinct,  sometimes  alternating  with  .obscura- 
tion of  the  eyes. — Detonation  in  r.  ear  when  swallowing. 

5.  Nose. — Pains  as  of  excoriation  and  of  a  bruise,  in  the  (r.)  ala  nasi. — 
Scabs  in  the  nostrils. — Yellowish  discharge  from  the  nose. — Obstruction  of 
the  nose,  with  abundant  secretion  of  mucus. — Frequent  sneezing,  without 
oofyza. 

6.  Face. — Pallor  and  coldness  of  the  face,  with  coldness  of  the  hands. — 
Cheeks  pale,  with  eyes  sunk,  and  surrounded  by  a  livid  circle. — Redness  and 
swelling  of  the  face  and  of  the  neck. — Eruption  on  the  face,  confluent, 
purulent,  and  of  a  deep  red  colour,  with  lenticular  pimples  on  the  forehead. — 
Burning  scabs,  with  yellowish  serum,  on  the  upper  lip,  cheeks,  and  chin. — 
Thick,  honey-coloured  scurf  on  the  chin,  upper  lip,  and  lower  portion  of  the 
cheeks  (milk  crust),  burning  soreness  and  oozing,  accompanied  with  swelling 
of  the  sul>-maxillary  glands,  and  insatiable  appetite. — Painful  ulcer  on  the 
lips.— Painful  swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands. — ^Trismus.— Disposition  to 
grind  the  teeth. 

S.  Mouth. — Foam  before  and  in  the  mouth. — ^Whitish  pustules,  painful 
on  being  touched,  and  ulcers  on  the  edge  of  the  tongue. — Swelling  of  the 
tongue ;  white,  painful,  burning  ulcers  on  the  edges  of  the  tongue. — Speech 
embarrassed,  with  convulsive  movements  of  the  head  (from  before  t)ack- 
wards)  and  of  the  arms  at  every  word  that  is  uttered. 

g.  Throat.— Throat  dry. — Inability  to  swallow ;  the  throat  is,  as  it 
were,  dosed,  and  feels  bruised  when  touched  externally  (with  eructations). — 
Stricture  of  cesophagus. — Strangling  on  attempting  to  swallow. — Constriction 
after  being  hurt  by  swallowing  a  splinter  of  bone. 

10.  Appetite. — ^Want  of  appetite,  caused  by  a  sensation  of  dryness  in 
the  mouth. — Satiety,  and  aching  in  the  stomach,  after  the  first  mouthful. — 
Great  inclination  to  eat  coal. — Continual  hunger  and  appetite,  even  shortly 
after  a  meal. — Burning  thirst,  esp.  during  the  cramps. — ^After  a  meal,  colic, 
cuttings,  pressure  on  the  epigastrium,  and  drowsiness. 

u.  Stomach. — ^Violent  and  noisy  hiccough ;  with  crying. — Bitter  and 
yellowish  regurgitation  on  stooping,  and  followed  by  a  burning  sensation  in 
the  throat — ^Nausea  in  the  morning  and  during  a  meal,  sometimes  with  head- 
ache.— ^Vomiting  of  blood. — Vomiting,  alternately  with  tonic  spasms  in  the 
muscles  of  the  chest,  and  convulsive  movements  of  the  eyes ;  (the  vomiting 
does  not  relieve  the  lock-jaw). — Burning  pressure  on  the  stomach  and 
abdomen.— Pulsative  pains  in  the  epigastrium,  which  is  much  inflated. — 
Oppression  and  anxiety  in  the  epigastric  region. — Swelling  and  throbbing  in 
the  pit  of  the  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen.-— Colic,  with  convulsions  (in  children  from  worms). — 
Cuttings,  immediately  after  a  meal,  with  drowsiness. — Pinchings  and  bor- 
borygmi  in  the  abdomen. — ^Accumulation  of  flatus,  with  anguish  and  Hi- 
humour. — ^Distension  and  painfulness  of  the  abdomen.~Pain,  as  from 
ulceration  in  the  groins. 


5i6  CICUTA  VIROSA 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation. — Liquid  and  too  frequent  evacua- 
tions.— Itching  in  the  rectum,  with  burning  pain  after  friction. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Retention  of  urine. — Frequent  micturition  ; 
the  urine  is  propelled  with  great  force.  —  Involuntary  urination  as  from 
paralysis  of  the  bladder. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Testes  drawn  up.— Sore  drawing  pain  in 
urethra  as  far  as  glans^  obliging  one  to  urinate. — Stitches  in  fossa  navicularis 
with  nightly  emissions.— Pollutions  without  lascivious  dreams. — Strictures 
(spasmodic)  sometimes  after  gonorrhoea. 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  delayed ;  spasmodic  S3nnptoms. 
— Tearing  and  drawing  in  coccyx  during  menses.  —  (Painful  tumours  of 
mammae.) 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness. — Difficult  respiration,  and 
want  of  breath. — Cough  with  copious  expectoration. 

i8.  Chest. — ^Tightness  in  the  chest ;  she  is  scarcely  able  to  breathe  all 
day. — Pressure  on  the  chest,  as  from  a  weight,  with  difficulty  of  respiration* 
— Sensation  in  chest  and  throat  as  though  something  the  size  of  a  fist  were 
lodged  there. — ^Tonic  spasms  in  the  muscles  of  the  chest,  alternately  with 
vomiting. — Heat  in  the  chest. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  and  from  excoriation, 
in  the  lower  extremity  of  the  sternum. — Burning  pain  in  the  nipples. — Burning 
in  the  chest. 

ig.  Heart. — ^Trembling  palpitation  of  heart. — Feels  as  if  heart  stopped 
beating ;  and  sometimes  faint  feeling  therewith. 

80.  Neck  and  Back. — Tension,  as  from  a  wound,  in  the  muscles  of 
the  neck,  on  bending  the  head  back. — Swelling  of  the  neck. — Tonic  spasms 
of  the  cervical  muscles. — Neuralgia  of  neck  with  tendency  to  draw  head 
backwards  and  dull  occipital  headache. — ^Tearing  jerking  in  coccyx. — 
Coccygodynia  coming  on  for  first  time  during  catamenia,  after  parturition. — 
Spasmodic  bending  backwards  of  the  back,  like  an  arch — ^Tension  above  the 
shoulder-blades. — Pain  of  ulceration  in  the  shoulder-blades. 

81.  Limbs. — Great  weakness  in  arms  and  legs  after  slight  exertion. — 
Trembling  in  limbs. — Spasmodic  contortions  and  fearful  jerking  of  limbs. 

98.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  or  of  excoriation,  in  the 
joints  of  the  shoulder,  and  in  the  forearms. — Sensation  of  heaviness  and  want 
of  strength  in  the  arms. — ^Jerking  in  the  1.  arm  all  day. — Startings  and 
convulsive  movements  (involuntary)  in  the  arms  and  in  the  fingers. — Deadness 
of  the  fingers. — ^The  veins  on  the  hands  are  enlarged. 

33.  Lovrer  Limbs. — Involuntary  starting  of  the  lower  limbs,  jerks  and 
twitches.— Painful  stiffness  of  the  legs.— Trembling  of  the  legs.— Yielding  ol 
the  feet,  when  walking ;  they  turn  inwards. 

84.  Generalities. — Pains,  as  from  excoriation,  or  from  a  bruise,  on 
various  parts. — ^Trembling  of  the  limbs.— Shocks,  as  from  electric  sparks, 
in  the  head,  the  arms,  and  the  legs. — General  convulsions,  and  fits  of  epilepsy, 
sometimes  with  cries,  paleness  or  yellow  colour  of  the  face,  pressing  together 
of  the  jaws,  numbness  and  distortion  of  the  limbs,  suspension  of  respiration, 
and  foam  at  the  mouth. — After  the  fit,  the  body  remains  insensible,  and,  as  it 
were,  dead. — State  of  insensibility  and  immobility,  with  loss  of  consciousness 
and  of  strength. — ^Attacks  of  catalepsy,  with  relaxation  of  all  the  muscles,  and 
absence  of  respiration. — Tetanus. — Drawing  pains  in  the  limbs. — Affections  of 


CIMEX  517 

the  r.  side  of  the  back. — Spasms  during  parturition ;  children  have  convulsions 
from  worms. — Strictures  after  inflammation,  sometimes  after  gonorrhoea. 

25.  Skin.— Burning  itching  over  the  whole  body. — Purulent  eruptions, 
with  yellowish  and  burning  scabs. — Lenticular  pimples,  of  a  deep  red  colour. 
—Long-lasting  purulent  eruptions,  confluent,  forming  thick  yellow  crusts, 
with  burning  pain. 

iA.  Sleep. — Sleeplessness  and  nocturnal  sweat.-— Half-sleep,  with  restless 
movements  and  confused  dreams. — Frequent  waking,  with  profuse  sweat, 
which,  however,  alleviates. — ^Vivid  dreams  of  the  events  of  the  day. — Vivid 
dreams  which  cannot  be  recollected. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse  weak,  slow,  trembling. — Shivering,  and  perpetual 
desire  to  be  near  the  fire. — ^The  chilliness  begins  in  the  chest  and  extends 
down  the  legs  and  into  the  arms. — Coldness  in  the  thighs,  and  in  the  arms, 
with  fixedness  of  look. — Heat  only  internally. — Perspiration  at  night  (in  the 
morning  hours),  principally  on  the  abdomen. — ^Worm  fever  with  colic  and 
convulsions. 


Gimex. 


Acanthia  lectularia.    Cimex  lectularius.    Bedbug.    N.  0.  Hemiptera. 
Tincture  or  trituration. 

CUaioaL — Constipation.  Cough.  Haemorrhoids.  Intermittent  fever.  Liver, 
complaints  of.  Muscles,  contraction  of.  Seminal  emissions.  Skin,  affections  of 
Yawning. 

CharaoteristiOB.— C/m^  is  an  ancient  remedy  for  intermittent 
fever.  A  characteristic  symptom  is  ;  "  Weariness  and  inclination  to 
stretch."  The  flexors  are  most  aflfected  ;  pains  in  all  joints  as  if 
tendons  were  contracted  and  too  short ;  every  motion  or  stretching 
of  arms  or  legs  causes  tightening  pain  in  them.  (Nash  records 
the  following  cure  by  Dr.  Brewster,  of  Syracuse.  After  driving 
a  fractious  horse  that  tried  to  run  away  over  a  very  rough  road 
a  man  was  so  bruised  and  sprained  about  the  buttocks  and  legs  that 
he  was  confined  to  the  house  for  a  long  time  in  consequence.  It 
settled  finally  into  what  appeared  Ukely  to  be  permanent  contraction 
of  the  lower  limbs.  No  remedy  relieved  till  Dr.  Brewster  remem- 
bered a  case  of  intermittent  fever  that  he  had  cured  twenty  years 
before,  being  guided  by  this  symptom.  Cimex  600  (Jenichen) 
promptly  cured.)  Irresistible  sleepiness.  Frequent  yawning ;  sensa- 
tion as  of  a  cold  wind  blowing  on  knees.  Pains  in  all  joints  as  if 
tendons  contracted  during  chill.  Chill  commences  with  clenching  of 
hands  and  violent  raging.  Before  chill,  thirst  and  heaviness  in  legs  ; 
less  thirst  with  chill,  still  less  with  dry  heat ;  none  with  sweat.  After 
the  chill,  thirst,  but  drinking  causes  violent  headache  ;  tickling  in 
lamyz  causing  dry,  continuous  cough.    Gagging  and  belching  at  end 


Si8  CIMEX 

of  cough.  Heat  with  gagging ;  oesophagus  feels  constricted.  Musty- 
smelling  sweats.  Night-sweats.  Tertian  and  quartan  intermittent. 
A.  W.  K.  Choudhury  relates  a  case  of  intermittent  (quotidian)  cured 
with  Cimex  30,  the  chief  indications  being:  " Chill  slight ;  thirst  some 
days,  none  other  days ;  shiverings  ;  passed  water  twice  during  chill ; 
chill  <  by  lying  down;  increase  of  cough  if  he  drinks  water  during  chill" 
Stools  with  hemorrhoidal  su£Ferings.  Stools  hard  in  small  balls ; 
urging  to  stool ;  after  the  discharge  of  a  small  piece  of  white  stool, 
rectum  closes  firmly.  Incontinence  of  urine.  Urine  hot ;  brown  or 
red  sediment.  Frequent  erections  in  morning;  seminal  emissions. 
Urticarious  eruption.  Motion  <.  Stretching  or  extending  the 
part  <•  Weariness  compels  to  lie  down.  Sitting  <  pain  in  small 
of  back.  During  rest :  in  morning,  sweat  on  nose.  Symptoms  <  in 
morning.  <  By  drinking.  The  whole  right  side  is  especially 
affected. 

Relations. — Compare :  Nat  m.  (headache  lessens  in  the  sweating 
stage) ;  Ars.  (headache  remains  or  increases  in  the  sweating  stage) ; 
BeU.  (throbbing  of  the  head  in  intermittents).  Ars.  and  Bry.  (gagging 
at  end  of  cough). 

STHPTOHS. 

1,  Mind. — ^Anxiousness. — Sensation  as  if  he  could  creep  into  himself 
and  on  that  account  could  not  sufficiently  crouch  together. — His  own  sweat 
is  disgusting  to  him. — Clenching  of  hands  with  violent  rage  at  beginning  of 
chill.— Anxiety  after  chill. 

2.  Head. — Confusion  of  head  as  if  headache  would  ensue. — Pain  like 
needle  stitches  in  vertex  with  cough. — Headache,  almost  depriving  him  of 
the  power  of  thinking ;  most  violent  during  the  chill ;  caused  by  drinking.— 
Sweating  on  head,  nose  and  chest. 

5,  Nose. — Annoying  dryness  of  nostrils. — Fluent  coryza  with  pressure 
in  frontal  sinuses. — Constant  sneezing  in  forenoon. — Sweat  on  nose,  morning, 
during  rest. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  coated  v/hite. — Swollen  feeling  of  the  tongue.— 
Feeling  as  if  burnt  on  the  tongue,  in  the  region  of  the  palate  and  the  upper 
anterior  gums. 

9.  Throat. — Dryness  of  the  throat,  causing  him  to  drink  all  day.— 
CEsophagus  constricted ;  during  the  hot  stage. 

iz.    Stomach. — Sour  eructations. 

la.  AtKiomen. — Pain  in  the  liver,  as  if  it  had  been  strained  by  bending 
the  r.  side  inward ;  the  spot  is  painful  when  touching  it  and  when  coughing. 
— Colic,  followed  by  emissions  of  flatulence  or  liquid  stools. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Stools  hard,  in  small  balls.  —After  the  discharge 
of  a  small  piece  of  white  stool  the  rectum  closes  firmly. — Stools  with 
haemorrhoidal  sufferings. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Urine  brown,  with  a  deposit  of  sediment 
(during  the  fever,  when  he  drinks). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Dry  cough,  with  gagging,  as  if  he  would 
vomit,  with  perspiration. — Breathing  oppressed  after  chill. 


CIMEX  519 

18.  Chest. — Chest  feels  oppressed  during  chill,-— After  chUl,  heaviness  in 
middle  of  chest ;  anxiety. 

ao.  Back. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  esctending  over  the  abdomen, 
with  distension  of  the  abdomen. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  ;  worse  when 
sitting. — ^Weariness  in  loins,  must  sit  down. 

91.  Limbs. — Painfulness  in  all  joints  ;  sensation  as  if  the  tendons  were 
too  short  (during  the  chill). 

82.  Upper  Lrimbs. — Pain  in  r.  shoulder  and  the  anterior  muscles  of 
the  chest,  extending  through  the  whole  arm  down  to  the  nails ;  the  fingers 
fed  as  if  they  had  gone  to  sleep. — ^At  beginning  of  chill,  dravTs  fingers 
together  making  a  fist. 

93.  L^v^er  Limbs. — During  chill  knee-joints  most  contracted ;  the  legs 
cannot  be  extended. — At  the  end  of  chill,  the  legs  feel  tired  ;  the  position  of 
legs  must  be  changed  constantly ;  this  ceases  during  the  hot  stage. — Ham- 
strings feel  too  short,  knees  flexed;  attempting  to  stretch  them  =  pain  in 
thighs. — Knees  feel  cold  as  from  a  cold  wind. 

S4.  Generalities. — Pain  in  recti  muscles  of  thighs,  with  oppression  of 
the  chest,  shortness  of  breath,  and  frequent,  deep  inspiration,  with  a  sensa- 
tion as  if  he  would  creep  into  himself,  and  on  that  account  could  not 
sufficiently  crouch  together;  every  attempt  to  stretch  out  arms  or  legs 
causes  tensive  pain  in  these  parts,  and  he  suffers  thirst  rather  than  move. 

s6.  Sleep. — Great  drowsiness ;  falls  asleep  when  sitting  in  the  morning. 
^Irreastible  sleepiness  during  chill. — Frequent  yawning ;  with  cold  feeling 
on  skin. 

87.  Fever. — Pulse  feeble  ;  intermitting.— Before  the  cold  stage,  thirst ; 
heaviness  in  the  lower  extremities. — ^At  the  beginning  of  the  chill,  clenching 
of  the  hands  and  violent  rage. — Chilliness  over  the  whole  t>ody,  followed  by 
dry  heat,  which  is  succeeded  by  some  moisture  over  the  skin. — During  the 
chill  painfulness  in  all  the  joints ;  sensation  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short ; 
the  knee-joints  are  most  contracted  ;  the  legs  cannot  be  extended ;  the  chest 
feels  oppressed,  obliging  one  to  take  a  long  breath  frequently ;  irresistible 
sleepiness. — ^At  the  end  of  the  chill  the  legs  feel  tired  ;  the  position  of  the  legs 
has  to  be  changed  constantly ;  this  ceases  during  the  hot  stage. — ^After  the 
chill  thirst,  and  when  he  drinks  he  is  attacked  with  violent  headache,  which 
ahnost  deprives  him  of  the  power  of  thinking ;  tickling  in  the  lamyx,  causing 
a  continuous  dry  cough ;  oppression  of  breathing ;  heaviness  in  the  middle  of 
the  chest ;  anxiety. — ^Amelioration  if  he  does  not  drink. — During  the  hot  stage 
gagging  in  the  oesophagus,  which  impedes  inspiration;  thirstlessness ;  the 
water  drunk  to  allay  the  gating  goes  down  at  intervals  only  ;  the  oesophagus 
feels  constricted. — If  he  drinks  during  the  fever  he  passes  soon  after  very  hot 
brown  mine,  depositing  a  good  deal  of  sediment. — ^The  perspiration,  after  the 
hot  stage,  is  accompanied  by  hunger. — Perspiration  mostly  on  the  head  and 
chest — During  the  intermittent  fever,  constipation  ;  stools  dry. 


BOSTON  UNiVi, 


i  1  1 


■  i^  U    mm>    ■  JBH   I 


%,yi 


520  CINA 


Gina. 

The  unexpanded  flower-heads  (commonly  called  "  seeds  ")  of  several 
varieties  of  Artemisia  maritima.  Semen  dnae.  Flores  ciiue. 
Artemisia  contra.    Wormseed.     N.  O.  Composite.    Tincture. 

C)hd09d^-~Abdomen.  distended.  Anaemia.  Anus,  irritaUon  of.  Asthenopia. 
Asthma.  Bronchitis.  Barbarygmi.  Chorea.  Colic.  Convulsions.  Cough.  Denti- 
tion. Diarrhoea.  Enuresis.  Eyes,  affections  of.  Hydrocephaloid.  intermittent 
fever.  Leucorrhoea,  Neuralgia.  Remittent  fever.  Scarlatina.  Sight,  affections 
of.    Spasms.    Strabismus.   Twitchings.    Urine,  milky.   Whooping-cough.    Worms. 

CharaoteristioB. — Cina  is  the  source  of  the  alkaloid  Sanioninum. 
It  is  pre-eminently  a  worm  medicine,  as  it  causes  all  the  symptoms 
which  characterise  helminthiasis  both  mental,  nervous,  and  bodily. 
It  corresponds  more  to  the  effects  of  lumbrici  than  to  those 
of  other  worms.  There  is  irritation  of  the  nose,  causing  constant 
desire  to  rub,  prick,  or  press  into  it.  In  children  there  is  extreme 
ill-humour  and  naughtiness.  Nothing  pleases  them  for  any  length  of 
time  ;  gritting  teeth  during  sleep ;  wetting  the  bed  (when  accom- 
panied by  picking  nose,  great  hunger,  restless  sleep) ;  tossing  all 
about  the  bed  in  sleep  ;  crying  out  as  if  in  delirium.  Sherbino  has 
found  ''getting  on  hands  and  knees  in  sleep"  a  strong  indication  for 
it  But  Cina  is  much  more  than  a  mere  worm-medicine.  Many  S3rmp- 
toms  appear  to  be  reflex  from  abdominal  irritation.  A  characteristic 
feature  is :  Extreme  sensitiveness  of  mind  and  body :  offended  bv 
the  slightest  thing  ;  peevish  and  obstinate  ;  aversion  to  be  caressed. 
Over-sensitiveness  of  surface :  cannot  endure  to  be  approached, 
touched,  or  pressed  upon  ;  touch  induces  or  aggravates  spasms. 
Child  cannot  bear  to  have  head  combed  or  brushed.  Aversion  to 
hght.  Strabismus  ;  with  sickly  look  and  dark  circles  round  eyes  ; 
yellow  vision.  Asthenopia,  defective  accommodation  ;  yellow  vision. 
Kavenous  hunger;  sinking  immediately  after  a  m^.  Difficult 
swallowing  of  liquids ;  clucking  noise  from  throat  to  stomach. 
Nocturnal  eneuresis;  urine  white,  turbid,  at  times  fetid.  Larynx 
extremely  sensitive,  touching  it  causes  suffocative  spasm.  Cough 
excited  by  sensation  of  feather  down  in  throat  Reflex  cough  ; 
caused  by  writing  or  reading  (to  oneself).  In  fever  there  is  thirst 
with  chill ;  face  pale  and  cold  ;  hands  warm  ;  nausea  or  vomiting 
of  bile  or  ingesta.  Charles  Mohr  (H.Af.,  January,  1898)  commends  it 
for  :  anaemic  persons  suffering  from  indigestion  and  non-assimilation 
of  food  ;  or  after  acute  illness  when  they  have  headache,  vertigo,  and 
neuralgia.  In  the  cachectic  who  have  pains  in  the  belly  and  deranged 
abdominal  functions,  and  suffer  nervously.  For  asthenopia  from 
onanism,  when  reading  by  artificial  light  is  next  to  impossible  ;  eyes 
feel  veiled,  need  constant  wiping.  Spasmodic  strabismus  from  ab- 
dominal irritation.  Spasmodic  asthma  after  food  that  disagrees, 
''  sensation  as  if  sternum  lies  too  close  to  back,  embarrasses  breathing 
and  causes  anxiety  and  sweat."    Prosopal^a  of  supra-  and  infra- 


CINA  521 

orbital  region  and  zygoma  chiefly,  pains  pressing,  screwing,  with 
hyperaesthesia.  Gastralgia,  enteralgia,  and  fevers  when  the  leading 
symptoms  are  present.  Nash  (Leaders  in  Typhoid  Fever)  mentions 
two  cases  of  t;^hoid  in  which  Cina  proved  curative,  the  indications 
being  ''  Intense  circumscribed  redness  of  the  cheeks^  and  frequent  and 
violent  rubbing  of  the  noseJ*  S.  C.  Ghose  has  recorded  {H.  W., 
September,  1099)  a  striking  cure  by  Cina  6  and  200  of  a  case  of 
in&mtile  remittent  fever,  in  which  the  classical  symptoms  of  the  drug 
were  present ;  the  fever  came  on  very  irregularly.  The  symptoms 
of  Cina  are  <  night ;  before  midnight  child  waies  up  frightened. 
<  From  open  air  ;  cold  air  ;  cold  water.  <  Yawning.  Child  lies 
on  belly,  or  on  hands  and  knees,  during  sleep.  Guernsey  says  Cina 
is  suited  to  complaints  which  are  concomitant  to  yawning,  which 
come  on  whenever  one  yawns. 

BfilationB. — Antidoted  by :  Camph.,  Caps.,  Chi.,  Pip.  nig.  Antidote 
to :  Caps.,  Chi.,  Merc.  Follows  well :  Dros.  and  Ant.  t.  Compare  : 
In  aversion  to  be  touched,  Ant.  c.  Ant.  t..  Hep.  Sil.,  Thu. ;  gurgling 
along  oesophagus  when  swallowing  fluids,  Helleb.,  Cupr.  ;  difficult 
swallowing  liquids.  Bell.,  Caust.,  Hyo.,  Ign.,  Lach.,  Lye,  Pho.  ;  in 
cough  <  by  reading  or  writing,  Mang.,  Meph.,  Nux,  Plat. ;  in  white 
stools,  Dig,  ;  in  ravenous  hunger,  Ars.,  Calc,  lod.,  Sil.  Staph. ; 
aversion  to  be  caressed,  Ars.,  Lach. ;  in  squint,  Aim. ;  in  asthenopia 
and  defective  accommodation,  Artem.  v.  (but  Art.  v.  has  dizziness 
from  coloured  light ;  and  Cina  has  >  from  rubbing).  Teste  places 
Cina  in  the  Arsen.  group  from  its  analogy  in  the  digestive  sphere. 
Cham,  has  many  points  of  contact  with  Cina  and  some  opposite 
conditions. 

CaoBatioii.— Worms.    Yawning. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Lachrymose  and  plaintive  humour. — ^A  child  cries  when  it  is 
touched ;  is  averse  to  being  caressed. — Continual  inquietude,  with  desire  for 
things  oi  all  kinds,  which  are  rejected  some  moments  after. — Disposition  to 
be  o£Fended  by  trifling  jests. — Great  anguish  and  anxiety  on  walking  in  the 
open  air. — Delirium. 

3.  Head. — Headache,  alternately  with  pressure  on  the  abdomen. — 
Numbing  pressure,  as  from  a  load,  which  weighs  upon  the  head,  esp.  when 
walking  in  the  open  air. — ^The  head  falls  to  the  side  and  is  jerked  backwards, 
with  twitches  in  the  limbs  and  cold  perspiration  of  the  face. — ^Tearing,  drawing 
cephalalgia,  aggravated  by  reading  or  meditation. — Headache  before  and  after 
the  epileptic  attacks;  after  attack  of  intermittent  fever.-^Dull  pains  in  the 
head,  with  eyes  fatigued,  chiefly  on  waking  in  the  morning. — Cold  perspira- 
tion on  the  head  (forehead)  and  on  the  pale,  cold,  bloated  face,  with  blueness 
around  the  mouth;  twitching  of  the  limbs  and  sleepiness,  worse  at  night 
(after  attacks  of  whooping-cough  and  epilepsy). 

3.  Eyes. — ^Aching  in  the  eyes,  when  fatiguing  them  by  reading ;  when 
using  them  at  night  by  the  candle-light.^Convulsive  movements  of  the 
muscles  of  the  eyebrows. — Confusion  of  sight,  on  reading,  which  disappears 
on  rubbing  the  eyes.— Pupils  dilated. — ^Weakness  of  sight  (from  onanism). — 


522  CINA 

Weak  sight,  with  photophobia  and  pressure  on  the  eyes,  as  if  sand  had  been 
introduced  into  them.— When  looking  at  a  thing  steadily  (reading)  he  sees  it 
as  through  a  gauze,  which  is  relieved  by  wiping  the  eyes. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis ;  also  bleeding  from  the  mouth. — Inclination  to  put 
the  fingers  into  the  nose. — ^The  child  rubs  the  nose  constantly,  and  bores  with 
the  fingers  in  the  nose  until  blood  comes  out. — Flow  of  pus  from  the  nose. — 
Violent  sneezing,  which  provokes  a  sensation  of  pressure  on  the  temples,  and 
seems  as  though  it  would  burst  the  chest. — Fluent  coryza,  with  sensation  of 
burning  in  the  nostrils. — Stoppage  of  the  nose,  in  the  evening. — Fluent  coryza 
at  noon. — ^The  nose  burns. 

6.  Face.— Paleness  of  face,  with  livid  circle  under  the  eyes. — Earth- 
coloured  complexion. — Face,  puffed  and  bluish,  esp.  round  the  mouth. — Face 
alternately  pale  and  cold,  or  red  and  hot. — Pale,  cold  face,  with  cold  perspira- 
tion.— Cramp-like  pains  and  successive  puUings  in  the  cheek-bones,  aggravated 
or  renewed  by  contact  and  pressure. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Toothache,  provoked  by  the  air  and  cold  drinks. — Pains,  as 
from  excoriation,  in  the  teeth. — Grinding  of  the  teeth. 

8.  Mouth. — Sensation  of  dryness  and  roughness  of  the  month,  esp. 
of  the  palate. 

Q.    Throat.— Inability  to  swallow,  esp.  liquids. 

ID.  Appetite. — Increase  of  thirst. — Hunger  shortly  after  a  meal. — 
Voracity. — Bulimy. — ^Aversion  of  the  sucking  child  to  the  milk  of  its 
mother. — Hunger  may  come  on  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  as  in  children, 
or  one  may  feel  hungry  a  few  minutes  after  a  hearty  meal. — Bitter  taste  of 
bread. — ^Vomiting,  or  diarrhoea  immediately  after  eating  or  drinking,  esp. 
drinking. — Vomiting  of  mucus  and  of  ascarides. — ^Vomiting  during  the  fever, 
with  tongue  clean. — Bilious  vomiting. — Disagreeable  risings. 

II.  Stomach. — ^Audible  gurgling  from  the  throat  into  the  stomach  when 
drinking. — Frequent  hiccough. — Pain  in  the  precordial  region  oppressing  the 
breathing. 

18.  Abdomen. — Obstinate  pinchings  in  the  abdomen. — ^Pinching  or 
cramp-like  pressure  transversely  across  upper  abdomen,  after  a  meaL— 
Painful  twisting  about  navel. — Cutting  and  pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen 
from  worms. — Painful  rolling  in  the  region  of  the  navel,  which  is  very  sensi- 
tive to  the  touch. — Cramp-like,  frequently  recurring  pains  in  the  abdomen, 
as  when  the  catamenia  are  about  to  appear. — Unpleasant  sensation  of  warmth 
in  the  abdomen. — Bloated  abdomen,  esp,  in  children. — Feeling  of  emptiness 
in  the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Stool  with  maw-worms  (short,  thick  worms).— 
Loose  evacuations  of  the  consistence  of  pap. — Discharge  of  ascarides,  and  of 
other  worms  by  the  anus. — Itching  of  the  anus. — Diarrhoea  of  bile,  and  of 
stercoraceous  matter. — Loose,  involuntary,  whitish  evacuations. 

14.  Urinary  Organa.—Frequent  want  to  make  water,  with  profuse 
discharge.— Wetting  the  bed.— Urine  soon  becomes  turbid.— Involuntary 
emission  of  urine  (at  night). — Urine  milky. 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Catamenia  premature,  and  too  abundant. 
— ^Metrorrhagia.— Womb-troubles  in  general 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Short,  interrupted  breathing,— Respiration 
wheeling  and  panting.— Abundance  of  mncus  in  the  larynx,  which  is  constant, 


CINA  523 

and  compels  continual  hawking. — Gagging  cough  in  morning  after  rising ; 
irritation  thereto  (as  from  dust) ;  is  renewed  by  inspiration  after  a  long 
interval — Cough,  excited  by  taking  a  deep  inspiration. — Dry,  tickling  cough 
induced  by  reading  (to  oneself). — Hoarse,  transient  cough  in  the  evening. — 
Dry  cough,  with  cramp,  want  of  breath,  anxiety,  paleness  of  face,  and  groans 
after  the  paroxysm ;  or  with  stiffness  of  the  body,  and  bleeding  from  the  nose 
and  mouth. — Cough,  with  sudden  starts,  and  loss  of  consciousness. — Before 
coughing,  child  raises  herself  suddenly,  tosses  wildly  about,  the  whole  body 
becomes  stiff,  she  loses  consciousness,  just  as  if  she  would  have  an  epileptic 
fit,  then  follows  the  cough. — ^Whooping-cough  in  violent,  periodically  returning 
attacks,  from  a  titillating  sensation  in  the  throat,  as  of  a  feather,  and  much 
tough  mucus : — in  the  morning  without  expectoration,  in  the  evening  with 
di£Bcult  expectoration  of  white,  occasionally  blood-streaked  mucus,  which 
is  tasteless;  worse  in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening;  better  during  the 
night,  aggravated  by  drinking,  walking  in  the  open  air,  pressing  on  the 
larynx,  when  lying  on  the  right  side,  in  the  cold  air,  and  when  awaking  from 
sleep. 

18.  Chest. — Difficulty  of  respiration,  and  anxious  oppression  of  the  chest, 
as  if  the  sternum  were  compressing  the  lungs. — Respiration  short,  often  inter- 
rupted, or  rattling. — Spasmodic  digging  in  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  going  to 
burst—Jerking  and  digging  shootings  in  the  chest. — Burning,  stitches,  and 
soreness  in  the  chest. 

90.  Back. — Pains,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  loins,  <  by  motion. — 
Drawing-tearing  pain  along  whole  spine. — Drawing  or  jerking  pains  in 
middle  of  spine. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Tearing  and  paralytic  pullings  in  the  arms. — Cramp- 
like tearings  in  the  arms  and  in  the  hands. — Contraction  and  starting  of  the 
hand  and  of  the  fingers. — Sprained  feeling  in  the  wrist- joint — Weakness  of 
the  handy  which  suffers  everything  to  escape  from  it. 

93.  LiOvrer  Ldmbs. — Paralytic  or  cramp-like  pains,  and  pullings  in  the 
legs. — Spasmodic  stretching  and  twitching  of  the  feet. — Cramp-like  extension 
of  the  legs. 

84*  Generalities. — Paralytic,  tractive  pains  in  the  limbs. — Pressure  and 
squeezing,  with  dull  shootings,  or  cramp-like  tearings,  pullings  and  jerkings, 
or  burning  shootings  in  different  parts. — ^Twitching  of  limbs. — Convulsions, 
and  distortion  of  the  limbs. — Nocturnal  epileptic  convulsions,  followed  by 
headache. — Epileptic  convulsions  (esp.  at  night,  with  or  without  conscious- 
ness) with  cries,  bending  backwards  of  the  back,  and  violent  movements 
of  the  hands  and  feet. — ^Tetanic  stiffness  of  the  whole  body. — External 
pressure  <,  or  renews  the  sufferings. — Painful  sensibility  of  all  the  limbs, 
on  movement,  and  on  being  touched. — ^Affections  of  the  1.  side;  1.  lower 
extremity. — ^The  majority  of  the  sufferings  appear  at  night,  or  when  seated, 
and  are  <  in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening. — Heaviness  in  the  limbs. 

«6.  Sleep. — Frequent  yawning,  with  trembling  and  shuddering. — 
Nocturnal  sleeplessness,  with  agitation,  tears,  cries,  heat,  and  anguish ;  in 
children. — ^Wakes  in  the  morning,  restless  and  lamenting,  in  a  start. — Child 
gets  on  hands  and  knees  in  sleep ;  on  abdomen. 

•7.  Fever. — Pulse  small,  hard,  and  rapid. — Frequent  shuddering,  with 
trembling,  even  near  the  fire. — Quotidian  fevers,  or  tertian,  with  bulimy. 


522  CINA 

Weak  sight,  with  photophobia  and  pressure  on  the  eyes,  as  if  sand  had  been 
introduced  into  them. — ^When  looking  at  a  thing  steadily  (reading)  he  sees  it 
as  through  a  gauze,  which  is  relieved  by  wiping  the  eyes. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis ;  also  bleeding  from  the  mouth. — Inclination  to  put 
the  fingers  into  the  nose. — ^The  child  rubs  the  nose  constantly,  and  bores  with 
the  fingers  in  the  nose  until  blood  comes  out. — Flow  of  pus  from  the  nose. — 
Violent  sneezing,  which  provokes  a  sensation  of  pressure  on  the  temples,  and 
seems  as  though  it  would  burst  the  chest. — Fluent  coryza,  with  sensation  of 
burning  in  the  nostrils. — Stoppage  of  the  nose,  in  the  evening. — Fluent  coryza 
at  noon. — ^The  nose  burns. 

6.  Face. — Paleness  of  face,  with  livid  circle  under  the  eyes. — Earth- 
coloured  complexion. — Face,  pufFed  and  bluish,  esp.  round  the  mouth. — Face 
alternately  pale  and  cold,  or  red  and  hot. — Pale,  cold  face,  with  cold  perspira- 
tion.— Cramp-like  pains  and  successive  puUings  in  the  cheek-bones,  aggravated 
or  renewed  by  contact  and  pressure. 

7.  Teeth.--Toothache,  provoked  by  the  air  and  cold  drinks. — Pains,  as 
from  excoriation,  in  the  teeth. — Grinding  of  the  teeth. 

8.  Mouth. — Sensation  of  dryness  and  roughness  of  the  mouthy  esp. 
of  the  palate. 

Q.    Throat. — Inability  to  swallow,  esp.  liquids. 

ID.  Appetite. — Increase  of  thirst. — Hunger  shortly  after  a  meal. — 
Voracity. — Bulimy. — ^Aversion  of  the  sucking  child  to  the  milk  of  its 
mother. — Hunger  may  come  on  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  as  in  children, 
or  one  may  feel  hungry  a  few  minutes  after  a  hearty  meal. — Bitter  taste  of 
bread. — ^Vomiting,  or  diarrhoea  immediately  after  eating  or  drinking,  esp. 
drinking.— Vomiting  of  mucus  and  of  ascarides. — Vomiting  during  the  fever, 
with  tongue  clean. — Bilious  vomiting. — Disagreeable  risings. 

II.  Stomach. — ^Audible  gurgling  from  the  throat  into  the  stomach  when 
drinking. — Frequent  hiccough. — Pain  in  the  precordial  region  oppressing  the 
breathing. 

18.  Abdomen. — Obstinate  pinchings  in  the  abdomen. — Pinching  or 
cramp-like  pressure  transversely  across  upper  abdomen,  after  a  meaL — 
Painful  twisting  about  navel. — Cutting  and  pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen 
from  worms. — Painful  rolling  in  the  region  of  the  navel,  which  is  very  sensi- 
tive to  the  touch. — Cramp-like,  frequently  recurring  pains  in  the  abdomen, 
as  when  the  catamenia  are  about  to  appear. — Unpleasant  sensation  of  warmth 
in  the  abdomen. — Bloated  abdomen,  esp.  in  children. — Feeling  of  emptiness 
in  the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Stool  with  maw-worms  (short,  thick  worms). — 
Loose  evacuations  of  the  consistence  of  pap. — Discharge  of  ascarides,  and  of 
other  worms  by  the  anus. — Itching  of  the  anus. — Diarrhoea  of  bile,  and  of 
stercoraceous  matter. — Loose,  involuntary,  whitish  evacuations. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  want  to  make  water,  with  profuse 
discharge. — ^Wetting  the  bed. — Urine  soon  becomes  turbid. — Involontaiy 
emission  of  urine  (at  night). — Urine  milky. 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Catamenia  premature,  and  too  abundant 
— Metrorrhagia. — ^Womb-troubles  in  general. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Short,  interrupted  breathing. — Respiration 
wheezing  and  panting. — Abundance  of  mucus  in  the  lar3mx,  which  is  constant, 


CINA  523 

and  compels  continual  hawking. — Gagging  cough  in  morning  after  rising ; 
irritation  thereto  (as  from  dust) ;  is  renewed  by  inspiration  after  a  long 
intervaL — Cough,  excited  by  taking  a  deep  inspiration. — Dry,  tickling  cough 
induced  by  reading  (to  oneself).— Hoarse,  transient  cough  in  the  evening.— 
Dry  cough,  with  cramp,  want  of  breath,  anxiety,  paleness  of  face,  and  groans 
after  the  paroxysm ;  or  with  stiffness  of  the  body,  and  bleeding  from  the  nose 
and  mouth. — Cough,  with  sudden  starts,  and  loss  of  consciousness. — Before 
coughing,  child  raises  herself  suddenly,  tosses  wildly  about,  the  whole  body 
becomes  stiff,  she  loses  consciousness,  just  as  if  she  would  have  an  epileptic 
fit,  then  follows  the  cough.— Whooping-cough  in  violent,  periodically  returning 
attacks,  from  a  titillating  sensation  in  the  throat,  as  of  a  feather,  and  much 
tough  mucus :— in  the  morning  without  expectoration,  in  the  evening  with 
difficult  expectoration  of  white,  occasionally  blood-streaked  mucus,  which 
is  tasteless;  worse  in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening;  better  during  the 
night,  aggravated  by  drinking,  walking  in  the  open  air,  pressing  on  the 
larynx,  when  lying  on  the  right  side,  in  the  cold  air,  and  when  awaking  from 
sleep. 

is.  Chest. — Difficulty  of  respiration,  and  anxious  oppression  of  the  chest, 
as  if  the  sternum  were  compressing  the  lungs. — Respuration  short,  often  inter- 
rupted, or  rattling. — Spasmodic  digging  in  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  going  to 
burst— Jerking  and  digging  shootings  in  the  chest. — Burning,  stitches,  and 
soreness  in  the  chest. 

90.  Back. — ^Pains,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  loins,  <  by  motion. — 
Drawing-tearing  pain  along  whole  spine. — Drawing  or  jerking  pains  in 
middle  of  spine. 

23.  Upper  Irimbs.— Tearing  and  paralytic  pullings  in  the  arms.— Cramp- 
like tearings  in  the  arms  and  in  the  hands. — Contraction  and  starting  of  the 
hand  and  of  the  fingers. — Sprained  feeling  in  the  wrist-joint.— Weakness  of 
the  hand,  which  suffers  everything  to  escape  from  it. 

23.  LiOwer  Limbs.— Paral3rtic  or  cramp-like  pains,  and  pullings  in  the 
legs.— Spasmodic  stretching  and  twitching  of  the  feet.— Cramp-like  extension 
of  the  legs. 

84.  Generalities. — Paralytic,  tractive  pains  in  the  limbs. — Pressure  and 
squeezing,  with  dull  shootings,  or  cramp-like  tearings,  pullings  and  jerkings, 
or  burning  shootings  in  different  parts.— Twitching  of  limbs.— Convulsions, 
and  distortion  of  the  limbs. — Nocturnal  epileptic  convulsions,  followed  by 
headache. — EpUeptic  convulsions  (esp.  at  night,  with  or  without  conscious- 
ness) with  cries,  bending  backwards  of  the  back,  and  violent  movements 
of  the  hands  and  feet.— Tetanic  stiffness  of  the  whole  body. — External 
pressure  <,  or  renews  the  sufferings. — Painful  sensibility  of  all  the  limbs, 
on  movement,  and  on  being  touched. — ^Affections  of  the  1.  side;  1.  lower 
extremity.- The  majority  of  the  sufferings  appear  at  night,  or  when  seated, 
and  are  <  in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening. — Heaviness  in  the  limbs. 

96.  Sleep. — Frequent  yawning,  with  trembling  and  shuddering. — 
Nocturnal  sleeplessness,  with  agitation,  tears,  cries,  heat,  and  anguish ;  in 
children. — ^Wakes  in  the  morning,  restless  and  lamenting,  in  a  start. — Child 
gets  on  hands  and  knees  in  sleep ;  on  abdomen. 

27.  Fever.— Pulse  small,  hard,  and  rapid. — Frequent  shuddering,  with 
trembling,  even  near  the  fire.— Quotidian  fevers,  or  tertian,  with  bulimy, 


524         CINCHONINUM   SULPHURICUM 

nausea,  tongue  clean,  diarrhoea,  pupils  dilated,  and  emaciation. — Shivering 
in  the  evening. — Strong  febrile  heat,  with  delirium,  tossing,  and  agitation. — 
Chilliness,  with  shaking  or  trembling,  ascending  from  the  upper  part  of  the 
body  to  the  head.^Chill,  with  coldness  of  the  pale  face  and  heat  of  the 
hands.— Heat  at  night,  with  thirst. — Chilliness  with  thirst— After  the  per- 
spiration (sometimes  before  the  chill)  vomiting  of  food  (with  a  clean  tongue) ; 
at  the  same  time  canine  hunger. — Heat,  esp.  in  the  head,  with  paleness, 
or  yellowish  colour  of  the  face,  and  livid  circle  under  the  eyes,  or  with  redness 
of  the  cheeks. — ^After  the  fever,  headache. — Cold  sweat  on  the  forehead, 
around  the  nose,  and  on  the  hands. 


Ginchoninnm  Salpharicnm. 

Sulphate  of  Cinchonine.    (CxgHaaN.O)  HaSO^. 

Ollnieal.— Amblyopia.  Constipation.  Diarrhoea.  Epistaxis.  Fever.  Hair 
falling  off.  Headache.  Heartburn.  Sexual  excitement.  Spinal  irritation.  Urinary 
disorders.    Veins  distended. 

CharaoteristioB. — Cinckon.  suL  has  been  extensively  proved,  but 
it  appears  to  have  been  little  used  in  practice,  from  having  been  over- 
shadowed by  the  better  known  alkaloid,  Chinin.  suL  The  general 
outline  of  symptoms  is  the  same  in  both.  Some  of  the  most  peculiar 
symptoms  of  Cinch,  s,  are  the  following  :  Bursting  headache  on 
waking.  Pain  in  anterior  lobe  of  cerebrum,  as  though  a  net  were 
drawn  through  the  whole  substance  of  the  brain.  Darkness  before 
the  eyes  on  exerting  them.  Sensation  as  if  the  throat  were  burnt  with 
hot  drink.  Cold  feeling  at  pit  of  stomach.  Pasty  taste  ;  and  pasty 
stools.  The  sexual  organs  are  excited :  voluptuous  dreams  and 
painful  erections  at  night.  Menses  a  week  too  soon  and  more 
copious  than  usual.  The  chest  seems  hollow  and  distended  so  that 
breathing  seems  especially  easy.  Many  symptoms  of  fever  are  present ; 
and  there  is  recurrence  of  symptoms.  Sweat  between  shoulder-blades 
in  the  night,  followed  by  itching.  Symptoms  <  after  eating;  by 
motion.  Weariness,  sleepiness,  general  aching;  especially  in  eyes, 
ears,  and  genitals. 

SYMPTOMS. 

z.  Mind.— Sort  of  transient  intoxication ;  complete  disinclination  for 
work. 

a.  Head. — Confusion  in  head  with  pressure  in  eyes. — Morning  head- 
ache ;  bursting  headache  on  waking. — Pain  in  anterior  lobe  of  cerebrum  as 
though  a  net  were  drawn  through  the  whole  substance  of  the  brain. — Profuse 
falling  out  of  hair. — ^Tension  in  scalp,  with  soreness  at  roots  of  hair,  as  if 
there  were  pus  under  scalp  (mostly  r.). 

3.  Eyes. — ^Accumulation  of  mucus  before  eyes. — ^Attacks  of  darkness 
before  eyes ;   on  exerting  them. 

4.  Ears. — Roaring  in  ears ;  during  the  night. 


CINERARIA  MARITIMA  525 

$.    Nose. — Sodden  nose-bleed  of  thin,  bright  red  blood  while  sitting. 

8.  Mouth. — Pt3ralism ;  esp.  in  forenoon. 

9.  Throat. — Sensation  as  if  throat  were  burnt  with  hot  drink,  and 
something  were  sticking  in  pharynx. — Sticking  pains  in  throat,  as  with  fine 
needles,  on  swallowing. 

u.  Stomach.— Sodden  heartburn. — Pains  at  pit  of  stomach  <  by 
pressure. — Great  heat  in  stomach ;  extending  into  abdomen,  and  up  into 
chest,  throat,  and  head,  esp.  in  throat,  with  burning  thirst. — Cold  feeling 
at  stomach  ;  fulness ;  pressure ;  throbbing  ;  sensitiveness. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Dull  cutting  in  anus,  extending  thence  to  navel, 
with  fine  stitches  in  pit  of  stomach. — Pasty  diarrhoea. — Constipation;  hard, 
scanty  stools  with  tenesmus. — Pasty  stool  passed  slowly  with  much  pressing, 
sphincter  very  much  relaxed,  while  the  rectum  is  more  contracted  than  usual. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Burning  sensation  in  urethra  after  passage  of 
nrine. — Excessive  urging. — Urine  thick  sediment;  t>rownish  green;  dark 
red ;  reddish  yellow  ;  white. — Iridescent  film. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Great  excitement,  erections. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menstruation  a  week  too  soon  and  much 
worse  than  osual. 

i8.  Chest. — Chest  seems  hollow  and  distended  so  that  breathing  seems 
esp.  easy. — Stitches  mostly  extending  from  r.  side  to  pit  of  stomach  at  inser- 
tion of  diaphragm. — Pressive  pain  under  sternum ;  waking  in  night  it  seems 
as  though  lower  portion  of  sternum  were  pressed  inward. 

90, 91.  Neck,  Back  and  Limbs. — Painful  stifiFness  of  neck ;  <  moving 
it— First  dorsal  vertebrae  painful  to  pressure. — ^Trembling  of  limbs  and  weak- 
ness.— Pains,  drawings,  bruised  sensation. 

94.  Generalities. — Periodic  sticking  pains  in  chest,  >  standing  or 
sitting,  <  lying  or  during  deep  cough. 

2O.  Sleep. — Sleepiness. — Quiet  sleep  without  dreams,  but  without  being 
refreshed. — ^Voluptuous  dreams  and  painful  erections. 

97.  Fever. — Chilliness. — Shaking  chill  lo  a.m.  to  noo.n  without  subsequent 
fever  or  sweat — Burning  skin. — Great  heat  of  body  with  turgescence  of  veins 
(evening). — Heat  of  head  4  p.m.  with  cold  extremities. — Sweat  with  excessive 
thirst  in  night — Skin  dry,  veins  distended.— Sweat  between  scapula  at  night, 
followed  by  itching  compelling  him  to  scratch. 


Cineraria  Maritima. 

Senedo  cineraria.  Dusty  Miller.  N,  O.  Compositse.  Tincture  or 
succus  of  the  fresh  plant,  growing  wild,  gathered  just  before 
the  flower-buds  open. 

CliBical, — Cataract.    Corneal  opacity. 

GharaetoriBtios. — ^This  is  an  unproved  drug,  but  it  has  been  used 
with  a  good  deal  oi  success  in  cases  of  cataract  as  an  external  applica- 
tion.   The  method  adopted  is  to  instil  one  drop,  four  or  five  times  a 


526  CINNABARIS 

day,  into  the  eye  aflfected,  and  to  keep  this  up  for  several  months. 
Traumatic  cataract  and  corneal  opacities,  as  well  as  senile  cataract, 
have  been  removed  in  this  way.  I  have  seen  no  reports  of  cores  by 
internal  use  of  the  remedy  alone,  but  in  some  cases  it  was  given 
internally  as  well  as  used  externally.  Generally  the  patients  have 
received  specific  homoeopathic  treatment  internally  at  the  same  time. 


Ginnabaris. 

Mercuric  Sulphide.    Red  Sulphide  of  Mercury.    Hg  S.    Trituration. 

GUnieal^  Albuminuria.  Bubo.  Catarrh.  Chancre.  Cystitis.  Dysentery.  Eye, 
inflammation  of.  Gleet.  Gonorrhoea.  Gout.  Nose,  external,  sensitive.  Priapism. 
Rheumatism.  Sciatica.  Scrofula.  5/^/,  abttormal.  Sycosis.  Syphilis.  Tape- 
worm.   Warts. 

Charaoteristios. — Cinnabar,  corresponds  to  sycosis  as  well  as  to 
syphilis,  and  to  combinations  of  the  two.  In  warts  on  the  prepuce 
it  is  more  specific  than  Thuja  ;  especially  for  fan-shaped  warts.  In 
the  mental  sphere  there  is  indolence  and  indisposition  to  mental 
labour.  Forgetful.  Fretful,  easily  provoked.  Headache  with  nose- 
bleed. General  sensitiveness  to  touch  :  bones  of  skull,  scalp,  roots  of 
hair  ;  bridge  of  nose ;  warts  bleed  when  touched.  Sensation  on 
bridge  of  nose  as  if  touched  with  metallic  substance,  uneasy  creeping 
and  pressing  sensation  about  nasal  bones  as  from  wearing  spectacles 
when  not  used  to  them.  Jerkings  and  pullings  are  frequent.  Berridge 
reports  this  symptom  cured  :  "  Left  leg  feels  shorter  than  right  whilst 
walking."  Jerking  in  penis ;  occurring  during  sleep.  Tearing  stitches 
in  glans.  Burning,  stinging,  itching  of  corona  glandis.  Leucorrhea, 
the  discharge  of  which  causes  a  pressure  in  vagina.  Haemorrhages 
are  frequent :  nose-bleed  ;  bleeding  piles.  In  sSdition  to  dysenteric 
symptoms  there  is  obstinate  constipation,  stools  hard  and  too  large. 
Protrusion  of  anus  during  stool.  Formication  as  from  a  large  worm. 
Little  pimples  round  anus  with  burning  and  itching.  The  skin  is 
much  aifected.  Redness  predominates  (colour  of  the  drug).  Red 
spots.  Heat,  redness,  and  swelling  of  face,  especially  about  eyes.  "  We 
are  led  to  use  this  for  very  red  and  very  fiery-looking  ulcers,  which 
may  occur  in  the  throat  or  on  any  other  part  of  the  body,  in  the 
mouth,  on  the  legs  ;  particularly  if  there  be  nodes  on  the  shm-bones. 
In  very  angry-looking  chancres  "  (Guernsey).  Eruption  on  posterior 
cervical  region  ;  on  inner  and  lower  part  of  thigh  with  itching. 
Warts  ;  pimples ;  pustules  ;  ulcers ;  violent  itching  and  pricking, 
especially  about  joints.  The  back  of  the  neck  is  much  afiFected. 
Pain  extending  to  occiput  when  head  is  thrown  back.  Pain  r.  side 
of  neck  on  turning  head.  Muscles  seem  contracted.  Glands  enlarged 
The  symptoms  are  >  in  open  air.  Cold  and  chilly  in  warm  room.  <  In 
summer.    Most  symptoms  are  <  at  night    Sweat  <  at  noon.    Gene- 


CINNABARIS  527 

rally  rest  >  ;  walking  <.   Headache  <  after  sleep.    After  dinner  >. 
Symptoms  intermit  in  severity. 

BdlatioiUU — AntidoUd  by  :  Hepar,  Nit.  ac..  Opium,  and  Sulphur. 
Compare  :  Camph.  j[red  spots) ;  Lach.,  Merc,  Nit.  ac,  Thuja  (Cinnab. 
is  better  than  Thuja  in  warts  on  prepuce) ;  compare  also  Sep.  (warts 
on  margin  of  prepuce) ;  Ant.  t.  (warts  at  back  of  glans).  Seneg.  has  > 
bending  head  backward,  Clem,  has  headache  <  from  same ;  Clem, 
also  has  vertigo  on  lifting  head  up  or  moving  head  ;  Cinnab.  has  pain 
in  back  of  neck  when  head  is  thrown  back. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Indisposition  for  mental  labour. — Sensation  of  fulness  in  the 
head  from  mental  application. — Forgetf ulness  (forgets  things  he  has  to  do). — 
Fretfoly  easily  provoked. — Desire  to  be  alone. 

s.  Head. — Solent  and  frightful  attack  of  cephalalgia,  in  the  sinciput  and  in 
the  temples,  mitigated  by  compression  of  the  head. — Stupefying  buzzing  in  the 
bead,  a  little  after  dinner,  and  in  the  evening  before  lying  down. — Giddiness  in 
the  morning  after  rising,  when  stooping,  with  nausea. — Congestion  of  blood  to 
the  head,  particularly  to  the  vertex  ;  worse  after  eating. — Intense  headache ; 
be  cannot  raise  his  head  from  the  pillov^ ;  relieved  by  external  pressure. — 
Dull  pain  in  the  forehead,  which  is  cold ;  relieved  by  heat. — In  the  morning, 
after  waking,  pain  in  the  forehead  and  top  of  the  head ;  <  when  lying  on  the 
1.  side  and  back  ;  >  and  going  ofiF,  when  turning  on  r.  side,  and  after  rising. — 
Shooting  pain  in  the  1.  side  of  the  head,  with  increase  of  saliva  and  great  flow 
d  urine.— Shooting  in  the  teguments  of  the  head. — Painful  sensitiveness  of 
the  cranium  and  of  the  hair  on  being  touched. 

3.  Eyes. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  with  pressive  shootings  and  con- 
stant lachrymation  when  fixing  them  on  an  object. — Shooting  pains  in  inner 
canthus  of  r.  eye,  with  burning  and  itching. — Inflammation  df  r.  eye,  with 
profuse  discharge  of  mucus  from  the  nose.-^Flow  of  tears. — Sticking  pain 
about  the  punctum  lachrymale  of  the  upper  eyelid. — Redness  of  the  whole 
eye,  with  swelling  of  the  face. 

4.  Bars. — Roaring  in  the  ears  with  swelling  of  the  face  (after  eating). — 
Scurfy  eruption  in  r.  external  ear. — Itching  in  r.  ear. 

5.  Nose.— Violent  fluent  coryza,  with  secretion  of  burning  serum. — 
Sensation  as  if  touched  by  a  cold  metallic  body,  on  a  small  space  over  the 
root  of  the  nose.— Itching  of  the  nose,  with  bleeding  (very  dark  blood)  after 
blowing  it — Coryza,  with  lameness  of  the  thighs  and  aching  in  the  small  of 
the  back ;  lumps  of  dirty  yellow  mucus  are  discharged  from  the  posterior 
nares. 

6.  Face. — Heat  of  the  face,  which  is  much  swollen,  mostly  about  the 
eyes. 

8.  Mouth. — Both  corners  of  the  mouth  are  chapped. — ^Tongue  coated 
white  in  the  morning. — ^A  small  ulcer  on  the  roof  of  the  mouth,  on  the  r.  side 
of  the  tip  of  the  tongue ;  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue. — Burning  constrictive 
sensation  in  the  palate ;  taste  hitter  in  the  morning. — Salivation  and  increased 
flow  oi  urine. — Putrid  taste  in  the  mouth. 

g.  Throat.— Dryness  and  irritation  of  the  throat  (posterior  nares,  tonsils, 
fauces)  at  night,  with  soreness  during  the  day. — In  the  morning,  secretion  of 


528  CINNABARIS 

tenacious  macus  from  posterior  nares,  in  lumps. — Increased  dryness  of  mouth 
and  throat,  being  obliged  to  moisten  and  rinse  the  mouth  every  time  he  wakes. 

ID.  Appetite. — Nocturnal  dryness  and  heat  in  the  mouth  and  in  the 
throat,  with  much  thirst. — Scanty,  tenacious,  frothy  saliva  in  the  mouth, 
without  thirst;  better  after  drinking.— Pressive  contractions  in  the  throat 
during  deglutition. — After  a  meal,  disagreeable  sensation  of  swelling  over  the 
whole  body,  with  tightness  in  the  chest  and  in  the  stomach. — Appetite 
increased. 

II.  Stomach. — ^At  night,  heat,  which  extends  upwards  from  the  stomach 
towards  the  neck  and  the  head,  and  disperses  on  rising  up  in  bed. — Soreness 
in  the  stomach,  with  dizziness  and  lightness  in  the  head  and  tightness  in  the 
temples. — Nausea,  alleviated  by  eructations. — Nausea,  with  water-brash  (in 
the  evening). 

la.  Abdomen.— Flashes  of  heat  confined  to  the  abdomen,  with  great 
flatulence  (worse  in  the  forenoon). 

1$.  Stool  and  Anus. — Evacuations,  soft  and  frequent,  preceded  by 
pinchings  in  the  abdomen;  less  afterwards. — Bloody  dysentery. — Greenish 
mucous  diarrhoea. — Sensation  of  formication  in  the  anus,  as  if  from  a  large 
worm. — Little  pimples  around  the  anus,  with  burning  and  itching ;  thin  stools 
and  tenesmus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  and  increasing  emission  of  watery 
urine ;  also  during  the  night. — Pain,  as  if  from  a  sore  in  the  urethra,  when 
urinating;  this  pain  wakes  him  up  at  night. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.-~Swelling  of  the  penis. — Pseudo  gonorrhoea, 
with  redness  and  swelling  of  the  prepuce. — ^Violent  itching  of  the  corona 
glandis,  with  profuse  secretion  of  pus.— iSmall,  shining  red  points  on  the  glans 
penis. — Condyloma. — Blennorr hoea. — Sycotic  excrescences. — Sexual  desire 
strongly  excited,  and  great  inclination  for  coition,  with  great  appetite  for 
eating  and  drinking. — Strong  erections  in  the  evening  in  bed. — Fetid  and 
corrosive  sweats,  between  the  scrotum  and  the  thighs  when  walking. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Leucorrhoea,  causing,  during  its  dis- 
charge, a  pressure  in  the  vagina. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness  in  the  evening. — Dyspnoea, 
with  heat.  —  Cough  from  tickling  in  the  throat.  —  Dry  cough,  in  single 
shocks,  when  lying  down ;  >  by  sitting  up. 

18.  Chest.— Chest  oppressed,  feels  contracted ;  relieved  by  stretching 
himself. — Pain  running  over  the  ensiform  cartilage,  from  the  seventh  rib  on 
the  r.  side  diagonally  through  the  chest. — Pulsative  and  shooting  pains  in  the 
chest,  esp.  when  walking. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Pain  in  back  part  of  neck  when  head  is  thrown 
back,  extending  to  occiput. — Wrenching  pains  in  the  vertebrae  of  the  neck. — 
The  muscles  of  the  back  part  of  the  neck  seem  as  if  contracted. — Tearing  in 
the  side  of  the  back,  even  at  night  on  moving  in  the  bed,  >  by  the  heat 
of  the  fire. — Aching  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  bruised. — Pain  all  over 
the  back  down  to  the  loins,  aggravated  on  drawing  a  long  breath. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  in  the  1.  shoulder,  between  the  clavicle  and 
scapula,  interiorly. — Pain  in  the  middle  of  the  upper  part  of  r.  arm,  as  though 
it  would  break. — Periodical  shooting  pains  in  the  arms. — ^Tearing  in  the  arms 
when  writing,  >  by  the  heat  of   the  fire. — Sensation  of  lameness  in  r. 


CINNABARIS  529 

ann. — ^Numbness  of  1.  arm,  from  elbow  to  end  of  little  finger,  it  feels  as  if 
the  "crazy-bone"  was  struck. — ^The  joints  <^  the  fingers  and  knuckles  are  red 
(and  hot). 

Q.  lAy'wer  Limb8.-^Painful  jerking  in  the  leg,  in  the  evening,  after 
sleeping. — Shooting,  drawing,  and  aching  pains  in  the  thighs,  from  the  hip- 
joints  nearly  down  to  the  condyles ;  <  at  night.— Violent  itching  on  the 
inside  of  thighs,  knees,  and  legs ;  worse  in  the  knees,  esp.  at  night. — Profuse 
perspiration  between  the  thighs  (when  walking). — Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  knee* 
joint ;  <  when  walking  (ascending),  >  at  rest. — Pain  in  the  tendo  Achillis 
and  OS  calcis  after  walking.— Coldness  in  the  joints.— Coldness  of  the  feet, 
day  and  night. 

14.  Generalities. — Sensation  of  lameness  in  all  the  limbs. — Pulling  and 
shuddering  in  the  arms  and  the  legs. — Paral3rtic  pains  in  the  limbs,  with 
indolence  and  drowsiness. — ^Weariness,  languor,  tired  and  prostrated  ;  worse 
before  eating,  better  when  riding  in  the  open  air. — General  nervous,  uneasy 
sensation. 

85.  Sldn. — Itching :  of  the  nose  (bleeding  after  blowing  it) ;  of  eyelids ; 
canthi  (outer) ;  ears ;  face  (1.  side)  palms  of  hands  (r.) ;  thighs  (inside) ; 
knees ;  legs  ;  at  the  anus  (at  night),  on  the  shoulders  (evening). — Sensation 
as  if  pimples  were  coming  out  over  the  body. — Red  papulous  eruption, 
without  itching,  on  both  elbows. — Redness  of  the  skin. — Red,  fiery-looking 
ulcers,  which  may  occur  in  the  throat  or  in  any  other  part  of  the  body,  in  the 
mouth,  on  the  legs ;  particularly  if  there  be  nodes  on  the  shin-bones. — ^Very 
angry-looking  chancres. 

a6.  Sleep. — Sleepiness  in  the  daytime  and  sleeplessness  at  night ;  uncon- 
qoerable  desire  to  sleep  after  dinner,  early  in  the  evening  (during  the  day). — 
Restlessness  and  sleeplessness  at  night,  from  a  constant  How  of  ideas  changing 
from  one  thing  to  another. — Nightly  sleeplessness,  without  causing  fatigue. — 
Restless  sleep,  with  vivid  dreams  and  much  talking. — Nightmare  after  mid- 
night 

97.  Fever. — Pulse  slower  in  the  forepart  of  the  day,  accelerated  in  the 
evening. — Coldness  and  chilliness  in  the  warm  room. — Internal  and  external 
heat  of  the  body  during  the  whole  night. — Profuse  perspiration  between  the 
thighs. — Perspiration  most  at  noon. 


Ginnamomom. 


Cinnamomum  Zeylanicum  and  Cinnamomum  Cassia. 
AT.  0,  Lauraceae.    Tincture. 

GMBieaL— Ascites.    Caries.    Constipation.    Diarrhoea.    Haemorrhages.    Head- 
adie.    Hysteria.    Leucorrhoea.    Menorrhagia.    Metrorrhagia. 

OharaoterlstiOB. — ^A   leading  feature   of   Cinnamon  is  haemor- 
rhage.    Hie  haemorrhage  is  bright  red  and  clear  and  <  by  any 
physical  exertion.     Cinnam.  also  causes   gastric    disturbance    and 
hysterical  attacks ;  pains  in  bones  and  in  muscles,  and  great  weakness 
VOL.  I.  35 


S30  CISTUS   CANADENSIS 

as  after  loss  of  fluids.  Hysterical  attacks,  going  ofiF  with  enictations ; 
with  nausea  or  vomiting.  The  symptoms  are  <  while  riding ;  from 
exertion  ;  from  talking ;  in  afternoon  and  evening  up  to  midnight. 
Talking  s=  hysterical  attacks.  It  has  been  used  in  large  doses  by 
the  old  school  in  cases  of  uterine  cancer,  and  some  success  has  been 
claimed  for  it. 

RelatioiiB.— //  is  aniidoted   by:    Aeon.      //  antidotes:  Opium. 
Compare:  Sil.,  Ipec. 

SYMPTOMS. 

zz.  Stomach. — Nausea  while  riding,  with  gagging  and  vomiting  of 
mucus. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea  <  after  drinking,  with  acidity. — Long- 
continued  constipation;  stool  in  hard  balls. — Haemorrhage  from  bowels 
occurring  esp.  after  any  ph3rsical  exertion ;  blood,  bright  red  and  clear. 

zO.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menorrhagia ;  in  females  troubled  with 
itching  at  nose  ;  blood  bright  red  <  after  false  step  or  strain ;  blood  bright 
red. — Metrorrhagia. — Repeated  small  haemorrhages  during  gestation  and 
puerperal  state ;  <  on  any  exertion,  lifting,  straining,  over-stretching  arms ; 
false  step. 


Gistus  Canadensis. 

Helianthemum  canadense.    Rock-rose.    Ice-plant.    Frost-weed. 
N.  0.  Cistaceae.    Tincture  of  whole  plant. 

Olinieal* — Bone  affections.  Cancer.  Diarrhoea.  Erysipelas.  Follicular 
pharyngitis.  Glandular  8WcUings.  Hip-joint  disease.  Hospital  gangrene.  Lupns. 
Panaritium.    Parotitis.    Scorbutus.    Scrofula.    Sore-throat.    Ulcers.    Zona. 

CharaoterifltioB. — Cistus  is  a  very  ancient  remedy  for  scrofulous 
affections,  and  also  in  scorbutic  states  and  gangrenous  ulcerations. 
The  provings  and  homoeopathic  uses  confirm  its  suitability  in  these 
respects  and  bring  out  clearer  indications.  It  is  most  suited  to 
scrofulous  subjects  who  are  very  sensitive  to  cold  air.  "  Sensitive  to 
cold  air ''  runs  through  the  pathogenesis  and  also  feelings  of  coldness, 
of  which  its  peculiar  property  of  favouring  the  formation  of  ice  about 
its  roots  in  early  winter  is  strangely  suggestive.  Cold  f  eeUngs :  in 
larynx ;  in  abdomen.  ''  Inhaling  the  slightest  cold  air  causes  sore- 
throat,  which  he  has  not  when  inhaling  in  a  warm  room."  Inhaled 
air  feels  cool.  Cold  breath.  Stitches  and  cold  feeHngs  are  very 
prominent ;  there  is  also  a  soft  or  spongy  feeling  which  is  very 
characteristic.  (I  cured  with  Cistus  a  case  of  sore-throat  that  had 
lasted  for  years  under  allopathic  treatment  with  local  swabbings. 
There  was  an  accumulation  of  thick  yellow,  leathery  phlegm  that  had 
to  be  cleared  away  by  local  means.  The  patient  complained  of  a 
"  spongy "  feeling  in  the  throat,  and  that  led  me  to  tiie  remedy.) 
Trembhng  (with   the   fever).      Sensation  as  if  ants  were  ruaning 


CISTUS   CANADENSIS  531 

thnmgh  the  whole  body  (in  evening,  mth  anxious,  difficult  breathing). 
There  is  also  great  sensitiveness  to  touch :  <  from  touch.  Throat 
symptoms  >  by  swallowing.  <  By  motion.  <  Evening ;  night ; 
morning.     <  By  drinking  co£Fee  (diarrhcea).     >  By  expectoration. 

BmitlonB.^Antidoted  by :  Rhus  t,  Camph.,  and  Sepia.  Com- 
faUblc :  Magnesium  (the  plant  grows  on  a  magnesium  soil),  Bell., 
Carb.  v.,  Phos.  Incompatible:  Coffee.  Compare:  Arg.  n.,  Lach., 
Carb.  V.  (cold  breath) ;-  Sul.  (morning  diarrhoea). 

SYMPTOMS. 

X.  Mind. — Bad  effects  from  vexation. — All  mental  excitement  <; 
(stitches  in  throat ;  cough). 

8.  Head. — Headache  in  sinciput  after  being  kept  waiting  for  dinner ; 
>  eating ;  <  towards  evening  and  lasts  all  night ;  in  r.  side,  with  piercing 
pain  in  eye. — Forehead  cold,  and  sensation  of  coolness  inside  forehead,  in  a 
▼ery  warm  room. — Pressive  pain  at  root  of  nose  with  headache. — Head  drawn 
to  one  side  by  swellings  in  neck. 

3.  Eyes. — Stitches  in  eyes;  scrofulous  inflammation;  feeling  as  if 
something  were  passing  around  in  the  eye,  with  stitches. — ^Weight  above 
eyes. 

4.  Ears. — Discharge  of  water  and  bad-smelling  pus. — Inner  swelling  of 
ears  with  discharge. — ^Tetters  on  and  around  the  ear,  extending  into  meatus. 
—Swelling  of  parotid  glands. 

5.  Nose. — Cdd  feeling,  or  burning  in  nose. — Chronic  catarrh  ;  frequent 
and  violent  sneezing  evening  and  morning. — Inflammation,  swelling  and 
iniraing  L  side  of  nose. — ^Tip  of  nose  painful. — Eczema. 

6.  Face. — Feeling  as  if  facial  muscles  would  be  drawn  to  one  side. — 
Flushes  of  heat  in  face.— Heat  and  burning  in  bones  of  face. — Half-way  up 
cheek,  swelling  beginning  at  ear. — ^Vesicular  erysipelas.  —  Lupus.  —  Sharp 
shooting,  intolerable  itching,  and  thick  crusts ;  with  burning  on  r.  zygoma. — 
Caries  of  lower  jaw ;  with  suppurating  glands  on  neck.— Open,  bleeding 
cancer  on  lower  lip. 

8.  Mouth. — Scorbutic,  swollen  gums,  separating  from  teeth;  easily 
bleeding,  putrid,  disgusting. — Dry  tongue  and  palate. — ^Tongue  sore,  surface 
as  if  raw. — Impure  breath. — Sensation  of  coldness  of  tongue,  larynx  and 
trachea.— Saliva  cool ;  breath  feels  cool. 

9.  Throat. — Coolness  in  throat. — Soft  or  spongy  feeling  in  throat. — k% 
if  sand  in  throat — ^Continuous  feeling  of  dr3mess  and  heat  <  after  sleeping, 
eating  and  drinking. — Small  dry  spot  in  gullet ;  <  after  sleeping  must  get  up 
and  drink  ;  >  after  eating ;  throat  looks  glassy ;  on  back  of  throat  stripes  of 
tough  or  leathery  mucus. — ^Must  swallow  saliva  to  relieve  unbearable  dryness, 
csp.  daring  night — Periodical  itching  in  throat. — Dry,  without  feeling  dry. — 
Burning  high  up  behind  uvula. — Stitches  cause  cough;  when  mentally 
agitated. — Cough  causes  tearing  pain  in  throat — Sore.throat  <  from  inhaling 
least  cold  air. — Hawking  of  mucus,  tough,  gum-like,  thick,  tasteless ;  mostiy 
mornings, — Expectoration  of  (bitter)  mucus,  relieving  throat — Scrofulous 
swelling  and  suppuration  of  glands  of  throat. 

n.  Stonoiach. — Desire  for  acid  food  and  fruits,  but  pain  and  diarrhoea 
foUow  eating  them. — Desire  for  cheese. — Eating  and  drinking  >  dry  throat 


532  CITRUS   LIMONUM 

and  pain  in  sincipat — ^Af ter  eating :  pain  in  stomach ;  cold  feeling  in  stomach. 
— ^Af ter  drinking  coffee,  diarrhoea. — ^Empty  and  cool  eructations. — Frequent 
nausea ;  with  diarrhoea. 

12, 13.  Abdomen,  Rectum,  and  Stool.—Stitches  in  1.  hypocbondriam. 
— Cool  feeling  in  whole  abdomen. — Pain  in  groin  coming  from  back. — ^Thin, 
greyish-yellow,  hot  stools,  squirting  out ;  irresistible  urging,  <  from  midnight 
until  noon. — Diarrhoea  :  from  coffee  ;  fruits  ;  with  goitre ;  chronic  ;  in  wet 
weather  ;  in  scrawny  scrofulous  children. — Chronic  dysentery. 

15.    Male  Sexual  Organs.— Itching  in  scrotum. 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Induration  of  mammae ;  sensitive  to 
cold  air ;  cancer. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Lsrynx  and  trachea  :  inhaled  air  feels  cool ; 
itching  in ;  feeling  as  if  windpipe  had  not  space  enough. — ^Asthmatic  in 
evening  after  lying  down  and  at  night. — ^Cough  :  <  by  mental  agitation  ;  from 
stitches  in  throat ;  with  painful  tearing  in  throat. — Raw  feeling  in  upper  chest 
extending  into  throat. — Expectoration  of  bitter  mucus. — ^After  raising  phlegm 
feels  very  much  relieved. 

30.  Neck  and  Back. — ^Glands  of  neck  and  throat  swollen ;  suppuration. 
— Itching  on  back. — Eruption  like  zona. — Burning,  bruised  pain  in  coccyx 
preventing  sitting,  <  from  contact 

21.  Limbs. — In  evening,  pains  in  knees,  in  r.  hand,  in  1.  shoulder.— 
Drawing  pains  in  muscular  parts  of  hands  and  of  lower  extremities,  with 
pains  in  joints,  fingers,  and  knees. — ^Tearing  and  drawing  pains  in  all  the 
joints,  knees  and  fingers. 

32.  Upper  Limbs. — Sprained  pain  in  wrists. — Pain  in  fingers  (r.  hand) 
while  writing. — Tearing  in  finger-joints. — ^Tips  of  fingers  very  sensitive  to 
cold. — ^Tetter  on  hands. 

83.  Lov^er  Limbs. — Pains  in  knee  and  r.  thigh  when  walking  or  sitting. 
— Tearing  in  knees. — Piercing  pain  in  r.  great  toe  (evening). — Cold  feet 

25.  Skin. — Itching  all  over  body  without  eruption. — ^Vesicular  erysipelas 
of  face. — Lupus  on  face. — ^Tetter. — Hard  swelling  roimd  mercurial  syphilitic 
ulcers  on  lower  limbs. 

26.  Sleep. — Very  restless  at  night. — Sleepless  from  dryness  of  throat- 
Night  sweats. 

27.  Fever. — Chilliness  ;  followed  by  heat  with  trembling,  accompanied 
by  a  rapid  swelling  and  great  redness  of  glands  below  ear  and  in  throat- 
Heat  with  thirst,  causing  to  drink  frequently. — Night  sweats. — Sweats  easily. 


Citrus  Limonom. 

Lemon.    N.  0.  Rutaceas.    Expressed  juice. 

OliiiicaL — Cancer.  Constipation.  Convulsive  fits  (Stramoniom  and  other 
poisonings).  Diarrhoea.  Dropsy.  Dysentery.  Dyspnoea.  Haemorrhage.  Rhernnatwm. 
Scurvy.   Splenitis.    Sunstroke. 

CharaoteristiOB* — In  the  observations  with  this  plant  the  ex- 
pressed juice  of   the  fruit   has  been  used  containing  citric  add. 


CLEMATIS   ERECTA  533 

Lemon- juice  and  citric  add  are  traditional  remedies  for  and  preventives 
of  sea-scurvy.  That  their  action  is  homoeopathic  has  been  proved 
by  the  occurrence  of  scurvy  from  the  excessive  use  of  the  acid  when 
taken  for  other  purposes.  Used  as  a  local  application  (in  one  part  of 
citric  acid  to  eight  of  water)  it  has  relieved  the  pains  of  cancer.  It  has 
a  powerful  e£Eect  on  the  circulation  and  on  the  blood  itself,  producing 
faintness,  weak  pulse,  haemorrhages,  and  dropsies.  Inflammation  and 
psdnful  enlargement  of  the  spleen ;  dyspnoea.  Daily  headache. 
Stiffness  in  the  joints,  particularly  in  the  fingers ;  bruised  feeling, 
particulai^  in  the  feet.    Herpetic  eruptions. 

RelatfoilB. — Citrus  is  aniidoted  by:  Aeon.,  Asarum,  Datura, 
Euphorbia,  Hepar,  Sepia.  //  antidotes :  Aeon.,  Euphorb.,  Stramon., 
snake-bites,  and  all  animal  poisons.  It  increases  the  curative  effects  of 
Bell.  Compare  :  It  should  be  compared  with  Acetic  acid ;  and  the 
"  bruised  pain  in  the  joints  '*  recalls  the  action  of  its  congener,  Ruta  ; 
Bell.,  Lach.  As  an  antidote  against  Stram.  it  has  been  employed 
with  great  success,  the  juice  of  the  fruit  being  administered  by  the 
teaspoonful.  The  symptoms  removed  were :  Convulsive  fits  with 
violent  movement  of  the  hands  and  of  the  feet,  eyes  convulsed, 
fixedness  of  look,  saUvation,  pupils  dilated,  face  red  and  puffed. 
Loss  of  reason,  and  disposition  to  be  frightened.  Pulse  small  and 
quick.    Convulsions  renewed  or  provoked  by  light. 


Citrus  Ynlgaris,  see  Aurantiom. 


Clematis  Erecta. 


Upright  Virgin's  Bower.    Flammula  Jovis.    N.  0.  Ranunculaceas. 
Tincture  of  leaves  and  stems. 

GUnioaL— Cancer.    Byes^  affections  of.    Face^  pimples  on.     Gonorrhoea.    Head- 
ache.   Rheumatism.    Testicles^  inflammation  of.    Toothache.    Urethra^  stricture  of 

CSharaoteristios.— C/^ma/ts,  like  other  Ranunculi,  is  a  direct  irritant 
of  the  skin  producing  inflammation  and  vesication.  It  was  used  by 
Stoerck  before  Hahnemann's  time  in  cancerous  and  other  foul  ulcers, 
inveterate  skin  eruptions,  syphilis,  and  rheumatism.  In  the  provings, 
the  external  head  (left),  eyes,  teeth  (left),  skin,  urinary  and  mie  sexual 
organs  show  the  greatest  number  of  symptoms.  Inflammation  of 
eyes  «  left),  smarting,  burning,  stitches,  redness,  lachrymation, 
photophobia.  Sensation  as  if  fire  were  streaming  from  eyes.  There 
IS  mucus  in  the  urine,  but  not  pus.  Flow  of  urine  by  fits  and  starts ; 
or  has  to  wait  a  long  time  before  he  can  urinate,  with  intense  pain 
along  fore  part  of  urethra.  Beginning  of  inflanunatory  stricture. 
"  Affections  of  urethra  ;  penis  in  general ;  prepuce  in  particular." 
Swelling  of    inguinal   glands.     Painful,  inflamed,  swollen    testicles. 


534  CLEMATIS   ERECTA 

Clematis  acts  best  on  light-haired  people ;  torpid,  cachectic  condi- 
tions ;  swellings  and  indurations  of  the  glandular  system ;  syphilitic 
taint.  Great  debility  ;  twitching  of  muscles ;  vibrating  sensation 
through  body.  The  symptoms  are  <  by  touch  and  generally  by 
motion  ;  headache  and  toothache  <  Ijdng  down  in  evening.  Eyes 
<  on  closing  them.  Headache  <  bending  head  backward.  Great 
debility  3-5  p.m.  ;  nearly  all  symptoms  <  night.  Weakness  after 
eating.  Aversion  to  be  washed.  <  By  cold  water ;  cold  air ;  cold 
weather ;  moist  poultices.  Toothache,  temporarily  >  by  drawing  in 
cold  air ;  <  from  heat  of  bed.  <  During  increasing,  >  during  waning 
moon.    Giddiness  when  lifting  up  head,  or  when  moving  head. 

RelationB. — AntidoUd  by:  Bry.  (toothache,  urinary  symptoms), 
Camph.  Antidote  to :  Merc.  Compatible :  SiL  Compare  :  Ars.  (skin  ; 
Clem,  has  more  redness,  is  <  from  washing ;  has  moist,  alternating 
with  dry  scabs) ;  Puis,  (gonorrhoeal  orchitis,  testicle  tender  and  hard 
as  a  stone) ;  Bell.,  Bry.,  Calc,  Canth.,  Con.,  Caust.,  Dulc.  (sjrphilitic 
ulcerations) ;  Graph..  Merc,  (iritis,  sensitive  to  cold) ;  Petr.  (impetiso 
on  neck  and  occiput) ;  Sars.  (syphilitic  ulcers).  In  ''  aversion  to  be 
washed,"  compare  Ant.  c.  Hep.,  Pho.,  Sep.,  Spi.,  SuL  In  bending 
head  back.  Cinnabar.    Cobalt,  has  <  bending  head  forward. 

BTMPTOMB. 

I.  Mind. — Sadness  and  apprehension. — Moroseness< — ^Aversion  to  con- 
versation.— Indifference. — Fear  of  being  alone,  but  disinclined  to  meet 
otherwise  agreeable  company. — Memory  impaired. 

a.  Head. — In  the  morning,  confusion  and  heaviness  of  the  head.— 
Giddiness  if  he  lifts  his  head  up,  or  when  moving  the  head. — Head  feels  foil 
and  heavy,  hanging  down. — Headache,  aggravated  by  bending  the  head 
backwards. — Pressive  tension  in  the  forehead  and  sides  of  the  head,  as  well 
as  in  the  bones  of  the  cranium. — Digging  pressure  on  the  brain. — Piercing  in 
the  temples. — Boring  pains  in  the  temple. — Hammering  and  strokes  in  the 
head. — Purulent  pimples  on  the  forehead,  painful  on  being  touched. — Burning, 
incisive  pains  in  the  skin  of  the  forehead. — Eruptions  on  the  head. — Moist 
phlyctenae  on  the  occiput  and  at  the  nape  of  the  neck ;  sore,  tingling  and 
stinging-itching;  often  drying  up  in  scales;  when  getting  warm  in  bed, 
violently  itching ;  only  temporarily  relieved  by  scratching ;  with  soreness 
and  rawness. — Itching  on  the  hairy  scalp. 

3.  Eyes. — Pressure  on  the  ball  of  the  eye. — Smarting  in  the  eyes,  and 
in  the  margins  of  the  eyelids,  esp.  on  closing  them. — ^The  closed  eye  is  very 
sensitive  to  the  air  (cold  air),  and  when  it  is  opened  very  sensitive  to  the  light. 
— Shootings  in  the  corners  of  the  eyes. — Itching  in  the  canthi. — Burning  and 
heat  in  the  eyes,  with  dryness,  as  if  fire  were  streaming  from  the  eyes. — 
Inflammation  of  the  iris. — ^The  white  of  the  eyes  has  a  yellow  tint — While 
writing,  the  letters  momentarily  run  into  one  another  ;  at  times,  double  vision, 
with  flickering  before  the  eyes. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  with  profuse 
lachrymation. — Inflammation  and  ulceration  of  the  margins  of  the  eyelids.— 
Photophobia. 

4.  Ears. — Burning  pain  in  exterior  of  the  ear. — ^Tinkling  in  the  ear.— 
Ringing,  as  from  bells  in  the  ear. 


CLEMATIS  ERECTA  535 

5.  Nose. — Purulent  pimples,  painful  on  being  touched  at  the  root,  and 
on  the  point  of  the  nose. — Fluent  coryza  (with  sneezing),  with  abundant 
secretion  of  mucus,  streaked  with  blood. 

0.  Face. — Pace  pale  and  sickly. — Sensation  of  burning  in  the  skin  of 
the  cheeks  (momentary  flushes). — Incisive  burning  pains  in  ^e  lower  lip. — 
Cancer  of  the  lips. — Phlyctenoid  eruptions  on  the  lip. — ^White  vesicles  on  the 
nose  and  on  the  face,  as  from  a  sunburn. — ^Moist  eruption  on  the  face, 
preceded  by  stinging  pain. — Purulent  pimples  on  the  chin. — Swelling  of  the 
sobmaziUary  glands,  with  nodosities,  hard,  tensive,  pulsative,  and  painful  on 
being  touched. 

7.  Teeth.— Toothache,  <  by  smoking  tobacco.— Toothache  in  a 
decayed  molar  tooth,  much  <  from  a  crumb  of  bread  coming  into  it ;  much 
>  by  cold  water. — Nocturnal  pains  in  the  teeth,  which,  in  a  horizontal 
position,  are  aggravated  so  as  to  occasion  despair,  with  tossing,  weakness, 
anxiety,  and  insupportable  suffering  on  being  uncovered.— Shooting  pains 
or  successive  pullings  in  the  teeth,  extending  even  into  the  head  and 
producing  incapacity  for  intellectual  labour. — Sensation  as  if  the  decayed 
tooth  were  too  long ;  the  least  contact  is  exceedingly  painful,  with  an  excessive 
flow  of  saliva. 

8.  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  tongue  in  the  morning.— Dull  shootings  and 
piercings  in  the  root  of  the  tongue. — Small  blisters  on  the  tongue  and  in  the 
throat,  which  soon  become  ulcers. — Expectoration  of  sanguineous  saliva. 

9.  Throat. — Heat  and  burning  in  the  mouth  and  throat. — Sensation  of 
roughness  in  the  throat. 

10.  Appetite. — Prolonged  satiety,  though  the  food  continues  pleasant 
to  the  taste. — After  eating,  nausea,  and  sleepiness.  —  Nausea  on  smoking 
tobacco,  with  weakness  of  the  l^gs.— Aversion  to  beer. — Increased  thirst,  with 
desire  for  ice. 

n.  Stomach. — Disagreeable  sensation  of  coldness  in  the  stomach. — 
Tension  of  the  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pains,  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  hepatic  region,  on  touch- 
ing the  part,  and  on  stooping. — Stitches  in  the  liver.— When  walking,  incisive 
oootractions  in  the  regions  of  the  loins. — Pressure  towards  the  exterior  of  the 
inguinal  ring,  as  if  a  hernia  were  about  to  protrude. — Swelling  and  induration  of 
the  inguinal  glands,  with  jerking  pains. — Sensation  of  constriction  in  the  lower 
abdomen,  which  is  hard.--^titches :  shooting  up,  <  on  breathing  and  urinating. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Frequent,  liquid,  or  loose  evacuations,  without 
colic.— Loose  stools,  with  burning  at  the  anus. — Burning  heat,  and  itching  at 
the  anus  (in  the  evening)  ;  better  after  an  evacuation. — Haemorrhoids,  itching, 
discharging  some  mucus. — Hard  stool,  difficult  to  discharge  (in  the  evening). 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Increased  secretion  of  urine. — Purulent  urine. — 
Urine  turbid,  milky,  dark,  with  flakes  of  mucus  and  frothy. — Secretion 
diminished ;  the  last  drops  cause  violent  burning. — Secretion  slow  and  in  a 
small  stream. — During  the  emission  of  urine,  pulling  in  the  spermatic  cord. — 
Bnrning  sensation  and  smarting  in  the  urethra,  on  commencing  to  urinate. — 
Stitches  in  the  urethra ;  stitches  from  the  abdomen  into  the  chest — Contrac- 
tion of  the  urethra,  with  the  urine  stopping  suddenly,  or  only  flowing  drop 
by  drop ;  jerk-like  tearing  in  fore  part  of  urethra  in  the  intervals. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Itching  on  the  genitals. — ^Violent,  long- 


536  CLEMATIS   ERECTA 

continuing  erections,  with  stitches  in  the  urethra.— Swelling  of  the  r.  half  o£ 
scrotum. — Drawing  pains,  in  the  testes  and  in  the  spermatic  cord,  extending 
to  the  groins  and  the  thighs.— Painful  inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  testes. 
— Induration  of  the  testes. — ^Thickening  of  the  scrotum.— Aversion  to  sexoa! 
enjoyment,  as  after  excessive  indulgence. — ^Burning  pain  in  the  penis»  during 
emission  in  coition. 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Swelling  and  induration  of  the  mam- 
mary glands ;  cancer  of  the  breast ;  and  womb. — Menses  too  early. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Violent  cough,  with  irregular  respiration, 
at  times  too  slow,  at  times  too  rapid  ;  barking  cough,  with  burning  pain  in 
the  sternum  and  stitches  in  both  sides  of  the  lungs. 

18.  Chest.— Violent  shocks,  with  dull  shootings  in  the  sides  of  the  chest 
and  of  the  abdomen. — Shootings  in  the  chest,  aggravated  by  breathing. 

19.  Heart. — Sharp  stitch  in  the  heart,  from  within  to  without 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Itching  pustules  round  the  neck,  with  excoria- 
tion after  scratching. — Humid  tetters  from  the  nape  of  the  neck  to  the  occiput 
— Eruption  of  pustules  in  the  lumbar  region. 

33.  Upper  Limbs. — Swelling  and  induration  of  the  axillary  glands. — 
Pressure  or  pullings  in  the  muscles  of  the  arms  and  of  the  hands. — Gnawing 
blisters  on  the  hands  and  fingers,  with  swelling ;  cold  water  aggravates  the 
sufferings. — The  hands  feel  as  if  they  were  too  large ;  they  are  dry  and  hot — 
Arthritic  nodosities  in  the  joints  of  the  fingers. 

23.  Lovrer  Limbs. — ^Tearing  in  the  thighs. — Scaly  tetters  in  the  thigh« 
— Furunculi  in  the  thigh. — Itching  of  the  toes  and  perspiration  between  them. 

34.  Generalities.— Convulsive  movements  of  the  muscles  in  difiFerent 
parts  of  the  body. — Relaxation  of  the  muscles. — Great  emaciation. — Fatigne 
of  all  the  limbs,  esp.  after  a  meal,  with  beatings  in  all  the  arteries. — ^Vibration 
through  the  whole  body,  after  lying  down. — Great  debility  and  weakness, 
3-5  (p.m.). — Lancinations  from  below  upward,  <  on  breathing,  or  urinating, 
concomitant  with  uterine  or  other  afiEections. 

85.  Skin. — Obstinate  miliary  eruptions.— Vesicular  eruptions  on  the 
body. — Scaly  tetters,  discharging  a  sanious  pus,  yellowish  and  corrosive, 
and  with  redness,  heat  and  swelling  of  the  sldn. — Obstinate  tetters,  red  and 
moist,  with  insupportable  itching  in  the  heat  of  the  bed,  and  after  washing. — 
Itching  over  the  whole  body. — ^Aggravation  of  all  skin  symptoms  by  the  heat 
of  the  bed  and  from  washing. — ^The  tetters  (painful,  not  itching  over  the 
whole  body)  are  red  and  humid  while  the  moon  is  increasing,  and  pale  and 
dry  when  the  moon  is  waning. — Burning  or  tingling,  and  pulsation  in  the 
ulcers,  with  shootings  in  the  edges  when  touched. — Psoric  pustules  over  the 
whole  body.— Painful  swelling  and  induration  of  the  glands. 

36.  Sleep. — Great  drowsiness  during  the  day,  even  in  the  morning  after 
rising. — Sleeplessness  in  the  evening  and  at  night — Sleep,  with  frequent 
dreams,  agitation,  and  tossing  ;  vivid,  lascivious  dreams ;  profuse  perspiration 
after  midnight. — In  the  morning,  sensation  of  not  having  slept  enough. 

37.  Fever. — Pulse  accelerated.— Quartan  fever,  characterised  by  shud- 
dering, followed  by  sweat. — Sweat  on  waking,  and  sensitiveness  of  the  skin, 
which  the  patient  cannot  bear  to  be  uncovered. — Dry  heat,  with  sensation  of 
general  heat  (at  night). 


COBALTUM  537 

Gobaltum. 

Cobalt.    Co.  (A.W.  58*6).    Trituration. 

CMnfaali — Constipation.  Eye,  afifections  of.  Gonorrhoea.  Haemorrhages. 
Headache.    Impotence.    Liver  disorders.    Lumbago.    Masturbation,  effects  of. 

ChanoteristiOB. — ^The  most  characteristic  symptom  of  Cobalt  is 
a  very  pronounced  backache  <  sitting ;  >  rising  up,  walking,  or 
lying  down.  Backache  with  seminal  emissions.  Other  symptoms 
are  :  Frequent  nocturnal  emissions  ;  with  lewd  dreams  ;  with  partial 
or  no  erections ;  impotence.  Headache  <  bending  head  forward 
(Clematis  <  bending  head  backward).  Pimples  on  the  head  and 
elsewhere  ;  itching  of  the  skin  when  warm  in  bed  at  night.  Smarting, 
darting  pains  in  eyes.  Lachnrmation  in  open  air.  Pain  in  hollow 
tooth,  which  feels  too  long  and  is  sensitive  to  touch.  Tongue  thickly 
coated  white  ;  cracks  across  middle.  No  appetite  for  supper.  Urine 
has  strong  pungent  smell.  Drowsiness ;  unrefreshing  sleep.  Sitting 
and  stooping  <  ;  Lying  down,  rising  from  sitting,  walking  >.  Most 
symptoms  are  <  morning.  Cold  air  =:  lachrymation,  and  <  pain 
in  teeth.     Warmth  of  bed  =  itching  all  over.    Jarring  <  headache. 

Rebltioiui. — Compare : — ^Zinc.  (in  pain  in  back  <  sitting)  ;  Agn. 
(impotency)  ;  Nux  (effects  of  masturbation)  ;  Selen.,  Titan.,  Thallium. 
Dr.  Jos.  Anthal,  of  Budapesth,  has  discovered  that  Nitrate  of  Cobalt 
is  a  perfect  antidote  to  Cyanide  of  Potassium,  the  two  forming  an 

insoluble  compound. 

« 

BTMPTOMB. 

I.  Mind. — Great  exhilaration  of  spirits. — Great  vivacity  and  rapid  flow 
of  thoughts  (evening). — More  disposed  to  study. — Feeling  of  great  uneasiness, 
had  to  move  about  and  could  not  keep  still  (with  pain  in  the  stomach  and 
abdomen). 

8.  Head. — Dizziness  during  stool. — Dulness  in  the  head,  with  hard 
stools. — Fulness  in  the  head ;  feels  too  large,  worse  from  stooping  and 
bending  forward. — Pain  in  the  forehead  soon  after  rising. — Bruised  pain 
in  the  head. — Headache  as  if  it  would  burst,  had  to  lie  down,  with  sour 
stomach  after  supper. — As  if  the  top  of  the  head  would  come  off. — When 
stepping,  sensation  as  if  the  brain  went  up  and  down. — Headache  worse  in 
the  room,  going  off  in  the  open  air. — Headache,  with  severe  pain  in  the  small 
of  the  back. — Great  itching  in  the  hairy  scalp,  in  the  beard  and  under 
the  chin. 

3.  Eyes. — Loss  of  vision  on  writing,  dinmess  of  sight ;  while  reading 
the  letters  look  blurred. — ^The  eyes  smart  in  the  light. — On  writing, 
dartings  in  the  eye. — Pain  in  the  back  part  of  the  eyes,  with  headache. — 
Darting  pains  in  the  eyes  on  coming  to  the  .bright  sunshine. — The  eyes  ache 
at  ni^t — Profuse  lachrymation  inlthe  open  air  with  water  from  the  nose,  with 
pain  in  the  eyes  in  cold  air. — Sensation  as  if  something  (sand)  were  under  the 
upper  lid,  obliging  him  to  rub  it. 

4.  Ears. — Stinging  through  the  1.  ear  from  the  roof  of  the  mouth. 


538  COBALTUM 

5.  Nose.— Putrid,  sickish  smell  before  the  nose.— Thin  discharge  from 
the  nose,  water  from  the  nose. — ^The  nose  feels  obstructed. 

6.  Face.— A  large,  very  painful  boil  on  r.  side  of  the  chin. — ^Peeling 
of  the  lips  with  soreness,  they  bleed  easily. — Disposition  to  keep  the  jaws 
tightly  closed. 

8.  Mouth. — Flat  mucous  taste  in  the  mouth.— Tongue  coated  white 
with  cracks  across  the  middle  (morning). — Stinging  pain  in  the  roof  of  the 
mouth.  —Constant  secretion  of  water  in  the  mouth  with  swallowing. 

9.  Throat.— Throat  feels  dry  and  raw.— The  throat  is  filled  with  white 
mucus. — Soreness  of  the  throat  when  hawking. — Sensation  of  fulness  in  the 
throat  from  the  stomach. 

XX.  Stoxnach. — Hiccough  after  eating,  with  soreness  in  the  pit  of  the 
stomach. — Belching  of  wind  (in  the  morning),  (during  stool). — Rising  of  bitter 
water,  with  pain  in  the  stomach,  afterwards  dryness  in  the  throat. — Feeling 
in  the  stomach  as  if  it  contained  undigested  food. — Fulness  of  the  stomach  as 
if  it  were  filled  with  air. — Soreness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  caused  by 
hiccough. 

12.  Abdoxxien. — Shooting  pain  in  region  of  liver. — Sharp  psdn  in  region 
of  spleen,  <  on  taking  a  deep  inspiration. — Feeling  of  emptiness  in  abdomen 
and  umbilicus. — Colic  (5  a.m.)  followed  by  watery  stool  and  tenesmus. — 
RumbUng  in  the  bowels  (before  stool). — Fulness  in  the  abdomen  after  a 
slight  meal. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constant  desire  for  stool  while  walking  worse 
when  standing  still,  followed  by  diarrhoea. — Soft,  thin  stool  with  severe  colic 
in  the  lower  bowels,  followed  by  tenesmus,  pain  in  the  sphincter  ani,  and 
headache. — Small,  hard,  dry  stool. — Feces  like  hazel-nuts,  with  dulness  in 
head. — Pressure  in  the  rectum. — Constant  dropping  of  blood  from  the  anus 
(no  blood  with  the  stool). 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Increased  secretion  of  pale  urine,  frequent 
micturition,  after  drinking  coffee  early  in  the  morning. — Frequent  discharge 
of  small  quantities  of  urine.  Scanty  urine  with  a  greasy  pellicle  and  yellow, 
flocculent  sediment  and  strong  pungent  smell. — Smarting  in  the  end  of  the 
urethra  during  micturition. — Burning  in  the  urethra.—^Secondary)  gonorrhoea, 
with  a  greenish  discharge. 

X5.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Frequent  nocturnal  seminal  emissions  with 
lewd  dreams,  waking  him  up  from  sleep ;  with  headache. — Impotence  and 
nocturnal  emissions  without  erections.— Severe  pain  in  r.  testicle  ;>  after 
passing  urine. — ^Yellow-brown  spots  on  the  genitals  (and  abdomen). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.  —  Frequent  sighing.— On  taking  a  deep 
inspiration,  stitches  in  the  chest,  soreness  in  the  stomach  and  pain  in  the 
spleen. — Cough  with  soreness  in  the  throat  and  rawness  when  hawking. — 
Stitches  in  anterior  part  of  larynx. — Short  hacking  cough,  with  frequent 
eructation  of  a  quantity  of  bright  red  blood,  it  feels  as  if  it  came  from  the 
larynx. — Raising  of  much  thick,  tough  mucus  mixed  with  a  considerable 
quantity  of  bright  red  blood ;  with  the  sensation  of  fulness  and  pressive  pain 
in  the  larynx,  accompanied  by  a  sensation  of  scratching  and  rawness,  with 
occasional  burning  pains,  and  a  disposition  to  keep  the  jaws  closed  tightly ; 
these  sensations  are  increased  by  pressure,  empty  deglutition  and  cold  water* 
— Copious  expectoration  of  frothy  white  mucus. 


COCA  539 

90.  Neck  and  Back«— Pain  between  the  shoulders,  in  the  lombar 
region  and  small  of  the  back.— Aching  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  worse 
when  sitting,  going  ofiF  when  rising,  walking  or  lying  down. — Pun  in  the  back 
(spine),  increasing  while  sitting,  better  on  walking  or  lying  down. — Backache 
with  seminal  emissions. 

n.  Upper  Limbs.— Stitches  in  the  arms  (wrist-joints).— Aching  pain 
in  the  wrist-joints. 

93.  Lower  Limbs.— Shooting  in  the  thighs  from  the  liver.— Excessive 
weakness  of  the  knees.— Foot-sweat,  mostly  between  the  toes,  smelling  sour 
or  like  sole  leather.— Flushes  of  heat  along  the  legs.— Stitches  in  the  legs.— 
Bruised  pain  in  all  the  limbs.— Jerks  in  the  limbs  when  falling  asleep. — 
Ttembling  of  the  limbs,  esp.  the  legs,  aching  when  sitting.— Tingling 
sensation  in  feet  as  if  asleep,  sometimes  like  pricking  of  needles ;  circulation 
imperfect  (Cab.  muriat). 

95.  Skin. — Itching  all  over  when  getting  warm  in  bed. — Itching  of  the 
shoulders ;  outside  of  the  knee. 

96.  Sleep.— Difficulty  of  falling  asleep.— When  falling  asleep  jerks  in 
the  limbs. — ^Wakens  from  lewd  dreams  and  pollutions. — Can  do  with  less  sleep 
than  usual,  wakefulness. — Unrefreshing  sleep. 

97.  Fever.— Chilly  from  11  to  12  a.m. ;  headache  with  nausea  and 
bngoor  from  noon  to  2  p.m. ;  followed  by  fever  and  perspiration. — Chilliness 
with  yawning  from  4  to  5  p.m. ;  feels  dull  and  weak  with  aversion  to 
mental  exertion.— Flushes  of  heat  with  perspiration. 


Coca. 

Erythroxylon  coca.   N.  0.  Lineae  (suborder  Erythroxyleae).    Tincture 
of  leaves.    Solution  or  trituration  of  the  alkaloid,  Cocaine. 

taiaieaK — ^Angina  pectoris.  Asthma.  Constipation,  chronic.  Cough.  Deaf- 
aeas.  Debility.  Fever.  Heart  disease.  Haemorrhoids.  Mountain-sickness,  or 
Veta.    Rheumatism.    Scrofula.    Scurvy.    Voice,  weakness  of. 

Qiaraoteristlos. — Coca  has  been  used  for  centuries  by  natives  of 
West  South  America  as  an  intoxicant ;  and  also  as  a  remedy  for 
"Veta,"  the  condition  induced  in  persons  on  coming  to  live  in  high 
tablelands  : — ^faintness,  throbbing  heart  and  head,  dysentery,  &c.  It 
is  like  tea  and  coffee  in  arresting  tissue-change,  and  enabling  those 
who  take  it  to  undergo  unusual  fatigues.  Like  China  it  produces 
ringing  in  the  ears  and  deafness  and  also  fever.  The  alkaloid 
Cocaine  is  the  well-known  local  anaesthetic.  A  characteristic  symptom 
of  Cocaine  poisoning  is  a  sensation  as  if  small  foreign  bodies  were 
under  the  skin,  generally  like  grains  of  sand ;  or  else  as  of  a  worm 
under  the  skin.  This  is  undoubtedly  the  keynote  symptom  of  Coca. 
It  is  known  as  '^  Magnan's  Symptom,"  named  mer  the  eminent 
neurologist  who  first  described  it.  His  description  is  "  a  sensation 
as  if  foreign  bodies  were  under  the  skin,  generally  small  round 


540  COCA 

substances  like  grains  of  sand."  Korkasoff  reports  a  case  of  multiple 
neuritis  in  which  this  symptom  was  present.  The  patient  was  a 
woman  who  was  being  treated  for  a  uterine  affection  by  means  of 
vaginal  tampons  containing  Cocaine,  A  discontinuance  of  these 
caused  the  disappearance  of  the  symptom.  Cooper  cured  a  case  of 
chronic  rheumatism  in  an  aged  woman  who  had  this  symptom,  with 
the  fraction  of  a  grain  of  Cocaine  given  in  single  doses  at  long 
intervals.  Dr.  J.  W.  Springthorpe  described  (/f.  W.^  February,  i89<^ 
a  variety  of  this  symptom  experienced  by  himself,  and  recorded  in 
a  paper  entitled  "The  Confessions  of  a  Cocainist"  He  called  it 
"  Hunting  the  Cocaine  bug."  "  You  imagine,"  he  says,  "  that  in  your 
skin  are  worms,  or  similar  things,  moving  along.  If  you  touch  them 
with  wool,  and  especially  with  absorbent  wool,  they  run  away  and 
disappear,  only  to  peep  cautiously  out  of  some  corner  to  see  if  there 
is  any  danger.  These  worms  are  projected  only  on  the  Cocainist's 
own  person  or  clothing.  He  sees  them  on  his  linen,  in  his  skin, 
creeping  along  his  penholder,  but  not  on  other  people  or  things,  and 
not  on  clothes  brought  clean  from  the  laundry."  In  a  case  reported 
in  Lancet  J  June,  1886,  a  man  who  had  a  4  per  cent,  solution  of  Cocaine 
applied  to  a  tooth,  swallowed  twenty  to  thirty  drops  of  the  solution. 
Half  an  hour  after,  he  was  seized  with  :  (i)  Feeling  of  faintness  and 
giddiness  ;  (2)  next,  an  attack  of  palpitation  with  a  sense  of  flushing, 
especially  up  the  back.  There  was  marked  diminution  of  smell ; 
great  difficulty  in  producing  vomiting;  a  scarlatina-like  rash  over 
the  body,  especially  about  the  neck ;  dinmess  of  vision  ;  relaxation 
of  sphincters  and  weakness  of  exb-emities;  the  mind  remained 
clear,  but  the  pulse  was  fast,  weak  and  intermittent  A  striking  case 
was  recorded  in  the  British  Medical  journal  of  December  13,  1890  : 
"At  a  meeting  of  the  Paris  Academie  de  M6decine  on  December 
2nd,  M.  Hallopeau  presented  a  communication,  in  which,  after 
distinguishing  two  forms  of  cocaine  poisoning — namely,  the  acute, 
in  which  the  symptoms  are  produced  immediately  after  a  dose  and 
speedily  pass  off,  and  the  chronic,  in  which  they  are  due  to  the 
prolonged  use  of  the  drug — he  related  a  case  which  in  his  opinion 
showed  that  the  poisonous  effects,  while  coming  on  acutely,  might 
last  for  a  considerable  time.  On  March  7,  1890,  a  man  had  about 
eight  milligrammes  of  hydrochlorate  of  cocaine  injected  into  his  gum 
as  a  preUminary  to  the  extraction  of  a  tooth.  Toxic  symptoms  at 
once  supervened.  There  was  intense  precordial  oppression,  with 
thready  pulse,  extreme  excitement  and  loquacity  ;  the  patient  walked 
about  the  room,  hitting  out  at  random  with  his  fists  and  crying  out 
that  he  was  dying.  In  ten  minutes  he  became  quiet  and  the  tooth 
was  extracted,  after  which  he  was  able  to  walk  home,  arriving  there, 
however,  in  a  state  of  extreme  prostration.  Then  ensued  a  train  of 
nervous  symptoms,  such  as  continual  headache,  intractable  sleepless- 
ness, bad  taste  in  the  mouth,  with  occasional  attacks  of  excitement 
accompanied  by  giddiness,  faintness,  and  a  sense  of  impending 
death.  All  brain  work  was  impossible  ;  the  patient  could  not  do  the 
simplest  sum  in  arithmetic,  and  was  in  a  state  of  profound  depression. 
A  sense  of  formication  and  numbness  in  the  hands  and  forearms  was 
almost  incessant.    This  condition  lasted  four  months,  and  it  was  two 


COCA  541 

months  after  the  injection  before  the  least  improvement  was  observed, 
and  then  progress  towards  recovery  was  very  slow.    M.  Hallopeau 
thinks  the  symptoms  indicate  a  poisonous  action  of  cocaine  on  the 
nervous  centres,  and  especially  the  brain.    As  it  is  impossible  to 
suppose  that  so  small  a  quantity  of  the  drug  should  have  remained  in 
the  circulation,  he  is  driven  to  conclude  either  that  it  was  stored  up 
in  the    cells   of   certain  nervous  centres  or  that  it   produced  in 
them  persistent  lesions."     Homoeopaths  have  no  such  difficulty  in 
understanding  the  prolonged  effect  of  a  single  dose.    Among  other 
effects  observed  from  its  use  in  dentistry  are  ''mental  depression 
and  drowsiness,"  and  ''  intense  oppression  in  chest ;  dilatation  of 
pupils  ;  acceleration  of  pulse  and  breathing,  and  mental  excitement." 
W.  J.  Guernsey  Quotes  in  H,  P.,  November,  1888,  from  Med.  Register^ 
August    II,   1880,  the   experience    of  J.  £.  Shadle,  who  applied 
pledgets  of  a  4  per  cent,  solution  of  Cocaine  to  the  nasal  cavities  of 
a  man  of  35,  preparatory  to  operation.    On  each  occasion  he  com- 
plained of  a  "  cold, '  gone,'  relaxed  feeling  about  the  external  genitals, 
and  a  sensation  as  if  the  penis  were  absent.    Towards  the  end  of 
treatment  he  noticed  a  permanent  weakness  of  the  sexual  organs,  and 
finally  seminal  losses  and  impotence  set  in  and  continued  until  the 
Cocaine  was  entirely  withheld."    Compare  this  with  the  experiences 
of  R.  K.  Ghosch  (H.  /?.,  vi.  15,  49)  with  Coca  ^  (which  he  finds,  in 
drop  doses,  act  better  in  such  cases  than  in  the  potencies)  in  palpita- 
tion and  dyspnoea  on  ascending,  when  arising  from  nervous  causes, 
especially  self-abuse ;  in  complaints  from  self -abuse  generally  ;  ex- 
cessive secretion  of  urine  with  or  without  sugar  ;  enuresis  nocturna  ; 
nymphomania  after  childbirth,  during  menses,  from    irritation  of 
eczema  or  other  affections  of  the  vulva ;  in  satyriasis.    The  homoeo- 
pathidty  of  Coca  in  enuresis  is  shown  by  its  effect  in  relaxing  the 
sphincters  in  one  of  the  cases  named  above.      There  are  some 
characteristic  headaches  of  Coca,    In  general  ''headaches  of  high 
altitudes"  may  be  taken  as  a  strong  indication.    Coca  has  also  a 
"tight"  headache,  as  if  a  rubber  band  were  stretched  across  the 
forehead.     After  the  invigorating  effects,  the  sense  of  lightness  and 
ability  to  dimb  a  mountain  without  fatigue,  have  passed  off,  or  when 
the  intoxication  has  been  carried  to  a  further  degree,  a  sense  of 
heaviness,  numbness,  and  drowsiness  succeeds,  with  a  disinclination 
to  move.    There  is  extreme  weariness,  and  especially  weakness  of 
the  legs.    A  pecuUar  symptom  is  :  Sensation  as  if  oesophagus  would 
be  rent  by  force  of  rising  flatus.    Coca  suits  persons  who  are  wearing 
out  under  mental  and  physical  strain ;  bashful,  timid  people ;  old 
people ;  short-breathed  people ;  effects  of  dissipation  ;  weakly,  ner- 
vous, fat  or  plethoric  people  ;  children  with  marasmus.    Effects  of 
cold ;    cough    from    cold    air  ;    rheumatism   from    sUghtest   cold. 
Symptoms  <  climbing,  walking  or  sitting ;  <  cold  air. 

RelatioilB.— Com^^rtf :  Arsen.  (effects  of  climbing) ;  Stram.  likes 
company  and  light ;  Coca  likes  solitude  and  darlmess ;  Paullinia, 
Scutel.,  Cypr.,  Valer.,  Can.  ind.,  tea,  coffee,  tobacco.  Gundlach 
discovered  the  best  antidote  to  be  Gels. 


542  COCA 

STMPTOHB. 

z.  Mind. — Melancholy. — Hypochondriasis.— Mental  depression  with 
drowsiness. — Bashf ulness. — Prefers  solitude  and  darkness. — ^Muddled  feeling 
in  brain. — Loss  of  energy. — Great  mental  excitement. 

2.  Head.— Vertigo  and  fainting.— Tension  over  forehead  as  from  a 
rubber  band. — Headache  just  over  eyebrows ;  not  constant ;  <  raising  head 
or  turning  eyes  up. — Shocks  in  head;  dull,  full  feeling  in  ocdpnt  with 
vertigo,  <  lying  down,  the  only  possible  position  is  on  the  face.— Oocipat 
painful,  tender  to  touch  ;  pains  <  on  coughing. — Headache  with  chilliness ; 
with  dryness  in  throat ;  >  after  eating ;  >  at  sunset 

3.  Eyes.— Intolerance  of  light  with  dilated  pupils.— Dark  doud  before 
eyes ;  eyes  deeply  reddened  until  bloody  tears  gushed  out — ^White,  dark,  and 
fiery  spots  before  eyes  ;  flickering  or  flashing. — Indistinct  vision  soon  followed 
by  headache  and  nausea. — ^Aching  pain  behind  eyes  causing  feeling  as  if 
squinting  inwards. 

4.  Ears. — Ringing,  buzzing,  and  humming  in  ears ;  with  fever. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis  passing  from  r.  to  1.— Sense  of  smell  ^eatly 
diminished. 

8.  Mouth. — Month  dry,  esp.  on  waking. 

9.  Throat. — Uvula  feels  swollen ;  swallowing  difficult — Dryness  early 
in  morning. 

iz.  Stomach. — Retards  hunger  and  thirst. — Loss  of  appetite  esp.  for 
solid  food. — Craves  spirits  and  tobacco.— Ailments  from  salt  food. — Flatus 
rises  with  such  force,  it  seems  as  if  oesophagus  would  be  rent  by  it — Empty 
feeling  or  full  feeling  in  stomach.— Confirmed  dyspepsia,  esp.  in  hypo- 
chondriacs. 

la.  Abdomen. — Pressure  and  tension  in  hypochondria  after  meals. — 
Flatulence. — ^Violent  bellyache,  with  tympanitic  distension. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Flatus  from  bowels,  smells  like  burnt  gun- 
powder.— Dysentery. — Constipation  from  inactivity  of  rectum;  stools  dry; 
Uke  walnuts. — Piles  painful  on  walking  or  sitting. — Sphincters  relaxed. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Fine  stitches  in  female  urethra  before  urinating. 
— Frequent  desire,  with  increased  flow. — Disturbed  frequently  at  night — 
Nocturnal  enuresis. — Film  on  urine. — Urine  smells  like  sweat — ^Yellowish 
red  flocculent  deposits ;  oily  scum  on  surface. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sensation  as  if  penis  were  absent-^ 
Coldness,  "gone"  sensation,  relaxation  of  external  parts. —  Emissions. — 
Nervous  prostration  from  sexual  excess. — Spermatorrhcea  and  partial  impo- 
tence.— Satyriasis. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  flow  in  gushes  awakening  her 
from  sound  sleep. — Nymphomania,  during  menses ;  and  after  parturition. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Weak  voice.— Phthisis  laryngea,  when  from 
rritability  of  pharynx  stomach  will  retain  no  food. — Rapid  breathings. — 
Painful  shortness  of  breath ;  at  night. — Short  breath  in  athletes,  or  in  those 
taking  alcohol  or  tobacco  in  excess. — Haemoptysis. — On  coughing,  pain  in 
occiput. — ^Cough  from  cold  air  or  fast  walking. — Expectoration  of  small 
lumps  like  boiled  starch,  immediately  after  rising  in  morning. 

18.  Chest. — Sudden  attack  of  cramp  in  chest ;  became  cold  and  unable 


COCCINELLA  543 

to  coDtiiiiie  the  ascent— Intense  oppression  in  chest^Rosh  of  blood  to  chest 
with  sli^t  headache. — Emphysema. 

ig.  Heart. — Palpitation  with  flashing.— Violent  and  andible  palpita- 
tion ;  angina  pectoris ;  from  climbing  or  over-exertion.— Pnlse  greatly 
accelerated ;  intermittent.— Pulse  eartremely  slow  and  intermittent,  loses  one 
beat  in  four. 

SI.  Umbs.— Feeling  of  internal  cold  with  numbness  of  hands  and  feet. 
^Weakness  of  extremities. 

tS-    Skin. — Scarlatina-like  rash  over  h6dy,  esp.  the  neck. 

sfi.    Sleep. — Inclination  to  sleep,  but  can  find  no  rest. — Great  drowsiness. 

•7.  Fever.— Sense  of  flushing,  esp.  up  the  back  (with  palpitation). 
ChilUness  and  headache  in  afternoon.— At  night  heat  and  sleeplessness,  with 
throbbing  in  arteries. — Flushes  of  heat  on  the  back  and  burning  in  abdomen. 
—Extreme  weariness  accompanies  the  fever. — Night  sweats 


Goccinella. 

Cocdnella  septempunctata.   Ladybird.  Sun-chafer.  N.  0.  Coleoptera. 
Tincture  of  freshly  crushed  beetles. 

QlaieaL— Pace,  neuralgia  of .    Hydrophobia.    Tic  douloureux.    Toothache. 

OharaeteFlBtiea. — Most  of  the  symptoms  of  Cocdnella  appear  in 
the  teeth  and  nerves  of  the  face  and  mouth.  It  has  been  used  in 
hydrophobia,  and  therein  its  actions  would  appear  to  be  analogous  to 
that  of  Cantharis,  Symptoms  indicating  it  are  :  <  by  any  bright 
object.  Is  awakened  by  profuse  accumiSation  of  saliva  ;  vomits  and 
complains  of  sore  throat.  The  neuralgia  of  Coccin.  is  <  at  night, 
accompanied  by  icy  cold  extremities  and  cold,  moist  skin  ;  the  right 
side  is  most  affected.  Pains  extend  from  one  part  to  another,  and 
may  jump  from  side  to  side.  Its  attacks  recur  periodically ;  are  often 
of  brief  duration  but  quickly  recurring,  generally  <  at  night ;  but 
may  be  entirely  absent  in  the  night  Returning  every  eight,  ten, 
twelve,  fourteen,  or  twenty  days. 

RttlAtioiiS.— Caf/r^ar^  ;  in  tic  douloureux,  Spi.,  Thuj. 

BTMPTOMB. 

8.  Head. — Dull  headache,  as  from  an  enlargement  of  the  brain  towards 
the  occiput. — Semi-lateral,  tearing  and  shooting  pains  in  the  sinciput. 

6.  Face. — Faceache,  the  disappearance  of  which  is  attended  by  faint- 
ness,  oppressed  breathing,  and  intermittent  pulse. — Flush  of  blood  (con- 
gestion) to  face,  like  a  transient  heat;  cheeks  red,  esp.  r. — Pressure  and 
heaviness,  esp.  over  r.  eye,  which  is  sensitive  to  least  touch. — During  paroxysm, 
cannot  open  eyes,  pain  <  by  any  bright  object. — ^Tearing,  rhythmical  with 
poise,  extending  from  r.  upper  jaw  to  the  lobule  of  ear. 

7*  Teeth. — Chronic  pain  extending  from  superior  molars  to  forehead  ; 
affected  part  paler ;  attack  lasts  only  a  minute  but  is  instantly  repeated,  <  at 


544  COCCULUS 

night,  preventing  sleep.^-Sensation  of  coldness  in  all  the  teeth ;  in  the  entire 
buccal  cavity. — Rhythmical,  violent  drawing  in  both  rows  of  teeth  while 
eating. — Sensation  as  though  the  teeth  would  be  drawn  out ;  severe  drawing 
in  jerks. — ^Jerking  and  tearing  with  stitches,  extending  to  occiput  with  warmth 
through  whole  head.— Painful  sensation  in  back  teeth  as  if  they  were  hollow 
and  air  were  forced  into  them. — Pulsative  jerking  in  back  teeth. — Swollen 
gum. 

8.    Mouth.— Tobacco  bites  the  tongue  severely. 

Q.    Throat. — Sensation  in  the  throat  as  though  the  uvula  was  too  long 
(Nux  vam.  has  this  same  sensation,  when  the  uvula  is  bluish  and  inflamed}. 

10.    Appetite.— Appetite  lost. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — With  disappearance  of  p^n  in  face  respi- 
ration becomes  oppressed. 

26.  Sleep. — Nocturnal  attacks  of  pain  entirely  preventing  sleep,  but  could 
not  sleep  even  when  pain  did  not  appear. — ^Attack  ends  in  a  general  heat  and 
sleep  of  two  or  three  hours,  from  which  he  wakes  without  any  pain. 


Coccolas. 

Cocculus  Indicus.  N,  0,  Menispermaceae.  A  tincture  is  prepared 
from  the  powdered  seeds,  which  contain  a  crystallisable 
principle  Picrotoxinc  (which  see),  a  powerful  poison. 

Cllnieal. — ^Anger,  effects  of.  Bones,  affections  of,  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis. 
Chorea.  Colic,  Convulsions.  Debility.  Paintness.  Fear,  effects  of.  Haemorrhoids. 
Headache,  Hernia.  Intermittent  fever.  Kneet  weakness  of;  cracking  in.  Memory, 
weak.  Mental  excitement,  effects  of.  Menstrual  headache.  Menstruation,  hainfuL 
Overstrain,  bodily  or  mental.  Palpitation.  Paralysis.  Parotitis.  Phtniriasis. 
Rheumatism.  Riding  in  carriage,  effects  of.  Sea-sickness.  Sleep,  affecHonsfrom  loss 
of.    Somnolence.    Spasms.    Spinal  irritation.    Tympany.    Vertigo.    Vomiting. 

CharaoteristiOB. — Cocculus  has  been  used  from  ancient  tiroes  as 
a  poison  for  stupefying  fish,  and  making  them  easy  to  catch.  Corre- 
spondingly we  find  it  produces  great  disturbance  of  the  sensorimn  in 
human  beings,  and  all  the  symptoms  of  intoxication.  It  is  commonly 
used  as  an  adulteration  of  beer  to  heighten  its  intoxicating  prof>erties. 
A  very  characteristic  symptom  is  a  sensation  of  hoUowness  or  emptiness 
in  the  head  or  other  parts.  AUied  to  this  is  a  sense  of  Ughtness  of 
body.  Another  characteristic  is  an  opening  and  shutting  sensation, 
especially  in  the  occiput.  Along  with  the  vertigo  is  nausea  and 
vomiting  which  bring  it  into  close  relation  with  sea-sickness  and 
carriage-sickness.  CoccuL  corresponds  perfectly  to  the  sensitive 
condition  caused  by  loss  of  sleep  and  night-watching,  and  is  the  first 
remedy  to  think  of  for  removing  this.  "Irritable  weakness"  is  a 
leading  note  in  the  Cocculus  effects.  The  Cocculus  patient  is  very 
sensitive  to  fear,  anger,  grief,  and  all  mental  disturbances ;  also  to 
noise  and  touch.  Enlargement  of  Hver  after  anger.  Easily  startled. 
Fear  of  ghosts  and  spectres.  Stinging  pains,  stitches,  constriction  ; 
in  the  hands  a  pithy  feeling.    Many  symptoms  are  <  at  menstrual 


COCCULUS  545 

period  ;  piles  during  menses.  Cocculus  has  cured  a  case  of  delirium  at 
onset  of  menses  during  first  and  second  days ;  the  patient  said,  '^  I 
always  see  something  alive,  on  wall,  floor,  chairs,  or  anywhere,  always 
roUingy  and  will  roll  on  me."  Cocculus  is  suited  to  persons  of  mild 
and  duggish  temperament ;  light-haired  persons  ;  hypochrondriacal, 
timid,  fearful,  and  nervous  persons.  Other  prominent  features  of 
Coccul.  are  :  Paralytic  pains,  or  pains  as  of  dislocation.  Paralytic 
weakness ;  lax-muscles.  '*  Weakness  of  neck  muscles  with  heaviness 
of  head."  Sensation  as  if  single  parts  had  gone  to  sleep.  Im- 
movability of  parts  affected.  Of  localities,  the  right  hypochondrium 
(especially  liver),  inner  hypogastrium,  inner  forehead,  back,  upper 
arm,  and  bones  of  arm  are  chiefly  affected.  This  has  been  verihed  : 
"Spasmodic,  flatulent  colic,  about  midnight,  flatus  passed  without 
relief,"  recurring  several  nights ;  promptly  cured  by  CoccuL  3X. 
lippe  cured  a  case  of  enlargement  of  the  liver  after  parturition,  the 
indication  being  **the  Uver  was  more  painful  after  anger."  The 
sensitiveness  to  touch  is  very  great  and  serves  to  indicate  Cocculus 
in  preference  to  other  remedies  in  many  affections  where  this  is 
pronounced,  in  articular  rheumatism,  in  ulcers,  in  neuralgic  affections 
of  bones.    The  least  jar  is  unbearable  (travelling  by  land  or  sea). 

<  By  touch,  pressure,  or  jar.  <  From  motion  generally  ;  moving 
body ;  rising  from  bed ;  bending  over  or  stooping.  <  Kneeling  ; 
walking ;  swallowing  saliva.  Sitting  >  some  symptoms.  Many 
symptoms  are  <  evening  and  night,  especially  about  midnight  and 
I  a.nL  Sensitive  to  air  either  hot  or  cold.  Longs  for  cold  drinks, 
but  eating  or  drinking  anything  cold  =  tearing  in  limbs.   <  Open  air. 

<  From  sun.  <  By  warmth  of  bed.  >  In  a  room.  A  decoction 
of  Cocculus  is  a  domestic  remedy  used  locally  for  destroying  head- 
er body-lice. 

Seiatioiift. — Antidoied  by :  Camph.,  Cham.,  Cupr.,  Ign.,  Nux  v., 
Staph.  //  antidotes  :  Alcohol,  Tobacco,  Cham.,  Cup.,  Ign.,  Nux  v.,  and 
the  fever  of  Thuj.  Incompatible  with  :  Caust.,  Coffee.  Compatible  : 
Follows  well  Aco.  (endocarditis  with  fearfulness)  ;  Cham.,  Nux,  Ign. 
Compare :  Aco.,  Act.  r.  ;  Ant.  c.  (gastralgia).  Agar,  (somnolency). 
Ant.  t.,  Ars.,  Bell.,  Calc,  Carb.  v.  (parotitis),  Cham.,  Coff.,  Cupr., 
Ign.  (headache),  Ip.,  lod.,  Lach.,  Merc,  Mosch.,  Nitr.,  Nux  mos. 
(somnolency),  Oleand.,  Petr.,  Puis,  (headache),  Rhus,  Sabi.,  Sassafras, 
ScuteL,  Silic,  Stram.,  Tab.,  Val.,  Ver.  In  effects  from  noise,  Nux, 
Nit.  ac.  Sense  of  lightness,  Asar.,  Can.  ind.,  Calc,  Gels.,  Sticta,  Sil., 
Thuj.  j  menstrual  sick  headache,  Lac.  def.  ;  fear  of  ghosts,  Aco.,  Ars., 
Bro.,  Carb.  v..  Lye,  Pho.,  PuL,  Sul.,  Zn.  Umbilical  hernia,  Nux 
(without  urging,  Bry.,  Nat.  mur.,  Ver.) ;  <  from  kneeling,  Mag.  c, 
Sep. ;  nausea  constant,  Ip.,  KaU  c,  Sul.,  Ign.,  Acet.  ac. ;  uterine  spasm, 
dysmenia,  dark  flow,  Ign.  (Coccul.  is  distinguished  by  having  weak, 
lame  feeling  in  small  of  back  ;  as  if  at>out  to  be  paralysed  ,*  trembles 
on  beginning  to  walk) ;  weak  from  talking,  Ver.,  Sul.,  Calc. ; 
functional  paralysis  from  fatigue  or  mental  emotions,  Ign.,  Pho., 
Nat.  m.,  Collins.  ;  in  occipital  headache.  Gels.,  Jug.  c  Weakness  of 
neck  muscles.  Ant.  t. ;  >  putting  head  back,  Seneg.  «,  Clem., 
Cinnab.).  Compare  also:  Picrotoxin  and  Picric  acid  in  paralytic 
VOL,  I.  36 


546  COCCULUS 

sensations   and   e£Fects  of   fatigue.     Teste  places  CoccuL  in   his 
Causticum  group. 

Causatioil.— Anger.  Fright.  Noise.  Sleep,  loss  of-  Sea- 
sickness. Travelling.  Over-strain,  mental  or  bodily.  Sun.  Tea- 
drinking. 

BTMPTOMS. 

z.  Mind. — Pre-occupation  of  mind,  and  sad  and  melancholy  reflections, 
as  if  the  patient  had  sustained  wrongs. — He  sits  as  if  wrapped  in  deep  sad 
thoughts,  and  does  not  take  notice  of  anything ;  anxiety. — Loss  of  will  and 
power  to  decide  on  any  action. — Hypochondriacal  humour  ;  despair. — Strong, 
anxious  apprehension,  inquietude,  and  fear  of  death.— Disposition  to  be 
frightened. — Excessive  susceptibility. — Disposition  to  take  everything  in  bad 
part  and  to  be  angry. — Mania. — Mistakes  concerning  the  lapse  of  time;  it 
passes  too  quickly. 

s.  Head.--Confusion  of  the  head,  esp.  after  eating  or  drinking. — 
Dulness  in  the  head,  increased  by  reading  or  meditation. — ^Vertigo,  as  from 
intoxication,  or  on  rising  up  in  the  bed,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  which  forces 
the  patient  to  lie  down  again. — Fits  of  vertigo,  with  nausea  and  loss  of  con- 
sciousness.—Headache,  with  inclination  to  vomit  or  vomiting,  and  pain  as 
from  a  bruise  in  the  intestines. — ^The  headache  is  aggravated  after  sleeping, 
eating,  or  drinking  (coffee),  in  the  open  air,  while  riding  in  a  carriage ;  and  is 
relieved  in  a  warm  room,  or  when  becoming  warm  in  bed. — Violent  aching 
pains,  esp.  in  the  forehead. — Stupid  feeling  in  the  head  (cold  perspiration 
on  forehead  and  hands). — During  motion,  headache,  as  if  the  eyes  were 
being  torn  from  the  sockets,  with  vertigo. — Pain  in  the  head,  which  seems,  as 
it  were,  empty  and  hollow,  or  sensation  of  constriction  in  the  brain. — 
Pulsative  pains,  sometimes  in  the  crown  of  the  head,  sometimes  in  the 
temples. — Convulsive  trembling  of  the  head,  caused  by  weakness  of  the 
muscles  of  the  neck ;  worse  after  sleeping  and  in  the  open  air,  from  coffee 
and  tobacco  ;  better  in  the  warm  room. 

3.  Eyes. — Pressure  and  pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  eyes,  and  difficolty 
in  opening  the  eyelids  at  night. — Pain  in  the  eyes,  as  if  they  were  torn  out  of 
the  head  (with  headache). — Convulsive  rolling  of  the  balls  of  the  eyes  during 
the  spasms. — Pupils  very  much  dilated ;  or  contracted. — Dryness  erf  the  eye^- 
lids. — Inflammation  of  the  eyelids. — Eyes  prominent  and  glassy. — Dim- 
sightedness  (after  reading  a  short  time  the  print  is  all  blurred). — Confusion  of 
sight,  with  black  spots  before  the  eyes. — Phantoms  before  the  eyes. 

4.  Ears. — Buzzing  in  the  ears,  with  hardness  of  hearing,  and  sensation 
as  if  the  ears  were  stopped ;  with  noise  as  from  rushing  watet. — ^The  r.  ear 
feels  closed. — Swelling  of  the  parotids. 

5.  Nose.— Swelling  of  the  nose,  sometimes  semi-lateral  (r.). — Coryza, 
with  ulcerated  nostrils. — ^Very  acute  sense  of  smell. 

6.  Face. — Face  of  a  burning  red,  puffed  and  hot.— Transient  heat  in 
the  cheeks. — Flushes  of  heat  in  the  face  after  drinking. — Blue  circles  round 
the  eyes. — Face  convulsively  contracted. — Cramps  in  the  cheek-bone  and  in 
the  masseters. — Swelling  and  induration  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands. 

7.  Teeth. — Pains  in  carious  teeth,  but  only  when  eating. — Looseness  of 
the  teeth,  with  swelling  of  the  gums. 


COGCUtUS  547 

&  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth  (in  the  night),  without  thirst — Foam 
before  the  mouth,  forming  bubbles.-^Tongue  loaded  with  a  yellow  coating. 

g.  Throat.— Difficulty  of  speech,  as  from  paralysis  of  the  tongue.— 
Dryness  of  the  throat — Excessive  sensitiveness  of  the  palate ;  the  food  seems 
to  be  too  strong,  or  too  salt. — Constriction  in  the  gullet,  which  seems  to  be 
paralysed. — Burning  pain  in  the  cssophagus,  and  in  the  throat,  with  sulphurous 
taste  in  the  mouth. 

10.  Appetite.— Metallic,  copperish  taste. — ^Acid  taste,  esp.  after  a 
meal,  or  when  coughing.— Acid  taste  of  bread. — Bitter  taste  of  tobacco. — 
Desire  for  cold  drinks,  and  esp.  for  beer.— Thirst  during  a  meal. — 
Excessive  loathing  of  all  food  and  drink. — Repugnance  to  all  acids.— 
Balimy. 

11.  Stomach. — Risings,  with  pain  in  the  stomach  and  in  the  epigas- 
trium.—Risings  with  inclination  to  vomit. — Frequent  empty  eructations, 
leaving  a  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  and  throat. — Eructations  with  nausea  and 
sticking  pains  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Empty,  or  fetid  and  putrid  risings. 
—Attacks  of  nausea  inducing  syncope. — Inclination  to  vomit  on  rising  up  in 
the  bed,  which  compels  the  patient  to  lie  down  again. — Inclination  to  vomit 
daring  a  meal,  or  in  consequence  of  a  chill,  with  abundant  accumulation  of 
saliva.— Vomiting  and  nausea  from  the  motion  of  a  carriage,  or  of  the  sea. — 
Sensation  of  fulness  in  the  stomach,  with  difficulty  of  respiration. — ^Violent 
cramp-like  pains,  squeezing,  as  if  from  a  claw  and  cramps  in  the  stomach, 
sometimes  a  short  time  after  a  meal. — ^Anxious  oppression  and  pinchings  in 
the  epigastrium,  with  difficulty  of  respiration. 

12  Abdomen. — Pain  in  the  hypochondria  as  from  a  bruise. — Pressive 
pain  in  the  hepatic  region,  aggravated  by  coughing  or  stooping. — Shootings  in 
the  hepatic  region. — Abdominal  pains,  as  if  the  intestines  were  bruised,  or  as 
from  an  internal  abscess,  when  moving. — Pressure,  as  from  a  stone,  in  the 
umbilical  region,  and  in  the  abdomen. — Sensation  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  it 
were  hollow  and  empty. — Inflation  of  the  abdomen. — ^Contractive  pinchings 
in  the  upper  part, of  the  abdomen,  with  suspension  of  respiration. — Burning 
pains,  pullings  and  tearings  in  the  abdomen. — Cramp-like  pains  in  the 
abdomen. — Hysterical  spasms  in  the  abdomen,  in  women. — Flatulent,  cramp- 
like colic,  esp.  at  night,  aggravated  by  coughing,  or  by  stooping  forwards. — 
Tendency  to  protrusion  of  inguinal  hernia. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation,  with  tenesmus. — Evacuation  hard 
and  difficult. — Ine£Fectual  desire  for  stool,  with  constipation. — Contractive 
pain  in  the  rectum,  preventing  sitting  (in  the  afternoon). — Diarrhoea,  with 
emission  of  flatulency  before  the  stool. — Loose  evacuation  of  a  putrid  smell. 
—Faeces  soft  and  yellow,  which  cause  burning  in  the  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — ^Aqueous  urine  with  urgent  inclination. — 
Frequent  want  to  make  water,  even  in  pregnant  women. — Frequent  desire  to 
urinate,  with  small  discharges. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Itching  in  the  scrotum. — Pulling  pains  as 
from  a  bruise  in  the  testes,  on  their  being  touched. — Great  sensibility  and 
excitability  of  the  genital  parts,  with  desire  for  coition. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Premature  catamenia,  with  cramps  in 
the  abdomen. — Painful  catamenia,  with  abundant  discharge  of  coagulated 
blood,  followed  by  haemorrhoids. — Suppression  of  catamenia,  with  spasmodic 


548  COCCULUS 

and  pressive  colic,  flatulency,  paralytic  debility,  oppression,  anxiety,  cramps 
in  the  chest,  fits  of  nausea,  even  to  fainting,  and  convulsive  movements  of 
the  limbs. — Catamenia  too  scanty  and  irregular,  with  leucorrhoea  in  the 
intervals. — (Metrorrhagia.)^Discharge  of  sanguineous  mucus  from  the  uterus, 
during  pregnancy. — Leucorrhoea  like  blood. — Leucorrhoea,  similar  to  water 
in  which  meat  has  been  washed,  intermixed  with  a  sanious  and  purulent 
serum. — Cramps  in  the  uterus. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Fatiguing  cough,  from  oppression  of  the 
chest,  which  manifests  itself  only  during  the  cough. — ^Oppressed  breathing, 
from  contractive  sensation  in  the  trachea,  as  if  irritated  by  smoke,  causing 
constant  coughing. — Periodical  cough,  every  fourth  night,  towards  midnight, 
or  about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,  with  constriction  in  the  throat  which 
brings  on  coughing. 

18.  Chest. — Suspension  of  respiration,  which  stops  in  the  pit  of  the 
throat,  as  if  from  constriction  of  the  throat. — ^Tightness  and  constriction  of 
r.  side  of  chest. — Stitches  in  the  chest  (sternum)  when  walking. — Short, 
intermittent  respiration. — Pressure  on  the  chest,  as  if  from  a  stone. — 
Hysterical  spasms  in  chest.— Cramps  iA  chest,  with  sighs  and  groans. — 
Tensive  constriction  in  the  chest,  sometimes  on  one  side  only,  with  difficulty 
of  respiration. — Gurgling  and  sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  chest — Fatigue 
of  the  chest,  from  reading  aloud. — Congestion  in  the  chest,  with  anxiety. — 
Red  spots  on  the  chest. 

19.  Heart.— Palpitation  of  the  heart ;  nervous,  with  anxiety. 

90.  Neck  and  Back.— Cracking  of  the  vertebrae  of  the  neok,  during 
movement. — ^Weakness  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  which  are  inadequate  to 
the  support  of  the  head.— Red  spots  on  the  neck.— Paral3rtic  tearings  (in  the 
back  and)  in  the  loins. — Pullings  and  tearings  in  the  back,  esp.  when  speaking, 
walking,  and  stooping.— Tremor  in  the  back. — Shootings  between  the  shoulder- 
blades,  and  in  the  loins. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Lancinations  in  the  shoulder-joint,  and  in  the 
arm,  during  repose. — Lancinating  pains  in  the  arm,  proceeding  from  a 
wounded  finger. — Convulsions  of  the  arm,  with  retraction  of  the  thumbs.— 
Paralysis  of  the  arms. — Palpitation  of  the  muscles  of  the  arm.— Pain,  as 
from  a  bruise,  in  the  bones  of  the  arm,  during  movement  (when  lifting  them 
up,  and  when  touching  them). — Lameness  of  the  arm  (cannot  write). — Hot 
and  arthritic  swelling  of  the  hands. — Numbness,  or  heat  and  cold  alternately, 
of  one  or  other  of  the  hands. — ^Tingling  of  hands  and  paralytic  tr«nbling.— 
Torpor  of  the  hands. — Cramp-like  contractions,  and  starting  of  the  fingers. 

23.  Lower  Limbs.— Paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs,  proceeding  from  the 
loins. — Drawing  tearings  in  the  knees,  feet,  and  toes. — Pain  as  if  from  a  bruise 
in  the  thighs,  during  movement. — Pain  in  the  heel  (os  calcis)  as  if  bruised.— 
Cracking  in  1.  hip-joint.— Cracking  of  the  knees,  during  movement — Inflam- 
matory swelling  of  the  knee,  with  transient  lancinations. — Burning  sensation 
in  the  feet. — Hot  and  itching  swelling  of  the  feet,  sometimes  in  the  evening. 
— Numbness  in  the  feet. — Cold  and  perspiration  of  the  feet. 

24.  Generalities.— Pullings  and  paralytic  tearings,  by  fits,  or  continuous, 
in  the  limbs  and  in  the  bones. — Paralytic  immobility  of  the  limbs,  with 
drawing  pains  in  the  bones. — Convulsive  movements  of  the  muscles  in 
di£Eerent  parts.- Aching,  digging  pains  in  the  limbs. — Pains,  as  from  a  bruise, 


COCCULUS  549 

even  in  the  internal  organs. — Sensations  of  hoUowness ;  as  if  bruised  in  outer 
parts;  same  in  bones;  numb  feeling  of  outer  parts;  sensation  as  if  single 
parts  bad  gone  to  sleep. — ^Affections  of  the  r.  hypochondrium  (particularly  of 
the  liver) ;  inner  hypogastrium,  inner  forehead,  back,  upper  arm,  bones  of  the 
arm.— Aversion  to  open  air;  hysterics;  paleness  of  the  skin,  red  spots; 
shuddering  in  general. — Sensation  of  hoUowness  or  of  constriction  in  the 
internal  organs. — Painful  sensibility  of  the  limbs  to  the  slightest  touch. — 
Painful  sti£Fness  and  crackings  in  the  joints. — Semi-lateral  sufferings. — Rheu- 
matic pains,  with  hot  swelling  of  the  parts  affected. — ^Attacks  of  gout,  with 
swelling  of  the  affected  parts. — Shooting  pains  in  lymphatic  swelling. — En- 
gorgement and  induration  of  the  glands. — Haemorrhage. — Cramps  and  con- 
vulsions of  the  limbs,  and  of  the  whole  body,  sometimes  induced  by  ulcers,  or 
by  wounds,  painfully  sensitive  to  the  touch,  or  on  using  the  parts  affected. — Con- 
vulsive movements  of  the  limbs  and  of  the  muscles,  as  in  St.  Vitus'  dance. — 
During  the  convulsive  fits,  face  red,  puffed,  and  hot. — ^Trembling  of  the  limbs. 
—Attacks  of  epilepsy. — Paralysis,  chiefly  semi-lateral,  with  insensibility  of 
the  parts  affected. — ^Aggravation  of  the  sufferings  by  sleep,  speech,  drinking, 
and  eating,  but  esp.  on  taking  coffee  or  smoking  tobacco,  as  well  as  by 
cold  air. — Hysterical  ^asms,  vnth  anguish. — Weakness  and  loss  of  strength, 
after  the  least  bodily  fatigue,  movement,  or  the  interruption  of  sleep. — Want 
of  vital  energy. — Fainting  fits. — Numbness,  sometimes  of  the  hands,  some- 
times of  the  feet,  in  transient  fits. — The  open  air  is  insupportable,  whether  it 
be  warm  or  cold. — Emaciation. 

25.  Skin. — Great  itching,  esp.  in  the  evening,  or  when  undressing,  or 
at  night  in  bed. — Red  pimples,  like  grains  of  millet,  with  itching  in  a  waiia 
temperature. — Eruption  of  hard  and  knotty  pimples,  with  red  areolas  and 
burning  pain. — Induration,  cold  swelling  of  the  glands,  with  stinging  pains. — 
Ulcers  very  sensitive  to  contact. — Red  spots  in  the  chest  and  on  the  side  of 
the  neck. — Pale  (chlorotic)  colour  of  the  skin. 

26.  Sleep.— -Obstinate  inclination  to  sleep  in  the  morning. — Sleeplessness 
on  account  of  anxiety  and  bodily  restlessness. — Spasmodic  yawning. — Sleep 
retarded  in  consequence  of  a  great  flow  of  ideas. — Half  sleep,  like  coma  vigil. 
—Sleep  interrupted  by  frightful  anguish  and  inquietude. — During  sleep,  starts, 
cries,  convulsive  movements  of  the  hands,  of  the  eyes,  and  of  the  head. — 
^^d  dreams,  exciting  fear. — Anxious,  frightful  dreams,  dreams  of  death, 
of  disease,  Ac. — Fear  of  ghosts  at  night. — Sleep  unrefreshing,  with  frequent 
waking. 

27.  Fever. — Shivering,  and  sensation  of  cold,  with  trembling. — In  the 
evening,  shivering  and  shuddering  in  the  back. — Chill  in  the  afternoon  and 
evening  principally  on  the  legs  and  in  the  back ;  not  relieved  by  heat — Dry 
heat  during  the  night. — Perspiration  during  the  night,  which  is  only  cold 
on  the  face. — Morning  sweat,  esp.  on  the  chest. — Intermittent  fever,  with 
colic  and  lameness  of  the  small  of  the  back. — Fever,  with  tendency  to  become 
chilly,  though  the  skin  is  hot  to  the  touch. — Chilliness  alternating  with  heat. 
—Burning  heat  and  redness  of  the  cheeks,  often  with  cold  in  the  feet. — Fever 
with  cramp-like  pains  in  the  stomach,  and  paralytic  weakness  in  the  loins. — 
Easy  perspiration  during  movement,  with  great  fatigue. — Sweats  night  and 
morning.— Pulse  full,  hard,  and  frequent.— Pulse  small^and  spasmodic ;  some- 
times it  cannot  be  felt. 


550  COCCUS  CACTI 

Coccus  Cacti. 

Cochineal.  iV.  0.  Hemiptera.  An  insect  infesting  cactus  plants.  The 
dried  bodies  of  the  female  insects  are  used  for  making  a  tinc- 
ture or  trituration.  They  also  constitute  a  well-known  dye. 
(Coccus  Cacti  has  sometimes  been  confounded  with  CoccineUa 
septcmpunctatay  both  insects  being  known  as  '*  Cochenille "  in 
French.) 

OUnical.— Asthma.  Backache.  Catarrh.  Gonorrhoea.  Gravel.  Haemorrhages. 
Heart,  affections  of .  Impotence.  Irritation,  Lahia^  inflammation  of.  Menorrhagia. 
Nephritis.    Phthisis.    Spasms.    Tinnitus.    Uric  acid  diathesis.    Wnooping-cougk. 

Charaoteristios. — Coccus  cacti  acts  more  especially  on  mucous 
membranes.  It  compares  with  Cantharis  in  its  action  on  the  renal 
organs,  and  with  Cactus  in  causing  haemorrhages,  in  disturbing  the 
heart  and  in  causing  lancinating,  stitching,  and  pricking  sensations. 
Itching,  sticking  and  biting  in  various  parts  of  the  skin  ]  red  spots  and 
itching  pimples.  Sensations  of  irritation  predominate,  especially  in 
throat  and  respiratory  organs,  eyes  and  urino-genital  organs.  In  the 
throat  there  is  a  sensation  as  if  a  hair  or  crumb  were  lodged  behind 
larynx,  and  as  if  a  thread  were  hanging  down  the  back  of  the  throat 
causing  a  cough.  Haemorrhages  are  apt  to  be  in  large  black  clots, 
especially  haemorrhages  from  kidneys  and  uterus.  Lancinating  pains 
and  itching  of  glans  penis,  symptoms  of  the  passage  of  small  cadculi. 
The  cough  exactly  corresponds  to  the  whooping-cough  type,  there  is 
no  remedy  which  has  a  wider  range  in  this  a£Fection.  "Cough  <  in 
morning ;  the  child  awakens  and  is  immediately  seized  with  a 
paroxysm  of  coughing  ending  in  vomiting  clear,  ropy  mucus  hanging  in 
long  strings  from  the  mouth."  Hoarseness.  Fatigue  of  vocal  organs. 
Violent  tickling  in  larynx.  Stitching  and  ulcerating  pains  below 
clavicles,  especially  left.  Peculiar  sensations  are :  As  if  a  ball  or 
stone  lying  in  stomach  ;  raging  pain  as  though  a  fluid  were  injected 
into  a  small  blood-vessel  ,*  as  if  something  ascending  towards  stomach ; 
as  of  mucus  ascending  and  descending  trachea  ;  as  of  a  plug  of  mucus 
moving  in  chest ;  as  if  head  would  split.  Kunkel  records  the  case  of 
a  man,  75,  who  had  suffered  from  nocturnal  enuresis  up  to  the  age  of 
seven.  When  almost  20  he  frequently  passed  large  quantities  of  uric 
acid,  and  at  the  same  time  he  began  to  have  symptoms  of  chronic 
catarrh  of  the  colon,  frequent  scanty  stools,  much  mucus,  cross 
humour,  itching  anus,  threatening  of  piles  but  no  bleeding.  Insonmia 
soon  followed.  Coc.  c.  2  and  3  was  ^ven  without  benefit  Aqua  calds 
did  some  good  but  not  much.  In  three  successive  years  he  was  sent  to 
Carlsbad  with  good  result  to  the  intestinal  catarrh,  but  the  sleepless- 
ness was  untouched.  Gradually  all  kinds  of  arthritic  symptoms 
developed,  especially  in  knees.  There  was  occasionally  considerable 
flow  of  urine,  and  the  more  copious  it  was  the  better  the  patient 
slept,  and  the  less  pain  in  the  joints.  The  same  relief  followed  an 
attack  of  diarrhoea.  Four  weeks  at  Assmanhausen  caused  the  excre- 
tion of  large  quantities  of  uric  acid  one  year,  but  had  no  effect  the 
next,  and  the  Knee  got  worse*    Wiesbaden  did  good  one  year  and 


coccus   CACTI  551 

none  the  next  Half  a  tumbler  of  Kronenquelle  water  drunk  every 
morning  did  good  to  the  knee  and  enabled  him  to  walk  better  than 
he  had  done  for  a  long  time.  In  three  or  four  years  the  excretions 
of  uric  acid  had  ceased  and  the  patient's  state  grew  worse  :  insomnia 
recurred,  diarrhoea  became  much  more  frequent.  A  fortnight 
previous  to  such  attack,  patient  noticed  he  had  great  aversion  to 
butcher's  meat  Coc.  c.  30  gtt  i.  morning  and  evening  was  given. 
Gradually  sleep  returned.  There  was  almost  daily  excretion  of  uric 
add,  sometimes  in  the  form  of  large  shot ;  the  diarrhoea  ceased  and 
the  p>atient  went  about  his  work  with  pleasure.  Berridge  cured  with 
Cac.  c.  a  case  of  gonorrhoea,  guided  by  the  symptom  :  "  Excruciating 
pain  in  left  iliac  region  extending  to  groin  and  halfway  down  thigh, 
as  if  a  fluid  were  forcing  its  way  thireJ^ 

There  is  general  sensitiveness  to  touch  and  pressure ;  rinsing 
mouth  or  bru^ng  teeth  causes  cough  and  vomiting.  Warmth  < 
most  symptoms  ;  cough  <  entering  warm  room  ;  throat  <  by  warmth 
of  bed.  Tickling  in  trachea  and  cough  >  open  air.  Teeth  very  sensi- 
tive to  cold.  Catarrh  <  on  slightest  exposure.  Catarrh  from  autumn 
till  warm  weather.  Symptoms  <  night  and  early  morning  ;  cough  < 
on  waking.  Symptoms  are  often  periodic.  The  symptoms  are  < 
lying  down.  But  the  least  exertion  causes  lassitude  and  tendency  to 
perspire  or  cough,  <  during  exercise.  Mental  exertion  <  pain  in 
occiput  Rising  up  ss  haemorrhage  with  passage  of  large  clots  from 
uterus. 

BalationB. — Compare :  Canth.,  Cact.,  Ocim.  can.,  Sars. ;  apices  of 
lungs  sore,  tenacious  mucus,  Kali  bi.  Many  of  the  Cactus  symptoms — 
pricking  and  sticking  pains,  heart  disturbances,  &c. — reappear  in  the 
pathogenesis  of  this  Cactus-fed  insect. 


SYMPTOMS 

I.    Mind. — Ill-humoured,  irritable,  apprehensive. 

9.  Head. — Giddiness ;  the  head  feels  dull  (pressive  headache,  also  in 
frontal  region),  as  if  he  had  drunk  too  much,  with  a  white-coated  tongue. — 
Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head  when  entering  a  warm  room ;  >  in  the  open 
MT.— Throbbing,  pressing,  or  sticking  pains  in  temples. — ^Violent  raging  pain 
eitending  from  r.  eye  along  squamous  portion  of  temporal  bone  on  its  inner 
side  to  occiput ;  it  seems  as  though  a  fluid  were  injected  paroxysmally  into  a 
small  blood-vessel. — Sensation  as  though  a  hot  constricting  band  extended 
from  one  mastoid  process  across  occiput  to  the  other ;  this  region  seemed 
tense  and  constricted ;  the  condition  became  worse,  until  at  last  it  affected 
the  whole  skull,  in  which  the  pain  seemed  to  fix  itself,  and  it  seemed  as  though 
the  bones  became  drawn  closer  and  closer  together  ;  the  whole  scalp  was  also 
involved  and  seemed  to  be  drawn  tighter  about  the  skull. 

3.  Eyes. — Sensation  as  if  a  foreign  body  were  lodged  t>etween  the  eye- 
lid and  the  eye.— Sensation  as  if  the  edges  of  the  eyelids  were  swollen. — Con- 
junctivitis; increased  lachrymation. 

4.  Ears.*— Sudden  violent  stitch  in  1.  internal  ear,  extending  into  1.  side 
of  neck  and  into  sternum.— Intolerable  itching  inl.  ear.— Tickling  and  itching 


552  COCCUS  CACTI 

in  ears. — Cracking  in  ears  on  swallowing. — Great  roaring  in  ears  as  from  a 
storm. 

5.  Nose.— Dryness  of  the  nose,  with  inclination  to  sneeze. — Swelling  o£ 
nose,  with  itching,  violent  sneezing,  and  increased  secretion  of  mucus. — Red- 
ness on  the  edges  of  the  nostrils.— Crusts  (yellow)  on  the  edges  of  the 
nostrils. 

6.  Face. — Crawling  sensations  in  the  face. 

7.  Teeth. — Sensation  as  if  cold  air  were  blown  on  the  teeth. — Great 
soreness  of  the  teeth  to  contact. — Drawing  and  jerking  pains  in  teeth  ;  teeth 
sensitive  to  cold  things. — Loud  speaking  or  brushing  teeth  causes  cough  and 
vomiting. 

8.  Mouth. — Sweetish,  metallic  taste  in  the  mouth  (with  accumulation 
of  water  in  the  mouth). — Taste:  metallic;  bitter;  sweetish;  sour. — Dry, 
brown-coated  tongue. — Mouth  and  tongue  dry,  with  much  thirst. — Burning 
in  mouth  and  throat. — Rawness  of  mouth  and  throat. — Stitches  and  burning 
in  the  throat  and  on  the  tongue. — Great  sensitiveness  of  mouth  and  fauces,  so 
that  rinsing  of  the  mouth  caused  cough  and  vomiting  of  thick  masses  of 
mucus. — Sensation  as  if  the  palate  were  elongated,  with  continuous  hawking. 
— The  arches  of  the  palate  are  very  irritable. 

9.  Throat. — Swelling  of  the  tonsils,  with  continuous  desire  to  swallow, 
and  sensation  as  if  a  plug  were  lodged  in  the  throat. — Swelling  and  redness 
of  r.  tonsil. — Dryness  and  burning  in  throat  and  fauces. — Rawness  and  scrap- 
ing in  throat,  with  expectoration  of  mucus. — Sensation  as  if  uvula  were 
elongated,  causing  constant  hawking. — Throat  S3rmptoms  <  from  warmth, 
csp.  in  bed.— Difficult  deglutition. 

ID.  Appetite. — Desire  to  eat  often  and  much  at  a  time ;  much  thirst.— 
After  dinner  much  thirst,  and  when  he  drinks  water  then  chill. — Sensation  of 
hunger,  with  colic. — Canine  hunger. 

11.  Stomach. — Spasmodic  empty  eructations. — Heartburn. — Sensation 
as  if  something  indigestible  were  lying  in  the  stomach. — Nausea  and  vomit- 
ing; vomiting  of  mucus, — Retching;  inclination  to  vomit — Distension  of 
stomach. — Heaviness  and  pressure  in  stomach  ;  sticking  pains. — Stitches  in 
the  pit  of  the  stomach  when  inhaling. — Epigastric  region  sensitive  to  touch. 

12.  Abdomen. — Fulness  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  he  had  eaten  too  much, 
with  swelling  and  tenderness  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Pains  in  1.  hypochon- 
drium,  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence  ;  pains  extend  to  1.  side  of  back  and 
lumbar  vertebras. — Burning  drawing  in  region  of  spleen. — Flatulent  distension 
of  abdomen,  with  much  rumbling. — Griping  in  abdomen  followed  by 
diarrhoea. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — During  stool,  burning  in  rectum ;  stitches  in 
rectum. — Itching  in  anus,  with  tenesmus  from  slight  exertion. — Stitch  from 
the  anus,  extending  into  the  urethra. — ^Copious,  soft  or  pasty  stools. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Stitches  extending  from  the  kidneys  throagh 
the  urethra  into  the  bladder. — Dull,  pressive  pain  and  soreness  in  region  of 
kidneys. — Pressure  in  bladder. — Spasmodic  pain  in  the  bladder,  with  alter- 
nate coldness  and  heat. — Itching  at  the  end  of  the  urethra. — Stitches  and 
itching  in  urethra. — Burning  pain  in  urethra  while  urinating. — ^Freqnent  and 
great  desire  to  urinate. — Great  desire  to  urinate  in  the  morning  (with  erection). 
— Frequent  micturition. — Frequent  and  copious  urination,  urine  dear  as 


coccus  CACTI  553 

water. — Red  sediment  like  brickdust.— The  discharge  of  urine  is  slow,  in 
small  quantities,  with  violent  burning  pain. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Genitals  hot,  red,  swollen.  —  Frequent 
erections,  with  increased  desire. — Lascivious  mood,  nocturnal  emissions. — 
Loss  of  sexual  power  with  constant  duU  burning  pains  in  1.  hypochondrium 
and  pains  across  loins  as  if  broken. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.-— Swelling  and  heat  of  pudenda.—Soreness 
of  vulva ;  cannot  bear  pressure  of  clothing. — Inflammation  of  labia. — Great 
tenderness  and  irritation  in  extreme  lower  part  of  vagina,  <  when  urinating  ; 
can  walk  a  long  distance,  but  is  <  after  sitting  in  the  house  all  day. — Menses 
too  early ;  too  profuse  ;  and  last  too  long. — Haemorrhage  from  uterus,  with 
passage  of  large  clots,  which  escape  when  quiet,  or  when  getting  up  to  pass 
water. — Enormous  black  clots  pass  from  vagina. — Mucous  leucorrhcea,  pre- 
ceded by  drawing,  thrusting  pain  in  inguinal,  vesical,  and  pubic  regions. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Fatigue  of  the  vocal  organs,  even  after 
speaking  without  exertion  ;  the  voice  becoming  rough  and  hoarse ;  respira- 
tion somewhat  laborious. — Scraping  sensation  in  the  throat. — Hawking  and 
coughing,  with  increased  thirst. — The  bronchial  tubes  are  loaded  with  mucus. 
^Rawness  in  air-passages,  causing  cough. — Sensation  of  a  crumb  the  size  of 
a  walnut  sticking  behind  the  larynx,  obliging  him  to  swallow  constantly. — 
Whooping-cough ;  nightly,  periodical  attacks  of  cough  from  tickling  in  the 
larynx,  ending  with  expectoration  of  a  large  quantity  of  viscid,  stringy  mucus. 
—Morning  cough  (6  a.m.) ;  first  barking,  dry  cough,  followed  by  expectoration 
of  viscid  mucus ;  the  difficult  expectoration  causes  retching  and  vomiting. — 
Cough  with  expectoration  of  viscid,  stringy,  yellow,  sour-tasting  or  reddish 
mucus. — Cough,  in  a  warm  room ;  >  in  a  cold  room. — Short  paroxysms  of 
cough,  followed  by  easy  expectoration  of  globules  of  mucus. 

18.  Chest. — Burning  under  the  sternum.— In  the  chest  sensation  of  heat, 
of  soreness. — Oppression  and  soreness  in  chest. — Stitches  and  sticking  pains 
in  sides  of  chest. 

19.  Heart  and  Pulse. — Pressive  pain  in  precordial  region. — Sensation 
as  if  everything  were  pressed  towards  the  heart. — Heavy  pressure  in  the 
r^on  of  the  heart. — Irregular  beating  and  palpitation  of  the  heart,  with 
anxiety  after  eating. — Pulse  accelerated. 

80.  Back. — Stitches  between  the  shoulders. — Bruised  pain  in  small  of 
back  and  region  of  kidneys. — ^Violent  pressive  pain  in  region  of  kidneys. 

81.  Limbs. — Drawing,  tearing  pains  in  the  limbs. 

88.  Upper  Limbs. — Sensation  as  if  a  fine  glass  splinter  were  sticking  in 
the  tips  of  the  fingers,  under  the  nails. 

83.  Lower  Limbs. — ^Violent  stitches  in  the  r.  hip-joint.— Hot  swelling 
of  the  knees. — Pain  in  the  r.  patella  when  walking. 

84.  Generalities. — Great  weariness  and  prostration.  —  Itching  and 
prickling  sensations  in  the  skin. 

86.  Sleep. — Irresistible  desire  to  sleep. — Great  sleepiness  (after  dinner). 
Vivid  dreams. — Uneasy,  restless  sleep,  interrupted  by  vivid  dreams. — Frequent 
awaking  during  the  night,  with  excitement,  as  if  he  had  taken  too  much 
coffee. 

87.  Fever. — Chilliness  all  day ;  cold  feet  in  the  morning,  with  perspira- 
tion of  the  whole  body. — Chilliness  all  over  the  body,  esp.  in  the  afternoon 


554  CODEINUM 

and  evening.— Increased  warmth  of  body.— Greatly  overpowered  by  modcnte 
heat.— Chilliness  in  the  evening,  with  heat  in  the  head,  followed  by  general 
heat,  and  then  perspiration  all  night,  which  relieves.— Perspiration  when 
walking ;  on  the  lower  extremities  ;  in  the  morning. 

Coohlearia,  see  Annoracia. 
Codeinum. 


An  Alkaloid  of  Opium.    C^  H^i  NO; 


3* 


tXboliOMlm-^BUpharospasm,  Chorea.  Cough.  Diabetes.  Eczema.  Gastralgia. 
Numbness.   Pniritus.  Restlessness.  Spasmodic  twitchings.   Vomiting  of  pregnancy. 

CharaoteristiOB. — Codein  possesses  many  of  the  properties  of 
opium,  from  which  it  is  derived,  but  it  has  characters  sufiGiciently 
distinctive  to  entitle  it  to  a  separate  description.  Codein  seems  to 
possess  in  great  degree  the  exhilarating  properties  some  persons 
experience  on  taking  opium,  though  it  is  not  without  strong  soporific 
effects  as  well.  There  are  many  disorders  of  sensation,  notablv 
troublesome  itching.  The  characteristic  here  is :  '*  Itching  with 
warmth."  "  Itching  and  heat  of  face  and  head."  **  A  sensation  of 
agreeable  warmth  "  is  another  characteristic  symptom.  Convulsive 
twitchings  of  muscles  and  limbs,  and  especially  of  orbital  muscles,  are 
very  marked.  Twitchings  prevent  sleep  at  night.  Numbness  and 
prickling.  Codein  has  in  many  cases  controlled  diabetes.  Headache 
is  <  in  morning  ;  restlessness  and  cough  <  at  night  Symptoms  in 
general  are  <  by  motion  and  >  by  rest. 

Relations.— Comj^ar^  ;  Opium  in  sickness,  pains  in  stomach  and 
region  of  solar  plexus,  constipation,  sexual  excitement.  Agar, 
(twitching  of  eyelids ;  Ars.  (pains  in  legs,  nightly  restlessness)  ;  Hyo. 
(twitching  of  eyelids  after  reading)  ;  Lach.  (sensitiveness  of  surface)  ; 
Rhus,  Sul.,  Sul.  ac.  (trembling) ;  Culex  (vertigo  on  blowing  nose). 

Causatioii. — Fatigue  and  excessive  mental  exdtementsidiead- 
ache. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Great  exhilaration  of  spirits. — Depression  with  desire  to 
sleep,  frightful  dreams  and  dull  headache  on  awaking. — Increased  or 
diminished  power  of  fixing  attention  or  appl3ring  mind. — Bewildered  on 
waking. — Confusion. 

2.  Head. — Dizziness  on  blowing  nose. — Wh^i  closing  eyes  objects 
appear  to  turn  round. — Dull  headache  in  morning,  gradually  diminishes 
towards  noon,  when  it  disappears. — Dull  headache  soon  after  rising,  <  1.  side, 
lasting  about  two  hours. — Dull  headache  with  dry  lips  and  constant  desire  to 
moisten  them. — Headache  from  fatigue  and  excessive  mental  excitement 

3.  Eyes. — Involuntary  twitching  of  1.  eyelid,  sometimes  >  by  rubbing. 
^^Involuntary  twitching  of  both  eyelids  whenever  he  attempted  to  read  or 


CODEINUM  555 

write. — Pnpils  contracted.— Sudden  failure   of  vision.— On  blowing  nose 
sparks  before  eyes. 

5.  Nose. — ^Mucous  discharge  with  irritation  of  the  Schneiderian  mem- 
brane.— Entire  loss  of  smell  for  several  days. 

8.    Mouth.^ — Month  dry. — Unable  to  articulate. 

g.  Throat.— Strong  pulsations  in  both  carotids. — Tickling  sensation  in 
throat,  in  afternoons  and  evenings. 

II.  Stomach. — Great  thirst  with  a  particular  desire  for  bitter  substances. 
—Empty  eructations  with  acute  pains  in  stomach. — Nausea  and  vomiting  ; 
sometimes  preceded  by  an  agreeable  glow  at  epigastrium. — ^Tenderness  in 
stomach  with  violent  pulsations  of  heart  and  carotids. — ^Violent  spasmodic  pain 
at  pit  of  stomach  (solar  plexus). 

i^  Stool. — Constipation,  with  tenderness  of  bowels,  esp.  transverse  and 
descending  colon,  and  some  flatulence. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Semi^paralysis  of  bladder. — Quantity  of  urine 
increased  and  saccharine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sexual  excitement  during  the  night,  leading 
to  pollutions. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — ^Tickling  in  larynx  which  causes  a  cough. — 
Short,  irritating  cough  <  during  night— Troublesome  cough  with  copious 
mucous,  and  sometimes  purulent,  expectoration  ;  with  nervous  excitability. — 
Night  cough  of  phthisis. — On  inspiration,  pain  in  r.  lung ;  pain  below  scapula ; 
stitching  pains  in  1.  lung. 

ig.  Heart. — Uneasy  feeling  at)out  heart. — Fluttering  and  oppression 
with  great  desire  to  walk  in  open  air. — Painful  pulsation  when  attempting  to 
study  or  write. — ^Violent  pulsations  of  heart  and  carotids. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Neuralgic  pains  from  occiput  to  back  of  neck. 
—Convulsions  in  muscles  of  back. — Sharp  pains  extending  from  stomach 
and  chest  through  to  back,  between  shoulders,  <  on  r.  side. 

21.  Limbs. — Paralytic  weakness  in  arms  and  legs. — Spasmodic  twitches 
in  arms  and  legs. — Numbness  of  hands  and  feet ;  prickling  and  numb  sensa- 
tion in  various  parts  of  the  body. 

92.  Upper  Liint>s. — Pains  in  deltoids  on  moving  arms. — ^Jerking  pain  in 
arm. — Pulsating  pain  in  1.  upper  arm. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — In  lower  limbs  involuntary  twitchings ;  spasmodic 
jerkings ;  neuralgia  and  rheumatic  pains. — Paralytic  affections  with  extreme 
restlessness. 

24^  Generalities.— Extreme  restlessness.— Trembling  of  whole  body. 
—Marked  sensitiveness  of  surface. — Choreic  movements. — Symptoms  are 
periodic,  paroxysmal ;  at  times  sudden. 

25.  Skin« — Itchy;  prickling. — Eczematous  eruption  with  troublesome 
itching.— Itching  with  feeling  of  warmth. 

96.  Sleep. — Sleepy  and  drowsy.— Twitchings  in  sleep.— Cough  disturbing 
sleep.— Frightful  dreams. 


556  eOFFEA  CRUDA 


CofTea  Crada. 

Coffee,    N.  0.  Rubiadae.    Tincture  of  raw  berries. 

OUiiioaL — Apoplexy.  Asthma.  Aural  neuralgia.  Colic.  Convulsions.  Diarrhoea. 
Ecstasy.  Excitement  Headache.  Heart,  hyperaesthesia  of .  Hernia.  Hyperaesthesia. 
Hysteria.  Intermittents.  yoy^  ill-effects  of .  Labour  pains.  Metrorrhagia.  Neuralgia. 
Over-sensitiveness.    Sciatica.    Shock.    Sleeplessness.    Toothache. 

OharaoteriBtios. — ^The  effects  of  Cqffea  cruda  have  to  be  con- 
sidered separately  from  those  of  Cqffea  tosta,  since  the  roasting  converts 
much  of  the  Coffeine  into  Coffeone  or  Methylamine,  which  gives  to 
coffee  its  aroma.  But  the  effects  are  scarcely  distinguishable,  and  I 
have  not  attempted  to  keep  them  strictly  apart  The  provings  of 
Cqff.  c.  were  made  with  the  raw  berries.  Coffea  belongs  to  the  same 
family  as  China^  ipecacuanha^  and  like  these  remedies  has  many 
symptoms  of  intermittent  fever.  It  has  been  noticed  that  coffee- 
drinkers  who  do  get  ague  are  more  difficult  to  cure  than  those 
who  do  not  drink  coffee.  The  great  characteristic  of  Coffea  is 
exaltation  of  the  senses  and  sensibility  in  general.  Sight  is  im- 
proved, fine  print  can  be  read  easily  ;  hearing  is  more  acute,  and 
noises  are  intolerable.  The  sense  of  smell  is  heightened.  All  kinds 
of  pains  are  intolerable ;  and  are  accompanied  with  fear  of  death. 
The  mental  activities  are  exalted.  Sudden  emotions,  especially  joy, 
produce  dangerous  symptoms.  Great  sensitiveness  to  touch  or 
contact.  These  symptoms  will  recall  Aeon.  Guernsey  places  it  in 
the  front  rank  of  remedies  for  irritability.  He  compares  four  others 
with  it.  all  of  which  have  irritabilitv  in  high  degree,  but  have  different 
concomitants :  Acon,^  "fearful  anci  anxious  ;  dreads  things"  ;  Aur.^ 
"  suicidal,  will  thrash  around  in  bed  (as  females  in  confinement)  as  if 
wishing  to  injure  or  kill  themselves  "  ;  Cham,,  "  spiteful,  uncivil " ; 
Coff,,  *'  wakeful,  on  the  constant  move"  ;  Nux  v.,  "sullen,  keeps  the 
eyes  shut ;  doesn't  wish  to  speak  or  have  anything  to  do  with  any 
one."  Staph,  and  Coloc.  deserve  mention  also.  Teste  groups  Coff 
with  Causticum.  He  remarks  that  dynamised  Coff.  crud.  prevents 
or  neutralises,  in  many  persons,  the  eftects  of  roasted  coffee.    This 

2uasi-isopathic  action,  as  Teste  truly  remarks,  is  by  no  means  con- 
ned to  Coffea  ]  dynamisations  of  many  other  drugs  being  anti- 
dotal to  secondary  effects  of  the  crude  substances.  Hahnemann 
describes  the  migraine  of  coffee-drinkers  thus :  "  It  comes  in 
the  morning  after  waking,  increasing  little  by  little.  The  pain 
becomes  intolerable,  and  sometimes  burning,  integument  of  head 
very  sensitive  and  painful  on  slightest  touch.  Body  and  mind  exces- 
sively sensitive.  Patients  look  exhausted,  retire  to  dark  places,  close 
their  eyes  to  avoid  light  of  day  ;  remain  seated  in  an  armchair  or 
stretched  on  a  bed.  The  least  noise  or  motion  excites  the  pain. 
They  avoid  talking,  being  talked  to,  or  hearing  others  talk.  The 
body  is  colder  than  usual  though  no  chills  are  experienced;  the 
hands  and  feet  are  especially  cold.  They  loathe  everything,  especially 
food  and  drink,  on  accoimt  of  a  continual  sickness  at  the  stomach. 


COFFEA  CRUDA  557 

If  the  attack  is  very  violent  a  vomiting  of  mucus  takes  place,  which, 
however,  does  not  relieve  the  headache.  There  are  no  alvine  dis- 
charges. This  kind  of  megrim  scarcely  ever  leaves  before  evening. 
If  the  paroxysm  is  less  violent,  a  little  strong  coffee  which  was  the 
first  cause  of  such  a  headache  will  produce  a  temporary  palliation  of 
the  pain,  but  the  disposition  to  relapse  becomes  so  much  greater. 
The  attacks  come  irregularly,  every  fortnight,  or  every  few  weeks, 
without  any  apparent  cause,  and  quite  suddenly,  so  much  so  that  the 
patient  often  does  not  feel  a  single  unpleasant  symptom  the  evening 
preceding  the  attack.  Such  a  headache  has  never  been  seen  by  me 
except  in  real  coffee-drinkers.*'  It  is  well  to  inquire  carefully  into  the 
dietary  of  patients  who  come  complaining  of  headaches  of  this  kind. 
More  recently  Dr.  Gilles  de  la  Tourette  (Lancet,  July  20,  1895)  has  de- 
scribed the  effects  of  coffee.  In  his  opinion  they  are  very  frequently 
mistaken  for  the  effects  of  alcohol :  "  morning  vomiting  of  glairy 
mucus,  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  thickly-coated  tongue,  loss  of 
appetite.  The  disgust  excited  by  even  the  idea  of  solid  food  is  such 
that  these  patients  eat  nothing  else  but  bread  soaked  in  their  poison 
—coffee.  There  supervene  then  nausea,  vomiting,  and  painful  acid 
eructations."  The  pulse  is  slowed.  Insomnia  is  common,  and  if 
there  is  sleep  it  is  disturbed  by  dreams  of  a  terrifying  nature,  like 
those  met  with  in  alcoholism.  The  effects  of  coffee  are  less  deep 
than  those  of  alcohol,  and  quickly  disappear  when  the  habit  is  discon- 
tinued. Peculiar  symptoms  are  :  as  if  head  too  small ;  as  if  some- 
thing hard  pressing  on  surface  of  brain  ;  as  if  head  would  burst  and 
fly  to  pieces  if  she  moved  ;  as  if  intestines  were  being  cut ;  as  if  body 
would  burst ;  ''  tight "  pain  ;  sensation  of  warmth.  Coffea  is  suited  to 
tall,  lean,  stooping  persons,  with  dark  complexions.  Sanguine  choleric 
temperament,  complaints  during  infancy  and  dentition.  Diarrhoea  in 
housewives  who  have  much  care  and  troiible  in  managing  their  house- 
holds. The  symptoms  are  >  by  warmth,  and  <  in  open  air 
(though  in  toothache  warm  drinks  <,  cold  drinks  >).  Touch  <  ; 
would  like  to  rub  the  part  but  it  is  too  sensitive.  Slight  passive  move- 
ments are  p6i(ceived  as  enormous ;  children  at  times  cannot  bear  to 
be  carried  about  Most  symptoms  are  <  at  night :  sleeps  till 
3  a.m.,  after  which  he  only  dozes. 

RelatioiiB. — Antidoted  by :  Aeon.,  Cham.,  Ignat.,  Nux,  Merc, 
Puis.,  Sulph.,  and  especially  Tabac.  (Teste).  Antidote  to :  Bell., 
Cham.,  Cicut.,  Coloc,  Lye,  Nux  v.,  Strycb.,  Valer.  It  is  incom- 
pakhlc  with  :  Canth.,  Caust.,  Coccul.,  Ignat  Followed  well  by :  Aur., 
BeH.,  Op.,  Nux  v.,  Lye.  Compare :  Cypr.  (ecstasy)  ;  Bry.  and 
Cham,  (toothache  >  by  cold)  ;  Aco.  (predicts  hour  of  death) ;  Coca, 
Codein,  Coff.  tost 

GaaBation. — Effects  of  sudden  emotion,  especially  pleasurable 
ones.  Fear  or  fright.  Wine  (wine-drinkers  should  take  coffee  ;  beer- 
drinkers  should  tSce  tea).    Over-fatigue  and  long  journeys. 

STMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Over-sensitiveness ;  weeping  mood.— Great  anguish ;  cannot 
be  coBiposed ;  is  not  able  to  hold  the  pen  ;  trembles. — Sentimental  ecstasy ; 


558  COFFEA  CRUDA 

excited  imagination;  increased  power  to  think. — ^Excessive  weeping  and 
lamentations  over  trifles.— The  pains  seem  insupportable,  driving  to  despair. 
— Fright  from  sudden  pleasant  surprises. 

2.  Head. — Pains  in  the  head,  as  if  the  brain  were  bruised  (as  if  the 
brain  were  torn  or  dashed  to  pieces). — Semi-lateral  cephalalgia,  as  if  a  nail 
were  driven  into  the  parietal  bone. — In  the  vertex  he  feels  and  hears  a 
cracking,  when  sitting  quietly. — Heaviness  of  the  head. — Congestion  in  the 
head,  esp.  when  speaking  (or  after  a  pleasant  surprise). 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  lively  and  red,  with  unusually  clear  sight ;  can  read 
small  writing  more  distinctly. 

4.  Ears. — Excessive  sensibility  of  hearing. — Musical  sounds  seem  to  be 
too  loud,  and  too  sharp. — Hardness  of  hearing,  with  buzzing  in  the  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis,  with  heaviness  of  the  head.— The  sense  of  smell  is 
more  acute. 

6.  Face. — Heat  of  the  face,  with  redness  of  the  cheeks. 

7^  Teeth. — Successive  pullings,  and  sharp  pains  in  the  teeth,  with 
inquietude,  anxiety  and  tears,  esp.  at  night  and  after  a  meal. — ^Toothache, 
>  by  cold  water. 

Q.  Throat. — Sore  throat;  with  great  and  painful  sensibility,  and 
swelling  of  the  velum  palati ;  <  when  swallowing. 

II.  Stomach. — ^Taste  of  hazel  nuts,  or  sweet  almonds,  in  the  mouth.— 
Tobacco-smoke  appears  particularly  agreeable. — Sensation  of  immoderate 
hunger,  with  rapid,  hurried  eating. — ^Thirst  increased,  esp.  at  night,  it 
wakens  him. — Bilious  vomiting. — Cramps  in  the  stomach,  with  pressive, 
shooting  pains. 

IS.  Abdomen. — ^Anxiety  and  oppression  in  the  region  of  the  epigas- 
trium.— ^The  clothes  are  oppressive.— Colic,  as  if  the  stomach  had  been  over- 
loaded, as  if  the  abdomen  would  burst ;  cannot  su£Fer  the  clothes  to  be  tight 
on  the  abdomen. — Pressure  in  the  abdomen  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence.- 
Abdominal  pains  which  induce  despair,  esp.  in  women. 

13.  Stool. — Faeces  soft,  with  frequent  evacuation. — Diarrhoea,  also  during 
dentition. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Abundant  emission  of  urine,  'esp.  towards 
midnight. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Great  excitement  of  sexual  desire,  with 
flaccidity  or  strong  irritation  of  the  genital  parts;  without  emission  of 
semen,  and  with  dry  heat  of  the  body. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Immoderate  irritation  of  the  sexual 
parts  of  females,  with  voluptuous  itching,  great  secretion  of  mucus,  and 
frequent  flow  of  blood. — Metrorrhagia. — Labour  and  after-pains  insupport- 
ably  painful. 

17.  i8.  Respiratory  Organs  and  Chest.— Short,  jerking,  dry  cough, 
with  great  irritation  in  the  larynx,  and  anxious  tossings.— Oppression  of  the 
chest ;  obhged  to  take  short  inspirations ;  the  breathing  heaves  the  chest 
visibly.— Night  cough  (cough  with  measles). — Fits  of  suffocation. 

IQ.  Heart. — Palpitation  of  heart ;  violent,  irregular,  with  trembling  of 
limbs. — Nervous  palpitation. — Palpitation  after  excessive  joy,  surprise. 

22.  Upper  Limbs.— Trembling  of  the  hands,  while  grasping  anything. 
— Cramp-like  contractions  of  the  fingers. 


COF.FEA  TOSTA  559 

83.  Lov^er  Umbs. — Cramps  in  the  calf  of  the  leg,  on  bending  the 
knee.— Cramps  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  on  bending  the  instep.— Trembling  of 
the  feet 

84«  Generalities. — Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  parts  a£Fected. — Great 
flexibiJity  of  the  muscles,  and  activity  of  the  whole  body. — Mental  and 
physical  excitability. — Aversion  to  the  open  air,  with  uneasiness  and  aggrava- 
tion of  the  symptoms  during  a  walk  in  the  open  air. — ^Twitching  of  the  limbs. 
— Convulsions,  with  grinding  of  the  teeth,  and  coldness  in  the  limbs. — ^Violent 
shivering,  with  feverish  increase  of  bodily  heat. — Fever  with  inconsolable 
angutsb. — Shuddering  with  colic  and  violent  agitation.— The  pains  are  felt 
intensely,  driving  to  despair,  and  inclination  to  weep. — ^Tears,  howls,  cries, 
tossing  and  discouragement,  esp.  during  the  paroxysm  of  pain,— Cries 
of  children. — ^Anxiety  of  heart  and  of  conscience,  with  apprehensions. — He 
feels  nnusnaiiy  well. — Vivacity  and  excessive  loquacity. — ^Vivacity  and  eleva- 
tion of  the  imagination,  with  acuteness  of  the  intellectual  faculties. 
25.  Skin. — Eruptions  (measles),  with  over-exdtability  and  weeping. 
A  Sleep. — Sleeplessness,  from  over-excitability  of  mind  and  body 
(sleeplessness  of  lying-in  women). — Sleeplessness  from  excitement  of  the 
imagination,  flow  of  ideas,  and  fantastic  visions. — Inclination  to  lie  down  and 
to  shut  the  eyes,  without  being  able  to  sleep. 

27.  Fever. — Chilliness  increased  by  every  movement. — Internal  chilli- 
ness, with  external  heat  of  the  face  and  body. — Chills  running  down  the  back. 
—Dry  heat  in  the  evening  after  going  to  bed,  with  chilliness  in  the  back. — 
Nightly,  dry  heat,  with  delirium. — Perspiration  on  the  face,  with  internal 
cbiUiness. 


Goffea  Tosta. 

Coffee.    N.  O.  Rubiaceae.    Infusion  of  the  well-roasted  berries. 

Gliaieal* — ^Antidote  to  poisons.    Labour  pains.  Migraine.   Nervous  excitement, 
effects  of.    Seminal  emissions.    Urinary  affections.    Vertigo. 

CSharaeterlstios.— The  symptoms  of  Coffea  t.  have  been  princi- 
pally obtained  from  sensitive  persons  on  whom  strong  coffee  has  acted 
injuriously  ;  and  the  clinical  uses  have  been  mainly  based  on  these. 
But  a  word  must  be  said  about  the  antidotal  effects  of  Coffee.  As  an 
allopathic  antidote  to  Opium  in  poisonous  doses  its  value  is  well  known. 
In  addition  to  Opium  and  its  derivatives  it  counteracts  the  effects  of 
Nux  vomica,  Belladonna,  narcotic  mushrooms,  poisonous  sumach, 
tobacco,  bitter  almonds,  Prussic  acid,  Coloc,  Valer.,  Cicuta^  Chatnom,, 
salts  of  Antimony,  Lead,  Phosphorus,  Phosphoric  acid.  On  account  of  its 
extensive  antidotal  properties  Coffee  has  largely  been  condemned  by 
homoeopathic  practitioners ;  but  it  should  be  remembered  that  it 
does  not  antidote  all  other  medicines,  and  it  is  questionable  if  it 
counteracts  the  effect  of  many  of  the  atx)ve-named  drugs  when  they 
are  given  in  high  potencies.  In  any  case  it  is  desirable  to  forbid 
its  use  when  BaL,  Cham.,  Coloc»,  IgncU.,  Lye,  and  Nux  are  being  given. 


56o  COFFEA  TOSTA 

Coffea  tosL  is  serviceable  against  both  cold  and  heat.  Beneficial  to 
persons  who  live  in  the  open  air.  It  has  caused  and  cures  dynamically  a 
toothache  like  that  of  Coff,  crud.  when  >  by  cold ;  *'  cold  vrater  > 
intense  pain  in  sound  teeth  of  right  lower  jaw."  (I  have  several  times 
cured  a  toothache  hke  this  with  Coff.  c,  30.)  Coffea  tost,  is  useful  in 
confinements  to  relieve  the  excess  of  suffering  which  some  women 
experience—''  pains  intolerable."  It  is  useful  also  in  heart  affections 
where  there  is  troublesome  palpitation  from  heart-irritability ;  and 
in  general  nervous  excitement.  Whilst  it  is  generally  given  in  the 
form  of  black  coffee  in  such  conditions  it  is  also  available  for  use  in 
the  attenuations.  Other  indications  for  its  use  are  :  Tense  arteries. 
Periodic  headaches  in  hysterical  women.  Nervous  and  gastric  head- 
aches. Vomiting  on  least  exertion.  Diarrhoea  from  overwork  and 
too  much  care.  Gout  and  rheumatism  with  tendency  to  form  <^alk- 
stones.  There  is  a  definite  and  extensive  proving  oiE  Coff.  t,  given  in 
Allen. 

Relations. — Compare:  Coff.  crud.,  Coffein.  Antidotcd  by :  Caps. ; 
see  also  Coff.  C. 

SYMPTOMS. 

!•  Mind. — ^An  agreeable  mental  excitement  causing  wakefulness. — 
Vivacity  of  thought,  versatility. — Symptoms  would  come  suddenly  and  take 
away  adl  mental  energy. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  with  whirling  sensation  in  head,  causing  a  general 
faint  feeling,  <  when  thinking ;  has  to  banish  reflection ;  with  burning  in 
stomach  ;  partial  >  by  change  of  position. — Sensation  as  if  everything  in  the 
head  were  going  in  circles,  now  in  one  direction  now  in  another;  with 
incessant  noises  in  the  ears. — Rush  of  blood  to  head. — ^Violent  headache  ;  < 
by  motion. 

3.  Eyes. — Intolerance  of  candle-light ;  it  is  surrounded  by  a  halo. — 
Sensation  of  fog  before  eyes. — Muses  volitantes. 

4.  Ears. — Every  step,  or  loud  word,  is  painfully  felt  in  the  ears. — Ring- 
ing, roaring,  buzzing,  singing  in  ears. 

6.  Face. — Face  pale ;  pu£Fy ;  anxious. 

7.  Teeth. — Seized  with  such  an  intense  pain  in  r.  lower  (somid)  teeth, 
that  it  nearly  drove  him  crazy. — Nothing  relieved  but  cold  water.  So  soon  as 
the  water  became  warm  in  the  mouth  the  pain  returned. 

iiy  12.  Stomach  and  Abdomen. — Nausea  with  faintness ;  with  in- 
effectual efforts  to  vomit.— Vomiting  with  difficulty. — (Vomiting  without  the 
least  exertion.) — Heaviness  and  distress  in  epigastrium ;  sensitive  to  touch  and 
pressure ;  <  by  cold  food  or  drink. — Extreme  sensitiveness  of  hepatic  re^on. 
— Sticking  pains  in  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Haemorrhoids. — Discharge  of  exceedingly  bright 
blood,  every  morning,  with  the  regular  stool. — Copious  evacuations  after  the 
first  dose  followed  by  constipation. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— At  close  of  micturition,  a  slight  milky  discharge. 
— It  diminishes  all  the  solid  constituents  of  the  urine,  except  the  existing 
phosphates. 

15.  Male   Sexual   Organs. — ^Weakness  of   sexual   p>ower. — Seminal 


COFFEINUM  561 

emissioiis,  3  ajn.,  with  voluptuous  itching ;  followed  by  chill  and  cold,  clammy 
sweat. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Spasmodic  sensation  deep  in  uterine 
re^on,  it  seems  as  if  something  tried  to  press  outward  and  could  not,  because 
it  constantly  gave  rise  to  spasms. — (Severe  labour  pains,  patient  becoming 
greatly  excited ;  severe  pains  in  small  of  back.) — Menstruation  increased  and 
prolonged. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Diminution  of  amount  of  expired  carbonic 
add.— Asthma ;  with  oppression  of  chest. 

19.  Heart. — Palpitation  :  from  irritable  heart ;  with  vertigo  and  fainting. 
—Arteries  tense. 

81.    Limbs. — ^Trembling  of  limbs. — ^Jerking  of  limbs  (secondary  effect). 

84.  Generalities.  —  Great  excitement.  —  TrembUng.  —  Haemorrhages  : 
(from  nose,  lungs,  stomach,  and  rectum). — L.  side  most  affected. — Aversion  to 
open  air,  which  <. — General  >  from  moderate  outdoor  exercise. 

86.  Sleep. — Complete  sleeplessness. — ^Wakefulness,  with  ecstatic  excite- 
ment, intermitting  with  dreams. — ^When  going  to  sleep,  starts  up  suddenly  in 
affright,  with  groans  and  fear  of  falling,  or  of  some  impending  danger. — 
Visions  of  enchantment ;  followed  by  dreams  of  death  of  dear  friends,  which 
do  not  abate  the  cheerfulness  or  exhilaration,  but  he  looks  at  all  with  super- 
natural indifiFerence. 

87.  Fever. — Chilliness,  with  general  shaking  and  chattering  of  teeth; 
cannot  get  warm ;  chills  ascend  from  fingers  and  toes,  and  thence  to  nape  of 
neck  and  vertex  (>  by  cayenne  pepper  taken  internally). — Excessive  heat, 
threw  off  clothing  and  sat  in  a  draught. — Orgasm  of  blood. — Flushes  of  heat. 
—Sensation  of  alternate  warmth  and  coldness  moving  about  in  the  bowels. 
—Sweat :  general ;  profuse  ;  cold,  clammy,  esp.  in  palms  of  hands. 


Goffeinom. 

Coffein  or  CafiFein,  an  alkaloid  obtained  from  Coffea  arabica. 
C|  H,o  N4  Oa.  Trituration  of  the  alkaloid,  and  also  of  the 
Citrate  of  Coffein. 

Ghanusteristies. — ^A  proving  has  been  made  with  this  alkaloid, 
bat  has  brought  out  no  symptoms  not  included  in  the  pathogenesis 
of  Coffea,  Pulsation  of  the  arteries  on  head  and  temples  was  very 
marked.  Sparks  before  eyes — roaring  in  the  ears.  Vomiting  with 
relief  of  all  symptoms.  The  Citrate  ^  coffein^  which  is  used  largely 
in  allopathic  practice,  has  occasioned  dangerous  poisonous  symptoms 
in  a  number  of  cases.  These  seem  the  most  characteristic  :  Restless- 
ness and  dizziness  ;  unable  to  keep  erect.  Violent  precordial  anxiety. 
Palpitation.  Abdominal  pulsation.  Violent  trembling  of  all  the  ex- 
tremities. Grating  of  the  teeth.  Features  expressive  of  the  greatest 
anxiehr.  Feeling  of  constriction  of  the  neck  and  throat,  recurring 
pcriodBcally  every  fifteen  minutes.  Pulse  very  rapid, 
vou  L  37 


562  COLCHICINUM 


Colchicinum. 

Alkaloid  of  Colchicum  autumnale.    C,  H,3  NOe.    Trituration, 
dlnieal.— Diarrhoea.    Fever.    Intestinal  catarrh.    Prostration.    Sleeplessnes. 


ChaFaoteriBtiOB. — This  alkaloid  has  been  proved  and  the  sym- 
toms  are  sufficiently  distinctive,  though  I  am  not  aware  of  anydinical 
experience  with  it.  The  symptoms  point  strongly  to  its  use  in  that 
form  of  intestinal  catarrh  characterised  by  the  appearance  of  shreddy 
membranes  ;  and  the  symptom, ''  convulsive  jerlangs  of  right  hand/' 
should  prove  a  valuable  indication,  if  not  a  ke3mote. 

RelationB* — Compare:  Ars.,  Caust.,  Colch. 

SYMPTOMS. 

3.    Eyes. — Pupils  widely  dilated. 

6.    Face. — ^Tearing  pains  in  face. 

8.    Throat. — Increased  secretion  of  saliva. 

II.  Stomach. — On  rising  from  bed,  at  night,  nausea  suddenly  increased, 
and  was  followed  by  vomiting  of  undigested  food,  and  afterwards  of  a  bitter 
greenish  fluid ;  the  vomiting  was  repeated  early  in  the  morning. — ^Vomiting 
of  blood  for  nine  or  ten  days.— Pains  and  excessive  sensitiveness  in 
epigastrium. 

18.  Abdomen. — Distension  and  sensitiveness. — Frequent  rumbling. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Urging,  causing  him  to  leave  his  bed,  followed 
by  copious  pasty  evacuation,  with  excessive  tenesmus ;  this  was  repeated 
three  times  within  a  short  period. — Stools  accompanied  with  tenesmus  and 
consisting  of  a  thin  fluid  with  numerous  flakes  looking  like  the  cooked  white 
of  egg  in  pieces  from  two  to  four  inches  long. — Stools  thin,  yellowish  green, 
slimy,  accompanied  by  pain. — Liquid  stools. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  turbid,  depositing  a  copious  white 
sediment. 

19.  Heart. — Pulse  during  the  first  two  hours  sank  about  eleven  beats. 
22.    Upper  Limbs. — Convulsive  jerkings  of  r.  hand. 

84.  Generalities. — ^Very  great  exhaustion  on  second  day,  increasing  to 
feverish  excitement  lasting  two  days. 

26.  Sleep. — Slight  somnolency  and  coUapse.—Awakened  from  sleep 
soon  after  midnight  by  uneasy  dreams. 

87.  Fever. — Chill  about  noon  on  first  day,  followed  by  violent  heat 
lasting  several  hours,  with  increased  thirst,  very  rapid  pulse»  oouf u^a  of  the 
head,  uneasiness  and  sleeplessness. 


COLCHICUM  563 

Colchicum. 

Colchicum  autumnale.     Meadow  Saffron.    N.  0.  Melanthaceae  of  the 
Liliaceae.    Tincture  of  the  bulb  dug  in  spring. 


L — Appendicitis.  Asthma.  Cataract  Cholera.  Colic.  Cot^h,  Cramp, 
Debility.  Diabetes.  Diarrhcea.  Dropsy.  Dysentery.  Eye,  affections  of.  Feet, 
fainfid.  Gout,  Heart,  affections  of.  Ileus.  Intermittent  fever.  Intestinal  catarrh. 
Lumbaio.  Myalgia,  Nephritis  {rheumatic  and  gouty).  Pericarditis.  Proctalgia. 
Prostatitis.  Rectum,  prolapse  of.  Rheumatism.  Stiff-neck.  Tongue,  sensibility 
lost    Typhlitis.    Typhoid  fever. 

OharacteristlOB. — Colchicum  is  best  known  as  a  remedy  in  gout 
and  rheumatism,  and  the  provings  show  its  specific  relation  thereto. 
It  acts  on  muscles,  bones,  and  joints.  It  causes  extreme  relaxation 
of  the  muscular  system — ^the  head  falls  forward  on  the  chest ;  or  falls 
back  when  the  patient  is  raised  from  the  pillow  ;  arms  fall  helpless 
by  the  side.  Stitching,  jerking,  drawing  pains  in  muscles ;  periosteum, 
and  joints.  Extreme  disinclination  to  move ;  <  from  motion. 
Mind  befogged  ;  but  answers  correctly.  Absence  of  apprehension, 
no  fear  of  death.  Results  of  getting  wet  and  getting  chilled  ;  changes 
to  damp  weather;  autumn  dysentery,  spring  rheumatism.  (The 
flowers  of  the  plant  appear  in  autumn ;  the  leaves  not  till  the  following 
spring.)  It  corresponds  to  the  gouty  constitution  ;  leuco-phlegmatic 
and  melancholic  temperament ;  venous  constitutions ;  uric  acid 
diathesis,  the  sediment  being  pale  yellow  and  rather  like  fine  flour 
than  sand.  Also,  urine  black  as  ink  ;  urine  loaded  with  albumen  and 
casts.  There  is  the  irritability  and  aversion  to  touch  so  common  in 
gout ;  pain  in  small  joints,  and  especially  the  great  toes.  The  stomach 
is  acutely  disordered,  nausea  and  vomiting.  "  Nausea  at  thought, 
si^t,  or  smell  of  food,  especially  of  cooUng,"  is  a  characteristic 
symptooL  (Nash  records  a  striking  cure  by  Colch.  200,  to  which  he 
was  led  by  this  symptom.  The  patient  was  an  old  lady  who  was 
vomiting  blood,  and  passing  as  many  as  sixteen  bloody  stools  in  the 
day.  The  doors  of  the  room  had  to  be  most  carefully  kept  closed  to 
prevent  any  smell  of  cooking  reaching  her  as  that  immediately 
provoked  nausea.)  Sensation  of  icy  coldness  in  stomach  ;  or  burning. 
Coldness  is  a  common  symptom  :  abdomen  ;  stomach  ;  extremities. 
Profuse  cold  sweat ;  marKed  chills  with  or  without  periodicity. 
Burning  also  is  not  uncommon  :  in  cavities,  especially  abdomen.  The 
characteristic  stool  of  Colchicum  is  jelly-like  mucus ;  membranous 
shreds  being  also  marked ;  violent  tenesmus  accompanies.  Protrusion 
of  rectum.  "  After  evacuation,  as  in  dysentery,  there  is  generally  relief 
(but  in  typhus  fever,  e^,,  sometimes  a  terrific  spasmodic  pain  of  the 
sphincter  ani  comes  on  after  stool.  This  may  occur  in  common 
diarrhoea) "  (Guernsey).  The  rice-water  stool,  hippocratic  face,  cold- 
ness, cramps,  prostration,  led  Salzer  to  find  in  it  the  specific  for  certain 
epidemics  of  Asiatic  cholera.  All  functions,  mental  and  bodily,  are 
slow ;  nutrition  and  digestion  are  at  a  stand,  and  yet  the  patient  does 
not  emaciate  rapidly.  There  is  great  prostration  ;  debility  from  loss 
of  sleep  ;  the  prostration  of  typhoid  fever  and  typhoid  states.    On 


564  COLCHICUM 

the  other  hand  there  are  convulsions,  cramps,  and  sometimes  restless- 
ness.    The  pains  of  Colchicum  are  very  acute  and  unendurable.    The 
Colch,  dysentery  and  rheumatism  are  exceedingly  painf uL    Very  sensi- 
tive and  irritable.    Cannot  endure  strong  smells.    Gouty  diabetes,  the 
uric  acid  reappearing  as  the  sugar  disappears.    The  heart  is  affected  as 
other  muscles.   Oppression  and  anxie^  >  by  walking.   Heart-beating. 
Stitches    about   heart    and    loss  of  consciousness.     Heart  affect^ 
(pericarditis)  on  disappearance  of  symptoms  from  extremities  ;  rheu- 
matism appears  on  disappearance  of  uric  acid  from  urine.    Colch.  will 
reverse  this.    J.  R.  Simson,  of  Tonawanda,  N.Y.,  cured  a  very  twid 
case  of  typhoid  presenting  among  other  symptoms,  this  :   **  his  left 
pupil  was  contracted  so  as  to  be  almost  imperceptible,  while  the 
right  was  dilated  to  the  full  extent.''    This  is  peculiar  to  Colch,,  and 
no  remedy  relieved  the  patient  till  he  received  this.     B.  Simmons 
calls  attention  {H,  P.,  August,  1889)  to  the  powerlessness  of  the  affected 
parts  which  accompanies  many  Colchicum  affections,  especially  when 
occurring  in  leuco-phlegmatic  subjects  and  when  there  is  cedematous 
swelling  of  the  parts.    He  cured  a  woman,  36,  mother  of  two  children, 
of  leuco-phlegmatic  temperament,  who  complained  of  rheumatism  of 
the  hands,  which  were  swollen  ;  joints  stiff  and  powerless,  pain  as  if 
bruised  ;  the  arms  being  affected  but  in  less  degree.  *'  She  was  unable 
to  brush  her  own  hair,  not  so  much  from  the  pain  as  from  the  extreme 
weakness  and  powerlessness  of  the  parts  affected."    T.  F.  Allen  gives 
"  Tingling  in    finger-nails "  as  characteristic  of   Colch.  ;    no  other 
remedy  has  it.    As  usual  with  allopathic  specifics,  Colchicum  has  been 
terribly  abused.    Here  is  an  instance.    I  was  called  suddenly  to  see  an 
old  gentleman  of  72,  whom  I  found  in  a  state  of  collapse,  palUd,  surface 
was  cold  and  clammy,  almost  pulseless.    He  had  been  taken  suddenly 
ill  when  in  the  water-closet,  vomiting  "  black  bile,"  and  had  fallen  on 
the  floor  when  trying  to  walk  along  the  passage.    The  history  of  the 
attack  was  this  :   He  had  formerly  been  "  a  martyr  to  gout       Four 
years  previously  he  began  to  take,  on  lay  recommendation,  a  powder 
which  analysis  showed  to  be  composed  ot  equal  parts  of  Colchicum  and 
Jesuit's  bark.     He  kept  this  up  for  six  months  and  had  no  more  gout. 
But  at  the  end  of  the  six  months  he  had  the  first  attack  of  this  kind 
It  came  quite  suddenly  and  was,  as  far  as  I  could  learn,  identical  with 
the  one  in  which  I  saw  him.     In  addition  to  the  symptoms  named 
there  was  looseness  of  the  bowels,  the  stool  being  black  like  the 
vomit     He  was  compelled  to  lie  absolutely  still,  the  least  attempt  to 
raise  the  head  exciting  nausea.    Recovery  took  place  in  a  few  days. 
This  is  not  exactly  a  case  of  what  our  friends  would  call ''  midedne 
substitutive^^*  but  I  am  inclined  to  name  it  '^  maladic  substitutive,*^  the 
substituted  malady,  Colchicism,  being  considerably  worse  than  the 
gout  it  replaced.    These  attacks  had  recurred  every  few  months, 
although  the  powders  were  discontinued.    The  <  from  motion  is  as 
marked  as  that  of  Bry.    The  patient  must  rest  and  lie  down.    Cannot 
lie  on  left  side.     <  From  any  exertion  mental  or  bodily.    Bending 
forward  >  oppression  and  colic.    Symptoms  are  <  night  and  evening. 
Warmth  >  generally  ;  but  warm  food  <  toothache  ;  and  damp,  virarm 
weather  sr  prof tfse  watery  stools  ;  warm  stove  or  warm  room  ss  chilli- 
ness.   Symptoms  generally  are  <  from  cold  or  damp*;  from  getting 


COLCHICUM  565 

wet ;  from  bathing,  living  in  damp  dwellings ;  change  to  damp 
weattier ;  from  change  of  weather ;  dso  complaints  from  getting 
overheated.  Pains  in  gout  go  from  left  to  right ;  headaches  right  to 
left    Complaints  of  old  people  ;  asthmatic  people. 

BiBiBiionB.~Aniidoted  by :  Bell.,  Camph.,  Coccul.,  Nux  v.,  Puis., 
Spigel.,  honey  and  sugar.  In  poisoning  give  Ammon.  caust.  in  sugar 
water.  Follows  well:  Lye.  Followed  well  by:  Carb.  v.  (ascites). 
Compare:  Aco.,  Am.,  Ars.  (Colch.  has  the  prostration  of  Ars.,  but 
without  its  restlessness) ;  Cact.  and  Abrot.  (metastasis  to  heart)  ; 
Bry.  (gout,  rheumatism,  serous  efiFusions,  <  by  movement) ;  Chi., 
Coccul.,  Merc,  Nat.  m.,  Nux,  Op.,  Pod.  (painless  cholerine) ;  Puis, 
(derangement  of  stomach  by  eggs ;  gout ;  nausea  at  smell  or  thought 
of  food,  especially  if  rich  or  fat) ;  Sep.,  Calc,  Ars.,  and  Ambra.  (icy 
coldness  in  stomach) ;  Lach.  (black  urine ;  <  smell  of  food ; 
cholera) ;  Ver.  (cholera,  cold  sweat  on  forehead) ;  Bar.  c.  (paralysis 
of  tongue ;  cold,  loss  of  sensibility) ;  Nux  (debility  from  loss  of 
sleep ;  irritabihty,  all  external  impressions  annoy  ;  the  debility  of 
Colch.  is  more  profound  and  there  is  dislike  of  all  food,  and  nausea 
from  smells).  Colch.  is  botanically  allied  to  the  Veratrums,  the 
AUiums,  and  Iris.  Teste  includes  it  in  his  Zincum  group.  //  anti- 
dotes :  Thuja. 

Canaatioil. — Grief.  Misbehaviour  of  others.  Wetting.  Checked 
perspiration. 

SYMPTOMS. 

X.    Mind. — Great  dejection. — Ill-humour. —  Peevish;  dissatisfied  with 
everything. — ^The  sufferings  appear  insupportable. — ^The  least  external  im-, 
pression  (bright  light,  strong  smells,  bad  manners)  drives  him  to  distraction. — 
Weakness  of  memory. — Great  desire  for  rest  and  disinclination  to  every 
mental  exertion;   absence  of  mind. — Forgetfulness  and  distraction. 

3.  Head. — ^Giddiness  when  sitting  down  after  walking. — Pulsations  in 
the  head. — ^The  headache  is  relieved,  after  supper,  from  warmth  and  lying 
quiet  in  bed. — Pressure  on  the  occiput,  during  intellectual  exertion. — Cramp- 
like pains  in  the  head,  esp.  above  the  eyes. — Semilateral  tearing  4n  the  head. 
—Tingling  in  the  forehead  and  upon  the  head. 

3.  Eyes. — Pupils  much  dilated,  only  slightly  sensitive  to  light,  or  im- 
movable or  slightly  dilated. — L.  pupil  contracted,  while  r.  is  dilated  (typhoid). 
—Pains  in  the  eyes,  like  a  digging  pulling,  deep  in  the  eyeball. — Swelling  of 
the  lower  lids. — ^Watering  of  the  eyes  in  the  open  air. — (Iritis ;  keratitis ; 
maculae). — Suppuration  of  the  Meibomian  glands  (ulceration,  left  lower  lid) ; 
burning  and  redness  of  the  edges  of  the  eyelids. — ^Visible  traction  in  the  lower 
lids. 

4.  Ears. — Otalgia,  with  tearing  shootings  (after  measles). — Tingling  in 
the  ears,  as  if  they  had  been  frozen. — Sensation  of  obstruction  in  the  ears. 
—Purulent  discharge  from  the  ears,  with  drawing  pains, — Dryness  of  the 
ears. 

5.  Nose. — Aching  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  nose. — ^Tingling  in  the  nose. 
—Pains  as  from  excoriation  in  the  septum  narium,  aggravated  by  touch. — 
Bleeding  of  the  nose  in  the  evenings. — Excessive  sensibility  of  smell. — 


566  COLCHICUM 

Obstinate  coryza,  with  snuffling  of  a  great  quantity  of  viscid  macos,  pro- 
ceeding from  the  nose. 

6.  Face. — Features  disfigured. — ^Aspect  sickly,  sad,  su£Fering.  —  Face 
spotted  with  yellow. — ^Very  great  paleness  of  the  face. — Cheeks  red  and  hot 
(afternoon). — (Edematous  swelling  of  the  face. — Sensation  of  separation  in 
the  bones  of  the  face. — Sensation  in  the  masseters,  as  if  they  were  distended, 
with  difficulty  in  opening  the  mouth. — Drawings  and  successive  puUings  in 
the  muscles  and  bones  of  the  face. — Semi-lateral  tearing  in  the  face,  extending 
to  the  ear  and  the  head. — ^Tingling  in  the  skin  of  the  face,  as  if  it  had  been 
frozen. — Lips  cracked. — ^Tearing  in  the  lower  lip. — Cramp-like  pain  in  the 
maxillary  joint. 

7.  Teeth.-— Odontalgia,  with  tearing  pains. — Sensibility  of  the  teetii, 
when  they  touch  on  closing  the  jaws. — Acute  pains  in  the  gums. 

8.  Mouth. — Heat  in  the  mouth. — ^Tearing  in  the  palate. — ^Abundant, 
serous  salivation,  with  dryness  of  the  throat. — Heaviness,  stiffness,  and  in- 
sensibility of  the  tongue. — ^Tongue  coated  white. — Smarting  and  sensation  of 
dryness  of  the  tongue  and  throat. 

9.  Throat. — Sore-throat,  as  if  from  swelling  of  the  orifice  of  the 
cesophagus.— Tingling  in  the  palate. — Constriction  of  the  gullet — Inflamma- 
tion and  redness  of  the  palate,  of  the  fauces. — Inflammations,  tearings  and 
shootings  in  the  palate,  and  in  the  throat. — ^Accumulation  of  greenish  mucus 
in  the  throat,  and  in  the  mouth. 

10.  Appetite. — ^Appetite  suddenly  ceasing,  merely  from  the  sight  or 
smell  of  food,  with  loathing,  when  merely  looking  at  it,  and  still  more  from 
smelling  it ;  the  smell  of  broth  nauseates,  and  that  of  fish,  eggs,  or  fat  meat 
almost  makes  him  faint. — Insipidity  of  food. — Great  thirst,  esp.  for  coffee.— 
Taste  bitter  ;  violent  thirst. 

11.  Stomach. — Frequent  eructations.  —  Constant  hiccough. —  Nausea, 
increased,  so  as  to  occasion  loss  of  consciousness,  by  the  smell  of  fresh  eggs, 
or  fat  meat. — Nausea,  during  a  meal. — Nausea,  after  swallowing  the  saliva.— 
Nausea,  in  an  erect  position,  when  moving  at  table,  with  inclination  to  vomit, 
with  constant  flow  of  saliva. — ^Vomiting  of  food,  or  of  bile,  or  mucus,  of  the 
ingesta,  with  trembling,  violent  gagging,  colic,  succeeded  by  bitterness  in  the 
mouth  and  throat ;  every  motion  excites  or  renews  the  vomiting. — Stomach 
very  sensitive  to  the  touch. — Sensation  of  excoriation,  and  tingling  in  the 
stomach. — Sensation  of  cold,  or  of  burning  in  the  stomach,  with  heavy  pain. 
— Shooting  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Sensation  of  gnawing  hunger  in  the 
stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Inflation  and  fulness  of  the  abdomen. — Pressure  towards 
the  outside  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen. — Colic,  with  tearing  pains.— 
Pain,  as  of  excoriation,  in  1.  side  of  abdomen,  on  its  being  touched. — I^opsical 
swelling  of  the  abdomen,  with  a  fold  over  the  pubic  region. — Pain,  as  of 
burning  and  pressure  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  region  of  the  bladder,  and  in 
the  internal  genital  parts. — Pulsation  in  the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation. — Evacuations  slow,  difficult,  scanty, 
with  urging,  even  of  the  soft  stool,  with  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back. — Involun- 
tary  evacuation  of  faeces. — Watery  discharges,  going  off  without  sensation.— 
Diarrhoea,  consisting  of  mucus  like  rice-water. — Dysenteric  diarrhoea,  of 
white,  transparent,  gelatinous  mucus. — Ineffectual  pressing  to  stool ;  he  feels 


COLCMICUM  567 

the  faces  in  the  rectum,  but  cannot  expel  them. — Discharge  of  much  mucus 
from  the  rectum. — Extremely  painful  stools. — Sanguineous  evacuationSi 
mixed,  as  it  were,  with  false  membranes. — Prolapsus  recti. — ^Tingling  itching, 
burning,  and  tearing  in  the  anus. — During  stool  sensation  as  if  the  sphincter 
ani  were  torn  to  pieces. — Cramps  in  the  sphincter  ani. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urgent  want  to  make  water,  with  increased 
discharge  of  clear  urine. — Scanty  discharge  of  urine  of  a  deep  colour,  with 
tenesmus,  and  a  burning  sensation. — Painful  and  scanty  emission  of  urine  of  a 
bri^t  red  colour. — Brownish  or  blackish  urine. — ^Whitish  deposit  in  the 
urine. — Burning  sensation  and  pressure  in  the  urinary  organs,  and  the 
bladder,  with  diminished  secretion. — Pullings,  tearings,  and  incisive  pains 
in  the  urethra. — Frequent  micturition. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.-— Tingling  in  the  trachea.— Tickling  in  the 
pharynx,  which  excites  a  small  dry  cough. — Frequent  short  and  dry  cough. — 
Nocturnal  cough,  with  involuntary  emission  of  urine. — Hoarseness  in  the 
morning  with  roughness  of  the  throat. 

18.  Chest. — Difficulty  of  respiration,  and  oppression  at  the  chest,  with 
anxiety;  relieved  by  bending  forward. — ^Tensive,  pressive,  and  periodical 
oppression  of  the  chest;  frequent  pressure  in  small  spots  in  the  chest. — 
Shootings  in  the  chest,  sometimes  on  breathing. — ^Tearings  in  the  chest,  with 
obtuse  lancinations. — Pain,  as  of  excoriation  in  the  chest,  on  being  touched 
and  during  movement. — ^Tingling  in  the  chest. 

19.  Heart. — ^Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart. — Pressure  and  oppression  in 
the  region  of  the  heart,  as  if  an  attack  of  apoplexy  threatened ;  >  by  walking. 
— Hydrothorax. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Shooting  tension  between  the  shoulder-blades.-- 
Tearings  in  the  back. — Pain,  as  from  excoriation  in  the  loins,  during  move- 
mesd. — ^Drawing  in  the  small  of  the  back ;  worse  during  motion. — Soreness 
in  the  small  of  the  back  when  touching  it. 

82.  Upper  Limbs. — Stitches  in  the  r.  shoulder. — Painful  lameness  in 
the  arms,  which  makes  it  impossible  to  hold  the  lightest  thing. — ^Trembling  of 
the  r.  hand  preventing  writing. — ^Tearings  in  the  arms,  the  hands,  and  the 
fingers. — Paralytic  pain  in  the  arms. — ^Trembling  of  the  hands. — Heat  of  the 
palms  of  the  hsmds. — Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  fingers. — ^Tingling  in  the 
fingers,  as  if  they  had  been  frozen. — ^Tingling  in  the  finger-nails. — ^Torpor  in 
the  extremity  of  the  fingers. 

Q.  Lo'wer  Limbs. — ^Tearings  in  the  legs,  the  feet,  and  the  toes. — Para- 
lytic pullings  in  the  thighs. — Hot  (oedematous)  swelling  of  the  legs,  with  acute 
pains  during  movement.— Tingling  of  the  toes,  as  if  they  had  been  frozen. 

24.  Generalities. — Rheumatic  and  arthritic  tearing  in  the  limbs,  and 
other  parts  of  the  body,  esp.  in  warm  weather. — ^Tingling  in  many  parts  of 
the  body,  as  if  frost-bitten,  when  the  weather  changes. — ^Tearing  twitches, 
like  electric  shocks,  through  one  side  of  the  body,  with  sensation  of  lameness. 
—Starting,  shootings  in  the  muscles,  and  in  the  periosteum  of  the  limbs,  esp. 
in  coW  weather. — Frequent  starting  of  the  body. — Shooting  in  the  joints. — 
Paralytic  weakness,  of  the  muscles. — Pains  accompanied  by  paral3rtic  weak- 
ness, and  real  paralysis. — Great  weakness,  with  sensation  of  lameness  through 
all  the  limbs. — Dropsical  swellings. — The  su£Ferings  are  singularly  aggravated 
by  intellectual  fatigue,  by  touch,  by  too  brilliant  a  light,  and  by  the  smell  of 


568  COLLINSONIA  CANADENSIS 

pork. — ^Aggravation  of  the  sjonptoms  from  the  commencement  of  the  nig^t 
till  morning. — General  sinking,  and  consequent  painful  sensibility  of  the 
whole  body,  so  that  the  patient  cannot  move  without  groaning. — Nervous 
fatigue  and  weakness  from  nocturnal  labour. 

25.  Skin.— Itching,  as  from  nettles.— Tingling  in  di£Ferent  parts,  as  after 
being  frozen. — QBdematous  swelling  and  anasarca. — ^Suppressed  perspiration. 

26.  Sleep. — Drowsiness  in  the  day,  with  unfitness  for  exertion. — Irresis- 
tible sleepiness,  drowsiness.  —  Sleeplessness  from  nervous  excitability. — 
Sleeplessness,  without  entire  unconsciousness. — Sleeplessness,  because  he 
cannot  lie  on  the  1.  side,  on  which  he  is  accustomed  to  sleep. — Frequent 
waking  with  fright. — Nocturnal  heat,  with  violent  thirst. 


Collinsonia  Canadensis. 

Horsebalm.     Richweed.     Stone-root.    N.O,  Labiatae.    Tiacture  of 
fresh  root    Trituration. 

OUnieal. — Constipation.  Diarrhoea.  Dropsy  (cardiac).  Dysentery.  Dys- 
menorrhoea.  Dyspepsia.  Haemorrhages.  Hctmorrhoids,  Heart,  affections  of.  Irri- 
tation,   Labour.   Pregnancy^  affections  of.   Proctitis.    Pruritus  vulvas.    Rheumatism. 

GharaoterlBtiOB. — Collinsonia  is  native  to  North  America.  It 
has  a  very  tough,  hard,  knotted  root.  It  has  been  proved  twice,  first 
by  Burt  and  later  by  Dowla.  The  former  took  the  tincture,  the 
latter  the  powder.  Both  experienced  headache,  the  former  in  con- 
nection with  abdominal  and  rectal  disturbance,  the  latter  with  flush- 
ing, sensation  of  heat,  numbness,  feeling  of  enlargement.  The  legs 
felt  light,  as  if  he  could  run  like  a  deer.  Nux  vomica  relieved  the 
sensations,  the  symptoms  passing  off  from  above  downwards.  In 
Dr.  Burt's  case  ttie  symptoms  generally  passed  from  above  down- 
wards. As  a  domestic  remedy,  and  among  the  eclectics,  it  is  known 
as  a  remedy  for  chronic  catarrhal  conditions,  especially  of  stomach, 
bowels,  and  bladder  ;  also  of  nose,  pharynx,  and  larynx,  and  in 
tubular  and  capillary  bronchitis.  It  is,  according  to  Hammond,  "a 
stimulant,  a  most  valuable  tonic,  a  positive  diuretic  and  mild 
laxative.''  Hammond  also  commends  it  in  the  palpitation  of  the 
menopause.  F.  S.  Smith  mentions  that  it  has  a  domestic  reputation 
in  rheumatism.  He  records  a  case  (subacute)  in  a  woodsman  of  30. 
It  began  in  foot  and  ankle,  and  travelled  over  nearly  every  joint  in 
the  body.  A  few  drops  of  Collins,  f  was  mixed  in  a  tumbler  of 
water,  and  a  teaspoonful  given  every  two  hours.  Rapid  cure  resulted. 
He  utters  a  caution  against  using  low  potencies  where  there  is 
organic  heart  affections.  It  is  useful  in  heart  affections  alternating 
with  suppressed  haemorrhoidal  bleeding  ;  sensitiveness  about  the 
heart,  fulness,  oppressed  breathing,  faintness.  Dewey  mentions  that 
it  cured  a  case  in  which  there  was  severe  constrictive  pain  about  the 
heart  in  a  man  who  habitually  passed  blood  by  stool,  the  heart 
symptoms  coming  on  when  the  bleeding  ceased,  and  disscppearing 


COLLINSONIA  CANADENSIS  569 

when  it  was  re-established.  Collins,  cured  both.  It  has  cured 
inveterate  cases  of  dyspepsia  with  weight  in  epigastrium  and  piles. 

Neuralgia  and  rheumatic  pains  were  experienced  by  the  provers 
in  many  parts  :  upper  jaw,  arms,  hands,  knees,  joints.  The  greatest 
number  of  Dr.  Burt's  symptoms  were  experienced  in  the  bowels  and 
rectum :  Pains  in  umbilicus  and  hypogastrium,  constipation  with 
hard  light  stools,  great  straining,  faintness  ;  stools  of  mucus  and 
blood.  These  symptoms  suggested  the  use  of  the  remedy  in  cases  of 
piles,  where  it  has  proved  most  efficacious.  Piles  during  the  cata- 
menia.  Prolapse  of  the  rectum  with  piles.  The  heart  was  markedly 
a£Fected  :  irritation  of  cardiac  nerves;  palpitation,  faintness,  oppression. 
Nash  has  cured  cases  of  the  most  obstinate  constipation  with  Collins. 
In  one  there  was  severe  colic,  which  had  recurred  for  several  years, 
the  concomitant  symptoms  being  great  flatulence  and  hsemorrhoidal 
troubles-  He  differentiates  between  jEsc.  h.  and  Collins,  (both  of 
which  have  sensation  as  if  rectum  was  full  of  sticks)  thus  :  -dEsc.  has 
sense  of  fulness  in  rectum^  which  Collins,  has  not.  JeIsc,  piles  do  not 
bleed  as  a  rule  ;  those  of  Collins,  bleed  persistently,  ^sc.  has  pain, 
soreness,  and  aching  in  the  back  [and,  I  may  add,  <  by  walking.-* 
J.  H.  C.].  Collins,  has  more  persistently  constipation,  with  colic  on 
account  of  it.  JEsc.  may  have  constipation  or  may  pot.  Collins,  has 
shown  marked  power  of  disturbing  the  circulation  and  causing 
haemorrhages,  and  also  of  disturbing  cutaneous  sensation.  The 
symptoms  are  <  evening  and  night,  and  >  in  morning.  <  By 
slightest  emotion  or  ex^citement. 

RelationB. — AntidoUd  by  :  Nux.  Compare :  Lycopus  (botanical ; 
heart) ;  -^sc.  h..  Ham.,  Alo.,  Nux,  Sul.  and  Ign.  in  piles ;  Carb.  v., 
Graph.,  Ign.,  Liach.,  Pul.  and  Sul.  in  piles  during  menses  ;  Pod.  (pro- 
lapse of  rectum)  ;  Op.,  Coloc,  Arn.,  Diosc,  Hydrast. ;  in  functional 
paralysis  from  fatigue  in  mental  emotions,  Stan.,  Coccul.,  Ign.,  Pho., 
Nat  m. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Gloomy. 

2.  Head. — Dull,  frontal  headache  with  constipation  or  piles ;  or  from 
checked  haemorrhoidal  discharge. 

5.  Face. — Flushing  with  heat  of  face  and  lips  numb  ;  pricking  as  if  with 
needles. 

8.  Mouth. — Whitish  coating  of  tongue,  with  loss  of  appetite. — Tongue 
coated  yellow  along  centre  or  base,  with  bitter  taste. 

II,  13.  Stomach  and  Abdomen. — Nausea,  with  cramp-like  pains  in 
stomach ;  with  cutting  pains  in  hypogastrium  ;  with  constipation  during 
pregnancy. — ^Vomiting  with  pains  and  heat  in  stomach. — ^Weight  in  epi- 
gastrium.— Sharp  cutting  in  stomach  every  few  minutes  while  sitting. — Heavy 
dragging  ache  in  pelvis. — Colic  with  flatulence  and  nausea. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Pure  mucous  stools,  or  mucous  stools  mixed 
with  dark  substances ;  before  stool,  severe  pain  in  lower  abdomen ;  during 
stool,  tenesmus ;  after  stool,  little  pain  ;  vomiting. — Dysenteric  stools. — 
Haanorrhoidal    dysentery    with    tenesmus. — Obstinate    constipation    with 


576  COLOCYNTHINUM 

haemorrhoids ;  stools  very  sluggish  and  hard,  accompanied  by  pain  and 
flatulence. — Hard,  lumpy,  knotty  stools. — Light  dry  balls. — Bowels  more  apt 
to  act  in  evening  than  in  morning. — Bowels  not  moved  for  days,  constant 
pressure  in  rectum  with  a  heavy  dragging  ache  in  pelvis. — Piles  with  consti- 
pation, or  even  with  diarrhcea,  bleeding  or  blind  and  protruding. — Feeling  of 
sticks,  or  gravel,  or  sand  in  rectum ;  evening  and  night ;  >  in  morning.— 
Flowing  piles,  haemorrhage  incessant  though  not  profuse,  with  alternate  con- 
stipation and  diarrhoea. — Itching  or  burning  in  anus  with  swelling. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.-— Varicocele  with  extreme  constipatioa— 
Spermatorrhoea  kept  up  by  piles  and  constipation. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Uterine  diseases  depending  on  diseases 
of  rectum  and  bowels. — Dysmenorrhoea  with  haemorrhoids. — Pruritus  vulvae 
with  haemorrhoids ;  during  pregnancy. — Diarrhoea  after  confinement 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Haemorrhage  from  lungs  with  short,  hack- 
ing cough ;  dark,  tough,  coagula  enveloped  in  viscid  mucus ;  uneasiness  in 
chest,  but  no  pain  ;  with  rectal  symptoms. — Pams  in  chest  alternating  with 
piles. 

ig.  Heart. — Cardiac  hyperaesthesia. — Periodical  attacks  of  faintness  and 
oppression,  <  slightest  motion. — Palpitation  in  pile  subjects ;  piles  return  as 
heart  is  relieved. 

21.  Limbs. — ^Tearing  pain  in  arms,  hands,  and  legs ;  frontal  headache. — 
Tearing  in  both  knees,  passing  down  inside  of  legs  to  feet  while  sitting ;  dull 
frontal  headache. 

24.  Generalities. — Sensation  as  if  face  and  limbs  were  enlarged,  with 
warmth,  numbness  and  pinching  as  from  innumerable  needles;  lower 
extremities  seemed  not  to  belong  to  him. 


Colocynthinum. 


An  active  principle  (glucoside)  of  Citrullus  colocynthis.    C56  Ht4  O^, 
Dilutions  in  alcohol. 

OllnloaL^Colic.  Cough.  Debility.  Diarrhoea.  Feet,  burning  in.  Genitals 
(male),  congestion  of ;  pain  in.  Headache.  Neuralgia.  Spinal  pains.  Travdling, 
effects  of. 

OharaoteristiOB* — Having  had  a  separate  proving,  Colocynthinum 
must  be  considered  apart  from  Colocynih,^  from  which  it  is  derived, 
although  the  symptoms  of  the  two  bear  a  close  resemblance. 
Neuralgic  symptoms  are  prominent.  Stitches  and  sensations  of  heat 
are  found  in  many  parts.  Pulsation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with 
prickling  stitches  on  back  in  neighbourhood  of  middle  thoracic 
vertebrae.  Diarrhoea  and  colic  >  bending  forward.  Congestion  to 
male  genital  organs  and  pain  in  them.  Burning  pains  in  soles  of  the 
feet.  <  Evening ;  by  motion  ;  riding  in  cars.  >  By  rest ;  bending 
over  ;  black  co£Eee.  <  By  motion  ;  >  by  rest : — herein  appears  the 
relationship  of  the  glucoside  to  Bryonia^  the  botanic  relative  of  Coh- 
cynthis. 


COLOCYNTHINUM  571 

SYMPTOMS. 

X.    Mind. — Depression. 

8.  Head. — Painfulness  of  whole  head,  esp.  temporal  and  frontal  regions, 
scalp,  and  eyeballs,  <  moving  eyes,  straining  sight,  or  bending  forwards. — 
Headache  <  by  riding  in  railway  cars,  obliging  to  move  slowly,  and  tread 
softly,  otherwise  the  brain  seems  to  shake  about  as  if  loose  against  the  skull 
(in  the  median  vertical  region)  ;  accompanied  by  very  sore  pain  and  causing 
very  bad  humour. — Stitches  in  brain  ;  through  occiput  on  heavy  treading ; 
through  cerebellum,  like  lightning,  on  coughing. — Sensitiveness  of  cerebellum 
on  turning  head. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Vision  sharper. — Painfulness  and  aching  in  eyeballs  <  strain- 
ing sight,  moving  eyes  rapidly,  or  turning  head. 

6.    Face. — Pressure  in  left  cheek-bone. 

8.  Mouth. — Pain  in  hollow  molar  and  drawing  in  incisors,  with  sensa- 
tion of  swelling  of  1.  cheek. — Persistent,  disgusting,  bitter  taste. — Prickling 
and  metallic  taste  on  tip  of  tongue. 

u.  Stomach. — Continual  burning  pressure  in  stomach  up  into  oeso- 
phagus.— Sticking  in  epigastrium ;  which  was  tense  and  inflated. — Pulsation 
in  epigastrium  accompanied  by  pricking  stitches  on  back  near  middle  thoracic 
vertebrae. 

It.  Abdomen. — ^Warm  feeling  followed  by  copious  discharge  of  flatus. — 
Colic  with  inflation  in  umbilical  region ;  colic  below  umbilicus. — Slight  colic 
drawing  from  hypogastrium  to  hepatic  region,  with  shuddering  in  scrotum, 
erections,  and  pain  in  buttock. — ^Tension  in  r.  groin  and  drawing  along  sper- 
matic cord  into  r.  testis,  which  was  somewhat  sensitive  towards  evening ; 
<  next  morning,  and  <  walking,  bending  over,  and  going  upstairs. — Stitches 
from  small  of  back  to  groin  when  walking. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Tickling  in  rectum. — Feeling  of  moisture  at 
anas. — Irresistible  inclination  to  stool ;  scanty  brownish-red  evacuation  with 
painful  tenesmus  lasting  ten  minutes. — Brown  pappy  evacuations,  rapidly  and 
easily  discharged  in  qmck  succession,  without  tenesmus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Tenesmus  in  urethra  and  rectum  after  urinating. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Congestion  towards  genital  organs,  esp. 
scrotum,  with  feeling  of  heat  and  burning  in  small  spot  on  same,  without 
erections. — Cramp-like  pain  in  penis  with  sensation  as  if  it  were  bent  double. 
— Dark  redness  and  painfulness  of  frenum. — Crawling  on  penis  with  sexual 
desire. — R.  testis  swollen  and  painful  to  touch. — A  pollution  at  night  (very 
unusual  with  him). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Short  hacking  cough  excited  by  tickling  in 
throat ;  whitish  yellow  mucus. — Frequent  cough  in  early  morning. 

ao.  Neck  and  Back. — Sharp  in-pressing  pain  in  some  spots  on  nape, 
as  if  from  a  sprain  <  by  movement ;  sensitive  to  pressure. — Painfulness  and 
feeling  of  heat  along  whole  spine. — Stitches  in  region  of  lowest  dorsal 
vertebrae. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Tearing  in  1.  shoulder. — Frequently  repeated 
stitches  from  1.  axilla  down  to  1.  elbow. — Paralytic  weakness  of  r.  forearm 
while  writing. — Cramp-like  pain  in  muscles  of  1.  wrist 


572  COLOCYNTHIS 

93.  Lower  Limbs. — StifiFness  and  heaviness  in  tibiae. — Borning,  sticking, 
and  sensation  of  wannth  in  dorsum  of  r.  foot;  pressing  digging  pain  in 
external  side  of  second  toe  of  1.  foot. — Burning  pain  in  both  soles  with 
feeling  as  if  they  were  swollen. 

84.  Generalities.— Great  desire  to  lie  down  ;  which  relieves.— Unusual 
debility  towards  evening. 

26.    Sleep. — Restless  sleep  with  vivid  dreams. 


Colocynthis. 


Citrullus   colocynthis.    Cucumis  colocynthis.    Bitter  Apple.    N.  0. 
Cucurbitaceae.    Native  of  Turkey.    Tincture  of  pulp  of  fruit. 

CHniiMJ, — ^Cataract  Ciliary  neuralgia.  Colic,  Cozalgia.  Diabetes.  Diar- 
rhcea.  Dysentery.  Dysmenorrhoea.  Glaucoma.  Headache.  Hoarseness.  Men- 
strual colic.  Neuralgia,  Ovaries^  affections  of.  Paraphimosis.  Peritonitis. 
Rheumatism.  Sciatica,  Toothache.  Tumours.  Uterus,  pains  in.  Vagina, 
pains  in. 

CharaoteristiOB. — **  The  strongest  characteristic  calling  for  the 
use  of  this  remedy  is  an  agonising  pain  in  the  abdomen  causing  the 
patient  to  bend  over  double.  Relief  is  obtained  by  motion,  such  as 
twisting,  turning  and  wriggling  around,  and  the  motion  is  kept  up 
steadily  while  the  pain  lasts  ;  the  pain  is  <  by  eating  or  drinking  the 
least  amount.  This  pain  may  occur  alone,  or  in  the  dysentery, 
cholera,  &c.  The  doubling  over  of  the  patient  is  the  chief  character- 
istic" (Guernsey).  The  patient  bends  double  or  presses  something 
hard  against  the  abdomen.  He  leans  over  chairs,  the  table,  or  bed- 
posts to  get  relief.  According  to  Nash  Mag.  phos.  comes  nearest  to 
it  in  colic  and  neuralgic  afiFections.  Cham,  is  also  very  close,  t>oth 
having  colic  from  disturbing  emotions,  but  the  Cham,  child  does  not 
double  up,  it  tosses  about.  The  Staph,  patient  is  likely  to  have  black 
or  decayed  teeth  and  sore  eyelids,  and  there  is  chronic  tendency  to 
colic.  Verat.  has  colic  >  bending  double,  but  it  has  also  cold  sweat. 
Dioscorea  has  wind  colic,  but  is  >  by  stretching  out.  The  Stan,  child 
wants  to  be  carried  with  the  abdomen  on  the  mother's  shoulder. 

The  nearest  analogue  to  Colocynthis  in  its  entire  action  on  the 
human  body  is  its  botanical  congener  Bryoniaj  with  which  it  should  be 
compared.  Both  have  the  same  general  features — ^pain  in  muscles, 
nerves,  and  joints,  gastro-enteric  disturbance,  and  the  same  condition 
in  regard  to  rheumatic  joints,  <  by  movement.  Both  have  great 
irritability  and  ailments  from  mental  emotion,  though  the  latter 
feature  is  more  marked  in  Colocynth.  Arthritis  and  gouty  headaches 
with  ophthalmia,  facial  neuralgic  pains  extending  to  eye. 

Coloc.  has  diarrhoea  from  grief,  indignation  or  chagrin.  Sup- 
pressed lochia  from  indignation.  Diabetes  with  milky,  gelatinous,  or 
colloid  urine.  The  characteristic  griping  of  Coloc,,,  forcing  the  patient 
to  bend  double,  may  be  accompanied  by  cramps  in  other  parts,  which 


COLOCYNTHIS  573 

may  occur  with  or  without  stool ;  if  a  stool  occurs  it  gives  immediate 
relief  {Nux  the  opposite) ;  any  attempt  to  eat  or  drink  <.  Cramps 
occur  in  the  legs,  uterus,  and  ovaries.  A  sensation  as  if  clamped  with 
iron  bands  is  very  characteristic  in  (coxalgia ;  dysmenia,  &c.).  Drag- 
ging in  uterus  and  vagina.  Griping,  cutting,  tearing,  and  spasmodic 
pains  in  the  body ;  burning  pains  ;  pulsations  through  the  body  ; 
sensation  as  of  hard  stones  or  potatoes  in  the  body.  Easily  intoxi- 
cated by  stimulants.  Affections  of  right  side  generally.  The  pains 
are  often  accompanied  by  stiffness  and  retarded  motion  of  the 
a£Fected  parts ;  often  affect  the  hip-joints  ;  pains  affecting  joints  are 
much  <  by  motion  ;  many  neuralgic  pains  are  >  by  rest.  Abdominal 
pains  are  >  by  violent  exertion.  >  Lying  with  head  bent  forward. 
Rheumatic  pain  in  the  limbs  is  >  by  discharge  of  flatus.  Touch  <, 
and  pressure  >  many  of  the  pains.  Warmth  >  most  pains.  <  Even- 
ing and  night  Coloc,  has,  like  Lye,  Helleb.,  and  CausLf  a  4  p.m. 
aggravation.  One  prover  had  :  "  At  4  p.m.  the  colic  came  on,  six 
days  in  succession."  This  has  been  verified  clinically.  Coloc,  is 
suited  to  blondes ;  persons  of  choleric  temperament ;  and  those  liable 
to  cramps  and  colic,  from  fruit,  lead-poisoning,  or  excessive  venery. 

Relations. — Coloc.  is  antidoted  by :  Camph.,  Caust.,  Cham.,  Coff., 
Op.,  Staph.  Large  doses  are  counteracted  by  tepid  milk,  infusion  of 
galls.  Camph.,  and  Op.  //  antidotes :  Caust.,  Magnes.  Compatible : 
Stapn.,  Cham.  Complementary :  Merc,  (dysentery)  with  much  tenes- 
mus). Compare :  Bry.  (nearest  analogue),  Elater.,  Cucurbita  pepo. 
Diosc.  (griping,  tearing,  cutting,  spasmodic  pains  in  body,  but  > 
stretching  body  and  motion);  Dig.  (paraphimosis);  Caust  (joint 
rheumatism  ;  k>11ows  Coloc.  in  colic) ;  eyes  feel  hard,  Can.  ind  ; 
Canth.,  Cham.,  Chel.  ;  Chi.  (beer  intoxicates  easily)  ;  Coccul.,  Gamb., 
Lye,  Merc. ;  Nux  ;  Plumb,  (inclination  to  assume  strange  attitudes  in 
bed).  Staph,  (anger  with  vexation,  abdominal  pains,  neuralgia — they 
follow  one  another  well) ;  Verat. ;  Pul.  (hoarseness  4  p.m.).  From 
emotions,  Cham.,  Bry.,  Gels.,  Pho.  ac.  Ign.  ;  stiffness  of  knee-joints 
and  all  joints,  Colch. ;  stiffness  after  acute  rheumatism,  hinders 
squatting,  Graph.    Compare  also  Guaiac. ;  Crot.  tig. 

Oaasation. — Anger.  Indignation.  Chagrin.  Grief.  Catching 
cold. 

STHPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — Mental  dejection  with  taciturnity. — ^Aversion  to  talk  ;  disin- 
clined to  answer  questions. — Inclined  to  be  angry  and  indignant. — Lachry- 
mose humour. — Anxiety  and  inquietude,  with  an  inclination  to  run  away. — 
Want  of  religious  feeling. — Disinclined  to  occupy  oneself,  even  averse  to 
visit  his  otherwise  well-liked  friends. 

2.  Head. — Easy  intoxication  (from  drinking  beer). — ^Vertigo,  which 
occasions  falling,  on  turning  the  head  quickly,  with  tottering  of  the  knees. — 
Headache,  as  from  a  draught  of  air,  which  is  dissipated  by  walking  in  the 
open  air  .—-Compressive  pain  in  the  sinciput,  aggravated  by  stooping,  or  lying 
on  the  back. — Pressing  pain  in  the  forehead  and  root  of  the  nose,  as  if  a 
coryza  would  appear.— Attacks  of  semi-lateral  headache,  drawing  and  cramp- 


574  COLOCYNTHIS 

like,  or  pressivei  with  nausea  and  vomiting,  sometimes  daily,  towards  five 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon. — Pain  in  the  forehead  and  in  the  eyes,  as  if  pro- 
ceeding from  the  outside  inwards. — Headache  with  violent  pains,  which  do 
not  permit  a  recumbent  posture,  and  occasion  cries  or  weeping. — ^Attacks  of 
headache,  followed  by  suffocation. — Congestion  in  the  head. — Burning  pain 
in  the  skin  of  the  forehead,  and  the  scalp. — Heat  in  the  head. — Profuse  per- 
spiration on  the  head,  itching,  smelling  like  urine  (also  on  the  hands,  thighs, 
and  feet) ;  worse  at  night  in  bed ;  relieved  after  rising  and  walking  in  the 
warm  room. 

3.  Eyes. — Sensitive  pressure  in  the  eyes,  esp.  when  stooping. — 
Obscuration  of  the  sight— -Great  white  light  at  side  of  and  below  r.  eye. 
— Shimmering  circle  with  rays  before  r.  eye. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes.— 
Burning  and  incisive  pains,  and  shootings  in  the  eyes  (and  forehead). — Eyes 
feel  hard. — ^Aching  in  upper  and  outer  portions  of  r.  eyeball  in  evening,  <  by 
rubbing  it  with  finger ;  it  feels  harder  than  usual  there ;  this  aching  lasted 
some  days. — Smarting  in  eyes ;  painf ulness  of  eyeballs. — Pressive  feeling  in 
orbits,  towards  root  of  nose. — Painful  pressure  in  eyeballs,  esp.  on  stooping. — 
Pains  in  eyes,  sharp  cutting  in  r.  eyeball. — Stitches  as  with  knives  in  r,  eye- 
ball, extending  to  root  of  nose. — Pain  as  from  pressiu-e  on  both  eyelids  from 
above  downward. — External  strabismus  of  r.  eye,  with  smarting  lachryma- 
tion. — Dryness  ;  burning  ;  smarting  ;  lachrymation. — Discharge  of  acrid 
serum  from  the  eyes. 

4.  Ears.— Warmth  in  r.  car.— Obstruction  before  1.  car. — Itching, 
sticking  deep  in  ear,  extending  from  Eustachian  tube  to  tympanum ;  >  by 
boring  in  ear  with  finger. — Crawling  within  ear  >  by  boring. — Difficult 
hearing;  everything  heard  is  accompanied  by  a  roaring  noise.— Constant 
roaring  and  throbbing  in  both  ears,  esp.  1. 

5.  Nose. — Fluent  coryza. — Severe  burning  above  the  nose. — ^Throbbing 
burrowing  pain  in  nose  extending  from  1.  side  to  root 

6.  Face. — Pale  and  wasted  face,  with  downcast  (sunken)  eyes.— Ten- 
sive, tearing,  burning  or  shooting  pains  (prosopalgia)  in  the  face,  often  on 
L  side  only,  and  extending  to  the  ears  and  into  the  head. — Cramp-like  sensa- 
tion in  the  1.  malar  bone,  extending  into  1.  eye. — Scabs  on  the  face.— - 
Face  of  a  deep  red  colour  (during  the  fever).— -Face  puflFed,  with  heat  and 
redness  of  1.  cheek,  and  tearing  pains. 

8.  Mouth.— Pains  in  the  teeth,  as  if  the  nerve  were  pulled  or 
stretched. — Pulsative  pains  in  the  teeth  on  1.  side. — Burning  at  the  tip  of  the 
tongue.— Sensation  as  if  the  tongue  had  been  scalded  by  some  hot  fluid- 
Roughness  of  the  tongue.— Tongue  loaded  with  a  white  or  yellow  coating.— 
Cramps  in  the  gullet,  with  empty  eructations  and  palpitations  of  the  heart 

II.  Stomach.— Diminished  appetite,  without  thirst,  though  accom- 
panied by  a  strong  desire  for  drink,  with  a  sickly  taste  in  the  month.— 
Constant  nausea  with  risings. — Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  and  of  aU  food  and 
drink. — Colic  and  diarrhoea,  however  little  is  eaten. — Pains  in  the  stomach 
sometimes  after  a  meal.— Vomiting  of  food,  or  of  greenish  matter.— Vomit- 
ing, with  diarrhoea. — Painful  sensitiveness  cd  the  epigastrium  to  the  touch.— 
Violent  pressure  on  the  stomach  (with  sensation  of  hunger),  and  in  the 
precordial  region. 

IS.    Abdomen. — Inflation    of    the    abdomen,  as   from    tympanitis.— 


COLOCYNTHIS  575 

Feeling  in  the  whole  abdomen  as  if  the  intestines  were  being  squeezed 
between  stones. — Cramp-like  pain  and  constriction  in  the  intestines,  esp. 
after  a  fit  of  anger. — Excessively  violent  colic,  with  incisive,  cramp-like,  or 
contractive  pains,  which  compel  the  patient  to  bend  double  (<  in  any 
other  position),  with  restlessness  in  the  whole  body,  and  with  a  sensation  of 
shuddering  in  the  face,  which  seems  to  proceed  from  the  abdomen. — Pain  in 
the  abdomen  when  walking  (navel). — Colic,  with  cramps  in  the  calves  of  the 
1^. — Colic,  as  if  from  a  chill. — Colic  after  a  meal. — ^The  colic  and  abdominal 
pains  are  relieved  by  bending  double,  by  violent  exercise,  by  coffee  and 
tobacco-smoke ;  every  other  food  or  drink  causes  an  aggravation. — Pinching, 
and  sensation  of  clawing  in  the  abdomen,  mitigated  by  violent  exertion. — 
Cuttings  and  shootings  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  knives,  with  shiverings 
and  tearings  along  the  legs. — Great  sensibility,  soreness,  and  sensation  of 
emptiness  in  the  abdomen. — Grumbling  in  the  abdomen. — Inguinal  hernia. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation. — Constipation,  and  evacuations 
retarded  (during  pregnancy). — Loose  evacuations  of  a  greenish  yellow,  frothy 
and  of  a  sour  smell,  putrid  or  mouldy. — Slimy  diarrhoea. — Sanguineous 
evacuations. — Dysenterical  evacuations,  with  colic. — During  the  evacuation, 
contraction  in  the  rectum. — Painful  swelling  of  the  haemorrhoidal  tumoiu-s  of 
the  anus,  and  of  the  rectum. — Discharge  of  blood  from  the  rectum,  with 
stinging,  burning  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  anus  (daily).-— Haemor- 
rhage from  the  anus. — Paralysis  of  the  sphincter  ant 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — ^Tenesmus  of  the  bladder,  with  but  small  dis- 
charges.— Diminished  secretion  of  urine. — Abundant  discharge  of  urine  of  a 
bright  colour,  dmng  the  pains. — Urine  (like  that  in  dropsy  after  scarlet  fever) 
of  a  faint  flesh  colour,  with  a  white-brown  flocculent,  transparent  sediment, 
depositing  on  the  chamber  small,  red,  hard,  solid  crystals,  which  adhere 
firmly  to  the  vessel. — Fetid  urine,  which  soon  becomes  thick,  gelatinous,  and 
Mutinous. — Itching  at  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  with  desire  to  urinate. — 
Burning  in  the  urethra  after  micturition. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sensation  as  if  everything  were  flowing 
towards  the  genital  parts,  from  both  sides  of  the  abdomen,  occasioning  a  dis- 
charge of  semen. — Excitement  of  sexual  desire,  as  in  priapism. — Complete 
impotence. — Retraction  of  the  prepuce  behind  the  glans. 

zO.  Female  Sexual  Organs.—Cramp-like  pain  in  1.  ovary ;  in  uterus ; 
as  if  parts  were  squeezed  in  a  vice. — Ovarian  cyst,  paroxysm  of  acute  pain  in 
abdomen,  sacrum,  and  hip,  >  by  flexing  thigh  on  pelvis. — Metritis ;  metror- 
rhagia ;  suppressed  catamenia,  with  cramping  pains  >  by  bending  double ; 
or  caused  by  indignation  or  chagrin. — Stitches  in  the  ovaries. — Lochia 
suppressed  ;  puerperal  fever  after  vexation. — Painful  nodosities  in  the 
mammae. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Small  dry  cough,  excited  by  irritation  in  the 
larynx,  or  by  tobacco  smoke. — Constriction  in  the  larynx,  which  induces 
frequent  deglutition  with  oppressed  breathing ;  >  in  the  open  air. — Fits  of 
asthma  at  night 

x8.    Chest.— Oppression  of  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  compressed. 

ZQ.    Heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart. — Stitches  in  cardiac  region. 

so.  Neck  and  Back.— Tension  in  the  neck  and  shoulder-blades. — 
Drawing  pains  in  the  back,  as  if  the  muscles  were  stretched. — Great  weak- 


576  COLOCYNTHIS 

ness  in  the  back»  esp.  in  the  small  of  the  back,  with  pressing  headache 
(morning). — Congestion  and  suppuration  of  the  axillary  glands ;  subsultus  of 
muscles. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Bruise-like  pain  in  the  joint  of  the  shoulder,  esp. 
after  a  fit  of  passion. — ^Aching,  pressive,  and  shooting  pain  in  the  arms. — 
Cramp-like  pain  in  the  hands,  which  with  difficulty  sufiFers  the  fingers  to  be 
opened  ;  <  when  at  rest. — Pulling  in  the  tendons  of  the  thumbs. 

23.  Loiver  Limbs. — Pain  in  the  coxo-femoral  joint,  as  if  it  were 
fastened  with  an  iron  clasp,  the  pelvis  and  sacral  region,  with  pains  extend- 
ing from  the  lumbar  region  to  the  legs. — ^Tensive  lancination,  in  the  lumbar 
region  and  of  the  hips,  esp.  when  lying  on  the  back. — Pain  (in  the  r.  thigh) 
while  walking,  as  if  the  psoas  muscles  were  too  short ;  on  stooping  it  ceased, 
but  began  again  when  he  commenced  to  walk. — (Spontaneous  dislocation  of 
the  coxo-femoral  joint.). — ^Want  of  flexibility  in  the  knee,  which  prevents  the 
bending  of  it. — Cramps  in  the  legs. — Shootings  in  the  legs,  esp.  during 
repose. — Stitches  in  the  knee-joints. — Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  knees  (in 
the  morning). — Great  heaviness  and  trembling  of  the  legs. — ^The  feet  go  to 
sleep  (first  the  1.,  then  the  r.  foot). — Swelling  of  the  feet— Tearing  in  the 
soles  of  the  feet  during  repose. 

24.  Generalities. — Semi-lateral  pains. — Painful  cramps,  and  cramp- 
like contractions,  in  the  internal  or  external  parts. — Sensation  as  though 
stones  were  being  ground  together  in  the  abdomen,  working  upon  the  soft 
parts. — Contraction  of  the  tendons  in  some  parts  only,  or  throughout  the 
body,  with  a  drawing  up  of  all  the  limbs.— Twitching  of  the  muscles. — Stiff- 
ness in  all  the  joints.— Tearing  shootings,  traversing  the  whole  body  longi- 
tudinally.— Physical  depression  while  walking  in  the  open  air. — Fainting, 
with  coldness  of  the  external  parts. — Swelling  of  various  parts,  with  oppres- 
sion of  breathing. — Pulsations  through  the  body. — Burning  pains. 

25.  Skin. — ^Troublesome  itching,  with  great  restlessness  in  the  whole 
body,  esp.  in  the  evening  in  bed,  followed  by  perspiration. — Desquamation  of 
the  skin  over  the  whole  body. — Carbuncles,  with  continuous  burning  pain. — 
Small  ulcers,  with  itching  and  burning. — Eruptions  which  resemble  scabies. 
— Skin  hot  and  dry. 

26.  Sleep.— Distiu-bed  sleep  at  night  (by  dreams). — Sleepiness,  alternately 
with  delirium,  with  the  eyes  open. — Sleeplessness  following  a  fit  of  indiges- 
tion.— ^Very  wakeful  and  sleepless. — Lying  on  the  back  when  asleep,  with  one 
hand  under  the  occiput. — Frequent  vivid  and  lascivious  dreams. 

27.  Fever. — Cold  and  shivering,  with  heat  in  the  face,  without  thirst. — 
Coldness  of  the  hands  and  soles  of  the  feet,  while  the  rest  of  the  body  is 
warm. — Pulse  hard,  full  and  quick. — Strong  pulsation  in  the  arteries.— 
External  dry  heat. — Internal  heat,  with  attacks  of  flushes  of  heat — Nocturnal 
sweat,  of  the  smell  of  urine,  on  the  head,  hands,  legs,  and  feet,  causing 
itching  of  the  skin. — Perspiration  principally  on  the  head  and  on  the 
extremities. 


COMOCLADIA  577 

Golostrnm. 

The  milk  first  secreted  after  childbirth.    Solution. 

GHaiemL— Diarrhoea. 

Gharaoteristtos. — ^The  symptoms  of  ColosL  are  purely  clinical. 
Its  use  in  diarrhoea  was  probably  suggested  by  the  purgative  effect 
of  Colostrum  on  the  infant.  Bell  gives  the  indications  as  follows  : 
— Stools  :  Green,  watery  ;  yellow  ;  watery  ;  mucous  ;  bilious ;  profuse ; 
sour-smelling;  excoriating.  Ago.:  In  nursing  infants;  during  den- 
tition. During  stool  :  Colicky  pains  in  hypogastrium.  Accom- 
pafdmenis:  Great  nervous  irritability,  or  Ustlessness.  Pale  face. 
Tongue  coated  white  or  yellow.  Vomiting  of  sour  or  bitter  substances. 
Loss  of  appetite.    Tke  whole  body  smells  sour.    Fever.    Emaciation. 


Gomodadia. 

Comodadia  dentata.    Guao  (Cuba).    N.  O.  Anacardiaceae.    Tincture 

of  leaves  and  bark. 


L— Antrum  of  Highmore,  affections  of.  Breasts,  affections  of.  Ears, 
affections  of.  Eczema.  Erysipelas.  Eyes,  affections  of.  Herpes.  Leprosy.  Neu- 
ralgia.   Skin,  malignant  inflammations  of.    Toothache.    Ulcers.    Zona. 

Quupaoteristios. — Comocladia  shows  its  botanical  affinity  with 
the  Rhus  family  by  the  virulence  of  its  effects  on  the  skin,  the  shghtest 
contact,  and,  at  times,  even  walking  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  grow- 
ing tree,  being  sufficient  to  cause  violent  inflammation.  The  trunk 
and  branches  of  the  tree  contain  a  milky  fluid,  turning  black  on 
exposure  to  sunhght,  discolouring  the  skin,  linen,  &c.  (Compare  the 
^*  Marking  Nut ''  Anacardium.)  The  plant  causes  tormenting  itching, 
swelling,  redness,  vesication,  ulceration.  Hale  quotes  from  Navarro 
cures  of  ulcers  :  "  Sloughing  ulcer  of  right  breast."  "  Indolent  ulcer, 
lower  third  right  leg,"  deep,  discharging  sanious  fetid  pus.  '^  Inflam- 
mation of  left  leg  and  foot,  with  enormous  swelling  and  fever.''  A 
cough,  with  pain  under  left  breast  going  through  to  left  scapula,  has 
several  times  been  cured  with  ComocL  The  eye  symptoms  are 
peculiar :  pain  in  right  eye,  sensation  as  if  it  were  larger  than  left,  and 
more  protruded.  There  are  also  rheumatic  pains,  and,  as  with  Rhus, 
these  and  the  symptoms  in  general  are  >  by  motion  and  <  by  rest. 
In  contradistinction  to  Rhus,  heat  <  and  open  air  >  most  of  the 
symptoms.  Most  symptoms  are  <  at  night  as  with  Rhus.  Pres- 
sure >. 

RdattoiUk — Compare :  Anac,  Rhus,  Euphorb.  (red  stripes  on  skin) ; 
Apis  (eye  symptoms  <  near  stove). 
VOL.  L  38 


578  COMOCLADIA 


BTHPTQH& 

2.  Head. — Giddiness  on  rising  from  bed  ;  everything  looks  dark  ; 
>  motion ;  <  heat. — Severe  pain  at  intervals  from  posterior  portion  of  ^eballs 
to  occipital  protuberance  ;  <  near  warm  stove  ;  when  stooping  ;  >  in  open 
air. — Corrosive  itching  with  shooting  pains,  >  by  movement. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  protrude  ;  feel  sore ;  fee*  heavy ;  as  if  pressed  out  from 
above. — Eyeballs  feel  worse  on  moving  them. — R.  eye  painful,  feels  much 
larger  and  more  protruded  than  1.  (3  or  4  p.m.). — Eyes  <  near  warm  stove. — 
Sees  a  red  ring  round  flame  of  lamp. 

4.  Ears. — Heat  and  fulness  in  interior  of  r.  ear. — L.  ear  all  cracked,  and 
desquamating  a  substance  like  powered  starch. 

6.  Face. — Burning ;  extreme  swelling ;  heat  and  itching  of  face. — ^Aching 
first  in  1.  and  then  in  r.  maxillary  joint  on  entering  a  warm  roooL — ^Adiing  in 
base  of  r.  antrum  of  Highmore,  afterwards  in  1.,  sense  of  heat  and  fnlness, 
sensation  as  of  a  pimple  on  r.  antrum. — Lower  lip  blistered  and  swollen. — 
Sensation  as  if  the  skin  was  puckered  or  drawn  up  from  the  face  and  alx>at 
the  nose,  causing  slight  giddiness. 

8.  Mouth. — Sensation  as  if  a  tooth  were  being  drawn  out  of  its  socket, 
putting  the  nerve  on  the  stretch. — Pains  in  teeth  >  by  pressure. — ^When 
toothache  stops,  head  feels  large. — Second  r.  molar  carious,  pain  commenoes 
in  it  4.30  to  5  p.m. ;  at  times  shoots  down  in  line  with  larynx,  leaving  sore 
track  ;  pain  <  in  bed,  >  by  external  warmth  and  pressure. — Gums  of  lower 
jaw  inflamed. — ^Tongue  coated  dirty  yellow. — Mouth  dry. 

II.  Stomach. — Some  eructations  two  hours  after  eating. — Pressure  and 
heaviness  in  region  of  stomach. 

13.  Stool. — Severe  flatulent  pain  in  abdomen  preceding  and  during  a 
diarrhceic  stool ;  followed  by  a  feeling  of  weakness  and  perspiration  on  face 
and  neck. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Intense  itching  on  lower  part  of  penis,  also 
on  inner  side  oi  prepuce. — Continued  tingling,  itching  of  scrotum  during 
night. 

17, 18.  Respiratory  Organs  and  Chest. — Spasmodic  dry  cough  at 
night,  with  tickling  in  throat,  and  constant  dull  pains  under  1.  nipple,  extend- 
ing through  to  1.  scapula. — Cannot  draw  a  long  breath  on  account  of  sharp 
pain  at  centre  of  thorax  on  1.  side. — Soreness  in  1.  lung. — Sharp  pain  in  L 
breast,  about  one  inch  above  nipple,  and  leaves  a  burning  sensation ;  it  goes 
to  r.  side  and  down  r.  arm. — Sloughing  ulcer  on  r.  breast 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — On  moving  head,  sense  of  fulness,  rigidity  and 
lameness  of  muscles  of  neck. — Rheumatic  pains  and  stiches  in  back ;  stitches 
leave  a  burning. 

23.  Upper  Limbs. — Sharp  pains  through  r.  shoulder  to  scapula. — Pain- 
ful burning  on  arms. — Crampy  sensation  in  muscles  of  r.  upper  arm. — Numb, 
tensive  pain  in  forearm  and  rheumatic  stiffness  of  shoulders  and  elbow-joints. 
— Drawing  aching  in  forearm. — Drawing  cramping  in  fingers. — ^Vesicular 
eruption  on  arms  and  hands. 

33.  LoiTver  Limbs. — Intermittent,  pressing-outward  pain  in  L  sacro- 
iliac synchondrosis,  sensitive  to  pressure,  >  by  walking,  but  feels  lame  and 
sore. — Pulsating  pain  in  neck  of  r.  femur  and  in  r.  thigh. — Severe  pains  in 


CONIINUM  579 

both  knees ;  pressing  down  to  feet  on  inside  of  legs. — Drawing  in  r.  knee 
extending  into  anterior  muscles  of  thigh. — Drawing,  cramping  in  hollow  of  r. 
foot,  passing  along  outer  border  of  gastrocnemius  to  knee,  then  in  tibia,  where 
it  becomes  a  numb  aching,  then  in  tarsus  as  if  foot  would  cramp. — Inflam- 
mation of  leg  and  foot  with  violent  fever  ;  swelling  increased  enormously 
when  pain  subsided ;  skin  became  white  and  covered  with  thin  scales,  which 
cracked  and  discharged  a  sanious  fluid. — ^Vesicular  eruption  changing  to 
pustules  and  ulcers. — Herpes  on  legs. 

as.  Skin.— Tormenting  itching  and  burning  over  whole  body. — Red  all 
over  like  scarlet  fever. — Red  stripes  on  skin. — Enormous  swelling  ;  vesicles ; 
desquamation  ;  ulcers. — Malignant  erysipelas ;  herpes ;  zona ;  leprosy. 

96.  Sleep. — Dreamy,  refreshing  sleep  with  pleasant  dreams,  almost 
clairvoyant 

Conchiolinam. 

Mother-of-  Pearl.    Trituration. 

flHwiiwil.— Osteitis.    Pyaemia. 

ChanutteriBtios. — Observations  made  on  workers  in  mother-of- 
pearl  factories  show  that  inhalation  of  the  dust  produces  catarrh  of 
the  respiratory  organs,  and,  later  on,  inflammation  of  the  ends  of  bones. 
This  always  begins  in  the  diaphyses,  but  may  spread  to  the  epiphyses. 
It  always  attacl^  young  subjects.  First  there  is  a  more  or  less  intense 
pain  in  the  bone  ;  comes  suddenly  ;  at  first  continuous  ;  later  inter- 
mittent. Soon  after  the  appearance  of  the  pain  there  is  fever ;  thirst ; 
loss  of  appetite ;  sleeplessness ;  dark-coloured  urine  with  sediment. 
Then  swelling  occurs.  The  swelling  always  develops  on  one  or  the 
other  end  of  a  diaphysis,  never  in  tlie  middle  of  it  nor  in  the  epiphysis. 
The  swelling  has  a  clear,  sharp  margin  ;  it  is  extremely  painful  to  the 
sli^test  touch  ;  at  first  soft,  elastic  and  slightly  fluctuating,  it  may 
become  as  hard  as  a  bone.  Suppuration  may  occur.  The  bones  that 
have  t>een  a£Fected  are  lower  jaw,  scapula,  humerus,  radius,  ulna,  tibia, 
fibula,  tarsal,  and  metatarsal  bones.  I  cured  with  Conch.  3  a  delicate 
boy  who  at  three  different  times  had  had  pain  in  left  knee.  The 
left  inner  condyle  was  swollen  and  tender.  The  cure  was  rapid  and 
the  general  h^th  much  improved  at  the  same  time.  Conch,  has, 
no  doabt,  a  wide  range  of  action  in  affections  of  bones,  especially 
when  the  growing  ends  are  affected.  Calc.  phos,  and  Calc,  c,  are  its 
nearest  ansdogues. 

Coniinnm. 

Conicine.    An  alkaloid  from  Conium  maculatum.    €•  H.^N. 

Tincture. 

diBicaL— Eyes,   heavy.     Hearing,   illusions    of.     Hemiplegia.     Numbness. 
Tongue,  paralysis  of.    Vertigo.    Vision,  disordered. 

Ckhantotdrisiios. — Coniin.  is  a  poison  rivalling  prussic  acid  in  the 
intensity  of  action.    It  has  had  rather  an  extensive  proving.     It  causes 


58o  CONIINUM   BROMATUM 

numbness,  muscular  paralysis,  vertigo,  disorders  of  sight,  hearing,  and 
touch,  lethargy  and  overpowering  sleepiness.  A  feelmg  as  if  one  had 
been  up  all  night,  or  after  a  debauch.  Cramp  in  calves  on  ascending 
steps  or  drawing  ofiF  boots.    Vertigo  is  >  in  open  air. 

BTHPTOMB. 

1.  Mind. — Calm  and  tranquil ;  slowness  of  mental  process. — Inability 
to  think  or  fix  the  attention. — Loss  of  consciousness. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo  and  confusion  with  prostration  >  in  open  air.— 
Weighty  fulness,  and  pressure  in  head. — Open  air  caused  pain  in  supra-orbital 
and  cutaneous  malae  nerves. 

3.  Eyes. — Lids  heavy. — ^Vision  confused  ;  objects  swim. — Dazzling  of 
sight. — Complete  blindness. — Objects  seem  large ;  one  thinks  he  sees  his  own 
nose  a  shapeless  mass. 

4.  Ears. — Hearing  weakened  ;  ears  feel  as  if  stopped  with  cotton  wool. 
— Illusions  of  hearing. 

6.  Face. — Face  sunken,  pale. — Numbness  of  muscles  about  the  jaws.^ 
-Head  and  face  very  warm. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  pale,  paralysed,  and  numb. — Epithelium  denuded 
in  many  places,  papillae  very  prominent. — ^Violent  burning  in  mouth.— 
Accumulation  of  saliva. 

9.  Throat — Scraping  in  throat 

II.    Stomach. — Eructations ;  nausea ;  vomiting. 

13.  Abdomen. — Rumbling  with  distension  of  abdomen. — ^Tendency  to 
diarrhoea. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.-— Voice  thick ;  muddled  words  when 
speaking. — Respirations  frequently  yawning. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Spasmodic  distortion  of  neck  with  spasms  of 
face  which  draw  the  mouth  up  to  a  point. — Pain  in  1.  lumbar  region. 

21.    Limbs. — Heaviness  of  arms  and  legs,  esp.  1.  arm. 

23.  Upper  Limbs. — Numbness  with  tingling  of  arms. — ^Tense  cramp  in 
muscles  of  ball  of  thumb  with  painful  sensation  on  strongly  adducting  thumb. 
— Hands  bluish,  cold. — Moisture  on  finger-tips. — Fingers  and  hands  wet 

23.  Loiter  Limbs.— Gait  unsteady ;  weakness  esp.  marked  on  going 
out  to  walk. — Carries  body  forward. — Legs  felt  independent  as  if  they  did  not 
care  for  him  or  anybody  else. — Cramp  in  calves  on  ascending  steps. 


Coniinum  Bromatom. 

Crystallised  Bromohydrate  of  Conicine.    Cg  H,y  NHBr. 

ClinioaL— Head,  empty  sensation  in.    Inactivity.    Mental  apathy. 

GharaoteristiOB.— Conn.  bro.  has  produced  symptoms  of  mind 
and  head.    Coffee  dissipated  them. 


CONIUM   MACULATUM  581 

BTMPTOMB. 

!•    Mind. — Difficulty  in  intellectual  work. — State  of  inactivity,  rather 
than  a  tendency  to  sleep. 

8.    Head.— Cerebral  emptiness  and  vertigo. 


Goninm  Macolatnm. 

Coniom  maculatum.    Poison  Hemlock.  N.  0.  Umbelliferae.  Tincture 
of  fresh  plant  in  flower. 


U— Asthma.    Bladder,  inflammation  of.    Breast^  affections  of;  painful. 

Bronchitis,  Bruises,  Cancer,  Cataract,  Chorea.  Coufh.  Depression  of  spirits. 
Diphtheritic  paralysis.  EKrsmenia  (membranous).  Erysipelas,  ayes,  affections  of, 
Galactorrhoea.  Herpes.  Hypochondriasis.  Jaundice.  Liver,  enlarged.  Melancholia. 
Uenstruaiion,  disordered.  Numbness.  Ovaries^  affections  of.  Paralysis ;  Landry's. 
Peritcmitis.  Phthisis.  Pregnancy,  painful  breasts  during.  Prostatitis.  Ptoses.  Scro- 
fula. Spermatorrhea.  Sterility.  Stomach,  affections  of.  Testicles,  affections  of. 
Tetters.    Trismus.    Tumours.    Ulcers.    Vertigo.    Vision,  disordered,    tvens. 

Chanotaristios. — According  to  Hahnemann  Con.  is  one  of  those 
drugs  of  which  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  distinguish  the  primary 
and  secondary  e£Fects.  He  Slinks,  nevertheless,  that  the  primary 
action  is  one  of  "  rigidity,  condensation,  and  constriction  of  the  fibres, 
with  swelling  of  the  glands  and  diminution  of  the  senses.''  In  this 
Teste  concurs,  adding  that  the  action  is  primarily  inflammatory,  and 
that  this  accounts  for  its  suitability  for  *'  persons  of  a  lively,  quick, 
sanguine  disposition,  with  a  marked  development  of  the  glandular 
system  ; "  and  explains  why  it  is  characteristically  adapted  to  painful 
^andular  afiFections,  "  principally  such  as  result  from  a  strain  or  blow, 
but  the  precise  cause  of  which  may  have  escaped  our  recollection." 
Teste  places  Con.  at  the  head  of  the  analogues  of  Aeon.  It  is  to  the 
glands  and  capillary  system  what  Aeon,  is  to  the  heart  and  arterial 
system.  In  many  cases  Con.  may  be  regarded  as  the  ^*  Aconite  of 
chronic  diseases."  The  other  Aconite  analogues,  according  to  this 
author,  are  Cham.,  Seneg.,  Canth.,  and  Phos.  ac.  Con.  corresponds  to 
chronic  or  subacute  inflammation  with  sanguineous  engorgement  of 
the  parenchyma,  induration,  and  even  subsequent  ulceration  of  the 
tissues.  Thuja  represents  the  slow  and  progressive  hypertrophy  of 
certain  tissues,  certain  constituents  of  our  organs.  Stoerck  used 
Conium  in  his  heroic  fashion  and  made  with  it  some  notable  cures  of 
scirrhous  tumours,  ulcerating  and  otherwise  ;  but  it  was  Hahnemann 
who  first  showed  how  the  remedy  could  be  used  safely  as  well  as 
efiFectively.  Guernsey  writes  :  "  This  remedy  is  characterised  by  a 
great  dizziness,  brought  on  when  lying  down,  and  moving  the  head 
ever  so  slightly,  or  even  the  eyes — ^all  the  contents  of  the  room  appear 
to  whirl  around ;  patient  wishes  to  keep  the  head  perfectly  still.  In 
urinating  the  water  flows  at  first  in  a  full  stream,  then  stops,  flows 
again,  again  stops,"  &c.    Nash  illustrates  the  modaUty :  <  by  moving 


582  CONIUM   MACULATUM 

the  head.  He  thinks  "  turning  the  head  sideways  *'  is  the  most 
characteristic  form  of  it.  Some  give  it  as  ''  Lying  down  in  bed  and 
turning  over/'  but  he  regards  the  "lying  down"  as  the  least  important 
part.  He  cured  a  patient  who  had  aU  the  symptoms  of  locomotor 
ataxy,  and  who  could  not,  when  walking,  turn  the  head  the  least  bit 
sideways  without  staggering  or  falling.  A  case  of  lumbago  was  cured 
with  Con.  in  six  days,  after  seven  months'  sufiEering,  this  symptom 
being  present :  Cannot  turn  over  in  bed  without  being  dizzy.  < 
Ascending  ;  by  exercise.  Feeling  of  ball  pressing  into  back  over  left 
hip,  pain  shooting  down  left  leg,  ending  in  a  spot  that  felt  as  though 
pricked  by  a  bunch  of  hot  needles.  Under  **  Sensations  "  Guernsey 
gives  these  :  "  Heartburn ;  €.£,,  in  pregnant  women  where  an  excessive 
heartburn  comes  on,  when  going  to  bed  at  night.  Attacks  of  sick 
feeling.  Sensation  as  if  a  hoop,  band,  or  something  tight  was  around 
the  parts.  Deficiency  of  irritability  of  the  body  ;  the  body  has  very 
little  sensation.  Darting  from  within  outwards,  in  the  bones  ;  tension 
in  inner  parts,  also  in  outer  parts  ;  pricking  in  the  bones."  Another 
symptom  is  "  yellow  nails."  ProeU  (tf .  W.,  xxx.  541)  mentions  a  use 
of  Con.  which  illustrates  the  symptom  :  "  Interrupted  flow."  He 
has  had  excellent  results  with  Con,  10  in  strangury  and  ischuria, 
when  the  urine  cannot  be  discharged,  from  nervousness,  or  swelling 
of  the  prostate.  {NaL  sul,  5  trit.  was  effective  where  the  bladder 
could  not  be  entirely  emptied.)  Con,  has  a  very  marked  action  on 
the  pelvic  organs.  Constipation  is  very  pronounced ;  or  there  may 
be  diarrhoea.  Faintness  after  stool.  Burning,  or  coldness,  in  the 
rectum.  Sircar  has  recorded  {Calcutta  J,  of  Med,,  May,  1896)  a 
striking  case  illustrating  the  latter.  A  patient  had  severe  diarrhcea, 
for  which  the  doctor  was  about  to  give  Sulpk.,  when  he  asked  if 
the  stools  were  hot.  "On  the  contrary,  they  are  cold"  replied  the 
patient.  Sircar  found  "cold  flatulence"  under  Con.,  and  gave  it 
on  analogy  with  brilliant  effect.  On  the  sexual  spnere  Con,  has 
profound  action,  often  meeting  quite  contradictory  conditions — 
hypertrophy  or  atrophy  of  glands  ;  excess  of  function  or  abrogation. 
"Unsatisfied  sexual  desire"  is  a  very  leading  indication ;  and  sufferings 
therefrom  in  either  sex  are  effectually  allayed  by  Con,  I  have  used 
the  remedy  with  very  great  good  in  numberless  cases  of  weakness 
from  masturbation  in  men  and  youths.  "  Emission  on  the  slightest 
stimulus,  such  as  merely  being  in  the  society  of  a  woman,"  is  very 
typical.  Many  "engaged"  young  men  have  been  helped  by  the 
remedy.  It  corresponds  more  to  scanty  menses  than  the  opposite. 
Goodno  (Hoyne's  Theurapeutics — Amcr.  Horn,,  xxi.  386)  cured  a  girl  of 
25  of  severe  dysmenia  (which  had  existed  since  the  periods  com- 
menced) with  scanty,  almost  arrested  flow.  She  had  also  epistaxis, 
cough,  and  stitches  through  left  lung  at  times.  Two  years  pre- 
viously, after  unusual  excitement,  she  had  bearing-down  pains, 
prolapse,  and  anteversion.  The  dysmenia  pains  were  relieved  by 
Sepia  and  other  remedies,  but  prolapse  increased,  with  bearing-down 
as  though  the  womb  would  be  forced  from  vulva,  <  standing  and 
walking  before  and  during  menses  ;  intermittent  flow  of  urine,  with 
cutting  after  micturition  ;  obstinate  constipation  of  long  standing ; 
stool  (once  in  seven  days)  large,  hard,  followed  by  tremulous  weak- 


CONIUM   MACULATUM  583 

ness ;  she  must  lie  down  ;  dull  pain  below  left  mamma.    Prompt 
relief  and  speedy  cure  were  effected  by  Can.  im.    Scanty  menses 
(especially  in  old  maids)  is  an  indication.    Checked  lochia.     Pains  in 
breast  before  menses,  <  by  eveiy  step,  is  a  strong  indication  for 
Con,    Also  all  effects  of  hurts  to  the  breast  by  falls  or  blows.    After 
a  blow  on  the  breast  a  course  of  Con.  should  always  be  given. 
Nash  mentions  another   characteristic   of  Con.  :  "  Sweats  day  or 
night;  as  soon  as  one  sleeps,  or  even  on  closing  the  eyes."    This 
enabled  Lippe  to  cure  a  man  of  80  of  hemiplegia.    R.  C.  Markham 
cured  with  Con.  im.  an  obstinate  cough,  diy,  hard,  frequent,  with 
asthmatic  wheezing  or  fine  rattUng  in  chest  on  deep  breathing, 
<  slightest  exposure  to  cold  air  ;  getting  into  cold  bed,  or  out  of  a 
warm  one,  or  even  putting  arms  out  was  sufficient  to  bring  on  severe 
coughing.    The  guiding  symptom  which  appeared  last  and  led  to  the 
remedy  was  this  :  "  Pain  in  the  apex  of  left  lung,  with  soreness  in  a 
small  spot,  midway  between  neck  and  shoulder  just  back  of  clavicle. 
The  pain,  cutting  and  stitchlikCy  ran  downward  and  inward  toward  the 
sicmum.    A.  H.  Birdsall  reports  a  case  of  contusion  of  testicle.     He 
found  the  patient  writhing  in  agony,  the  pain  complained  of  being 
"  sharp,  cutting,  running  up  spermatic  cord  to  lower  part  of  back,  and 
also  through  scrotum  to  root  of  penis.    Con.  200  relieved  in  five 
minutes,  and  at  the  end  of  twenty  minutes  the  pain  was  gone    (H.  P., 
ix.  190.)    Conium  corresponds  to  :  light-haired  persons  ;  old  persons  ; 
old,  feeble  men  ;  old  maids  and  bachelors  ;  women  of  rigid  fibre  and 
easily  excited,  and  also  to  those  of  the  opposite  temperament ;  persons 
of  strong,  sedentary  habit  more  than  to  Uvely,  slender  persons  and 
children ;  persons  who  are  easily  intoxicated  with  stimulants  ;  women 
who  have  scanty  menses  ;   scrofulous   constitutions  ;   cancers   and 
glandular  enlargements.     The  effects  of  blows  or  fails  ;   effects  of 
grief ;   of  over-study.     Patients  who  are  <  when  idle.    Conium  is 
said  to  have  been,  and  almost  certainly  was,  the  poison  with  which 
Socrates  was  executed  ;    and  whether  or   not  this  was  the  case 
ascending  paralysis,  which  occurred  in  his  poisoning,  is  an  indica- 
tion for  Conium.    Benumbed  sensation ;  inability  to  sustain  mental 
effort ;  weak  memory  ;  tired  sensation  in  brain  ;  imbecility.     Hot 
spots  on  head.     Erysipelas,  pain  piercing  to  brain.     Red  vision. 
Weakness ;    tremulousness  and  palpitation  after  every  evacuation. 
Sensation  of  unreality,  as  if  in  a  dream.     Insanity,  periodical  or 
alternating.    Vertigo  <  on  turning  in  bed.    Accumulation  of  earwax. 
Craving  for  salt,  coffee,  and  sour  things.    There  is  the  same  flatulent 
tendency  as  with  Ammoniac  and  Asafcetida,  its  relatives.    Numbness 
and  deadness  of  limbs.     Stabbing  pains  are  a  great  indication  for 
Conium.     Weak-spells ;   faintness ;   sudden  loss  of  strength  while 
walking.   P^oxysms  of  hysteria  and  hypochondriasis  from  abstinence 
from  sexual  intercourse.     In  phthisis  patients  cannot  expectorate, 
must  swallow  sputa.     The  eye  symptoms  are  very  pronounced  : 
photophobia  ;  ptosis,  &c.    These  symptoms  are  <  night  and  early 
morning.   Most  symptoms  appear  when  at  rest,  especially  in  the  night 
and  in  periodical  attacks ;  some  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  <  During 
eating  ;  while  standing  ;   while  l3ring  down  (cough) ;  when  at  rest, 
when  lifting  the  affected  part ;  when  turning  in  bed  (vertigo)  ;  moving 


584  CONIUM   MACULATUM 

the  head  ever  so  Uttle  ;  turning  head  sideways.  >  In  the  dark ;  from 
letting  the  a£Fected  limb  hang  down  ;  from  moving  ;  when  walking ; 
by  stooping.  Aversion  to  open  air.  Desire  for  warmth,  especially 
that  of  sun.  Liability  to  take  cold  from  least  exposure  of  feet.  Great 
liability  to  take  cold.  Night  and  morning  sweat,  with  ofiFensive  odour 
and  smarting  in  skin  ;  or  offensive  odour  without  sweat  Touch  <, 
cannot  bear  the  pressure  of  tight  clothing.    Jar,  shock,  or  fall  <. 

Relations. — Conium  sho^d  be  compared  with  i£thusa,  CEnan., 
Phell.,  Petrosel.,  Ammoniac,  Asafcet.,  and  other  Umbelliferae.  It  is 
antidoted  by :  Coff .,  Dulc,  Nit.  ac,  and  Nit.  Sp.  dulc.  It  antidotes :  Merc, 
Nit.  ac,  Sul.  Compatible :  Am.,  Ars.,  Bell.,Calc.,  Lye,  Nux,  Phos.,  Puis., 
Rhus,  Stram.  Incompatible :  I  have  sometimes  found  Con.  disagree 
with  patients  who  had  been  taking  Psorin.  Compare :  in  swelling  and 
painfulness  of  breasts  before  and  during  menses,  Calc  (Con.  precedes 
and  follows  Calc  well  in  Calc.  subjects  who  have  scanty  menses ;  Bell. 
corresponds  to  Calc  in  other  respects) ;  in  scanty  menses,  Graph. ; 
in  suppressed  lochia,  Nux,  Hyo.,  Pul.,  Secal. ;  as  if  in  a  dream,  Ambra, 
Anac,  Calc,  Can.  ind.,  Stram. ;  ascending  paraljrsis,  Hydrocy.  ac., 
Mang.  (descending,  Merc.) ;  paralysis,  post-diphtheritic,  Gels. ;  sexual 
melancholia,  Zn.  ox. ;  vertigo  when  turning  in  t>ed,  Sil.  (Sil.  has 
vertigo  when  turning  to  left,  whilst  lying  down) ;  <  beginning  to 
move,  >  by  continued  motion,  Rhus ;  bruised  glands,  Sul.  ac.  Im- 
potence, Phos. ;  weakness  after  stool,  Phos.  (most  marked),  Nux. 

Cansatloii. — Contusions.  Blows.  Grief.  Sexual  excess.  Sexual 
abstinence.    Excitement.    Over-work.    Snowy  air.    Spring. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Hysterical  anguish,  with  sadness  and  great  inclination  to 
weep,  from  suppression  of,  or  from  too  free  an  indulgence  in,  the  sexual 
instinct. — ^Anthropophobia,  and  yet  fear  of  solitude. — ^Timidity  of  character 
(fear  of  robbers). — Superstitious  ideas. — Disposition  to  be  frightened. — lU- 
humour  and  moroseness. — Hypochondriacal  indifference. — Want  of  mental 
energy. — Inaptitude  for  labour. — Irritability,  and  disposition  to  be  angry. — 
Derangement  of  ideas  and  mania. — Confusion  of  ideas,  as  from  drowsiness. — 
Slowness  of  conception. — ^Weakness  of  the  intellectual  faculties,  and  of  the 
memory. — Ready  f orgetf ulness ;  excessive  difficulty  of  recollecting  things. — 
Delirium. 

2.  Head. — Intoxication,  after  having  taken  the  smallest  quantity  of 
spirituous  liquid ;  even  wine  and  water  in  small  quantities  intoxicates  him. — 
Vertigo  when  turning  in  bed ;  feels  as  if  the  bed  were  floating. — ^Whirling 
vertigo  on  rising,  and  sometimes  so  as  to  cause  a  fall,  sideways,  on  looking 
behind  (on  looking  around) ;  or  when  lying  down  in  bed,  esp.  in  the  morning. 
— ^Attacks  of  headache,  with  nausea,  and  vomiting  of  mucus. — Lancinating 
pain,  esp.  in  the  vertex. — Stupefying  pains  in  the  head,  esp.  when  walking  in 
the  open  air,  first  in  the  fore-part  of  the  head,  later  in  the  back  part,  with 
coryza ;  relieved  on  stooping  and  moving  the  head. — Excessive  sensibility  of 
the  brain,  even  to  talking  and  to  any  other  noise. — Quotidian  headache,  on 
account  of  insufficient  evacuations.— -Semi-lateral  pains  in  the  head,  as  if  it 
were  bruised. — ^Tearing  in  the  temples  and  sides  of  the  head,  with  the  sensa- 


CONIUM   MACULATUM  585 

tioD  au  if  the  brain  were  gone  to  sleep ;  worse  from  contact,  motion,  and  after 
eating ;  better  in  a  recumbent  position,  or  while  stooping. — Headache  as  if 
the  head  were  beaten  to  pieces,  or  would  be  pressed  asunder. — Downward 
(vessore  as  from  a  stone  on  top  of  the  frontal  bone. — Sticking  in  head  while 
cooghing. — Sensation  as  if  there  were  a  large  foreign  substance  in  the  head. 
—Heaviness  and  fulness  in  the  head,  esp.  on  waking  in  the  morning. — Pulling 
in  the  head,  with  numbness  of  the  brain. — Hydrocephalus;  the  pains  are 
<  when  a^iTEUcing,  after  eating,  in  the  open  air ;  >  on  external  pressure,  on 
lying  down,  and  on  closing  the  eyes. — ^Attack  of  tearing  headache,  which 
forces  the  patient  to  lie  down. — Obstinate  shooting  pains  in  the  sinciput, 
which  seem  coming  through  the  forehead. — Hot  flush  in  occiput ;  later  in 
head. — Heaviness,  and  squeezing,  as  from  a  claw,  in  the  forehead,  and  as  if 
proceeding  from  the  stomach. — ^Apoplexy  with  paralysis  (in  old  people). — 
Falling  ofiE  of  the  hair. 

3.  Eyes.— Aching  of  the  eyes  when  reading.— Itching  below  the  eyes, 
with  burning  and  smarting  pain  when  they  are  rubbed. — Itching,  shootings, 
or  smarting  in  the  internal  canthi. — Sensation  of  cold,  or  burning,  in  the 
eyes,  when  walking  in  the  open  air. — Pain,  as  of  burning  in  the  eyes,  with 
aching  in  the  orbits  in  the  evening. — Inflammation  and  redness  of  the 
sclerotica.— Hordeolum.— (Specks  in  the  cornea.)— Cataract  from  contusion. 
—Short-sightedness.— Yellow  colour  of  the  sclerotica, — Eyes  dulL — Eyes 
prominent. — ^Tremulous  look. — Obscuration  of  the  sight.^Momentary  blind- 
ness by  day  in  the  brightness  of  the  sun. — Myopia. — Presbyopia. — Diplopia. — 
The  lines  seem  to  move  while  reading. — Black  spots  and  coloured  bands 
before  the  sight,  in  a  room. — Red  appearance  of  objects. — Dazzling  of  the 
sigjit  by  the  daylight— Aversion  to  light  without  inflammation  of  the  eyes. — 
Photophobia,  with  pale  red  colour  of  the  ball  of  the  eyes. 

4*  Ears. — ^Tearings  and  shooting  in  the  ears,  and  round  the  ears,  esp. 
when  walking  in  the  open  air.— Accumulation  of  cerumen,  which  resembles 
mouldy  paper,  and  which  is  mixed  with  purulent  mucus. — Blood-coloured 
cerumen. — Roaring  and  humming  in  both  ears. — Buzzing,  tinkling,  and 
rumbling  in  the  ears. — Painful  sensibility  of  hearing. — Diminution  of  hearing, 
ceasing  when  the  cerumen  is  removed,  and  until  it  is  renewed. — Swelling  and 
induration  of  the  parotids. 

5.  Nose. — Swelling  of  the  nostrils. — For  several  days  tip  of  nose  thick 
red,  hot,  painful,  <  1.  side ;  later  a  yellow  blister  full  of  pus  appeared  1.  side 
of  lip. — Purulent  discharge  from  the  nose. — ^Nasal  haemorrhage,  frequent 
when  sneezing. — Increased  acuteness  of  smell. — ^Too  frequent  sneezing. — 
Troublesome  sensation  of  dryness  in  the  nose. — Obstinate  stoppage  of  the 
nostrils. — Stoppage  of  the  nose  in  the  morning. 

6.  Face. — Heat  in  the  face. — Complexion  sickly,  pale,  and  bluish, 
sometimes  even  with  swelling  of  the  face. — Fissures  in  the  skin  of  the  face, 
with  pain  as  from  excoriation  after  washing  and  wiping. — Nocturnal  pains  in 
the  face,  tearing  and  shooting. — Itching,  eruptions,  tetters  and  gnawing 
ulcers  on  the  face. — Moist  and  spreading  herpes  in  the  face. — Eruptions  of 
pimples  on  the  forehead. — Dryness  and  exfoliation  of  the  lips. — Blisters  and 
ulcers  on  the  lips. — Cancerous  ulcer  on  the  lip  (from  the  pressure  of  the  pipe). 
—Spasmodic  clenching  of  the  jaws. — Grinding  of  the  teeth. 

7.  Teeth. — Odontalgia,  generally  drawing,  provoked  by  walking  in  the 


586  CONIUM   MACULATUM 

open  air,  or  excited  in  hollow  teeth  by  cold  food— Shootings,  jerks,  gnawing, 
and  piercing  in  the  teeth.— Gums  swollen,  ecchymosed  and  bleeding. 

8.  Mouth.- Dryness  of  the  mouth  and  of  the  throat ;  or  salivation.— 
Embarrassed  speech.— Tongue  stiff,  painful,  swollen,  dry ;  covered  with  dirty 
mucus, — Horribly  offensive  tongue.— (Cancer  of  tongue.) 

g.  Throat.— Sore  throat,  as  from  a  ball  (^obus  hystericus)  moanting 
from  the  epigastrium. — Impeded  deglutition. — Involuntary  deglutition,  esp. 
when  walking  in  the  wind.— Constant  want  to  swallow,  when  walking 
against  the  wind.— Cramps  in  the  gullet.— Scraping  in  the  throat— Spasmodic 
constriction  of  the  throat. 

ID.  Appetite.— Bitterness  in  the  mouth  and  in  the  throat— Putrid  or 
acid  taste  in  the  mouth.— Total  absence  of  appetite,  and  great  weakness  of 
digestion. — Bread  will  not  go  down,  and  does  not  please  the  taste. — Bullmj. 
— Desire  for  coffee  or  for  acid  or  salt  food. — During  a  meal,  and  esp.  after 
taking  milk  food,  a  sensation  of  inflation  in  the  stomach,  and  in  the  abdomen, 
and  speedy  satiety.— After  a  meal,  sourness,  pyrosis,  pressure  and  fulness  in 
the  stomach,  risings,  colic,  flatulency,  nausea,  deadness  in  the  fingers,  weak- 
ness, fatigue,  and  sweat. 

II.  Stomach. — Empty  risings,  frequent  and  noisy,  sometimes  during 
the  entire  day. — Abortive  risings,  with  sensation  of  fulness  in  the  hollow  d 
the  throat — Risings,  with  taste  of  food. — Suppressed  eructations,  with  subse- 
quent pain  in  the  stomach. — Pyrosis,  ascending  up  into  the  throat,  some- 
times after  a  meal.— Acid  regurgitation,  esp.  after  a  meal. — Nausea  with 
inclination  to  vomit,  and  complete  loss  of  appetite,  or  else  with  eructations 
and  lassitude. — Nausea  after  every  meal,  or  in  the  evening. — ^Nausea  and 
vomiting  during  pregnancy. — ^Vomiting  of  mucus. — Pressure  on  the  stomach, 
even  during  a  meal.— Inflation  of  the  stomach. — Cramp-like,  contractive  pain, 
shootings,  and  pain  as  from  excoriation,  in  the  stomach  and  in  the  epigastrium. 
— Sensation  of  soreness  and  rawness  of  the  stomach  and  of  the  abdomen 
when  walking  on  the  stones. — Pain,  with  sensation  of  cold  in  the  stomach. 

la.  Abdomen.— After  taking  milk  sensation  of  inflation  of  the  abdomen. 
— ^Tensive  pain  in  the  hypochondria,  as  from  a  band  tightly  fastened. — Hard- 
ness of  the  abdomen  from  swelling  of  the  mesenteric  glands. — Pressure, 
traction,  tearings,  and  shootings  in  the  hepatic  region. — Lancination  in  the 
left  hypochondrium,  even  in  the  morning  in  bed,  with  oppression. — Landna- 
tions  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  knives  were  plunged  in  ;  stitches  in  the  spleen.— 
Fulness  of  the  abdomen,  even  in  the  morning  on  waking. — Swelling  of  the 
mesenteric  glands.— Contraction  of  the  abdomen,  with  oppression. — Spasmodic 
colic. — Incisive  and  tearing  abdominal  pains. — Movement  and  digging  in 
the  umbilical  region. — Sensation  as  of  excoriation  in  the  abdomen,  e^. 
when  walking  on  the  pavement. — Noise  and  borborygmi  in  the  abdomen.— 
Expulsion  of  cold  wind,  with  cuttings. — Incarceration  of  flatus. — Cuttings  on 
expelling  flatus. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Constipation  with  tenesmus. — Constant  urging 
without  stool. — Hard  evacuations,  only  every  second  day. — Hard  stool,  with 
tenesmus  (headache ;  discharge  of  prostatic  fluid). — Loose,  undigested  evacua- 
tions, with  cuttings,  and  frequent  risings. — Debilitating  diarrhoea. — (Stools 
undigested,  with  colic.) — Lancinations  in  the  anus. — Heat  and  burning  sensa- 
tion in  the  rectum,  while  evacuating,  and  at  other  times. — Emission  of  fetid 


CONIUM   MACULATUM  587 

or  cold  flatulence ;  (stool  feels  cold).-*-Faeces,  with  streaks  of  blood.— After  the 
evacoations,  weakness,  palpitation  of  the  heart,  frequent  expulsion  of  flatulence, 
and  trembling. — ^Involuntary  discharge  of  faeces  during  sleep. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pressure  on  the  bladder,  as  if  the  urine  were 
gcnng  to  issue  forth  with  violence  (with  stitches) ;  worse  when  walking,  better 
when  sitting. — At  night,  emission  of  urine,  frequent,  and  sometimes  involun- 
tary.— ^Flow  of  urine,  attended  by  violent  pain. — ^Urine  thick,  white  and  turbid. 
— Urine  red, — Retention  of  urine. — Difficult  emission  of  urine,  which  flows 
only  drop  by  drop. — Nocturnal  urination. — Wetting  the  bed. — Diabetes, 
accompanied  by  great  pain. — Frequent  inclination  to  emit  urine,  which  is 
dear  and  aqueous. — ^Viscid  mucus,  mixed  with  the  urine,  which  cannot  be 
passed  without  great  pain. — Discharge  of  pus  from  the  urethra. — Emission  of 
blood,  sometimes  with  difficulty  of  respiration.-— The  urine  stops  suddenly, 
and  does  not  begin  to  flow  again  for  some  moments. — Incisive  pains  in  the 
urethra  during  the  emission  of  urine. — Burning  sensation  and  shootings  in 
the  urethra,  esp.  after  the  emission  of  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Swelling  of  the  testes  (after  contusion). — 
Cutting  pain  through  scrotum  to  root  of  penis. — Lasciviousness. — Impotence, 
insufficient  erections,  and  absence  of  erections. — ^Want  of  energy  in  coition. 
— Erections  imperfect,  and  of  too  short  duration. — Easy  emission  of  semen, 
even  without  firm  erections. — Dejection,  after  coition. — Immoderate  pollutions. 
— Flow  of  prostatic  fluid  during  evacuation,  and  after  any  mental  emotion. — 
With  weakness  of  sexual  organs,  much  sexual  erethism,  amatory  thoughts, 
even  emissions  provoked  by  mere  presence  of  women. 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Cramps  in  the  uterus,  with  pinchings 
or  contracting,  or  with  digging  above  the  vulva,  accompanied  by  tension  in 
the  abdomen,  and  shootings  extending  into  the  1.  side  of  the  chest. — Itching 
in  the  external  and  internal  genital  parts. — Shootings  in  the  vagina,  and 
sensation  as  of  bearing  down. — Shooting  in  the  labia. — Catamenia  premature 
and  too  weak. — Suppression  of  catamenia. — Before  the  catamenia,  pains  in 
the  breasts;  anxious  dreams,  dry  heat,  pain  as  from  fatigue  in  the  limbs, 
lachrymose  humour,  inquietude,  and  hepatic  pains. — During  the  catamenia, 
sensation  of  bearing  down  and  dragging  in  the  thigh,  or  painful  cramps  in 
the  abdomen. — Suppressed  menstruation  (with  barrenness). — Burning,  acrid, 
corrosive,  and  pungent  leucorrhoea,  accompanied  or  preceded  by  colic. — 
Breasts  flabby. — Inflammation  of  the  mammae,  with  stitches ;  scirrhus  of  the 
mammae  after  contusion. — Scirrhous  induration  of  the  mammary  glands,  with 
itching  and  shooting  pains. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Catarrh,  with  fever,  sore  throat,  and  want 
oC  appetite. — Hoarseness. — Dryness  in  one  small  circumscribed  pkice  in  the 
larynx,  and  tickling  which  excites  coughing. — Cough  provoked  by  tickling 
and  scraping  in  the  throat — Dry  cough,  provoked  by  a  tickling,  with  oppres- 
sion of  the  chest,  and  fever  in  the  evening. — Suffocating  cough,  with  flushes 
of  heat  in  the  face. — Dry,  convulsive  cough. — Cough,  like  whooping-cough, 
with  sanguineous  expectoration,  or  in  violent  fits  during  the  night,  caused  by 
itching  in  the  chest  and  throat,  or  from  a  small  dry  spot  in  the  larynx,  without 
expectoration  at  night,  and  difficult,  bloody,  purulent,  offensive  expectoration 
daring  the  day. — ^The  cough  manifests  itself  generally  at  night  or  in  the 
evening. — Shortness  of  breathing  when  walking ;  suffocative  attacks  ;  op- 


588  CONIUM   MACULATUM 

pressed  breathing,  in  the  morning,  when  waking. — Cough  provoked  by  taking 
a  deep  breath,  or  by  taking  acid  or  salt  things. — Loose  cough,  but  without 
expectoration ;  he  must  swallow  what  he  coughs  up. — ^Yellow  and  purulent 
expectoration,  of  a  putrid  smell. — Cough  increased  by  lying  down. — During 
the  cough,  pains  in  the  head  or  in  the  abdomen,  with  shootings  in  the  L  side 
aggravated  by  movement. — Cough  during  pregnancy. 

x8.  Chest. — Short  respiration  when  miking,  and  on  the  least  movemenl, 
often  with  convulsive  cough. — ^Cough  relieves  the  tightness  of  the  chest. — 
Difficulty  of  respiration,  even  in  the  morning  on  waking. — Respiration  difficult 
and  slow,  esp.  in  the  evening  in  bed. — Difficulty  of  respiration,  with  pains  in 
the  chest,  in  the  evening  in  bed.— Fits  of  suffocation,  as  if  there  were  an 
obstruction  in  the  throat. — Shooting  in  the  sternum,  or  in  the  side  of  the 
chest. — Beating  stitch,  with  pain  in  upper  and  1.  part  of  chest  towards  the 
centre  of  the  chest. — Pressure  behind  sternum  and  desire  to  breath  deeply. — 
Violent  pains  in  the  chest,  with  violent  cough.— Pressure  on  the  chest,  in  the 
sternum,  and  in  the  region  of  the  heart — Drawing  pains  in  the  chest— Shocks 
in  the  chest. — Caries  of  the  sternum. 

19.  Heart.— Palpitation  of  the  heart,  esp.  after  drinking. — Frequent 
shocks  in  the  region  of  the  heart. 

20.  Neck  and  Back.— Tension  in  the  nape  of  the  neck: — Pain  as  from 
excoriation  in  the  vertebrae  of  the  neck. — Enlargement  of  the  neck. — Pains  in 
the  loins  on  bending  backwards. — ^Aching  and  compression  above  the  hips. — 
Pressive,  cramp-like,  and  tractive  pain  in  the  back. — Pain,  as  from  a  sprain  in 
the  1.  side  of  the  back  and  neck. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Shoulders  painful,  as  if  they  had  been  bruised  and 
excoriated. — Humid,  scabby,  and  burning  tetters  in  the  forearms. — Numbness 
of  the  hands,  and  esp.  of  the  palms  of  the  hands. — Cracking  in  the  wrist-joint 
— Sweat  in  the  palms  of  the  hands. — ^Torpor  of  the  fingers. — Itching  in  the 
back  of  the  fingers. — ^Yellow  spots  on  the  fingers  and  yellowish  nails. — 
Panaris. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Drawing  pains  in  the  hips. — ^Arthritic  pains  in  the 
knee,  tearing,  and  tensive,  aggravated  on  beginning  to  walk  after  sitting 
down,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short  (during  the  suppres- 
sion of  catamenia). — Restlessness  and  heaviness  in  the  legs. — Lassitude  in 
the  knees. — Cracking  of  the  knee-joint — Painful  swelling  of  the  legs  and  of 
the  feet. — Red  spots  on  the  calves  of  the  legs,  sometimes  painful,  becoming 
subsequently  green  or  yellow,  as  after  a  blow  or  bruise,  and  impeding  the 
movement  of  the  foot,  which  is  drawn  back,  as  if  the  tendons  were  con- 
tracted.— Cramps  in  the  calves  of  the  legs.— Coldness,  and  strong  disposition 
to  take  cold  in  the  feet  (even  from  a  slight  exposure  of  the  feet). — ^Torpor  and 
insensibility  of  the  feet. — Pustules  in  the  feet. 

24.  Generalities. — Cramps  and  cramp-like  pains  in  di£Ferent  parts. — 
Pain,  as  from  fatigue  in  the  limbs  and  joints,  while  at  rest — Nocturnal  pains 
and  sufiFerings,  which  disturb  sleep. — ^The  S3rmptoms  appear  during  repose, 
and  are  aggravated  on  beginning  to  walk,  or  by  any  movement. — ^Tendency 
to  strain  the  lower  part  of  the  back. — Attacks  of  hysteria  and  hypochondriasis. 
— Shocks  in  the  tendons,  trembling  and  convulsive  shakings  in  the  limbs. — 
Ebullition  of  blood. — Dropsical  swellings. — Swelling  and  induration  of  the 
glands,  with  tingling  and  shooting  pains. — Fainting  fits. — Great  general  dejec- 


CONVALLARIA  589 

tion,  with  involuntary  laughter. — Sensation  of  fatigue  esp.  early  in  the  morning 
in  bed. — Restlessness  in  the  body,  esp.  in  the  legs. — ^Want  of  energy,  and 
nervoos  debility. — Consumption.^^udden  sinking,  while  walking. — Great 
liability  to  take  cold. — Great  fatigue  and  other  sufferings,  from  walking  in 
the  open  air. — Continued  deprivation  of  natural  vital  heat 

25.  Skin. — Shootings,  and  pricking  itching  in  the  skin. — Swelling  of  the 
glands,  with  tingling  and  stitches  after  contusions  and  bruises. — Bluish  colour 
of  the  skin  over  the  whole  body. — Painful  inflammation  of  the  skin. — Nettle- 
rash  in  consequence  of  violent  bodily  exercise.— Pimples,  like  those  in  scabies, 
which  become  scurfy. — Brownish,  or  red  and  itching  spots,  over  the  whole 
Ixxly,  which  disappear  and  return. — Humid,  or  scabby  and  burning  tetters  — 
Blackish  ulcers,  with  sanious,  sanguineous,  and  fetid  discharge,  and  tingling 
tension. — Gangrenous  ulcers. — Ulceration  of  the  bones.— Panaris. — Petechiae. 
— Reddish  and  greenish  spots,  as  from  ecchymosis. 

96«  Sleep* — Drowsiness  during  the  day,  even  very  early  in  the  morning. 
— Somnolence. — Inclination  to  sleep  in  the  evening,  with  falling  down  of  the 
qrelids. — ^Tardy  sleep. — Disturbed  and  unrefreshing  sleep,  with  lachrymation, 
and  frequent,  anxious,  and  frightful  dreams. — Dreams  <^  disease,  mutilation, 
death,  danger,  and  quarrels. — ^At  night,  headache,  nausea,  gastralgia,  bleeding 
of  the  nose,  pains  in  the  limbs,  &c. — Half -waking  after  midnight,  with  great 
anguish. — Nightmare. — Starting  of  the  limbs  during  sleep. 

27.  Fever. — Shivering,  frequent  coldness  and  shuddering. — Coldness  and 
chilliness  in  the  morning  and  forenoon. — Chilliness,  with  desire  for  heat,  esp. 
in  the  sunshine. — Heat  internally  and  externally,  with  great  nervousness. — 
Dry,  internal  heat — Slow  fever,  with  total  want  of  appetite. — Inflammatory 
fever  with  great  heat,  abundant  sweat,  anorexia,  diarrhoea,  and  vomiting. — 
Fever  with  inflammation  of  the  throat,  and  cough. — Pulse  irregular ;  generally 
slow  and  full,  alternating  with  small  and  frequent  beats. — Nocturnal  sweat, 
even  at  the  commencement  of  sleep. — Heat  with  profuse  perspiration. — 
Perspiration  day  and  night,  as  soon  as  one  closes  the  eyes  and  goes  to  sleep. 
— Local,  fetid,  and  acrid  sweats. 


Gonvallaria. 

Convallaria  majalis.    Lily  of  the  Valley.    AT.  O,    Liliaceas 

GUakaL— Diarrhoea.   Heart,  affections  of.   Herpes.   Pruritus  vulvae.  I  Vomiting 
(o£  pregnancy). 

Chanutteristios* — Convallaria  is  a  popular  remedy  in  Russia  for 
heart  affections,  and  it  has  been  introduced  into  old-school  medicine 
principally  as  a  heart  remedy.  It  compares  closely  in  its  action  with 
Liliutn  tigrinutftj  and  also  resembles  its  other  botanical  relatives,  Alocj 
Allium  cepa,  and  Allium  sativum.  It  is  strongly  purgative  and  causes 
morning  vomiting.  It  has  been  proved,  and  the  symptoms  produced 
show  that  its  nearest  analogue  is  Lilium  tigrinum,  Nash  has  used  it 
in  30th  with  very  satisfactory  results  in  women  complaining  of  great 
soreness  in  uterine  region  with  sympathetic  palpitation  of  the  heart. 


590  CONVALLARIA 

He  has  also  removed  cardiac  dropsy  when  this  uterine  soreaess  has 
been  present  as  well.  Berridge  credits  it  with  this  symptom  : ''  Move- 
ment in  the  abdomen  as  from  the  fist  of  a  child/'  like  So/.,  Thuj.^  Croc. 
In  the  case  of  ConvaL  the  symptom  occurs  ''  wh^n  lying  on  the  back" 
Sleepiness  accompanies  many  symptoms.  >  In  open  air,  <  in  warm 
room  (like  Cepa). 

BTHPT0M8. 

X.  Mind. — Depression. — Mind  wanders  from  subject  when  reading. — 
Dull,  can  hardly  think. — Irritable  when  asked  a  question. 

a.  Head. — Dull,  heavy  pains  at  vertex  >  open  air. — Headache  with 
fever,  <  jarring,  >  rest 

3.  Eyes. — Sees  imaginary  grey  spots  about  3  in.  square  in  di£Ferent 
parts  of  the  room  on  coming  in  from  a  walk. — ^When  reading  sees  small 
words  (as "the,"  "it,"  "too,")  before  beginning  of  sentence,  when  they  are 
not  there. — P  is  substituted  for  other  letters. — ^About  every  fifteen  minutes, 
dull  pains  from  r.  eye  over  top  of  head  and  down  r.  side  of  neck. — Eyelids 
heavy. 

,  6.    Face. — Face  and  lips  sore,  crop  of  small  hydroa,  feel  raw. 
8.    Mouth. — Fine  red  points  on  tip  of  tongue. — Intense  redness  and 
soreness  of  tongue,  looks  like  raw  beef  ;  granular  and  quite  clean,  with  tender- 
ness of  stomach.— Coppery  taste  in  mouth.— Water  tastes  bitter. 

II.    Stomach. — Morning  sickness  and  vomiting. 

18.  Abdomen.— Severe  colic ;  pains  come  quickly  and  pass  off  slowly. 
— Dull  aching  pain  and  sore  feeling  in  hypogastrium,  <  when  coughing.— 
Labour*like  pains. — Movement  in  abdomen  like  the  fist  of  a  chiUL 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Tenesmus. — Slightly  thin  stool,  brown,  offensive 
with  tenesmus  and  heat  at  anus  after  stooL — Sensation  in  rectum  as  if  full  of 
gas,  not  >  by  passing  flatus. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Labour-like  pains  in  sacro-iliac  joints, 
worse  r.  side,  running  down  leg  intermittently. — Sensation  as  if  a  large  cord 
extended  from  sacro-iliac  synchondrosis  to  inguinal  region,  and  this  cord  was 
pulled  down  by  pelvic  organs  «  r.  side) ;  sensation  as  if  uterus  descended 
and  retroverted,  pressing  on  rectum  and  anus,  pain  continuous  and  unbear- 
able.— Soreness  in  uterine  region  with  palpitation  of  the  heart. — Itching  at 
urinary  meatus  and  orifice  of  vagina. 

ig.  Heart. — ^When  exercising,  fluttering  at  heart,  lasting  about  a  minute, 
then  face  would  get  red,  with  sensation  as  if  heart  stopped  beating  and  wooki 
start  again  very  suddenly,  with  faint,  sick  feeling.— Pulse  full,  compressitde, 
intermittent — Symptoms  >  after  lying  down. 

20.  Back. — Bruised  aching  in  back. — Pain  in  back  and  wrists,  giradually 
passing  of!. — Chills  run  along  back  at  every  movement. 

31.    Limbs. — ^Aching  in  wrists  and  ankles. 

25.  Skin. — Blotches  like  mosquito-bites,  itching  violently,  on  undress- 
ing  scratches  till  the  skin  comes  off. 


CONVOLVULUS   DUARTINUS  591 

ConyolYolas  ArYensis. 

Convolvulus.    Bind-weed.     N,  0.  Convolvulaceae.     Tincture  of  root. 

CHn1iaJ.^-Colic    Diarrhoea. 

Charaoteristios. — ^Very  few  experiments  have  been  made  with 
this  planty  and  in  those  the  resinoid  of  the  root,  and  pure  Convolvulin 
were  used.  The  few  symptoms  recorded  are  all  in  the  gastro-intestinal 
^here. 

STMPTOMB. 

XX.    Stomach.--£roctation  after  eating. 
I9.    Abdoinen.*-<k>lic  and  liquid  stool. 

13.    Stool. — Soft,  semi-fluid   evacuation,   preceded   by   flatulence   and 
vident  colic. — Stools  with  pain. 


ConvolYnlus  Duartinus. 

Ipomcea  l)ona-nox.  Morning  Glory.  N,  0.  Convolvulaceae.  Tincture 

of  Flowers. 

CHilwfcl. — Eye,  inflammation  of.    Headache.    Rheumatism.    Vertigo. 

Charaoteristios.— Convo/.  d,  was  proved  under  Mure,  and  some 
symptoms  that  are  peculiar  have  been  recorded  :  Reveries  in  day- 
time. Numbness  in  limbs.  Dreams  of  dead  persons.  Symptoms 
are  <  in  morning  and  >  after  cold  bath. 

BTMPTOMB. 

X.    Mind. — Moral  weakness. — Reveries  in  the  daytime. 

8.  Head. — ^Vertigo  with  faintness. — Burning  in  frontal  region,  ceasing 
after  a  cold  bath. — Pain  in  frontal  region  with  heat  at  root  of  nose. — Pain  in 
L  temple  (corresponding  to  inflamed  1.  eye). 

3.    Eyes. — Inflammation  of  1.  eye. 

8.    Mouth. — ^Toothache. — Swelling  of  gums. — ^Tongue  feels  swollen. 

g.  Throat. — Heat  and  dryness  at  anterior  and  upper  pari  of 
oesophagus. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  abdomen  with  internal  heat. — ^Violent  colic 
with  drawings. 

13.  Stool. — Constipation. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Red  urine.— Yellow  sediment  in  urine. 

88.  Upper  Limbs.— Numbness  of  arms,  <  when  hanging  down.— Pains 
in  L  shoulder  ;  in  L  wrist — Numbness  of  r.  index  and  middle  fingers. 

83.  Lower  Limbs. — Lancinating  pain  in  r.  knee. — Pain  fore  part  of 
L  leg  for  four  days. — Deep-seated  pain  in  calves. 


592  COPAIVA 

26.  Sleep.— Drowsiness  in  daytime.— Dreams :  about  quarrelling ;  aboat 
dead  persons ;  falling  out  of  his  front  teeth ;  of  flying  along  a  lighted  street  ; 
appearance  of  a  ghost ;  wakes  with  a  start. 


CopaiTa. 

Copaiva.    Copaifera  officinalis.    N.  0,  Leguminosae.    Tincture 
of  the  balsaoL 

CllnieaL— -Acne.  Anus,  itching  of.  Bladder,  irritable.  Blenorrhagia.  Bron- 
chitis. Catarrh.  Cough.  Cystitis.  Dysentery.  Fistula.  Gastritis.  SonorrhcBa. 
Haemorrhoids.  Measles.  Nose-bleed.  Prostatitis.  Pruritus.  Urethritis.  Urticaria. 
Vulva,  inflammation  of. 

CharaoteriBtios. — Copaiva  is  an  old-world  remedy  for  gonorrhoea, 
and  it  has  also  been  used  for  other  blenorrhagic  conditions.  It  has 
been  proved ;  and  observations  have  been  made  on  patients  who  have 
overdosed  themselves  with  the  drug.  The  chief  incidence  of  the  drug's 
action  is  on  the  genito-urinary  organs,  and  rectum.  It  is  suited  to  the 
irritable  bladder  of  old  women.  Irritation  accompanying  thickening 
of  bladder.  Burning  at  neck  of  bladder  and  in  urethra ;  discharge 
milky,  corrosive  ;  meatus  tumid  and  inflamed.  It  afiFects  the  skin  and 
mucous  membranes  generally.  In  chronic  bronchitis  it  is  useful  when 
there  is  profuse,  greenish-grey,  disgusting-smelling  sputa.  A.  P.  Bowie 
(Med,  Adv.,  XX.  14)  has  verified  this  indication  : ''  In  old  persons  (men,  I 
should  say)  who  from  cold  or  other  causes  cannot  urinate  ;  or  where 
there  is  frequent  desire  and  only  a  few  drops  pass  with  much  strain- 
ing— ^frequently  with  a  mucous  discharge  from  the  bowels,  with  much 
rumbling  and  rolling  in  the  bowels.*'  He  gave  5-drop  doses  of  the 
first  dilution.  He  commends  also  an  ointment  of  gtt.  x  of  the  balsam 
to  3j  of  vaseline,  "  to  relieve  the  biuning  and  itching  at  the  anus 
caused  by  piles." 

Relations*— iln/fVfo^^  £|y ;  Bell.,  Calc,  Merc,  Sulph.  Compare: 
Cannab.,  Canth.,  Cubeb.,  Eriger.,  Kali  bro..  Kali  i.,  Sep.,  Senec.  It 
has  less  violent  action  than  Canth.  Teste  says  he  is  unable  to  find 
any  difference  between  the  therapeutic  properties  of  Copaiv.  and  Sep. 
Both  are  antidoted  by  the  same  drug :  Merc.  cor.  in  the  male,  and 
Merc.  sol.  in  the  female,  according  to  Teste,  neutralise  the  action 
of  Copaiv.  almost  instantaneously. 

BYHPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — Depression  with  anxious  sadness. — Excessive  sensitiveness 
of  whole  nervous  system ;  least  noise  causes  starting  and  anger.— A  young 
girl  weeps  on  hearing  a  piano.— Uneasmess  on  account  of  one's  health.— 
Misanthropy.— Deficient  memory.— Loathing  of  life,  and  at  the  same  time 
fear  of  death. 

2.  Head.— Heaviness   of    head,    esp.   of   occipital   region,    which  is 


COPAIVA  593 

instinctively  pressed  against  collar  of  coat,  which  relieves. — Pulsative,  deep 
stitches  in  occiput. — Dull  pain  in  occiput. — Every  step  jars  the  head. — 
Hemicrania  (1.)  with  burning  pains^  sense  of  coldness  in  part,  weeping  and 
constant  moaning  (in  young  man  of  twenty-two,  disposed  to  be  hypochon- 
driacal. It  was  so  violent  that  Teste  had  to  give  Merc,  to  relieve  him). — 
Pressure  at  forehead. — Headache :  >  pressing  head  back  against  collar  of 
coat ;  gentle  pressure  with  hand ;  <  evening  and  night ;  intolerable  when 
leaning  on  pillow ;  washing  face  with  cool  water  in  morning  (sudden  stitches 
in  both  temples). — Falling  out  of  the  hair. — Sensitiveness  of  hairy  scalp. 

3.  Eyes. — Formication  in  canthi  of  eyes  in  evening. — Black  points 
hovering  before  eyes. — On  alternately  closing  eyes  objects  look  much  paler 
to  1.  eye  than  to  r. 

4.  Ears. — Excessive  sensitiveness  of  hearing,  esp.  to  sharp  sounds. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis  of  small  boys ;  also  after  wounds. — Profuse  yellow 
and  green,  thick,  fetid  discharge  from  nasal  passages  running  down  throat  at 
night. 

6.  Face. — Face  pale  and  sickly-looking. — ^Acne. — Urticaria. — Red 
humid  tetter  on  upper  lip,  which  is  swollen  and  painful  when  touched. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Teeth  set  on  edge. — Sense  of  coldness  in  teeth. — Foul 
breath  in  morning. — ^Tongue  covered  with  whitish  coating,  greenish  at  base. 
—Tenacious  phlegm  in  mouth  and  throat,  which  is  constantly  reproduced. 

g.  Throat.— Chronic  catarrh  of  throat. — Sensation  of  foreign  body  in 
phaiynz. — Swelling  of  both  tonsils  «  r.). 

n.  Stomach. — ^Thirst  and  diminished  appetite.-^Bitter  taste. — Hungry 
in  evening  on  going  to  bed. — Every  article  Of  food  seems  too  salt. — Rush  of 
blood  to  head  and  face  when  eating  or  after  a  meal. — Spitting  up  of  ingesta 
with  large  quantities  of  mucus. — Inclination  to  vomit. — Distension  and  fulness 
after  eating ;  gastric  troubles  during  menstruation  or  following  urticaria. 

IS.  Abdomen. — Pressing  pain  in  region  of  spleen,  becomes  pulsative 
from  time  to  time. — ^Tearings  in  the  abdomen  preceded  by  pullings  in  the 
bones  of  the  thighs. — Sensation  of  burning  in  the  abdomen. — Borborygmi  and 
movements  in  the  intestines. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — White,  loose  evacuations,  chiefly  in  the  morn- 
mg,  with  cold  and  drawing  tearings  in  the  abdomen,  which  force  the  patient 
to  bend  double. — Involuntary  evacuations. — Stools  like  sheep's  dung. — In- 
sufficient stools. — Fluent  piles. — Bloody  stools. — Stools  with  tenesmus. — 
Stitches;  spasms  in  rectum. — Intolerable  burning  at  the  anus. — Burning, 
itching  at  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Constant,  ineffectual  desire  to  urinate;  con- 
traction of  the  urethra ;  emission  of  urine  in  drops. — Itching,  soreness,  and 
sensation  of  scalding  in  the  urethra,  before  and  after  the  emission  of  urine. — 
Inflammation  of  the  urinary  organs ;  swelling,  dilatation,  and  inflammation  of 
the  orifice  of  the  urethra. — Pain  as  from  excoriation  in  the  orifice  of  the 
urethra,  which  remains  wide  open,  with  throbbing  pain  in  the  penis  generally. 
— Haematuria. — Urine  foaming;  greenish-turbid,  smelling  like  violets. — 
Yellow,  purulent  gonorrhoea. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Burning  and  sensation  of  dryness  in  the 
region  of  the  prostate  gland ;  induration  of  the  prostate  gland. — Swelling  of 
testes. — Swelling  and  induration  of  the  testes. 

VOL  I.  39 


594  CORALLIUM   RUBRUM 

z6.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Burning  and  itching  of  urethra ;  itching 
of  vulva ;  burning  red  spots  in  vulva. — Milky,  acid,  excoriating  discharge  vith 
painful  menstruation. — Profuse  gonorrhoeal  discharge. — Metrorrhagia. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Dry,  painful  cough,  with  dryness  in  the 
lar3mx. — Profuse  expectoration  of  a  greenish-grey  purulent  mucas,  of  a 
disgusting  smell. — Spitting  of  blood. 

19.    Heart.— Palpitation  of  the  heart. 

S3.    Lower  Limbs. — Pain  and  swelling  of  the  knees  and  malleoli. 

24.  Generalities. — Burning  pain  (skin,  abdomen,  urethra,  prostate 
gland,  chest). — Heaviness  and  pressure  (abdomen,  chest,  perineum). 

S5.  Skin. — Large  red  blotches  all  over  the  body,  with  constipation  and 
some  fever. — Dark-coloured  or  bright  red,  elevated,  intolerable  itching, 
lentil-sized,  measle-shaped  exanthema,  in  clusters,  flowing  into  one  another.— 
Nettle-rash,  pale  red  or  bright  red,  with  violent  itching.— Jaundice. 

a6.  Sleep. — Drowsiness  in  daytime. — Restless  sleep  at  night. — Fri^tf  ul, 
or  lascivious  dreams. 

87.  Fever. — Quotidian  fever,  shiverings  and  cold  in  the  forenoon,  with 
pain  in  the  dorsa  of  the  feet;  then,  in  the  afternoon,  general  heat  and 
thirst,  with  desire  for  cold  water. — During  the  febrile  cold,  the  instep  is  pain- 
fully sensible  to  motion. — Perspiration  profuse  of  a  pungent  smell. — Sour- 
smelling  sweat  at  night. — Profuse  inodorous  sweat  in  morning. 


Gorallium  Rubrom. 

Gorgonia  nobilis.   Class,  Zoophytes.  N.  0.  Gorgoniaceae.   Trituration, 

ClinloaL— Asthma  milleri.  Catarrh.  Chancre.  Cotfgh.  Eruptions.  C^ands, 
inflamed.  Hysteria.  Measles.  Post-nasal  catarrh.  Psoriasis.  Purpura.  Syphilis. 
Whooping-cough. 

Charaoteristios. — Red  coral,  the  product  of  a  coralligene  zoo- 
phyte, contains  carbonate  of  lime,  oxide  of  iron  (whence  its  colour), 
gelatin,  and  other  elements.  In  old  physic  it  was  considered  to 
have  "strengthening  properties,"  and  to  be  astringent,  sudorific, 
diuretic,  and  absorbent.  In  homceopathic  practice  Corallium  corre- 
sponds to  a  combination  of  syphilis  and  psora.  Is  suited  to 
persons  of  nervous  temperament ;  nervous  coughs.  It  causes 
eruptions  which  are  for  the  most  part  of  its  own  colour,  coral- 
red.  Red  spots  on  the  palms  of  the  hands,  at  first  coral  colour, 
then  darker,  and  finally  coppery.  The  chancres  to  which  it 
corresponds  are  coral-red.  The  cough  is  of  the  whooping- 
cough  type  ;  smothering  sensation  before,  and  great  exhaustion  after 
cough.  Cough  in  "minute-gun"  paroxysms.  Crowing  inspiration; 
sensation  as  if  inspired  air  was  icy  cold.  There  is  much  drowsiness 
with  Coral.,  and  many  symptoms  appear  during  sleep.  J.  N.  Lowe 
cured  with  Coral,  an  infant,  almost  a  year  old,  suffering  from  larjmgis- 
mus  stridulus,  the  indications  being  <  during  sleep  and  after 
wakinq.    Lach,^  given  first,  failed  to  relieve,    Guemsej^s  indication 


CORALLIUM   RUBRUM  595 

is:  '^  Whooping-cough,  or  any  other  kind  of  cough  when  the  attack 
comes  on,  with  a  very  rapid  cough,  and  the  attacks  follow  so  closely 
as  to  almost  run  into  each  other."  I  have  found  it  most  effective  in 
the  nervous  "  minute-gun  "  cough  where  the  patient  gives  an  isolated 
cough  at  regular  intervals  through  the  day.  Nash  finds  it  the  most 
useful  of  all  remedies  in  post-nasal  catarrh.  Guernsey's  other  indica- 
tion is  :  "  Red,  flat  ulcers  on  the  glans  and  inner  surface  of  the 
prepuce,  with  secretion  of  a  quantity  of  yellow  ichor."  In  the  head 
there  is  a  sensation  of  emptmess  or  hollowness.  Head  feels  very 
large.  Sensation  as  if  forehead  were  flattened.  Change  of  air  causes 
coughing.*  Feels  cold  when  uncovered  and  too  hot  when  covered. 
BalatioilB* — Antidote  to:  Mercury.  Complementary:  Sulph. 
Compare  :  Bell.,  Caust.,  Co£f.,  Coc.  c.  Con.,  Hyos. ;  Hydrphb.  (inspired 
air  feels  cold — also  Cistus.)  ;  Nit.  ac,  Nux  v.,  Mephit.,  Staph. ;  uros. 
(cough  always  moist — Coral,  always  dry) ;  Petrol.,  Selen.,  Graph. ; 
teeth  feel  too  close  together,  Tuberc.  (Koch).  Teste,  who  proved 
Coral,  and  elicited  its  respiratory  symptoms,  groups  it  with  Caustic. 

STMPTOMB. 

!•  Mind. — Grumbling  humour,  with  oaths  in  consequence  of  the  pain. 
— Irascibility  and  ill-humour. — ^Wine  has  a  natural  taste,  but  immediately 
stupefies  him. 

2.  Head. — Head  bewildered,  as  if  in  consequence  of  drunkenness. — 
Confusion  in  the  head,  which  feels  empty  and  hollow. — Intoxication  after 
drinking  very  litUe  wine. — Pressive  cephalalgia,  as  if  everything  were  going 
to  protrude  through  the  forehead,  compelling  motion  oi  the  head,  and 
mit^ted  only  by  uncovering  the  body,  which  is  burning  hot. — Pressing 
headache  in  the  forehead;  she  cannot  keep  the  eyes  open;  relieved  by 
walking  in  the  open  air. — ^Violent  cephalalgia  with  nausea,  greatly  aggravated 
on  sitting  down. — Pain  in  the  sinciput  as  if  it  were  flattened. — ^Aggravation  of 
the  headache,  and  congestion  in  the  head  and  in  the  face,  on  stooping. — 
Sensation,  as  if  wind  were  traversing  the  head,  on  moving  it  rapidly  (or 
rocking  it). — Sensation,  as  if  the  head  were  increased  in  size  (three  times 
its  size). 

3.  Eyes. — Pressure,  as  from  sand,  in  the  reddened  eyes  (evening). — 
Sensation  of  compression  in  the  orbit. — Pain,  as  from  excoriation  in  the  eyes, 
on  moving  the  balls  or  the  eyelids. — Sensation  of  heat  in  the  eyes,  on  closing 
the  lids,  with  a  sensation  as  if  they  were  swimming  in  tears. — Sensation  of 
huming  in  the  eyes,  by  candle-light 

5.  Nose.— -Semi-lateral  swelling  of  the  nose,  with  heat,  pulsation  and 
sleeplessness. — Painful  ulcer  in  the  nostril  (on  the  inside  of  the  r.  wing,  with 
the  sensation  as  if  the  nasal  bones  were  pressed  asunder). — Epistaxis,  some- 
times at  night. — Bleeding  of  the  nose,  from  one  nostril  at  a  time  (at  night). — 
Great  dryness  of  the  nose. — Fluent  coryza,  with  excessive  secretion  of  an 

'  inodorous  mucus,  resembling  tallow. — Profuse  secretion  of  mucus  through 
the  posterior  nares,  obliging  one  to  hawk  frequentiy. 

6.  Face. — Heat  in  the  face,  <  by  stooping. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise  in 
the  cheek-bone,  <  by  touch. — Pain,  as  from  dislocation  in  the  maxillary 
joint,  on  masticating,  and  on  opening  the  mouth  wide. — Painful  swelling  of 


596  CORALLIUM   RUBRUM 

the  sub-maxillary  glands ;  <  when  swallowing  and  on  bending  the  head 
forward. — Lips  cracked  and  painful. 

7.  Teeth. — Every  tooth  on  the  1.  side  feels  as  if  set  on  edge  ;  it  feels  as 
if  the  teeth  were  too  close  to  one  another,  or  as  if  a  tenacious  body  were 
lodged  between  them. 

9.  Throat. — Great  dryness  of  the  fauces. — Constant  hawking,  owing  to 
an  accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  posterior  nares. — Great  dryness  of  the  palate 
and  of  the  throat,  with  sensation  of  excoriation  on  swallowing. 

10.  Appetite. — Insipidity  of  food. — Sweetish  taste  of  beer.— Violent 
thirst ;  longing  for  acids  and  salt  food. — After  a  meal,  the  head  turns  round, 
as  during  intoxication. — After  dinner,  hot  cheeks  and  forehead,  with  cold  feet 

11.  Stomach. — Nausea,  with  dr3mess  of  the  tongue  and  violent  head- 
ache ;  <  when  sitting  up. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation  (for  six  days),  followed  by  copious 
papescent  stool. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Loam-  or  clay-coloured  urine,  with  similar 
sediment. — Burning  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.<--Copious  sweat  on  the  genital  parts.— 
Swelling  of  the  prepuce,  with  pain  as  from  excoriation  when  it  is  touched.— 
The  margin  of  the  prepuce  feels  sore  when  the  linen  touches  it. — ^The  framom 
is  painful,  as  if  pricked  by  needles. — Pseudo  gonorrhoea  (balanoblennorrhcea) 

I  with  fetid  secretion  of  a  yellowish-green  colour. — Red  and  smooth  ulcers 
on  the  glans,  and  in  the  internal  surface  of  the  prepuce,  with  sanious  and 
yellowish  secretion. — Pollutions. — Involuntary  seminal  emissions  during  sleep 
(without  dreams  or  erections). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Painful  cough,  as  if  a  stone  wwe  de- 
pressing the  pleura. — Yellow,  puriform  expectoration,  in  consequence  of  the 
cough. — Sensation  of  cold  in  the  respiratory  organs,  on  taking  a  deep  inspira- 
tion; inclination  to  cough,  with  difficult  hawking  up  of  bronchial  mucus 
(in  the  morning). — Crowing  during  inspiration. — ^Violent,  spasmodic  cough, 
"firing  minute-guns"  of  short,  barking  cough  all  day. — ^Whooping-cough,  or 
other  rapid  cough,  attacks  following  so  closely  as  almost  to  run  into  one 
another;  cough  till  patient  falls  back  exhausted. — Cough  with  morning 
aggravation;  smothering  sensation  before  paroxysms. — Cold  expectoration. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  in  nape  of  neck. — Pain,  as  if  the  small 
of  the  back  were  broken. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Pressive  pain  in  the  shoulder-blades,  aggravated 
by  coughing. — Pain  in  the  wrists,  as  if  he  had  been  writing  much  and  rapidly. 
— Pains  in  the  shoulder- joints,  as  if  the  head  of  the  humerus  were  pressed 
violently  outwards. — Smooth  spots  of  a  deep-red  colour,  in  the  palms  of  the 
hands  and  in  the  fingers. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Pain  in  the  knees,  tibia  and  tarsal  joint,  as  if  he 
had  walked  a  great  deal. 

24.  Generalities. — Failing  of  the  limbs,  after  the  least  exercise  in  the 
open  air. — Sensation  of  cold  in  the  hot  parts,  on  uncovering  them.— The 
symptoms  of  heat  and  cold  are  >  by  artificial  heat. 

25.  Skin. — Red  and  smooth  spots  on  the  skin. — Smooth  spots  on  the 
palms  of  the  hands  and  fingers,  first  of  a  coral  colour,  then  dark-red,  and  lastly 
copper-coloured. — Measles;  purpura;  psoriasis. 


CORNUS  ALTERNIFOLIA  597 

a6.  Sleep. — ^Yawning,  violent,  frequent  and  in  rapid  succession,  with  pain 
in  the  articulation  of  the  jaw. — Great  sleepiness  ;  falls  asleep  while  standing. 
— ^As  soon  as  she  falls  asleep  she  starts  up,  on  account  of  frightful  dreams. — 
Cannot  sleep  before  midnight  tosses  about ;  if  he  uncovers  himself,  he  feels 
too  cold,  and  when  covered,  he  feels  too  hot. 

27.  Fever.— Pulse  full  and  hard.— Chill ;  the  skin  is  of  the  ordinary 
temperature,  with  headache  and  violent  thirst ;  >  by  external  heat. — Febrile 
shivering,  with  burning  thirst,  and  pains  in  the  forehead. — Dry  heat,  internally 
and  externally,  with  full  and  hard  pulse. — Dry  heat  without  thirst,  and  not 
followed  by  perspiration. — ^The  hot  parts  feel  cold  when  uncovered. 


Goriaria  Ruscifolia^ 

Toot-berry  Tupa-kihi  or  Tutu  (New  Zealand).  N.  0.  Coriarieae 
(between  Anacardiaceae  and  Rutaceae).  Tincture  or  trituration 
of  the  berries. 

Clfaloal. — Delirium  tremens.    Mania.    Memory  lost.    Vomiting. 

CharaeteriBtios. — Coriaria  produces  intoxication  very  like  that  of 
alcohol.  Great  muscular  activity  as  in  acute  mania,  requiring  several 
persons  to  hold  a  person  when  under  the  influence  of  the  drug.  The 
most  marked  feature  is  complete  loss  of  memory,  which  ensues  after 
coming  out  of  the  acute  stage  of  the  poisoning.  A  prover  who  ate 
\\  gr.  of  the  resin  experienced  the  following :  Disagreeable,  irritating 
sensation  in  throat,  extending  to  stomach,  with  pain  across  region  of 
stomach,  accompanied  by  nausea  (in  five  min.).  In  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  vomiting  came  on,  continuing  more  or  less  for  two  hours.  Very 
unpleasant  sensations  continued  for  two  hours  more,  when,  after  great 
flushing  of  the  face,  with  all  but  intolerable  heat,  the  eflEects  passed 
away. 

Gornus  Altemifolia. 

Swamp  Walnut    Alternate-leaved  Cornel.    N.  0.  Comaceae.    Decoc- 
tion or  tincture  of  leaves. 

GUnittaL — Eczema.    Intermittent  fever. 

diaraoteriBtios. — F.  H.  Lutze  communicated  to  H,  Recorder. 
(x.  501)  a  Long  Island  farmer's  cure  for  eczema  with  a  decoction  of 
the  leaves  of  this  tree.  His  method  was  to  give  three  times  a  day 
a  wineglassful  for  three  days.  Then  for  the  next  three  days  apply  it 
locally  or  wash  the  part  with  it ;  then  administer  it  internally  for 
another  three  days,  and  so  on.  He  cured,  thus,  all  his  cases  in 
eighteen  days.  This  was  the  first  acquaintance  Lutze  had  with  the 
remedy.    Later  on  he  made  a  proving  {H.  £.,  xi.  346)  on  himself  and 


598  CORNUS   ALTERNIFOLIA 

another,  eliciting  symptoms  of  fever,  restlessness,  and  sleeplessness, 
skin  eruptions,  and  emaciation.  A  striking  symptom  was  a  cold 
feeling  in  chest  as  if  full  of  ice.  Symptoms  >  after  walking  in  open 
air ;  after  supper. 

Relations. — In  the  skin  effects  it  compares  more  closely  with 
Comus  cirdnata.  In  fever  with  drowsiness  and  gastro-enteric  dis- 
turbance it  is  practically  identical  with  the  other  Cornels.  All  three 
have  greatly  disturbed  sleep. 

BTHPTOMB. 

z.  Mind. — No  ambition  to  do  anything.^Awfol,  uneasy  feeling,  that 
something  terrible  is  going  to  happen. 

2.  Head. — Dull  pain  across  forehead  (esp.  r.  side)  with  aching  in  1. 
shoulder. — Dull,  heaving  feeling,  accompanied  with  a  nauseous  and  dizzy 
feeling. — ^Violent  pressing  headache  in  forehead,  lasting  all  day;  <  on 
motion,  on  stooping  felt  as  though  everything  would  come  out. 

5.  Nose. — Sneezing ;  head  partially  stopped  up  towards  night 

6.  Face. — Eruption  on  chin  r.  side,  small  pustules,  one  blind. — Ring- 
worm on  forehead  (r.  side). — Pustules  on  face  and  neck. 

8.  Mouth. — ^A  little  sore  inside  mouth  became  very  annoying ;  when 
food  came  in  contact  with  it,  or  only  moving  the  mouth  in  a  certain  direction, 
sticking,  pricking  pain. — ^Tongue  yellowish  white. 

9.  Throat. — Raw  feeling  in  throat. — Raw  feeling  in  throat,  with 
frequent  desire  to  clear,  sensation  as  though  something  lodged  there  and 
should  come  out. 

IX.  Stomach. — Sick  sensation  an  hour  after  dinner. — On  waking,  desire 
to  vomit,  with  chills;  an  hour  later  vomited,  which  gave  relief,  and  heat 
followed. 

IS.    Abdomen. — Dull  pain  r.  side,  in  region  of  liver,  about  11  a.m. 

13.  Stool. — ^Two  loose  evacuations  in  quick  succession  in  afternoon.— 
About  5  p.m.  diarrhcea  set  in,  continued  all  night  every  half-hour  to  an  hour ; 
lasted  a  week,  during  which  time  Lutze  lost  six  pounds  in  weight— Stool 
scanty,  hard  and  difficult. — Stool  hard  at  first,  then  loose. — Stool  scanty  or 
absent 

15.    Male  Sexual  Organs. — Dreams  of  coitus  and  has  an  emission. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Cough,  with  a  feeling  as  though  something 
heavy  was  lying  on  chest  and  throat. 

iS«  Chest. — Cold  feeling  in  chest,  as  if  it  were  filled  with  cold  air  or  ice ; 
(lasted  two  days,  was  very  disagreeable,  but  did  not  affect  respiration  or  heart). 

19.    Heart. — Dull  ache  in  region  of  heart  (afternoon). 

90.    Neck  and  Back. — ^Transient  pain  across  small  of  back. 

29.    Upper  Limbs.— Aching  in  1.  shoulder. 

94.  Generalities.— Can  hardly  pull  one  foot  after  the  other.— Tired 
and  drowsy. 

95.  Skin. — Eruptions  of  small  pustules  on  face  and  neck. — Eruption 
on  r.  wrist,  and  r.  side  of  chin,  small  pustules,  one  of  them  blind ;  next  day 
another  pustule,  ringworm  on  forehead. — (Decoction  internally  and  externally 
has  cured  eczema ;  skin  cracked  everywhere,  esp.  where  it  had  a  fold  or 
crease,  exuding  a  sticky  watery  fluid.) 


CORNUS  CIRCINATA  599 

86.  Sleep. — Sleep  much  broken  and  full  of  exciting  dreams ;  hears  all 
the  clocks  strike ;  hears  every  little  noise  and  sound ;  when  once  awake  mind 
becomes  active  and  it  is  difficult  to  get  to  sleep  again.^Tossed  and  turned  all 
night ;  could  not  get  into  a  comfortable  position. — Dreams :  of  dead  rats 
mashed  to  a  pulp ;  of  coitus  and  has  an  emission. — ^Awakes  tired. — Drowsy 
and  tired  during  the  day. 

vj.  Fever. — ^Towards  evening  felt  very  tired  and  drowsy,  with  heavy 
sensation  in  head ;  about  9.30  lay  down  on  lounge  and  dropped  ofiF  into  a 
doze ;  awake  half  an  hour  after  with  a  feeling  as  though  he  wanted  to  vomit, 
and  chills  which  continued  for  an  hour ;  then  he  vomited,  which  seemed  to 
relieve  somewhat,  after  which  fever  took  the  place  of  the  chill,  which  abated 
somewhat  towards  morning. 


Gornus  Circinata. 

Round-leaved  Cornel.    Green  osier.    N,  0.  Comaceae.    Infusion  or 
tincture  of  fresh  bark. 

QHnieal.  -Aphthae.  Bilious  headache.  Diarrhoea.  Dysentery.  Eczema.  In- 
termittent fever.  Jaundice.  Liver  derangement.  Mucous  membranes,  ulcers  of. 
Pmritm  vulvae. — XAiicaria. 

GharaoterUttios. — ^A  popular  remedy  for  aphthous  and  ulcerated 
conditions  of  mucous  membranes.  Hale  says  he  has  seen  it  cure 
chronic  ulceration  of  mouth  and  throat,  which  had  recurred  for  many 
years.  Com.  c.  has  had  an  extensive  proving.  It  has  caused  Uver 
derangement  with  aching  eyeballs.  Disturbed  sleep.  The  symptoms 
are  <  at  night ;  on  waking  ;  by  motion  of  any  kind  ;  from  catching 
cold ;  from  summer  heat ;  >  by  coffee.  The  fever  symptoms  are 
identical  with  those  of  Comus  f, 

EelatioiUk — Compare :  Nux  v.,  Hydrast.,  Chi.,  Eup.  perf.,  Ars. 

STHPTOHB. 

I.  Mind. — Forgetful. — Indifferent;  with  drowsiness. — ^Indolence  with 
loss  of  mental  and  physical  energy. — Unable  to  concentrate  attention. — Mind 
confused,  particularly  on  rising  in  the  morning. — Depression  and  petulance. 

a.  Head. — Dulness  and  weight  in  head,  esp.  temples,  >  by  coffee. — 
Heaviness  of  head,  with  nausea. — ^Aching  and  throbbing  pain  over  1.  eyebrow. 
—Doll  pains  over  eyeballs  ;  unusual  pulsation  extending  to  back  of  head. — 
Pulsating  headache  in  temples. — Headaches,  with  drowsiness  and  confusion 
of  kieas ;  semi-lateral  headaches ;  deep-seated  pains  under  vertex ;  dull, 
heavy  pains  over  whole  head,  with  drowsiness,  lassitude,  nausea,  and  general 
sweat— Headache ;  <  by  walking,  stooping,  shaking  head ;  >  by  coffee. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  sunken,  hollow,  as  after  a  debauch ;  dark  circles  under 
them,  conjunctiva  tinged  yellow. — Soreness  of  eyeballs ;  aching  pains  through 
them.— EyetMtlls  and  lids  heavy,  as  if  pressed  down  by  a  weight ;  inclination 
to  close  eyes  in  sleep. — Herpes  of  lids. 

4.  Ears.— Ringing  in  ears. 


6oo  CORNUS  CIRCINATA 

5.  Nose. — Prickling  in  nose  and  nasal  bones. — Coryza  early  in 
morning. 

6.  Face.— Heat  and  burning  in  face ;  without  redness. — Coantenaiice 
yellow,  or  pale,  sallow,  and  sunken,  indicating  sofiFering  and  debility. 

8.  Mouth.— Pungent,  bitter,  or  insipid  taste ;  yellowish  or  white  fur  on 
tongue. — Ulceration  of  tongue,  gums,  and  mouth;  from  cold,  or  gastric 
derangement ;  aphthao. — Sweating  and  burning  in  mouth,  throat,  and  stomach, 
with  desire  for  stool. 

zi.  Stomach.— Thirst  for  cold  drinks.— Eructations. — ^Acid  pyrosis; 
painful  and  slow  digestion. — Gagging  as  if  to  vomit  in  morning. — ^Nausea,  with 
confused  and  heavy  pain  in  head. — Nausea  with  bitter  taste  and  aversion  to 
all  kinds  of  food,  and  desire  for  sour  drinks. — Sense  of  f aintness  and  emptiness 
in  stomach  and  bowels. — Distension  ;  burning ;  oppression  :  pulsating  pain 
in  stomach. 

za.  Abdomen.— Chronic  hepatitis  and  bilious  derangement — Constant 
working  in  bowels  as  if  all  in  motion. — Borborygmus. — Distension  >  after 
loose  stool. — Griping  in  umbilical  region ;  <  during  stool. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — ^Urgency  to  stool ;  early  in  morning  in  bed  ;  with 
fulness  and  uneasiness  of  bowels ;  frequent  but  ineffectual. — Diarrhoea  with 
excessive  debility  and  nervous  irritability. — Stools :  dark,  bilious,  watery, 
mucous,  with  griping,  burning,  and  tenesmus,  nausea,  drowsiness,  dulness 
of  the  head,  and  general  perspiration;  dark  green,  thin  and  offensive; 
greenish  slimy ;  mucous,  bilious  or  watery ;  frequent  and  scanty ;  offensive 
flatus. — Bearing-down  pains  in  rectum  and  bowels,  with  urgent  desire  for 
stool. — Hard,  dry,  scanty  stool,  with  pressing  in  rectum. — Ulceration  of 
rectum. — Bowel  complaints  with  pains  before,  during,  and  after  discharges. — 
Dysenteries  and  diarrhoeas  with  inactivity  of  liver. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  desire  to  pass  water. — Urine  scanty 
and  high-coloured. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Increased  desire,  but  lack  of  power.— 
Frequent  strong  and  persistent  erections  during  the  night. — Pruritus. 

z6.    Female  Sexual  Organs. — Leucorrhoea. — Pruritus. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Frequent  inclination  to  expand  chest  by 
taking  a  long  breath. — Cough  with  sharp  stitches  in  chest. — Dry,  spasmodic 
cough,  or  tedious,  chronic  cough,  with  mucous  expectoration. 

18.  Chest.— <^hoking  sensation  in  upper  part  of  thorax. — Soreness  of 
chest  on  rising  in  morning. — Stitches ;  bruised  feeling ;  in  chest  and  back.— 
Dragging  down  on  each  side  of  chest. — Shooting  pains  from  centre  of  thorax 
to  lower  abdomen. — Intermittent  shooting  pains  in  chest  and  abdomen.— 
Rheumatic  or  neuralgic  pains  in  chest,  back,  and  limbs. — Fine  scarlet  rash  on 
chest,  with  itching. 

ig.  Heart. — Perceptible  pulsations  in  chest — Palpitation  of  heart — 
Circulation  accelerated. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Drawing  pains  at  nape  of  neck. — Dull  pains  in 
back. — Sore  pains  in  lumbar  region,  <  bending  forward. 

21.  Limbs. — Weakness  of  extremities. — Coldness  of  hands  and  feet  after 
a  loose  stool. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Weakness  and  fatigue  of  arms. — ^Burning  and 
itching  sensation  in  hands  and  arms. — Coldness  of  hands  following  a  loose  stool. 


CORNUS   FLORIDA  6oi 

23.  liower  Umbs.— Pain  in  r.  hip  while  l3ring  in  bed. — Legs  weak  and 
tremulous,  particularly  when  ascending. — Itching  on  legs  and  thighs;  burning 
sensation  in  feet. 

24.  Generalities.— General  debility  and  impaired  mental  energy,  with 
great  drowsiness  ;  in  heat  of  summer. 

25.  Skin. — Yellow  or  earthy  appearance  of  skin. — Heat  of  whole  surface 
with  itching,  burning,  or  prickling  sensations ;  <  by  scratching  or  rubbing. — 
Eczema,  pruritus  and  similar  a£Fections  of  external  genitals. — Itching  in 
paroxysms  <  at  night.— Dry  or  moist  eruptions;  with  cough.— Vesicular 
eruptions ;  urticaria ;  miliaria ;  roseola. 

26.  Sleep. — Drowsiness  with  entire  loss  of  mental  and  physical  energy ; 
heavy  feeling  in  head ;  depression  of  spirits ;  tendency  to  perspire. — Sleep 
onrefreshing  and  disturbed  by  unpleasant  dreams. 

27.  Fever.— Chilliness,  with  nausea,  dull  pain  in  head,  debility,  and 
languor. — Chilly  sensation,  followed  by  transient  flushing. — Flushes  of  heat 
and  coldness  in  alternation,  followed  by  cold  perspiration. — ^Transient  flushes 
of  heat  pervading  whole  body,  with  shooting  pains  through  brain. — Paroxysm 
preceded  for  days  by  sleepiness,  dull,  heavy  headache,  sluggish  flow  of  ideas  ; 
slight  exercise  causes  sweat  and  great  fatigue  :  during  apyrexia,  debility  and 
painful  diarrhoea ;  first  moderate  heat,  then  light  sweat,  ending  with  a  crawling 
sort  of  chill ;  when  all  the  stages  seem  aborted,  and  the  patient  says  the 
chills  amount  to  nothing;  weak,  languid,  and  loss  of  appetite.— General 
clammy  sweat,  with  headache,  nausea,  pain  in  back,  lassitude,  and  confusion 
of  ideas. 


Cornus  Florida. 

Dogwood.    N.  0.  Comaceae.    Tincture  of  fresh  bark. 
^'^^^^ — Dyspepsia.    Intermittent  fever.    Pneumonia. 

Characterifitics. — Hale  commends  Com.  /.  in  obstinate  inter- 
mittents  where  quinine  has  been  abused  and  where  the  following 
group  of  symptoms  is  present :  For  days  before  chill  sleepiness  ; 
doggish  flow  of  ideas ;  dull,  heavy  headache.  Paroxysms  attended 
with  nausea ;  vomiting  and  sometimes  watery  or  bihous  diarrhoea. 
In  the  chill,  cold,  clammy  skin  ;  in  the  fever,  violent  headache,  with 
throbbing,  stupor,  confusion  of  intellect  and  vomiting.  He  also  com- 
mends it  in  old  cases  of  dyspepsia  where  the  chief  symptom  is  acid 
pyrosis.  Cam,  /.,  which  has  had  a  separate  proving,  has  some 
very  remarkable  neuralgic  pains  in  arms,  chest,  and  trunk,  and  a 
sensation  as  if  broken  in  two.  It  has  been  used  successfully  in  a  case 
of  pneumonia  on  the  indication  of  the  stitches  in  the  chest. 

RelatioiiB. — Compare:  The  other  Cornels.,  Eup.  perf.,  Nux, 
ChL,  Kali  c,  Abies  n.,  Abies  can. 


6o2  CORN  us   FLORIDA 


STHPTOMS. 

2.  Head.— Constant  dizziness. — Severe  headache  and  quick  pulse  and 
violent  pains  in  bowels. — Fulness  and  pains  in  head  with  gastric  disturbance ; 
constant  tendency  to  sleep. 

3.  Eyes. — L.  eye  weak,  like  a  cloud  over  it. 

II.  Stomach. — Drinks  little  and  often ;  hunger  soon  aftor  eating ; 
desire  for  sour  things,  pickles,  pastry,  cakes,  &c. — Nausea,  vomiting,  and 
violent  pains  in  bowels;  with  headache. — ^Acid  pyrosis;  painful  and  slow 
digestion. — Indigestion  and  heartburn. 

IS.    Abdomen. — ^Violent  pain  in  bowels  with  purging. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Ine£Fectual  urging,  followed  by  cutting  in  1.  ribs 
and  under  scapula ;  later  copious  stooL 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Difficult  urination  in  morning  in  old  men. 

18.  Chest. — Stitches  in  region  of  1.  clavicle  extending  towards  r.  side,  < 
by  taking  deep  breath  ;  constant  tickling  in  chest  compelling  him  to  cough. 
with  difficult  expectoration  ;  constant  dizziness ;  chilliness,  followed  by  heat 
with  thirst  and  finally  sweat ;  dnnks  littie  and  often  ;  hunger  soon  after  eat- 
ing (inflammation  of  the  lungs). — Stitch  in  r.  chest  as  from  a  knife  thrust,  with 
vertigo.— Ineffectual  urging  to  stool,  followed  by  cutting  pains  in  ribs,  1.  side, 
with  pain  under  1.  scapula  as  if  a  piece  of  flesh  were  being  forcibly  twisted 
out ;  later,  copious  stool. 

ig.  Heart. — ^Increased  strength  and  frequency  of  pulse  with  fever  heat ; 
pulse  quick  and  hard. — Pain  beginning  in  elbow,  settied  about  heart  causing 
feeling  of  pressure  and  palpitation. 

80.  Neck  and  Back. — Sensation  like  a  jerk  or  shock  in  nape  of  neck. — 
Pains  at  waist  as  if  she  would  break  in  two ;  pains  run  up  whole  1.  side  of 
trunk  or  body  like  lightning ;  seems  as  if  they  would  give  her  a  twist  while 
running  up ;  pains  in  elbows  and  wrist 

ai.  Limbs. — Cramps  in  popliteal  spaces  with  tension  in  flexor  muscles, 
also  in  1.  arm. — Hands  and  feet  swollen. 

S8.  Upper  Limbs. — Neuralgic  sharp  pains  begin  in  r.  elbow,  extending 
to  hand  and  shoulder,  passing  down  r.  and  then  up  1. ;  pain  settled  about 
heart  causing  feelings  of  pressure  and  palpitation;  could  not  raise  arm 
because  of  pain  and  lameness ;  hands  and  feet  swollen,  pains  of  a  darting, 
needle-like  kind,  very  severe ;  difficulty  in  passing  water. — Pains  in  wrist — 
Numbness  and  stitches  in  wrists. — Blueness  of  fingers. 

aO.    Sleep. — Sleepy,  but  couldn't  sleep  all  night 

87.  Fever. — ChiU  with  cold,  clammy  skin,  followed  by  heat  with  thirst, 
and  finally  sweat. — Chill  followed  by  heat  with  thirst,  drinks  often,  but  little 
at  a  time,  then  sweat ;  constant  giddiness ;  hungry  soon  after  eating ;  desire 
for  sour  things,  later  for  sweets. — First  moderate  heat,  then  light  perspiration, 
ending  with  a  crawling  sort  of  chill,  beginning  in  back  and  going  upward.—- 
Increase  of  body  temperature ;  hot  sweat,  fulness  in  head. — Heat :  with  violent 
headache ;  thirst ;  hot,  but  moist  skin  ;  stupor. — Sweat  rolls  down  from  her ; 
chilly,  but  warm ;  cramps  from  sides  of  waist  running  toward  pubes ;  sleepy 
but  couldn't  sleep  all  night ;  had  to  get  up  and  look  out  of  window,  she  was 
so  sleepless ;  could  not  sleep  in  daytime,  sweating  ail  the  time. 


COTYLEDON  603 


Gorydalis. 


Corydalis  fonnosa.  Wild  Turkey  -  pea.  Stagger  -  weed.  N.  0. 
Fumariaceae.  Tincture  of  bulbous  root  gathered  when  plant 
is  in  flower.  Trituration  of  dried  root.  Triturations  of  Cory- 
dalin. 

GlUeaL— Gastric  catarrh.    Scrofula.    Syphilis.    Ulcerations. 

CSuunoteriBtios.— This  is  an  unproved  remedy,  but  clinical  experi- 
ence has  revealed  a  specific  relation  to  the  manifestations  of  syphilis : 
Hunterian  chancre ;  syphilitic  nodes ;  faUing  of  the  hair ;  syphilitic  and 
scrofulous  ulcerations  of  scalp ;  syphilitic  and  non-syphiUtic  ulcera- 
tions of  fauces — ^all  these  have  been  reported  cured  by  it  Hale  also 
conmiends  it  in  :  Scrofulous  dyscrasia ;  obstinate  skin  diseases ; 
cachexia  of  intermittents  with  emargement  of  Uver  and  spleen.  In 
massive  doses  it  has  cured,  according  to  eclectic  authorities  :  **  A  de- 
rangement of  the  stomach,  attended  with  profuse  morbid  secretion  of 
mucus,  there  being  always  a  coated  tongue,  with  fetor  of  the  breath, 
and  loss  of  appetite  and  digestion."  It  is  therefore  indicated,  as  Hale 
remarks,  in  gastric  catarrt^  being  an  analogue,  in  this  respect,  of 
Hydrastis.  It  has  not  been  used  in  the  potencies ;  ten  drops  of  the 
tincture  four  times  a  day  has  been  a  usual  dose. 

EdatioiUk— Coiff/ofi^ ;  Kali  iod.,  Phytolac.,  Stilling. ;  Berb.  aq., 
Mere,  LobeL  caenil. 

Goto  Bark. 

Goto  Bark.    A  bark  of  unknown  botanical  origin  {N.  0.  Lauraceae  ?) 
obtained  from  Bolivia.    Tincture.    Trituration  of  alkaloid  Cotoin. 

GUalML—Diarrhoca.    Tubercular  diarrhoea. 

CharaoteriBtios.— The  bark  has  been  used  in  medicine  as  a 
diarrhcea  remedy,  probably  from  aboriginal  tradition.  Hansen  says 
it  is  especially  valuable  in  "  chronic  tubercular,  watery  diarrhoea,  very 
copious  and  exhausting."    Substantial  doses  only  have  been  used. 


Cotyledon. 


Cotyledon  umbilicus.  Umbilicus  pendulinus.  Pennywort  Navelwort 
Kidneywort.  Le  Nombril  de  Venus.  N.  0.  Crassulaceae  (House- 
leek-fsunily).    Tincture  of  the  plant. 

OlIaioaL— Heart    affections.      Hysteria.       Sinuses.      Spleen,    affections   of. 
Rheumatism. 

OhaFaoteidstlOB. — Cotyledon  has  had  a  considerable  proving,  but 
I  am  not  aware  of  any  clinical  experience  with  it  having  been  recorded. 


6o4  COTYLEDON 

The  whole  houseleek  family  are  deserving  of  careful  study  by 
homoeopathists.  Among  the  most  peculiar  symptoms  of  CotyL  are  :  a 
feeling  as  if  some  part  of  the  body — a  foot  or  the  head — were  absent 
The  senses  of  sight  and  hearing  are  dulled.  A  yellow  patch  follows 
the  sight.  Disagreeable  surging  in  ears  ;  ears  feel  stuffed.  A  number 
of  pains  in  the  re^on  of  the  spleen  appear.  The  breathing  is 
oppressed,  the  heart  is  disturbed.  Rheumatic  symptoms  are  promi- 
nent. Weak,  faint  feeling.  Stitching,  pricking,  jerking  pains  are 
predominant  sensations.  Cooper  considers  it  a  cancer  remedy.  He 
has  cured  with  it  sinuses  in  buttock.  A  patient  to  whom  he  gave  it 
for  polypus  said  it  made  him  "  stagger  as  if  drunk."  Symptoms  are 
<  morning  and  evening. 

RelatifoiUL — Compare :  Sedum  acre. 

STHPTOMB. 

z.  Mind. — On  waking  disagreeable  sensation  running  down  back  of  r. 
thigh  and  leg,  with  a  feeling  as  if  there  were  no  foot. — Head  felt  ezceedin^y 
light  for  some  time  as  if  there  were  no  solid  head  ;  could  not  articolate  for 
some  time  though  she  tried  ;  followed  by  pressing  vertical  headache  >  by 
tea. — On  waking,  sensation  as  if  going  out  of  mind,  followed  by  trickling  as 
of  blood  down  1.  arm  from  shoulder  to  finger-joints. — Exhilaration. — Diffi- 
culty of  collecting  ideas. — Feels  lost  before  headache  comes  on. 

2.  Head. — Headache,  causing  desire  for  open  air,  which  >. — Dull  head- 
ache with  cold  feet. — Dull,  heavy,  stupefying  pain  in  forehead  and  vertei, 
shifting  suddenly  between  them. 

Q.  Throat. — Constant  choking  in  throat-pit,  and  feeling  as  if  he  would 
burst  into  tears. — Back  of  throat  feels  as  if  covered  with  thick  mucus. 

11.  Stomach. — Pain  at  epigastrium  through  to  shoulder  with  nausea.— 
On  swallowing,  the  morsel  seems  to  pass  and  press  against  some  swelling  in 
cardiac  region  (in  evening)  recurring  during  the  pain. 

12.  At>doinen. — Long  stitch  in  1.  hypochondrium. — Dull  pains  in  1. 
hypochondrium. — Dull  pushing  in  region  of  spleen  recurring  at  intervals. 

13.  Stool. — Bowels  freely  opened  ;  later,  constipation. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.'--Calls  to  urinate  frequent — Increased  flow  of 
clear  urine. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Tickling  in  larynx  with  dry  cough.— 
Oppressed  breathing. — Shooting  in  all  directions  in  chest,  particularly  under 
r.  scapula  and  1.  nipple  during  evening. — Stitches  below  both  nipples. 

19.  Heart. — Heat  about  heart. — Uneasiness. — Clawing,  dragging  pain, 
on  riding,  >  by  compressing  side. — A  troublesome  palpitation  and  fulness  at 
sternum  on  walking  up-hill,  consisting  of  one  or  two  jumps  or  roils  of  heart 
with  occasional  intermission. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Between  attacks  of  headache,  gnawing,  rheumatic 
pain  in  r.  shoulder. — ^Aching,  bruised  pain  in  wrists. — ^Aching,  tingling  in 
hands,  esp.  at  night,  preventing  sleep  ;  tingling  down  arm  when  the  nerve  is 
struck. 

23.  Lower  Limb8.--Aching  in  1.  thigh  followed  by  numbness. — Sting- 
ing pain  under  1.  gluteus  mazimus  in  region  of  sciatic  nerve. 


CRATiCGUS  OXYACANTHA  605 

24.  Generalities. — Occasionally  during  the  day  attacks  of  faintness 
with  green  shadows  before  the  eye. — Creeping  in  the  flesh,  and  feeling  as 
before  severe  cold  or  rheumatic  attack. 

Crataegus  Oxyacantha. 

Crataegus  oxyacantha.     Hawthorn.     N.  0.  Rosaceae.    Tincture    of 

the  ripe  fruit. 


L—Angina  fectaris.    Heart,  affections  of;  failure  of ;  hypertrophy  of. 

Ghanoteristios. — Cratagus  was  introduced  into  medicine  as  a 
heart  remedy  by  Dr.  Greene,  of  Ennis,  Ireland,  and  it  has  been  used 
empirically  with  much   success  in  cases  of  heart  failure.    It  has 
ustially  been  given  in  5-drop  doses  of  the  tincture.    Weak  and  rapid 
pulse  ;   dy^noea  and  dropsy,  dependent  on  failure  of  heart-power 
whether  from  valvular  a£Eection  or  from  anaemia,  appear  to  be  the 
leading  indications.    Heart-failure  threatened  from  slightest  exertion. 
The  drug  may  cause  nausea  when  given  in  the  tincture  unless  given 
during  or  immediately  after  a  meal.    The  mental  state  is  that  of 
irritability,  crossness,  and  melancholy.    Craiag,  is  the  nearest  ap- 
proach to  a  positive  heart  tonic  that  I  know  of.     It  has  produced  some 
heart  symptoms  and  has,  doubtless,  a  homoeopathic  relation  ;  but  it  is 
not  a  heart-poison  like  Digitalis^  and  has  no  cumulative  action.    Here 
are  some  cases  :  Halbert  in  Cliniquef  March,  1899,  records  this  case  : 
"  Mr.  S.,  a  young  man  sixteen  years  of  age,  had  worked  hard  at 
manna!  labour  since  his  twelfth  year  to  support  a  widowed  mother. 
He  had,  in  fact,  done  a  man's  work  before  his  physical  maturity 
would  permit  it.    For  some  time  he  had  shown  some  signs  of  cardiac 
hypertrophy,  and  had  been  cautioned  by  physicians  to  take  good  care 
as  to  his  heart.    About  a  year  ago,  during  some  gynmastic  extreme 
in  the  nature  of  sport,  he  was  suddenly  admonished  that  something 
had  'given  way,'  and  for  relief  was  obliged   to  take  to  his  bed. 
When  I  first  saw  him  he  was  obliged  to  lie  down,  respiration  was 
laboured  and  irregular,  and  the  heart's  action  was  greatly  exaggerated 
and  erratic.    There  was  decided  precordial  bulging ;  the  apex  beat 
was  considerably  displaced,  downward  and  to  the  left,  and  the  whole 
cardiac  dulness  was  greatly  extended ;  the  impulse  was  heaving  in 
character,  with  considerable  mitral  systolic  blowing  and  the  corre- 
sponding diastolic  intensification ;   there  were  also  signs  of  consi- 
derable pulmonary  engorgement  and  some  pain  in  the  chest  region. 
The  patient  was  put  into  a  warm  bath  tor  twenty  minutes,  and 
then  carefully  returned  to  bed.    Aconite  3X  was  administered  every 
half-hour,  and  continued  hourly  for  a  day  or  two  afterward  until  he 
was  somewhat  relieved.    CraUeguSf  five-drop  doses  of  the  tincture, 
was  then  administered  five  times  daily  for  a  long  time.    The  effects 
of  this  remedy  were  most  remarkable  ;  the  cardiac  irritation  gradually 
lessened  ;  the  area  of  dulness  decreased  and  the  rhythm  improved  ; 
at  the  same  time  all  the  general  symptoms  improved  rapidly.    He 
has  now  t>een  using  the  remedy  for  several  months,  and  the  result 


6o6  CRATAEGUS  OXYACANTHA 

is  most  satisfactory.  I  have  every  reason  to  expect  a  cure  of  the 
extreme  symptoms,  and  believe  the  heart  virill  be  reduced  to  a  safe 
hypertrophv,  which  will  virtually  be  a  cure."  A  girl  of  twelve  had  a 
sudden  collapse  in  third  week  of  typhoid  (Cliniquc,  vii.  52).  Crakeg. 
gtt.  V.  eveiy  two  hours  was  given  on  these  indications  :  Great  pallor, 
irregular  breathing,  cold  extremities,  pulse  120,  very  weak  and 
irregular.  Sitychniaj  Digit,  and  CacL  had  failed  to  give  more  than 
temporary  reuef.  Under  Cratceg.  she  rallied  at  once.  Cases  of 
hypertrophy  with  failing  power,  dilatation,  alcoholic  heart,  and 
nervous  palpitation  have  all  been  relieved  by  the  remedy.  T.  C. 
Duncan  (/7.  Recorder,  xii.  199)  gave  complete  relief  in  a  case  of 
angina  pectoris,  the  pain  being  above  and  to  left  of  stomach ;  pulse 
strong  and  forcible  ;  indications  of  hypertrophy  were  found.  A  very 
tender  spot  on  left  side  of  spine.  Craiagus  removed  at  the  same  time 
<<  a  hurried,  flurried  feeling"  and  the  anxious  expression  of  her  tanc^. 
Dr.  Duncan  produced  in  himself  when  proving  Cratc^us  a ''  flurried 
feeling,"  which  he  attributed  to  the  rapid  action  of  the  stimulated 
heart.  A  nervous  lady  medical  student  who  also  proved  it  had  "  an 
unusual  rush  of  blood  to  the  head  with  confused  feeling,"  followed 
later  by  ''  a  feeling  of  quiet  and  calmness  mentally."  The  remedy  is 
well  worth  a  thorough  proving. 

Relationi. — Compare:  Other  members  of  the  Rose  family, 
notably  Prunus  Virginianus  and  Amygdala  amara,  and  also,  Laurocer.^ 
Camphor^  Hydrocy,  ac.,  Digitalis,  Arsen,  iod,,  Strophanthus^  Phaseolus^  &c. 

BTMPTOMS. 

X.  Mind* — Irritability,  crossness,  melancholy. — Hurried,  flurried  feeling ; 
with  rapid  action  of  heart. — ^An  unusual  rush  of  blood  to  the  head  with  com- 
fused  feeling ;  followed  by  a  feeling  of  quiet  and  calmness  mentally. 

!!•  Stomach* — Nausea. — Dyspepsia  and  nervous  prostration,  with  heart 
failure. 

ig.  Heart. — Faintness  and  collapse. — Heart  failure  in  hjrpertrophy  and 
valvular  disease. — Palpitation  and  rapid  action  of  heart. — ^Angina  pectoris, 
pain  above  and  to  1.  of  stomach,  pulse  strong  and  forcible;  indications  of 
hypertrophy ;  very  tender  spot  1.  side  of  spine. — Hypertrophy  from  over- 
exertion; from  alcoholic,  venereal  and  other  excesses. — Heart  collapse  in 
typhoid. — Heart  dropsy. 

Crocus. 

Crocus   sativus.     Saffron.     N.    O.    Iridaceae.     Tincture   of   dried 
stigmas.    Cooper  makes  a  tincture  of  the  fresh  young  shoots. 

ClillieaL— Abortion,  threatened.  After-pains.  An^.  Asthenopia.  Blepharo- 
spasm. Brain,  congestion  of.  Chorea.  Dysmenia.  Painting.  Gs^tric  afifections. 
Haemoptysis.  Haemorrhages.  Headache.  Heart,  affections  of.  Hysteria.  Lach- 
rymation.  Laughter,  Leucorrhoea.  Mania.  Menstruation^  profuse.  Metrorrhagia. 
Nose^  bleeding  of.  Operations,  effects  of.  Ophthalmia.  Pregnancy,  imaginary ; 
afifections  of .    Tumours.    Ulceration.    Wounds. 

CharaoteristicB. — Crocus  has  three  characteristics  which  clearly 
call  for  its  use  when  met  with.    The  first  is  haemorrhage  iiotn  various 


CROCUS  607 

parts  (nose,  uterus,  Ac),  when  the  tdood  is  black,  viscid,  clotting, 
iomiing  itself  into  long  black  strings,  hanging  from  the  bleeding 
cxifioe.  The  second  is  a  peculiar  sensation  as  if  something  aUve  were 
moving  about  in  the  abdomen  or  chest  This  may  be  a  definite 
sensation,  or  it  may  be  a  hallucination  or  fixed  idea.  A  curious  dr- 
comstance  in  this  connection  is  the  fact  that  Cfocus  has  often  been 
soccessfnlly  given  to  pregnant  women  who  have  complained  of  violent 
fcetal  movements,  as  well  as  in  cases  of  imaginary  pregnancy.  The 
ranaining  characteristic  is  in  the  mental  sphere.  It  is  a  rapid  alter- 
nation of  mental  conditions  :  anger  with  violence  rapidly  followed  bv 
repentance ;  laughter  quickly  followed  by  tears.  I  once  cured  witn 
a  iew  doses  of  Crocus  a  young  artist  who  had  become  subject  to 
violent  outbursts  of  rage  in  which  he  would  take  up  a  knife  to  throw 
at  his  mother,  with  whom  he  lived,  and  almost  immediately  after 
would  be  abjectly  repentant.  The  household  was  on  the  point  of 
being  broken  up  when  the  trouble  was  completely  removed  by  Crocus. 
Uncontrollable  laughter  is  also  in  the  Crocus  symptomatology.  Hys- 
terical laughter  is  one  of  the  efiFects  observed  by  the  older  physicians. 
Teste  cites  from  Murray  the  case  of  several  children  "who  were 
seized  with  an  extraordinary  laughing  mania,  from  having  smelled  of 
leather  bottles  that  bad  contained  essence  of  saffron."  On  one 
occasion,  in  hospital,  I  happened  to  see  a  young  girl  who  was  really 
desperately  ill  with  heart  failure  and  valvular  disease,  in  a  fit  of 
hysterical  laughter.  This  made  me  think  of  Crocus,  The  only 
definite  sensation  she  complained  of  in  the  heart  region  was  a 
"jumping"  sensation.  Crocus  30  was  given,  and  very  soon  she  was 
able  to  lie  down  flat  (after  having  been  propped  up  for  weeks),  and  from 
that  time  she  made  a  rapid  recovery.  Another  Crocus  symptom  is  : 
Sensitive  to  music,  involuntarily  joins  in  on  hearing  any  one  sing. 
Stitches,  shocks,  throbbings,  broad  thrusts,  cuttings  and  jerkings  are 
among  the  commoner  sensations.  Twitchings  of  single  sets  of  muscles 
(chorea).  A  warm  sensation  ascending  to  the  heart,  impeding  breathing 
and  >  by  yawning  is  a  peculiar  symptom.  Tingling,  crawling,  pricking 
and  itching  are  met  with  in  the  skin.  Scarlet  redness  of  the  whole 
body,  or  scarlet  spots  on  skin.  (It  is  a  domestic  remedy  for  "  bring- 
ing out "  the  eruption  of  measles.)  Painful  suppuration  of  bruised 
parts  ;  old  cicatrised  wounds  re-open  and  suppurate.  Lipoma  and 
encephaloma  of  scalp.  Tumours  with  ulceration  and  characteristic 
bleeding.  The  reputation  of  Crocus  in  the  cure  of  tumours  is  also  an 
old  one.  It  was  used  externally  "  to  scatter  indolent  tumours  and 
ecchymoses."  Cooper  has  given  it  new  confirmation.  He  has  given 
it  in  single  doses  of  the  ^  tincture  in  a  case  of  malignant  disease  of 
the  side  following  extirpation  of  cancerous  kidney,  with  the  result  of 
arrest  of  progress  after  an  initial  aggravation,  and  complete  relief  of 
pain.  The  patient  was  a  woman,  who  had  formerly  had  haemorrhage 
with  dark  clots  at  the  periods  and  feeling  of  weight  towards  womb.  She 
had  had  also  the  sensation  of  something  moving  in  the  abdomen. 
Cooper  agrees  with  Culpepper  in  thinking  Croc,  very  similar  to  Calcnd. 
in  its  action.  It  is  a  vulnerary  and  corresponds  to  the  effects  of 
blows  (deafness ;  tumours,  &c.).  Crocus  is  especially  suited  to  women 
and  hysterical  men.    The  symptoms  are  <  fasting ;    evening   and 


6o8  CROCUS 

night ;  during  new  and  full  moon  ;  looking  fixedly  at  an  object ; 
during  pregnancy ;  in  a  hot  room  ;  in  hot  weather.  >  By  jrawning 
(desire  to  take  a  long  breath,  >  by  yawning) ;  in  open  air  (for  which 
there  is  craving) ;  after  breakfast.    Great  thirst  for  cold  drinks. 

BelationB.— Crocus  should  be  studied  along  with  the  other 
Iridaceae,  the  Alliaceseand  the  Liliaceae.  It  is  aniidoUd  by:  Aeon., 
Bell.,  Op.  Compatible:  Chi.,  Nux,  Puis.,  Sul.  Compare :  Plat  in  dark 
or  black  clotted  flow  ;  Croton  (pain  through  left  chest  to  back) ; 
Staph.  (>  by  yawning) ;  Fluor,  ac.  (sensation  of  cold  wind  blowing 
across  eyes)  ;  Codein  (twitching  of  muscles,  especially  of  eyeballs) ; 
Lach.  (pains  in  eye  to  top  of  head) ;  Tarent.  (contractions  of  single  groups 
of  muscles) ;  Calc,  Ipec,  Ign.  Tarent.  (hysteria  ;  hearing  music  wants 
to  join  in. — In  Tarent  music  subsequently  >  :  in  Croc,  it  does  not). 
Wants  to  jump  (Tarent,.  Stram.,  Sticta,  Asar.,  Agar.) ;  wants  to  kiss, 
Agar.  In  miscarriage  at  third  month,  Sabi.,  Kreas.  In  violent  move- 
ments of  foetus,  Op.,  Sil.,  Thu.,  Sul. ;  in  heat  in  heart,  Rhod.,  Lachn., 
Op. 

8TMPT0H8. 

1.  Mind. — Great  tendency  to  sadness,  sometimes  alternating  with  great 
gaiety  and  joyousness. — Great  inclination  to  laugh,  to  jest,  and  to  sing,  some- 
times with  excessive  weakness. — Loquacious. — Sings  involuntarily,  and  then 
laughs. — Immoderate,  improper  laughter;  changeable  disposition. — Frolic- 
some and  jesting  mania,  with  paleness  of  face,  headache,  and  obscuration  of 
the  eyes. — ^Abandonment  of  free  will. — Choleric  passion  and  violence,  fre- 
quently followed  by  prompt  repentance. — ^Alternate  austerity  and  mildness  of 
character. — Forgetfvdness  and  distraction. — Quickness  of  memory. 

2.  Head. — Stupefying  cephalalgia,  as  during  intoxication,  with  down- 
cast eyes. — Giddiness,  as  if  intoxicated,  in  the  forehead ;  in  the  room,  but 
not  in  the  open  air, — ^Vertigo,  with  fainting. — Confused  vertigo  on  rising 
from  a  reclining  posture. — ^Vertigo  when  raising  the  head,  with  heat  of  the 
whole  body. — Cephalalgia  above  the  eyes,  with  burning  pain,  sensation  of 
burning  and  aching  in  the  eyes,  esp.  in  the  evening,  by  candle-light — 
Head  heavy  in  the  morning,  with  aching  at  the  vertex. — Drawing  pain  in  the 
forehead,  with  nausea. — Semi-lateral  pulsation  in  the  head,  and  in  the  face 
(1.  side,  extending  into  the  eye). — Blows  in  the  forehead  and  the  temples. — 
Sensation  of  looseness  of  the  brain,  during  movement  (as  if  it  were  tottering 
to  and  fro). 

3.  Eyes.— -Itching  in  the  eyelids.— Tingling  in  the  eyebrows.—- 
Pressure,  pain  as  from  excoriation,  and  sensation  of  burning  in  the  eyes, 
and  in  the  eyelids,  esp.  on  closing  them,  and  on  reading,  or  in  the 
evening  by  candle-light. — Sensation  of  swelling  in  the  eyes,  as  from  much 
weeping. — Dryness  of  the  eyes. — Lachrymation  on  reading.— A  quantity  of 
tears  rush  from  the  dim  eyes  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  read. — Lachrymation  in 
the  room ;  not  in  the  open  air. — Heating  and  lancinating  pains  in  the  eyes 
after  surgical  operations. — Nocturnal  agglutination  of  the  eyelids. — ^Visible 
quivering  of  the  eyelids.— Heaviness  and  cramp-like  contractions  of  the  eye- 
lids.—Nocturnal  cramps  in  the  eyelids. — Constant  winking  of  the  eyes 
(inclination  to  wipe  the  eyes,  as  if  a  pellicle  of  gum  were  drawn  over  them). 


CROCUS  609 

—Pupils  dilated. — Constant  necessity  to  rub  the  eyes. — Confused  sight,  as 
when  looking  through  a  veil,  esp.  in  the  evening,  when  reading  by  candle- 
light— When  reading,  the  white  paper  seems  of  a  pale  rose  colour. — Spark- 
ling before  the  eyes. — Sudden  flashes  like  electric  sparks  (during  the  day). 

4.  £ars.--Otalgia,  similar  to  a  cramp. — ^Tinkling  in  the  ears,  in  the 
evening,  after  lying  down. — Buzzing  in  the  ears  with  hardness  of  hearing, 
esp.  on  stooping. 

5-  Nose. — Epistaxis  of  black  and  viscid  blood,  often  only  from  one 
nostril  at  a  time ;  with  cold  perspiration  on  the  forehead,  and  occasional 
fainting. — ^Violent  and  frequent  sneezing. 

6.  Face. — Face  of  an  earthy  colour. — Redness  and  paleness,  alternately, 
in  the  face. — Circumscribed,  burning  red  spots  on  the  face. — Burning  heat  in 
the  face,  esp.  in  the  morning. — Lips  cracked  and  ulcerated. — Pulsation  on 
one  side  of  the  face. 

8.  Mouth. — Scraping  and  roughness  in  the  mouth. — ^Accumulation  of 
water  in  the  mouth. — ^Tongue  moist,  and  charged  with  a  white  coating,  with 
erection  of  the  papillae. — ^Unusual  warmth  in  the  mouth. 

9.  Throat. — Sore  throat  as  if  caused  by  elongation  of  the  uvula,  or  as 
if  there  were  a  plug  in  the  throat,  during  deglutition,  and  at  other  times. — 
Scraping  and  roughness  in  the  throat  (in  the  evening  before  and  after,  but 
not  during  the  time  he  takes  his  food). 

10.  Appetite. — Nauseating,  acid,  sweetish  taste. — Nausea,  disappearing 
in  the  open  air. — Sweet  or  bitter  taste  in  the  bottom  of  the  gullet. — Constant 
thirst  in  the  evening,  with  uneasiness  in  the  abdomen  after  drinking. — 
Absence  of  appetite,  with  sensation  of  fulness,  however  little  be  eaten. 

11.  Stomach. — Empty  risings,  while  fasting  in  the  morning. — Pyrosis 
after  eating  with  a  good  appetite. — Heartburn  after  eating. — Qualmish- 
ness, uneasiness,  and  sensation  of  oppression,  in  the  epigastrium. — Burning 
pain  in  the  stomach. — Borborygmi,  and  fermentation  in  the  epigastrium. — 
Great  sinking  sensation  at  epigastrium. — Drawing  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach, 
hack  and  forth,  and  up  and  down. — Some  violent  stitches  in  pit  of  stomach. 

u.  Abdomen. — ^Abdomen  inflated,  with  sensation  of  fulness. — Disten- 
sion of  the  stomach  and  abdomen  (the  stomach  feels  distended  in  the 
morning  before  eating  anything). — Cramp-like  pains  in  the  abdomen. — 
Pinchings  in  the  abdomen  after  drinking  (water). — Pains  in  the  abdomen 
from  taking  cold. — Movements  in  the  abdomen,  stomach,  pit  of  the  stomach, 
arms,  and  other  parts  of  the  body,  as  of  something  alive  hopping  about. — 
Shocks  above  1.  hypochondrium.— Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  inguinal 
region.— Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  abdomen,  with  pressing  towards  the 
uterus. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Itching  and  tingling  in  the  anus. — Creeping  in 
the  anus,  as  from  ascarides. — Obtuse  shooting  in  the  side,  and  above  the  anus. 
—Stitches  and  itching  at  the  anus  (stitch  extending  from  the  anus  through 
the  small  of  the  back  into  the  left  groin,  increasing  during  an  inspiration). 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Excitement  of  the  sexual  desire. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Sensation  of  something  living  and 
moving  in  the  abdomen  ;  abdomen  swollen  ;  (these  symptoms,  when  occur- 
ring in  females,  as  they  often  do  at  the  change  of  life  and  at  other  times,  may 
lead  to  the  erroneous  idea  of  pregnancy). — Urging  of  blood  towards  the 

VOL.  I.  40 


6io  CROCUS 

genital  parts,  as  if  the  menses  were  commencing.— Catamenia  too  frequent 
and  copioos.— Catamenia  painful. — Metrorrhagia  of  black  and  slimy  Wood.— 
Flow  of  blood,  during  the  new  and  full  moon. — Haemorrhage  from  the 
uterus  (during  the  least  movement);  blood  viscid,  black,  smelling  badly 
(miscarriage  third  month).-— Threatened  abortion,  esp.  where  there  is  a 
haemorrhage  of  dark,  stringy  blood. — Post-partum  haemorrhage. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — ^Violent  dry,  shaking  cough,  much  miti- 
gated by  passing  the  hand  over  the  epigastrium. — Cough,  with  spitting  of 
blood.— Disagreeably  smelling  breath. — Difficulty  of  respiration. — Inclination 
to  breathe  deeply,  occasioned  by  a  sensation  of  heaviness  about  the  heart- 
Oppression  o£  the  chest,  with  desire  to  draw  a  long  breath ;  >  by  yawning. 
— On  breathing,  a  sensation  is  felt  as  from  the  vapour  of  sulphur  in  the  throat 

xS«  Chest. — Shootings  in  the  chest  and  esp.  in  the  sides. — Movements, 
as  if  something  alive  were  hopping  in  the  chest — Shocks  in  the  chest,  which 
suspend  respiration. — Peculiar  jerking  pains  in  interior  of  L  breast  (chest)  as 
if  drawn  towards  the  back  by  a  thread. 

XQ.  Heart. — Sensation  of  heat,  which  ascends  to  the  heart,  with  anxiety 
and  difficulty  of  respiration,  mitigated  by  yawnings. — Sensation  of  heaviness 
at  the  heart — Sensation  of  great  emptiness  in  precordial  region. — Drawing  in 
precordial  region  extending  to  stomach.-~Stitches  beneath  heart,  <  on 
inspiration. — Frequent  palpitation. — ^Anxiety  at  heart,  with  sense  of  wealmess 
extending  thence  through  abdomen  to  soles  of  feet 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — Sensation  of  stiffness  in  the  neck  during  move- 
ment.— External  swelling  of  the  neck. — Pulling  in  the  loins,  with  pains  in  the 
groins. — Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  back. 

82.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  in  the  shoulder- joint,  on  moving  the  arms,  as 
if  it  were  out  of  joint,  or  on  the  point  of  being  dislocated ;  cracking. — Numb- 
ness of  the  arms  and  of  the  hands,  with  immobility,  esp.  at  night,  during 
sleep. — Digging  pulling  in  the  forearms. — Heaviness  and  pain,  as  from  a 
bruise  in  the  forearms,  after  any  slight  movement  of  them. — Burning  pricking, 
and  tension  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  as  from  stagnation  of  the  blood,  after 
a  walk  in  the  open  air.— Chilblains  in  the  hands,  and  in  the  fingers. 

83.  Loiter  Limbs. — Sensation  of  weakness  in  the  thighs,  when  seated. 
— ^Violent  cracking  of  the  hip-joint,  of  the  knee-joint  (when  stooping).— 
Nocturnal  tearing  in  the  leg,  with  uneasiness  in  that  part — Pain,  as  from  a 
bruise,  in  the  calves  of  the  legs. — Fatigue  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  (from  stand- 
ing), with  burning  pain  and  tingling. — Chilblains  on  the  toes. 

84.  Generalities. — Movements,  as  of  something  alive  (hopping  and 
jumping)  in  various  parts  of  the  body. — ^Tingling  in  different  parts  of  the 
body. — Convulsive  attacks,  like  chorea  (every  seven  days),  with  laughter, 
dancing  and  leaping,  alternately  with  violent  paroxysms  of  whooping-cough. 
— Sensation  of  relaxation  and  bending  in  the  joints. — Numbness  of  some  of 
the  limbs,  at  night,  during  sleep.-^Amelioration  of  symptoms  in  the  open  air  ; 
several  of  them  appear  at  nighty  and  are  generally  aggravated  in  the  morning, 
— Ebullition  of  blood,  sometimes  throughout  the  body. — Discharge  of  a  black 
viscid  blood  from  different  organs. — Epistaxis. — Dark  stringy  blood  from  the 
nose ;  mucous  blood  from  the  same. — Cough  with  bloody  (dark)  expectora- 
tion.— Heaviness  and  failing  of  the  limbs,  after  light  exercise. — Striking 
alternation  of  the  most  opposite,  physical,  and  mental  symptoms. — Symptoms 


CROTALUS  CASCAVELLA  6ii 

generally  appear  on  the  1.  side. — Excessive  general  weakness,  with  fainting 
fits,  during  movement. — Desire  for  open  air. — Great  depression  in  the  morn- 
ing.—Trembling  of  all  the  limbs. 

25. — Skin. — Pricking,  crawling,  burning,  and  tingling  in  skin. — Red 
(scarlet)  colour  of  the  body. — Chilblains. — Suppuration,  painful,  of  old  wounds 
(old  cicatrised  wounds  open  again  and  suppurate). 

26.  Sleep. — Continuous  yawning  and  desire  to  sleep. — Great  inclination 
to  sleep  in  the  day,  esp.  after  a  meal,  sometimes  in  the  evening. — Sings  while 
sleeping.— Drowsiness,  with  eyes  dull  and  glassy. — Cries,  and  starts,  while 
sleeping. — Frightful,  or  gay  and  pleasant  dreams. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse  accelerated ;  feverish. — Chill  in  the  afternoon,  grow- 
ing worse  in  the  evening,  with  chilliness  extending  from  the  back  into  the 
legs,  with  trembling. — During  the  chill  (and  heat),  thirst. — Chilliness,  only 
of  the  back  part  of  the  body. — Flushes  of  internsd  heat,  with  pricking  and 
tingling  of  the  skin. — Heat,  mostly  of  the  head  and  face,  with  paleness  of  the 
cheeks  and  thirst. — Perspiration  very  little,  and  only  at  night ;  cold  and 
debiUtating. — Perspiration  only  on  the  lower  part  of  the  body. 


Crotalas  Gasoavella. 

A  Brazilian  Rattle-snake.  N,  0.  Crotalidae.  (Proving  by  Mure,  together 
with  effects  reported  by  Higgins.)  Trituration  of  the  virus 
with  Saccharum  lactis. 

GUnieaL — Goitre.  Headache.  Mania.  Meti-orrhagia.  Nose-bleed.  Uterus, 
neuralgia  of. 

Charaoterittios. — ^The  poison  of  Cascavella  is  as  deadly  as  that  of 
the  other  Crotalidae,  and  the  general  symptoms  are  like  tnose  of  the 
other  members  of  the  group,  but  the  mental  symptoms  are  more  pro- 
nounced and  peculiar.  Lancinating  pains  are  frequent,  and  are  <  by 
cold  washings.  Many  symptoms  are  <  at  night.  Pains  in  bones. 
Hallucinations  are  marked  and  peculiar  ;  a  magnetic  state  is  induced. 
There  is  headache  after  sleep  as  with  Lack.  Compare  :  Crotal.  hor., 
Lach.,  &c. 

8TMPT0H8. 

X.  Mind. — Magnetic  state  ;  she  hears  nothing,  and  again  sees  the  spectre 
of  death,  as  a  gigantic  black  skeleton. — Hears  a  strange  voice  to  1.  and  behind 
her,  and  follows  it,  throws  herself  against  closed  doors,  and  scratches  them 
with  her  nails. — ^Attempts  to  throw  herself  out  of  window. — Fancies  her  eyes 
are  falling  out. — He  fancies  he  hears  groans. — Thoughts  dwell  on  death. 
—Fright  at  night  about  indefinite  things.— Clairvoyant.— Anxiety  and  in- 
quietude.— Involuntary  groaning. 

8.  Head. — Entire  skull  compresses  the  brain  like  an  iron  helmet. — Sen- 
sation as  if  something  alive  were  walking  inside  the  head  in  a  circle. — Head- 
ache, epistaxis  and  great  excitement,  caused  by  starting  out  of  sleep. — Shocks 


6i2  CROTALUS  CASCAVELLA 

in  head  which  almost  throw  her  off  her  balance.— Acute  lancinations  in  r. 
temple. — Sensation  as  if  a  red-hot  iron  were  stuck  into  vertex. 

3.  Eyes. — Feels  a  blur  before  her  eyes. — Dazzling  blue  light. — Pressive 
sensation  of  r.  eyeball,  which  felt  as  if  drawn  out. — L.  eye  feels  as  if  drawn 
towards  temple. — Cutting  sensation  all  round  eyeball  as  if  it  was  being  taken 
out  with  a  pen-knife. 

4.  £ars« — Swelling  of  r.  ear. — ^Very  deaf. — Buzzing  in  ears  while  going 
downstairs. 

5.  Nose.— Bloody  serum  runs  from  nose. — Epistaxis  of  bright  blood.— 
Tip  of  nose  feels  drawn  up  as  by  a  string  and  fastened  to  centre  of  forehead 
— Smell,  like  that  of  the  snake ;  as  of  a  hospital. 

6.  Face. — Face  red ;  or  yellow. — Crawling  sensation  in  face. — Difficult 
to  move  lips. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  scarlet  red ;  paralysed. — Pain  in  tongue  and  larynx 
extending  to  abdomen. — Burning  and  prickling  at  tip. — Itching  of  tongue- 
Thick,  viscid,  dark  saliva. — Discharge  of  white  mucus  from  mouth. — ^Taste, 
very  salt ;  of  onions  ;  putrid. — Speech  difficult. 

g.  Throat. — Feeling  of  dust  in  throat ;  of  lump. — Burning  ;  constric- 
tion; formication. — Constrictive  pain  as  if  a  string  were  tied  round  thyroid 
body. — Pain  in  oesophagus  extending  to  abdomen. — Swallowing  difficult. 

11.  Stomach. — Great  desire  for  snow,  without  wanting  either  water  or 
wine. — Feeling  of  coldness  in  stomach  after  eating. — Sensation  of  an  opening 
in  stomach  through  which  air  passes. — Each  mouthful  of  food  falls  suddenly 
into  stomach,  like  a  stone,  with  pain  felt  even  in  the  back. — Epigastrium  sen- 
sitive, cannot  bear  clothing. — ^Violent  blow  in  epigastrium. 

12.  At>domen. — Feeling  as  if  a  peg  were  sticking  in  middle  of  liver. — 
Weight  at  diaphragm  ;  and  in  hypogastrium. — Sensation  of  a  band  round 
abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Prolapsus  ani ;  urging  and  tenesmus,  followed 
by  discharge  from  anus  of  mucus  like  white  of  egg, — Yellowish  diarrhoea. — 
Obstinate  constipation. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.  —  Copious  urination.  —  Involuntary  emissions 
during  sleep. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Violent  lancinations  in  uterus  when  wash- 
ing with  cold  water  ;  terrible  lancinations  if  the  water  is  warm,  with  weight  in 
uterus. — Lancinations  like  knife-stabs  in  uterus  and  anus,  esp.  when  washing 
with  cold  water. — Intermitting  metrorrhagia  (vermilion-coloured). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Dry  cough  at  night  from  tickling  in  throat 
— Green  expectoration  in  morning. — SufiFocative  feeling  with  dread  of  another 
attack. 

18.  Chest. — Intolerable  pains  in  thorax. — Sensation  as  if  head  and  chest 
were  compressed  by  iron  armour. — Sensation  of  water  in  chest,  with  efforts  to 
throw  it  up,  and  faint  feeling  as  if  heart  were  dipped  in  a  liquid. — Bone-pain 
and  swelling  of  1.  clavicle. — Stitches  in  1.  side  on  drawing  breath. 

19.  Heart. — Feeling  as  if  heart  were  beating  from  above  downwards.— 
Palpitation  if  any  one  stands  at  her  r.  side. — Faintness  >  in  open  air. 

ao.  Neck  and  Back. — Full  feeling  in  carotids. — Pain  in  sacro-lumbar 
articulation. 

21.    Limbs. — All  limbs  tremble  and  are  weary. 


CROTALUS   HORRIDUS  613 

«.  Upper  Limbs. — Knife-stabs  under  r.  axilla,  arresting  breathing. — 
Cramp  in  arms. — Pain  in  palm  of  hands  extending  to  wrist, — Numbness  and 
swelling  of  arms. 

^3.  Lovrer  Limbs. — Sensation  as  if  r.  hip,  from  hip  to  heel,  were 
shortened;  this  sensation,  though  illusory,  causes  him  to  limp. 

•5.  Skin. — Skin  red. — Eruption  of  small  red  pimples. — Prickling  formi- 
cation,  itching. 

a6.    Sleep. — Somnolence. — Dreams  of  corpses  and  ghosts. 

•7.    Fever. — General  coldness,  not  relieved  by  energy. — Feet  icy  cold. 


Grotalas  Horridas. 

Rattle-snake.  N.  O.  Crotalidae.  The  Rattle-snake  of  North  America. 
Symptoms  of  C.  Durissus  as  well  as  C.  Horridus  are  included 
in  the  pathogenesis.  Trituration  of  sugar  of  milk  saturated 
with  the  venom.    Solution  of  the  venom  in  glycerine. 


L — ^Amblyopia.  Apoplexy.  Appendicitis.  Bilious  fever.  Boils.  Can- 
cers. Carbuncles.  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.  Chancre.  Ciliary  neuralgia.  Con- 
vobions.  Delirium  tremens.  Dementia.  Diphtheria.  Dysmenorrhoea.  '  Dyspep- 
sia. Ears,  discharges  from.  Ecchymosis.  Epilepsy.  Eyes,  affections  of.  Erysi- 
pelas. Face,  eruption  on  ;  distortion  of.  Hsematuria.  Hatmorrhagic  dia- 
thesis. Headache.  Heart,  affections  of.  Herpes.  Hydrophobia.  Intestinal 
haemorrhage.  Jaundice,  Keratitis.  Liver,  disorders  of.  Lungs^  affections  of, 
Blastitis.  Measles.  Milk-leg.  Meningitis,  Ovaries,  affections  of.  Ozasna. 
Palpitation.  Peritonitis.  Perityphlitis.  Phlebitis.  Psoriasis  palmaris.  Purpura, 
Pysemia.  Remittent  fever.  Rheumatism.  Scarlatina,  Sleeplessness.  Small-fox. 
stings.  Sunstroke.  Syphilis.  Tetanus.  Thirst.  Tongue,  inflammation  of  ;  cancer 
of.  Ulcers.  Urticaria.  Vaccination,  effects  of .  Varicosis.  Varicocele.  Vomiting, 
bilious.    White-leg.    Whooping-cough.    Yellow  Fever, 

Oharaeteristios. — ^The  first  regular  proving  of  Croialus  was  made 
by  Hering  and  under  his  direction.  Stokes  also  contributed  a  prov- 
ing ;  but  the  most  complete  account  of  the  remedy  is  to  be  found  in 
the  monograph  of  J.  W.  Hayward,  forming  part  of  Materia  Medica 
Physiological  and  Applied.  This  includes  provings  made  by  Hayward 
and  his  provers.  trotalus  produces  profound  nervous  shock  and 
prostration  with  trembUng,  mental  alienation,  and  disorganisation  of 
the  fluids  and  tissues.  It  causes  bleeding  from  all  orifices  and  sur- 
6ices,  and  it  corresponds  to  the  haemorrhagic  diathesis ;  to  diseases 
caused  by  previous  low  states  of  system,  by  zymotic  or  septic  poison- 
ing, by  abuse  of  alcohol,  &c.  Low,  typhoid  states,  with  oppressed 
nervous  system,  and  degraded  blood-supply  often  re(}uire  it  Neural- 
^  occurring  as  a  sequel  of  septic  toxaemic,  or  even  nuasmatic  disease  ,- 
or  chronic  bilious,  climateric,  or  albuminuric  conditions.  Broken- 
down  constitutions.  The  Crotal,  patient  is  readily  moved  to  tears. 
Weeping  mood  ;  agony,  despair.  In  one  prover  perception  was  so 
clouded  that  she  was  in  danger  of  being  run  over  in  the  street ; 
and  memory  was  so  impaired  that  on  entering  a  shop  she  forgot 
what  she  had  come  for.    Sleepy,  but  cannot  sleep.    Grinds  teeth. 


6i4  CROTALUS   HORRIDUS 

"  Crotal,  is  preferable  in  fluid  haemorrhages,  yellow  skin  (hence  in 
yellow  fever  with  black  vomit),  epistaxis  of  diphtheria.  Naja  has 
more  nervous  phenomena.  Lack,  has  skin  cold — clammy  rather  than 
cold  and  dry ;  haemorrhage,  with  charred  -  straw  sediment ;  and 
more  markedly  ailments  of  the  left  side.  Elaps,  is  preferable  in  otor- 
hoea  and  in  affections  of  the  right  Imig.  The  cobra  poison  (Naja) 
coagulates  blood  into  long  strings.  Crotalus  poison  is  add  ;  the  Viper 
neutral.  The  Rotton-snake  ["  Bird "]  causes  more  sloughing  than 
any  other"  (Hering).  But  Hayward  observed  that  sloughing  is  a 
strong  indication  for  Crotal, ,  and  the  cure  by  this  remedy  of  his  own 
daughter  of  scarlatina  maligna,  with  gangrenous-looking  sore-throat, 
was  a  dramatic  outcome  of  his  researches.  A  case  of  raSle-snake  bite 
and  its  isopathic  cure,  related  by  Dr.  J.  S.  M.  Cha£Fee,  in  Horn.  Ncws^ 
Sept.,  1892,  gives  a  good  general  idea  of  the  action  of  the  venom:  *<  I  was 
called  to  see  James  Wright,  aged  54  years,  who,  while  binding  wheat, 
was  bitten  on  third  finger  of  right  hand  by  a  rattlesnake.  I  found 
him  bleeding  from  the  bitten  finger,  and  from  eyes,  nose,  ears,  mouth, 
rectum  and  urethra ;  pulse  no,  small,  wiry  ;  respiration  40 ;  tempera- 
ture 105  ;  haggard  expression  ;  whole  body  bathed  in  hot  perspiration  ; 
delirium.  This  patient  had  had  the  regular  routine  treatment  of  whisky, 
quinine  and  carbonate  ammonia  for  ninety-six  hours,when  Uie  attendants 
withdrew  and  pronounced  the  case  beyond  the  reach  of  medical  aid. 
A  marked  characteristic  symptom  was  a  mouldy  smell  of  breathy  with 
scarlet  red  tongue,  and  difficult  swallowing.  Great  sensitiveness  of 
skin  of  right  half  of  body,  so  much  so  that  the  slightest  touch  would 
produce  twitching  of  muscles  of  that  side.  I  prescribed  Crotalus 
nor,  30th  trituration,  30  gr.  in  four  omices  of  water,  a  teaspoonful 
every  hour,  until  my  return  visit,  twenty-four  hours  later,  when  I  found 
marked  improvement.  Temperature  normal ;  pulse  full,  soft  and 
regular  ;  delirium  gone  ;  saliva  and  urine  slightly  tinged  with  blood  ; 
appetite  returning,  he  having  asked  for  food  for  the  first  time  since  the 
accident."  The  medicine  was  continued  for  two  more  days,  vfh&x 
recovery  was  practically  complete.  The  action  on  the  right  side 
is  noteworthy,  as  CrotaL  is  predominantly  a  right-side  medicine 
{Lack,  is  more  left) ;  it  acts  strongly  on  the  liver  and  corresponds 
to  jaundice  and  yellow  fever.  Crotalus  has  been  used  with  great 
success  in  the  treatment  of  yellow  fever,  and  also  as  a  prophylactic 
against  it.  For  this,  inoculation  with  diluted  virus  has  been  prac- 
tised. The  pains  of  Crotalus  alternate  rapidly  with  each  other,  and 
frequently  recur  ,*  also  (except  headache)  appear  and  disappear 
suddenly  after  lasting  some  time.  Swelhng  of  whole  body.  Fetor 
of  evacuations  and  discharges.  Haemorrhages  from  all  the  orifices 
and  even  pores  of  the  sldn.  Peculiar  sensations  are  :  as  from  a  blow^ 
on  occiput ;  as  if  tongue  and  all  round  throat  were  tied  up  ;  as  of  a 
plug  in  throat  to  be  swallowed  ;  of  choking ;  as  if  the  heart  turned 
over  like  a  tumbler  pigeon.  Periodicity  marks  many  of  the  symptoms. 
Metastasis  of  er3rsipelas  to  brain.  Many  symptoms  are  <  in  morning 
on  waking  ;  or  wake  the  patient  up  in  the  night.  Orbital  pains  <  in 
evening.  Rest  >,  and  motion  and  exertion  <.  Open  air  >  head  and 
stomach  symptoms.  Cold  air  <  throat  and  respiratory  sjrmptoms. 
Dry  air  <  cough. 


CROTALUS   HORRIDUS  615 

SelationB. — Aniidotcd  by:  Lach.  Its  effects  are  modified  by 
Ammon.,  Camph.,  Opium,  Coffea,  Alcohol,  and  radiant  heat.  Com- 
P^^c  :  C.  Cascavella  (thoughts  dwell  on  dead  and  dreams  of  the  dead) ; 
Tarent-cub.,  Arsen.,  Lauroc.  (tetanus,  whooping-cough) ;  Apis.,  Carb. 
v.,  Silic.  (vaccination  effects)  ;  Camphor  (coldness  ;  Crotal.  has  more 
marked  genuine  collapse  with  confused  speech^,  Hyos.  Op.,  Nux  v., 
Cupr.,  Bell,  (sleepy  but  cannot  sleep) ;  Cad.  s.  (yellow  fever). 

Oansatton.— Fright.  Sun.  Lightning.  Alcohol.  Foul  water 
Noxious  eflBuvia. 

8THPT0H8. 

X.  Mind. — Memory  weak ;  stupid,  cannot  express  himself ;  makes  ridi- 
culous mistakes ;  with  coldness  of  skin. — Inabili^  to  hold  her  mind  to  a 
subject ;  perception  clouded,  on  walking  street  would  have  been  run  over 
but  for  her  sister's  watchfulness  ;  entering  a  shop  she  forgot  what  she  came 
to  purchase. — Torpid,  sluggish,  incoherent,  hesitating,  quiet  indifference. — 
Delirium  :  with  drowsiness  ;  with  wide-open  eyes  ;  loquacious  with  desire  to 
escape ;  delirium  tremens. — Sadness ;  thoughts  dwell  on  death  continually. — 
Oppression  of  brain,  as  if  from  carbonic  acid. — Excessive  sensitiveness,  easily 
moved  to  tears  by  reading.— Weeping,  with  timidity,  fear,  anxiety. — Snappish 
temper. 

2.  Head. — Vertigo :  with  faintness  ;  with  weakness  and  trembling ;  with 
pale  face ;  epileptic ;  auditory  cardiac  with  soft,  weak  pulse ;  >  resting  head ; 
with  venous  congestion  and  degraded  blood  ;  with  dilated  pupils  from  light- 
ning, anasmia,  or  sunstroke ;  from  fright. — Fainting  on  assuming  upright  posi- 
tion.— Dizziness  and  fainting  with  occipital  headache. — ^Apopletic  convulsions  : 
at  outset  of  zymotic  diseases ;  in  inebriates. — Awakes  in  morning  with  head- 
ache over  eyes. — Headache  extending  into  eyes. — Dull,  heavy  pain  and  heat 
over  eyes  and  in  sides  of  nose  ;  >  walking  in  open  air. — Severe  pains  in  r.  eye 
and  top  of  head,  on  r.  side  down  back  of  neck  at  intervals. — ^While  sitting  in 
chair,  heaviness  of  head  came  on  so  much  that  head  felt  as  if  it  would  tumble 
about,  as  if  muscles  of  neck  were  too  weak  to  support  it,  and  needed  the  help 
of  the  hands. — Dull,  heavy  throbbing  occipital  headache,  faint  spells ;  pain  as 
from  a  blow  in  occiput. — ^Violent  itching  of  scalp ;  eruptions,  pustules ;  falling 
off  of  hair. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Illusions ;  blue  colo\u*s ;  vanishing  of  sight  while  reading. — 
Blood  exudes  from  eye. — ^Yellow  colour  of  eyes. — ^Tearing,  boring  pain,  as  if  a 
cut  had  been  made  round  the  eye,  sometimes  sticking,  <  morning  and  even- 
ing. 

4.  Ears, — Full  sensation  in  ears. — Deafness ;  illusions  of  hearing;  audi* 
tory  vertigo.— Otorrhoea. — Blood  oozes  from  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis ;  in  zymotic  diseases ;  blood  thin,  dark,  uncoagu- 
lable;  with  flushed  face,  vertigo  or  fainting. — Ozaena  after  exanthemata  or 
S3rphilis. 

6.  Face. — ^Acne ;  of  all  varieties ;  of  masturbation ;  of  drunkards. — Face, 
puffed ;  yellow ;  red. — Neuralgia  of  a  dull  character,  chronic  or  periodic. 
— Parotitis. — Lips  swollen,  stiff,  numb. — Lockjaw.— Copious,  red,  itching, 
papular  eruption  on  face,  esp.  chin,  with  delayed  menses. 

8.    Mouth.— Grinding  of  teeth  during  sleep.^Tongue  and  all  round 


6i6  CROTALUS   HORRIDUS 

throat  during  sleep  feels  tied  up,  cannot  speak  a  word-— Tongue  very  red, 
smooth  and  polished,  feels  swollen. — ^Tongue  :  enormously  swollen ;  pro- 
truded ;  inflammation  of ;  cancer  of,  with  much  tendency  to  haemorrhage  ; 
syphilis  of. — Fetid  breath;  peculiar  mouldy  smell. — Putrid  sore  mouth. — 
Salivation,  bloody  or  frothy. 

Q.  Throat.— Tight  constriction  of  throat — Sensation  of  a  plug  to  be 
swallowed  ,*  as  if  uvula  swollen  or  sti£F ;  as  of  a  dry  spot  or  tickling, 
esp.  1.  side ;  <  on  waking. — ^Impossible  to  swallow  solids. — Gangrenous  or 
diphtheritic  throat  with  much  swelling ;  much  swelling  of  glands,  head 
thrown  up  and  backwards. 

11.  Stomach. — Hunger  with  trembling,  weakness,  and  occipital  head- 
ache.— Unquenchable  burning  thirst  —  Eructations,  sharp,  sour,  rancid. — 
Nausea  on  movement,  bilious  vomiting. — Dark  green  vomiting  imme- 
diately on  lying  on  r.  side  or  back. — Black  vomit — Frequent  faint  sinking, 
hungry  sensation  about  epigastrium  with  trembling  and  fluttering  sensation 
lower  down. — Craving  for  stimulants—Agonising  pain,  restlessness,  coldness, 
weak  pulse. — Cannot  bear  clothes  round  stomach  or  hypochondria. — Haema^ 
temesis,  blood  does  not  coagulate. 

12.  At>doinen. — Stitches  in  region  of  liver  on  drawing  a  long  breath, 
<  by  pressure. — ^Aching  in  liver,  vomiting,  coldness. — ^Violent  pain  in  1.  side 
near  last  ribs  as  if  in  diaphragm. — ^Jaundice;  malignant  jaundice  with 
haemorrhage. — Heat  and  tenderness  of  abdomen,  can  scarcely  bear  clothes 
on. — Swelling. — ^Violent  pain  in  course  of  colon ;  in  region  of  appendix. — 
Bubo. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Stools  :  black,  thin,  like  coffee-grounds,  ofiFen- 
sive;  dark  green,  followed  by  debility;  yellow,  watery  with  stinging  in 
abdomen;  low  spirits  and  indifference  to  everything. — Shuddering  with 
diarrhoea ;  aphonia. — Diarrhoea  from  noxious  effluvia ;  from  septic  matter  in 
food  or  drink  ;  from  high  game ;  summer  diarrhoea. — Dysentery ;  septic ; 
from  foul  water,  food,&c. ;  excessive  flow  of  dark  fluid  blood,  or  involuntary 
evacuations ;  great  debility  and  faintness. — Constipation  with  congestion  to 
head  and  headache.  —  Vomiting,  purging  and  micturition  simultaneously 
caused  by  spasmodic  contractions  with  tenesmus  and  strangury. — ^White 
stools. — Haemorrhage,  dark, -fluid,  uncoagulable. — Haemorrhoids:  great  ten- 
dency to  bleed,  on  using  paper,  on  straining  a  little  at  stool,  or  on  standing ;  in 
pregnant  women  ;  with  menstrual  irregularities ;  with  heart  or  liver  disease ; 
in  inebriates. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Haematuria. — Suppression  or  painful  retention 
of  urine. — Urine  :  scanty,  dark  and  red  with  blood  ;  jelly-like  ;  green-yellow 
from  much  bile  ;  copious  and  light-coloured. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sexual  instinct  increased  with  entire  relaxa- 
tion of  penis. — Sharp  cutting  in  glans. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  a  week  too  soon,  first  preceded 
by  weight  in  head  and  ears,  accompanied  by  pains  in  abdomen  and  back,  and 
cold  feet — ^The  pains  last  some  hours  longer  tiian  usual,  and  go  off  after  two 
days  with  intense  frontal  headache,  which  lasts  from  10  p.m.  to  x  a.m. — Five 
days  before  menses  much  pain  in  h3rpogastrium  and  down  thighs ;  in  region  of 
heart,  1.  arm  and  shoulder-blade ;  with  cold  feet — In  evening,  severe  sharp 
shooting,  rather  burning  pain,  repeated  at  short  intervals ;  apparently  start- 


CROTALUS   HORRIDUS  617 

ing  1.  side  of  womb,  passing  up  to  region  of  transverse  colon,  there  shooting 
or  cutting  across  from  both  sides  to  centre ;  thence  passing  up  1.  side  of  trunk 
to  L  side  of  face  and  temple  as  a  sharp,  cutting,  intermittent,  neuralgic  pain ; 
and  across  middle  of  forehead  there  was  a  heavy,  dull,  continuous  pain  ;  the 
sharp  pain  in  temple  lasted  an  hour  ;  the  dull  pain  only  ceased  on  going  to 
sleep. — Flushing  and  sinking  of  menopause. — Puerperal  fever,  or  convul- 
sions, with  albuminous  and  septic  conditions. — Offensive  lochia. — Inflamed 
breasts. — Phlegmasia  alba  dolens,  <  from  slightest  touch. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness, with  weak,  rough  voice. — Bruised 
pain  from  kuynx  to  chest. — Cough  with  stitch  in  1.  side  and  bloody  expectora- 
tion.— Dry  cough  on  speaking,  <  in  dry  or  cold  air. — Nervous  cough,  esp. 
laryngeal ;  dry  tickling,  constant  choking,  as  if  from  dry,  irritating  vapours,  or 
salt  or  pepper,  or  from  dry  spot  in  larynx,  <  1.  side ;  provoked  by :  cold  or 
dry  air ;  deep  inspiration  ;  speaking ;  by  external  pressure,  which  cannot  be 
borne,  <  on  waking. — ^Whooping-cough,  with  blueness  or  pallor  which  is  long 
in  passing  off,  attacks  followed  by  puffiness  of  face  and  haemorrhagic  spots, 
bloodshot  eyes,  epistaxis,  frothy,  stringy,  bloody  expectorations ;  threatened 
Gedema  and  paralysis  of  lungs. — Excessive  oppression  of  chest. — Burning  in 
chest  with  heat  in  forehead. — Pneumonia  with  tendency  to  gangrene. — Lungs 
seem  passive. — Stitches  in  r.  chest  near  sternum. 

XQ.  Heart. — Much  pain  in  heart,  through  1.  shoulder-blade  and  down  1. 
arm. — Palpitation  with  sore  pain  in  and  about  heart ;  feeling  as  if  heart 
tumbled  over. — Heart  tender  when  lying  on  1.  side. — Pulse  hardly  perceptible. 
—Phlebitis;  varicosis;  varicocele. 

so.  Neck  and  Back— Tearing  pains  from  (r.)  shoulder  to  neck,  <  on 
moving  arm. — Pain  on  top  of  shoulder  and  in  ascending  aorta. — ^Aching  in  r. 
kidney  and  in  stomach. 

81.  Limbs. — Painful  paralytic  sensation. — Rheumatic  and  neuralgic 
pains. — Bruised  pain  in  joints  and  bones. — Heaviness,  as  if  bones  were  made 
of  heavy  wood. — Numb  pain  as  after  cramp  in  anterior  of  fingers  and  in  toes. 
—Contraction  of  flexors. 

28.  Upper  Limbs. — Bruised  pains  in  bone  of  shoulder  in  paroxysms.— • 
Large  inflamed  furuncle  on  r.  upper  arm  near  elbow. — ^Tight,  cord-like  feeling 
extending  from  front  of  1.  elbow  down  front  of  forearm,  with  "round  spots  " 
of  pain  here  and  there  along  front  of  forearm. — ^Tubercle  on  wrist,  near  end 
of  radius,  size  of  large  split-pea,  and  rather  blue  from  sting  of  insect  some 
years  before,  more  pronounced  in  summer  months.— Vesicular  and  pustular 
eruption  about  wrists. — ^Trembling  of  hands. — Hands  (esp.  1.)  go  dead  on 
least  exertion. — ^Violent  spasmodic  pains  in  1.  palm  as  from  bee-sting. — Itching 
and  heat  of  palms. — Oozing  of  blood  from  under  nails. 

9^  Lower  Limbs. — Starting,  jerking,  trembling,  cramps,  numbness. — 
Drawing  suddenly  from  1.  hip  to  foot. — During  and  after  walking,  feels  as  if 
a  tendon  was  drawing  from  sole  of  r.  foot  through  bone  of  leg. — Small  purple 
spots  on  legs. 

85.  Skin. — Itching  stinging  all  over ;  urticaria. — Skin  dry,  stiff  like  thin 
parchment;  usually  cold. — ^Yellow  colour  of  whole  body  (haematic  rather 
than  hepatic  jaundice). — Pietechiae. — ^Vesicles  ;  herpes ;  pimples  ;  boils ;  car- 
buncles ;  burns ;  stings ;  pemphigus ;  ulcers ;  gangrene  ;  felons ;  anthrax. 
—Old  cicatrices  break  out  again. — Poliosis  rheumatica. — Dropsies. 


6i8  CROTON   TIGLIUM 

26.  Sleep.  —Yawning  ;  torpor  ;  sopor. — Drowsiness  with  inability  to 
sleep. — Starting  in  sleep. — Dreams  of  travelling,  of  quarrels ;  of  the  dead. — 
Symptoms  <  after  sleep. 

27.  Fever. — Surface  cold,  esp.  extremities. — Flushes  of  heat  all  over. — 
Sweat :  cold  ;  coloured,  esp.  axillary ;  bloody. — Malignant  scarlatina,  with 
infiltration  of  tissues,  esp.  of  throat. — Low,  bilious  remittents  of  South. — 
Yellow  fever,  haemorrhagic,  oozing  of  blood  from  every  pore,  vomiting  and 
purging  bloody  and  bilious  ;  fainting. — Septic  or  purpuric  fevers. — Cerebro- 
spinal meningitis. 


Groton  Chloral. 

Croton  Chloral-hydrate.    Butyl-chloral-hvdrate.    C4H3  CI3  OH.O. 
Trituration.    Solution  in  alcohol  and  glycerine. 

CllBieaL— Anaesthesia.    Neuralgia. 

GharaoteriBtioB. — Croton  chloral  received  its  name  from  the 
supposition  that  it  contained  Crotonic  acid  (C4  He  O.).  According 
to  Hale  it  is  said  to  possess  the  singular  property  of  producing 
anaesthesia  of  the  brain  and  nerves  of  the  head  without  a£Fecting  the 
sensibility  of  the  rest  of  the  body.  It  has  been  given  allopathically 
in  substantial  doses  in  cases  of  trifacial  neuralgia.  The  patients 
who  were  helped  by  it  had  carious  teeth  and  some  of  them  anaemia. 
In  two  cases  the  pains  were  aggravated  by  it.  In  some  it  caused 
sleep  ;  others  were  eased  but  did  not  sleep. 


Croton  Tigliom. 


Txglium  officinale.    Croton  oil  seeds.    N.  0.  Euphorbiaceae. 
Tincture  of  the  oil  from  the  seeds. 

OlinioftL— Cholera.  Cholerine.  Colds.  Cornea,  opacity  of .  Cough.  Diarrhcta, 
Eai  f  affections  of.  Eczema.  Eyes,  affections  of.  Hypopion.  Keratitis.  Neural^a. 
NifpieSy  painful.    Ophthalmia.    Proctalgia.    Rheumatism.    Rhus  poisoning. 

GhaFaoteriBtioB.— Cro/on  oil  is  best  known  in  its  uses  as  a 
powerful  purgative,  and  as  an  irritant  of  the  skin.  The  characteristic 
stool  of  Croton  is  a  sudden  evacuation  in  one  gush,  like  a  shot  ; 
followed  by  great  prostration.  Colic  before  stool ;  constant  urging  ; 
<  from  eating  and  drinking  and  from  every  movement  The 
evacuation  is  yellowish  or  yellov^sh  green.  On  the  skin  Croton  pro- 
duces erythema,  erysipelas,  eczema,  herpes  pustules.  The  antidote  to 
Croton  is  Ant.  tart.  Croton  antidotes  Rhus  tox.  Some  peculiar  sensa- 
tions are  produced  by  Croton :  "  As  if  the  skin  were  hide-bound/' 
(Also  mentally  hide-bound  ;  can't  think  outside  of  himself.)  <' As  of  a 
string  pulling  from  one  part  to  another ;  from  eyebaU  to  back  of  head ; 


CROTON   TIGLIUM  619 

from  nipple  to  back  with  pain  in  nipple  when  the  child  nurses."  "  As 
if  a  plug  were  forcing  outwards  at  anus."    Cutting,  sticking,  stinging, 
stitching  pains  and  burning  stitches.    Writhing  in  transverse  colon. 
Guernsey  gives  the  skin  indications  thus :   ''  In  any  skin  disease 
which  itches  very  much,  but  the  patient  cannot  bear  to  scratch  very 
hard  as  it  hurts ;  a  very  slight  scratch,  a  mere  rub  suffices  to  aUay 
the  itching.    Erysipelas  that  itches  exceedingly."     He  also  gives  : 
"  Otorrhcea  when  there  is  much  itching."    Teste,  who  was  among  the 
first  to  use  Croton  homoeopathically,  gives  a  very  interesting  account 
of   it.    He  quotes  Trousseau  and  Pidoux  as  saying  that  it  often 
happens  that  eruptions  are  developed  on  parts  not  touched  by  the 
remedy,  in  those  who  have  been  engaged  in  making  Croton  inunctions 
on  patients.    The  face  and  the  scrotum  especially  have  been  thus 
attacked.    The  itching  which  it  causes,  says  Teste,  is  at  first  more 
tingling  than  burning  (the  contrary  taking  place  with  Rhus).     The 
itching  changes  to  burning  (like  the  itching  of  Rhus)  if  it  is  taken  in 
large  doses  or  applied  externally.    The  eruptions  in  which  he  suc- 
ceeded were :  urticaria ;  large  copper-coloured  spots  almost  like  liver- 
spots  ;  small  red  blotches,  not  very  apparent,  in  thighs,  abdomen,  and 
genitals,  of  fifteen  years'  standing — all  accompanied  with  intolerable 
itching.    Two  remarkable  cases  are  recorded  by  Teste.    A  delicate, 
cachectic,  psoric  girl  of  four  had  suffered  for  two  years  without  inter- 
ruption from  a  fetid  discharge  from  the  nose,  less  in  winter  more  in 
summer.    Before  this  she  had  a  vesicular  erution  on  chest  and  neck, 
which  disappeared  of  itself,  being  followed  in  three  or  four  days  by 
the  discharge.      After  the  failure  of  SuL,  Merc,  sol,,  Calc,  on  the 
indication  of  the  previous  eruption  Teste  gave  Croton,  and  in  less 
than  a  fortnight  the  disease  lost  three-fourths  of  its  intensity,  although 
it  was  in  mid-summer.     Six  months  completed  the  cure,  the  only 
other  remedies  given  during  the  time  being  Lob.  u,  and  Kreas.    The 
other  case  was  that  of  a  man  of  forty,  very  fleshy,  who  for  fifteen  years 
had  been  subject  to  attacks  of  gout  returning  every  spring,  except  on 
two  occasions  when  a  most  fatiguing  and  obstinate  exanthem  ap- 
peared instead.    This  consisted  in  an  intense  redness  of  the  whole 
body,  accompanied  with  a  burning  itching,  especially  in  the  hollow  of 
the  hands,  at  the  chest,  and  behind  the  ears.    These  parts  were  the 
seat  of  a  yellowish,  plastic  exudation,  emanating  from  a  multitude 
of  small  vesicles  in  close  contact  with  each  other,  which  were  only 
distinctly  perceived  in  places  where  they  were  less  numerous,  and 
where  a  greater  degree  of  resistance  on  the  part  of  the  epidermis  im- 
parted to  them  a  certain  persistence.    Each  time  this  eruption  broke 
out  it  lasted  three  months  in  spite  of  purgatives  and  the  baths  of 
Bareges  and  Aix  les  Bains.    When  Teste  saw  the  patient  he  had 
neither  gout  nor  eczema,  but  a  dry,  racking,  almost  convulsive  and 
unceasing  cough.    Skin  rather  hot,  thirst,  a  little  headache,  heat  in 
chest,  no  dyspnoea.    Sometimes,  especiaUy  in  the  evening,  but  only 
for  a  few  da3rs,  he  showed  a  tendency  to  syncope.    At  ttie  end  of 
three  weeks,  having  received  no  benefit  from  Teste's  treatment,  the 
patient  took  of  his  own  accord  three  tablespoonfuls  of  the  "  Syrup  of 
White  Poppy,"  at  bedtime.     The  cough  ceased  entirely  for  some 
hours,  and  then  returned  in  its  old  intensity.    But  during  the  inter- 


620  CROTON   TIGLIUM 

mission  the  malady  had  come  out  on  the  skin,  and  at  daybreak  the 
patient  found  himself  covered  from  head  to  foot  with  his  old  horrible 
eczema.  He  was  almost  unrecognisable,  and  in  a  state  of  the  deepest 
anxiety  and  despair.  He  expected  three  or  four  months  of  it  Teste 
now  gave  Croton,  The  itching  disappeared  the  same  day.  Within 
five  or  six  days  there  remained  not  a  trace  of  either  cough  or 
eruption.  As  Uie  patient  removed  from  Paris,  Teste  was  not  able 
to  follow  the  case  in  subsequent  years.  Conrad  Wesselho^t  cured 
a  case  of  proctalgia  in  a  woman  of  thirty  with  CroL  tig.  32.  The 
attacks  came  on  after  stool,  lasting  half  a  day,  and  preventing 
her  from  fulfilling  her  duties  of  teacher.  There  were  no  piles, 
only  sensitiveness  of  rectum  to  touch.  He  was  led  to  the  remedy 
by  having  previously  had  another  patient  who  sufiEered  from  a 
similar  pain  after  using  Croton  pills ;  pain  in  the  rectum  came  on 
with  extreme  intensity  after  straining  at  stool ;  and  the  patient  (also 
a  woman)  was  in  agony  for  three  hours  afterwards,  with  frequent 
tenesmus.  The  pills  were  stopped  and  Nux  v,  given,  and  she  was 
well  in  a  week.  The  eye  symptoms  of  Croton  are  very  strongly 
marked.  Purulent  ophthalmia,  ulceration,  and  hypopion  have  been 
cured  by  it.  Many  of  the  symptoms  of  Croton  spread  from  below 
upwards.  Touch,  pressure  and  motion  <.  <  When  sitting  or 
crouching.  Open  air  <  dizziness  and  faintness.  Drinking  cold 
water  while  heated  =  complete  loss  of  voice.  Hot  milk  <  colic. 
Diarrhoea  is  <  in  summer.  Many  symptoms  are  <  at  night.  > 
After  sleep. 

^^iXon%.—Antidoted  by :  Ant.  t.  Antidote  to  :  Rhus.  Com- 
patible :  K.  bro.  Compare :  Elat,  Verat,  Ricin.,  Euphorb.,  Anac., 
Colch.,  Rhus,  Phos. ;  in  pains  in  breast,  Bry.,  Borax.,  Phelland, 
and  SU. ;  in  faintness  during  stool,  scanty  stools,  Dulc,  Ox.  ac.. 
Petrol.,  Sars.,  Sul.  (stools  not  scanty,  Apis.,  Nux  mosch.,  Puis,,  Spi., 
Ver.) ;  faintness  after  stool,  Nux. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind.  —  Sadness,  sometimes  with  dislike  to  labour;  or  else  with 
anxiety,  and  displeasure  concerning  everything. — Frequent  melancholy.— 
Agitation. — Grumbling,  discontented  humour. — Dislike  to  labour. — Nothing  is 
desired  but  loitering,  and  to  avoid  all  serious  undertakings.  —  Disordered 
aspect,  with  eyes  haggard,  sparkling.— Weakness  of  memory. — Feeling  as 
though  one  cannot  think  outside  of  himself,  "  feels  all  pent  up  "  inside,  and 
no  chance  for  the  thoughts  to  flow  out. 

8.  Head. — Head  confused :  on  rising,  as  if  by  a  cloud,  with  dohiess  and 
pressure  in  the  forehead ;  in  the  forehead,  with  pressure  and  heaviness ;  with 
pressure  in  the  temples ;  in  the  occiput,  sometimes  as  though  it  were  held  in 
a  vice  (on  1.  side),  with  heaviness  in  the  head,  and  digging  in  the  eyes,  with 
fulness,  cloudiness,  and  heaviness  in  the  forehead,  esp.  on  r.  side,  with  pres- 
sure, proceeding  downwards  from  the  occiput  to  the  part  underneath  the  ear, 
with  lancinations. — Giddiness  in  the  head,  as  after  spirituous  liquors.— 
Vertigo  with  dulness  of  the  head,  pale  complexion,  debili^  and  nausea ;  <  in 
the  open  air.— Vertigo  :  with  headache ;  with  heaviness  of  the  head,  so  as  to 


CROTON  TIGLIUM  621 

cause  falling  while  standing  upright ;  hardly  permitting  a  sitting  posture,  esp. 
on  raising  the  eyes ;  with  bewilderment  of  the  head  until  supper-time ;  on 
walking  in  the  open  air  ;  esp.  on  the  r.  side,  with  aching  in  the  eye ;  in  the 
sinciput,  with  draggings  across  the  nose  to  the  forehead. — Headache;  < 
in  the  morning. — Fulness  in  the  head,  with  numbness  and  weight  in  the  fore- 
head, every  day,  and  with  great  heaviness,  which  prevents  reading;  with 
sensation  of  vertigo  and  pressure  in  the  forehead. — Pressure  in  the  head  ;  in 
the  r.  temple  and  the  side  of  the  forehead ;  in  the  sinciput,  and  sometimes 
chiefly  on  the  1.  side;  or  else  with  violent  pains,  throbbings,  and  tension 
proceeding  from  the  forehead,  with  bewilderment  of  the  whole  head,  < 
after  a  meal. — ^Numbness  in  the  orbits,  <  within  doors  and  towards 
night;  above  all  in  the  air. —  Pressure  at  the  occiput.  —  Tension  at  the 
sincipat,  with  pressure  and  dartings. — Squeezing  in  the  temples. — ^Tearings, 
ascending  towards  the  vertex  ;  in  the  forehead,  extending  to  r.  temple,  where 
ttiey  become  lancinations. — Lancinations  in  forehead,  above  r.  eye ;  in  1. 
temple  ;  between  the  occiput  and  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Congestion  in  the 
head,  proceeding  from  the  abdomen,  with  hot  skin  and  perspiration. — Exter- 
nally, pricking  in  the  teguments  of  the  head  ;  tingling  at  the  occiput ;  jerking 
of  the  head ;  burning  at  the  temple,  as  by  live  coals ;  senstiveness  of  the 
teguments  of  the  head  :  the  hat  gives  pain. 

3.  Eyes. — Lancinations,  esp.  in  1.  eye;  jerkings  and  dartings  in  the 
angle  of  the  1.  eye  ;  with  frequent  contractions  and  jerking  of  the  whole  eye ; 
contractive  pains  in  the  1.  eyelids,  esp.  towards  the  internal  angle. — Sensation 
as  of  a  string  pulling  eyeball  back  into  head. — Stinging  in  the  eyeball. — 
Itching  of  the  eyelids. — Irritation  of  the  conjunctiva. — Inflammatory  redness 
of  the  1.  conjunctiva. — Ulceration  of  the  conjunctiva,  contraction  of  the  pupil, 
and  profuse  lachrymation  and  dimness  of  the  cornea. — Hypopion. — Inflam- 
mation of  the  eye,  in  which  a  drop  of  oil  has  been  introduced,  extending  over 
the  whole  side  of  the  face. — Burning  pain  in  the  inflamed  eye,  with  burning 
in  the  ear,  vertigo,  and  fainting. — CEdematous  swelling  of  the  eyelids. — Small 
vesicles  round  the  eye. — Swelling  of  a  subcutaneous  gland  below  the  inferior 
r.  eyelid,  with  redness  of  the  skin. — Much  quivering  of  the  eyelids. — Lachry- 
mation.— Sight  bedimmed,  as  though  crossed  by  a  fog  or  by  smoke ;  cloud 
before  the  weak  eye ;  before  both  ;  the  sight  is  lost,  sometimes  as  by  vertigo 
(in  a  room),  or  else  by  heaviness  and  weakness  of  the  eyes. 

4.  Bars. — Forcing  pain  in  the  1.  ear ;  sometimes  spasmodic  and  deeply 
seated. — Dull  aching  in  the  direction  of  the  two -auditory  ducts. — Pressure 
and  revolving  sensation  towards  the  orifice  of  the  ear,  with  confusion  of  the 
head. — Lancinations  below  1.  ear. — Hardness  of  hearing  of  r.  ear. — Loss  of 
hearing  for  a  short  time. — Noise  in  the  ear. 

5.  Nose. — Inflammation  of  the  nose,  and  of  the  whole  face. — Burning 
in  the  nostrils. — Eruption  on  the  septum,  with  redness  of  the  part,  pain  on 
touching  it,  and  small  yellow  vesicles,  which,  at  a  later  period,  form  crusts, 
and  at  last  desquamate. — Internal  irritation  of  the  nose  ;  dryness ;  cessation 
of  respiration  by  the  nose. — Increase  of  nasal  secretion  ;  thin  coryza. 

6.  Face. — Paleness  and  coldness  of  the  face. — Increased  heat,  some- 
times burning,  esp.  in  the  cheeks ;  or  else  over  the  whole  face,  remaining 
several  days. — Inflammation  of  the  face  and  of  the  nose ;  swelling  of  the  face ; 
eruption  of  pimples. — Burning  in  the  lips ;  sometimes  in  the  commissures. 


622  CROTON  TIGLIUM 

principally  with  swelling  of  the  external  edges ;  tension  in  the 
of  the  lips ;  dryness  of  the  lips,  sometimes  with  chaps,  or  else  experienced 
cniefly  in  the  evening,  with  tension. — Dragging  in  the  L  maxillary  artico- 
lation  ;  swelling  of  one  gland,  which  is  painful  on  being  touched. 

7.  Teeth. — In  a  hollow  molar,  pain,  as  of  excoriation,  while  eating. — 
Gums  bleed,  when  cleaning  the  teeth ;  interior  swelling,  sometimes  painfuL 

8.  Mouth. — ^The  interior  of  the  mouth  as  if  burnt ;  heat  within ;  dry- 
ness, with  scraping  in  the  throat — ^Accumulation  of  water,  which  sometimes 
escapes  at  the  corners  of  the  mouth. — ^Augmented  secretion  of  saliva,  with 
sensation  of  heat  in  the  mouth. — Frequent  salivation. — Irritation  of  the 
salivary  glands,  causing  frequent  expectoration,  occasioning  a  sensation  of 
burning  and  an  acridity,  with  rancid  taste  in  the  throat,  which  cease  only 
after  experiencing  symptoms  in  the  rectum  akin  to  those  which  follow  an 
evacuation. — ^Tongue  loaded  with  a  white  coating. — Sensitiveness  of  the  tip  of 
the  tongue. — Swelling  of  the  palate ;  tickling,  scraping,  and  burning  at  the 
junction  of  the  soft  and  solid  parts. 

g.  Throat. — Sensation  of  a  peg,  or  a  morsel,  in  the  throat,  whi^  can- 
not be  swallowed — Pulling  in  the  throat. — Scraping,  disagreeable  taste  in 
the  fauces. — Scraping  in  the  throat,  which  provokes  hawking. — ^Bnrning  in 
the  fauces  and  pharynx. — Burning  in  the  gullet  and  the  larynx,  preceded 
by  a  sensation  of  roughness,  followed  by  burning ;  removed  on  taking  a 
breath. — Burning  in  the  throat,  as  by  pepper ;  continuous,  with  constriction ; 
much  >  after  a  short  sleep ;  >  during  inspiration,  <  during  expiration ; 
heat  in  the  throat  and  the  oesophagus,  extending  into  the  stomach. — Uvula 
red  and  elongated. — Painful  swelling  of  sub-maxillary  glands  and  tonsils. 
— Dryness  of  the  gullet,  with  irritation,  as  though  it  were  inflamed ; 
with  difficulty  in  swallowing;  with  expectoration  of  mucus,  which  is  acid^ 
like  vinegar. — Copious  expectoration  of  viscid  mucus,  with  an  add  taste. 

10.  Appetite  and  Taste.— Taste :  of  almonds;  sickly,  with  painful 
tingling  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue ;  clammy,  the  tongue  being  charged  with 
coating  ;  sweet-bitter,  and  as  though  the  tip  of  the  tongue  were  acted  upon 
by  electricity ;  bitter ;  acid,  acrid,  ascending  from  the  stomach. — Appetite 
diminished,  as  well  as  thirst ;  no  appetite ;  loathing ;  repugnance  to  beer  ; 
inability  to  eat,  even  milk  porridge,  because  of  loathing  and  nausea;  after 
taking  milk,  great  repugnance  and  nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit.— ^After  a 
meal,  pain  in  the  abdomen. 

11.  Stomach. — Risings,  with  nausea,  sometimes  to  a  greater  extent  after 
drinking,  or  else  with  prostration  of  strength ;  with  loathing. — Regurgitations : 
of  water;  of  bile,  in  the  evening. —  Hiccough. —  Excessive  nausea,  with 
vanishing  of  sight,  sweat  on  the  forehead,  distension  of  the  abdomen,  exces- 
sive gagging,  vertigo;  <  after  drinking. — Nausea,  and  inclination  to 
vomit ;  frequently ;  with  continuous  loathing  and  uneasiness ;  with  disgust ; 
continual,  with  coldness,  regurgitation  of  water  with  salivation ;  with  vertigo 
and  want  of  appetite ;  which  hardly  permits  writing ;  in  the  abdomen,  with 
retching ;  frequent  efEorts  to  vomit,  with  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth. 
—Vomiting  :  with  nausea ;  of  coffee  taken ;  of  mucus,  with  bitterness  in  the 
mouth  ;  of  a  yellowish  liquid,  having  the  smell  of  oil,  and  a  smooth  taste  like 
oil ;  after  a  meal,  of  water,  of  mucus,  and  of  bread,  with  continual  nausea ; 
bitter  in  the  evening,  of  aliments  taken  at  supper,  preceded  by  nausea,  fulness, 


CROTON  TIGLIUM  623 

and  pressure  of  the  stomach,  followed  by  sweat  upon  the  face  ;  at  night,  of 
an  acid  liquidi  of  an  acrid  smell,  preceded  by  nausea ;  violent,  of  aliments 
taken  into  the  stomach,  on  walking  in  the  open  air  (after  great  nausea),  or 
else  of  water  following  nausea,  <  after  a  slice  of  bread  and  butter; 
violent,  sudden,  of  a  frothy  water,  yellowish  white,  with  spasmodic  efforts  ; 
vomiting  of  bile, — Fulness  :  with  pamf  ul  sensitiveness  of  the  stomach  ;  aching, 
sometimes  with  nausea  and  want  of  appetite. — Painful  sensitiveness  of  the 
stomach  ;  to  the  touch  ;  with  sensation  of  emptiness  and  nausea,  and  inclina- 
tion to  vomit,  until  the  afternoon. — Pressure  at  the  stomach  :  with  movement 
in  the  abdomen ;  with  tickling ;  with  anguish ;  with  uneasiness  in  the 
abdomen  ;  with  squeezing,  anguish,  and  excessive  uneasiness,  or  else  accom- 
panied by  tension. — Pressure  in  die  pit  of  stomach.— Contractions  in  the 
stomachy  with  pressure  in  the  pit,  and  discharge  of  water  from  the  eyes  and 
nose  ;  spasmodic  movements  as  if  about  to  vomit,  with  nausea ;  retraction  of 
the  upper  part  of  the  stomach. — Scraping  in  the  stomach ;  burning,  some- 
times as  if  by  hot  coals ;  burning  and  heat  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach ;  bor- 
borygmi,  and  weight  upon  the  chest. 

Z2.    Abdomen. — In  the  spleen  :  lancinations ;  aching. — ^Violent  pains  in 
the  abdomen  and  the  stomach ;  the  lower  portion  of  the  abdomen  affected ; 
and  painful  abdominal  symptoms  >,  after  taking  milk  porridge ;  constant 
pain  in  the  abdomen,  on  touching  the  navel,  with  noise  in  the  abdomen, 
and   bellyache;   pain   in    the   umbilical   region   and   lower    part   of   the 
abdomen  ;  the  pains  in  the  umbilical  region  are  <  by  the  touch,  or  on 
lying  down,  on  which  occasion  they  sometimes  extend  to  the  anus,  which 
then  protrudes. — Colic  in  the  umbilical  region,  sometimes  more  particularly 
in  the  evening,  and  with  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  followed  by  an  evacua- 
tion.— Pain  as  if  the  intestines  were  twisted  in  the  umbilical  region,  followed 
by  tearings  in  the  1.  side. — ^Violent  spasmodic  pains  in  the  abdomen,  more 
violent  when  in  a  crouching  posture  (as  when  at  stool),  than  when  walking  or 
standing  upright. — Tension  in  the  abdomen  :  between  the  navel  and  the  pit 
of  the  stomach ;  painful  and  spasmodic  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen, 
esp.  on  being  seated ;  violent,  with  inflation  of  the  whole  abdomen,  evacua- 
tion, emission  of  fetid  wind,  and  great  aggravation  of  all  the  symptoms  on 
being  seated  ;  in  the  umbilical  region  on  being  seated,  with  pressure  in  the 
anus.  —  Pressure  in  the  abdomen  :   on  going  out,  ascending  towards  the 
stomach,  with  sudden  nausea,  and  with  pinchings  and  tension  at  tlie  navel ; 
above  the  navel  with  squeezing.  —  Pinching  in  the  abdomen  :  with  bor- 
borygmi  ;  in  the  umbilical  region,  sometimes  more  particularly  while  walking ; 
with  cuttings,  sometimes  chiefly  in   the  umbilical  region  and  1.  side  of 
abdomen  ;  with  pressure  on  the  anus ;  violent  on  awaking,  with  rumbling  in 
the  abdomen  soon  after,  emission  of  fetid  wind,  with  great  urging  to  goto  stool, 
and  evacuation  with  abdominal  cuttings  and  spasms. — Cutting  pains,  with 
pinching,  in  the  transverse  colon,  renewed  after  every  evacuation;  com- 
mencing at  the  navel,  almost  stopping  respiration,  and  causing  a  lateral 
bending  of  the  body ;  above  the  navel,  as  with  knives,  disappearing  after  an 
evacuation  ;  in  the  umbilical  region  and  the  intestines  at  the  same  time,  or 
else  followed  by  an  evacuation ;  below  the  stomach,  in  the  abdomen. — 
Tearings  in  the  abdomen  during  a  meal ;  in  the  r.  side  of  the  abdomen,  with 
incisive  pains  below  the  stomach ;  in  the  colon ;  in  umbilical  region  after  a 


624  CROTON   TIGLIUM 

meal. — Lancinations  in  the  abdomen  :  above  the  navel ;  to  the  1.  of  the  navel ; 
in  the  caecum ;  in  the  region  of  the  sigmoid  flexure. — Excoriating  pains  in 
the  inferior  part  of  the  abdomen,  while  coughing* — Sensation  as  if  tepid  water 
were  moving  in  the  intestines,  esp.  on  the  1.  side. — Sensation  of  coldness  in 
abdomen, — Heaviness  :  in  the  superior  part  of  the  abdomen,  with  nausea ;  in 
the  lower  part,  with  retraction  of  the  abdomen. — Fulness  in  the  abdomen  : 
with  borborygmi  and  colic ;  with  pinching ;  with  tension  and  colic  in  the 
umbilical  region. — Inflation  of  the  abdomen  every  day,  with  tension  and 
borborygmi,  <  while  walking. — Movement  in  the  abdomen ;  fluctuation 
as  if  water  were  there ;  borborygmi,  sometimes  on  the  1.  side  ;  rumbling,  esp. 
in  the  small  intestines. — Externally,  tingling  heat  in  the  teguments  of  the 
abdomen. — Tension  and  pain  in  the  groins. — Emission  of  wind :  before  a 
stool ;  with  borborygmi  in  the  abdomen ;  frequent,  sometimes  with  lancina- 
tions, or  else  such  as  precede  a  soft  stool ;  fetid  wind. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.  — ^Urgent  inclination  to  go  to  stool :  with  ram- 
bling and  pinching  in  the  abdomen ;  as  from  heat  and  agitation  in  the 
abdomen  ;  with  pressure  on  the  anus,  as  in  diarrhoea  ;  in  the  morning  in  bed, 
and  after  getting  up,  stool,  followed  by  excoriating  pain  in  the  anus  ;  sudden, 
immediately  after  rising  or  commencing  exercise  ;  so  pressing  that  the  closet 
cannot  be  reached  soon  enough. — Stools:  soft,  like  pap,  sometimes  with 
burning  at  the  anus  ;  viscid,  of  good  consistence,  mucous,  aqueous,  sometimes 
copious  and  frequent,  even  at  night,  or  else  with  lancinations  in  the  anus ; 
liquid,  with  scraping  at  the  anus  ;  yellow,  loose,  sometimes  after  vomiting,  or 
else  following  sweat,  mucous,  with  tenesmus  ;  dark  green,  liquid,  followed  by 
long-continued  debility ;  now  firm,  afterwards  bilious  mucous,  and  finally 
aqueous  ;  brown,  pap-like,  with  mucus,  or  else  followed  by  t>orborygmi  in  the 
1.  side  :  gre3dsh-green,  dirty  brown,  quick,  and  ejected  by  one  effort. — Stool 
as  soon  as  he  drinks  (the  child  has  a  stool  and  colic  as  soon  as  it  nurses). — 
After  taking  coffee,  the  stools  (frequent)  cease. — ^After  the  stool,  drawings  and 
pressure  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen,  and  the  umbilical  region. — 
Ejection  of  ascarides,  and  of  the  taenia  solium. — Pressure  and  tenesmus  in 
the  rectum,  with  cutting  pains  going  round  it  on  being  seated. — In  the  anus  : 
burning,  which  sometimes  does  not  permit  the  patient  to  remain  seated,  with 
swelling  of  the  surrounding  parts,  or  with  pulsations  and  lancinations; 
scraping  after  a  stool ;  pains  of  excoriation  and  burning  after  taking  exercise, 
contractive  and  lancinating  pains  in  walking ;  pain  as  if  a  peg  were 
endeavouring  to  pass  out ;  pain  of  excoriation  after  the  stool,  with  prolapsus 
ani,  and  inclination  to  go  to  stool,  and  on  compressing  the  abdomen,  pressure 
on  the  anus  extending  to  the  genital  parts  and  the  glans ;  with  this,  much 
anguish,  oppression,  sweat  on  the  forehead,  and  nausea,  with  loss  of  sight  and 
hearing ;  rest  soothes  the  pains. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — In  the  r.  renal  region,  violent  lancinations* 
which  cut  short  respiration. — Inclination  to  urinate,  sometimes  Immediately 
after  having  made  water ;  increased  emission,  sometimes  with  frequency, 
even  every  half -hour. — Urine  :  yellow,  copious ;  cloud  in  the  urine,  which  is 
sometimes  turbid;  after  the  cloud  has  disappeared,  brown  crj^tallisations 
float  in  its  place ;  urine  pale,  frothy,  in  the  morning  ;  pale,  with  white  sedi- 
ment, in  the  daytime ;  orange-yellow  pale  at  night,  a  little  turbid  and  fleecy 
at  the  bottom  5  high-coloured,  fiery-red,  and  very  fleecy,  night  and  mom* 


CROTON  TIGLIUM  625 

ing ;  blood-red,  depositing  much  mucus  at  the  bottom,  which,  on  being 
disturbed,  forms  elongating  threads ;  thick  sediment  in  the  urine,  afterwards 
urine  witii  a  streaked  coating. — ^When  urinating,  heat  in  the  urethra,  or  in 
the  glans. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Penis  painful,  with  redness  of  the  glans, 
and  lancinations  in  the  urethra. — Pullings  in  the  1.  spermatic  cord,  hindering 
walking.— L.  testicle  retracted,  the  r.  pendant,  and  flaccid.-— Tetter-like  erup- 
tion on  the  scrotum. — Erections. 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs.--Catamenia  too  scanty,  or  altogether  sup- 
pressed, with  dyspnoea  and  palpitation  of  the  heart,  e^p.  on  going  to  bed. — 
Pain  and  stitches  through  the  breasts  into  the  chest,  and  extending  to  the 
back,  as  soon  as  the  child  begins  to  nurse. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Hoarseness.— Voice  hoarse,  sometimes  as 
from  a  cold,  or  with  necessity  for  hawking. — ^Tickling  in  the  larynx. — Secretion 
and  accumulation  of  rattling  mucus  in  the  larynx,  sometimes  increased,  with 
tickling,  or  chiefly  in  the  evening. — Bronchial  catarrh. — Pressure  on  the 
larynx,  esp.  on  1.  side. — Cough  :  with  frequent  hawking ;  continual,  sometimes 
with  mucus  in  the  bronchia,  difficult  to  be  detached,  with  expectoration  of 
mucus,  esp.  in  the  morning,  or  else  in  the  evening,  and  with  pressure  on  the 
chest. — Mucus  continuing  in  the  lungs,  with  dyspnoea  and  wheezing  on 
breathing  deeply. — ^When  coughing,  soreness  in  the  abdomen. 

x8«  Chest. — Respiration  impeded  by  aching  in  the  abdomen  ;  difficult, 
with  oppression  ;  sometimes  with  anguish. — Respiration  laboured  sometimes 
with  fulness  and  anguish  in  the  chest. — Respiration  short,  after  a  stool. — 
Dyspnoea  aggravated  on  going  up  stairs.— Chest  painful  on  pressing  upon  it. 
— Fulness  and  painful  sensitiveness  of  the  two  cavities,  with  burning  lancina- 
tions on  L  side,  and  towards  the  shoulder-blades,  or  else  with  pressure  and 
burning  on  r.  side,  and  on  1. — Particular  uneasiness  in  the  chest  and  abdomen. 
— ^Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  chest. — Pressure  on  the  chest :  in  breathing 
deeply ;  violent  in  the  evening ;  deep  in  the  middle  of  the  chest. — Lancina- 
tions in  the  chest :  below,  to  r.,  during  an  inspiration ;  sometimes  on  1.  side, 
esp.  in  the  evening. — Pulsation,  backwards  from  the  r.  side. — Burning  in  the 
chest,  sometimes  violent,  extending  to  the  intestines. 

19.  Heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart :  sometimes  violent,  such  as  may  be 
felt  externally ;  during  coition ;  after  a  meal,  esp.  on  lying  down ;  sudden 
throbbing  in  the  region  of  the  aorta. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  difficulty 
of  breathing,  esp.  on  going  up  stairs. — Frequent  lancinations  in  the  region  of 
the  heart,  sometimes  more  esp.  during  inspiration  ;  frequent  jerkings  towards 
the  heart ;  the  1.  ventricle  of  the  heart  is  chiefly  affected. — Externally,  pulsa- 
tion, and  throbbing-bubbling  in  (r.)  side  of  chest ;  tearing  pains. 

90.  Neck  and  Back, — In  the  cervical  vertebrae,  pressure  and  pulling. — 
In  the  lumbar  region,  tingling  as  from  insects. — Lancinations  in  r.  kidney. 

22.  Upper  Limbs, — ^Aching  in  r.  shoulder,  lancinations  in  1.  — In  the 
arms,  heaviness  and  lassitude ;  tensive,  contusive  pain  ;  sensation  of  heaviness 
and  weariness ;  tearing  in  r.  arm. — In  1.  elbow,  perforating  sensation  in  the 
joint — In  r.  forearm,  pulling,  tension,  pressure  and  contusive  pain ;  tearing 
in  1.  fore-arm  ;  pullings  in  the  r.  hand. — In  the  fingers  of  1.  hand,  jerkings ; 
pollings  and  tearings  in  the  middle  fingers  of  1.  hand  ;  digging  pains  in  the 
last  phalanges  of  the  fingers. 

VOL.  L  41 


626  CROTON   TIGLIUM 

^  Lower  Limbs. — In  1.  coxo-femoral  articulation,  tensive  pain,  felt 
esp.  when  rising  from  a  sitting  posture ;  puUings  and  swellings  in  \he  buttocks, 
and  in  the  anus,  after  taking  exercise. — In  the  legs,  lassitude  and  heaviness.— 
In  the  thighs,  tension  and  contusive  pain  ;  itching  burning  in  1.  leg,  also  sen- 
sation of  paralysis.—- Digging  and  tearing  in  the  knees ;  tension  and  pricking  ; 
arthritic  digging. — In  1.  leg,  pricking  ;  tearing ;  jerking  during  after-dinner 
sleep ;  hot  itching  of  r.  tibia.— Weight  and  aching  in  the  articulation  of  the 
r.  foot ;  lancinations  in  both  feet,  sometimes  as  if  they  were  dislocated ; 
jerking  and  teeing  in  the  sole  of  the  1.  foot— In  the  toes,  lancinations  and 
tearing,  esp.  in  the  great  toes. 

84.  Generalities. — General  lassitude  and  depression.  —  Pains  in  the 
limbs. — General  uneasiness,  ill-feeling,  with  lassitude,  followed  by  inclination 
to  sleep,  <  on  lying  down,  with  loss  of  sight  and  hearing;  drops  of 
sweat  on  the  forehead,  and  a  feeling  of  the  impossibility  of  reaching  the 
nearest  house,  with  vertigo,  paleness  of  face,  lassitude  and  depression,  striving 
to  reach  the  open  air,  where,  however,  the  malady  is  increased. — Sensation 
as  if  the  body  were  shattered,  sometimes  with  frequent  anxiety. — Sensation  of 
numbness  over  the  whole  body. — Great  excitement  throughout  the  whole 
body. — General  trembling. — ^Weakness,  sometimes  attended  by  uneasiness,  or 
else  by  depression. — Painting  fits. — Symptoms  >  during  sleep. 

25.  Skin. — Heat,  esp.  of  the  hands,  with  swelled  veins. — Itching,  followed 
by  burning  pain. — ^The  patient  can't  bear  to  scratch  very  hard  as  it  hurts ;  a 
very  slight  scratch,  a  mere  rub  suffices  to  allay  the  itching. — Erysipelas  that 
itches  exceedingly. — ^Vesicular  inflammation  (scarlet  redness)  of  the  skin.— 
Redness,  warmth,  stinging  here  and  there,  with  pustules,  running  into  one, 
oozing  and  forming  a  grey-brown  crust  on  the  day  following,  which  finally 
falls  off. — Pustules,  with  inflanmiation,  nearly  general,  of  the  teguments  c^ 
the  abdomen,  followed  by  desquamation. — Herpetic  eruption  on  the  scrotum. 

26.  Sleep. — Frequent  yawning  during  the  morning,  with  a  sensation  of 
flaccidity  and  tenderness  in  the  stomach. — Inclination  to  sleep,  unconquerable 
in  the  afternoon ;  towards  noon  obliging  the  patient  to  lie  down,  but  without  the 
power  to  go  to  sleep,  with  palpitation  of  the  heart. — Disturbed  sleep  during 
the  night,  in  consequence  of  a  multitude  of  dreams,  which  are  sometimes 
painful  and  anxious. — ^At  night,  in  bed,  anxious  tossing  about,  without  power 
to  sl6ep  ;  afterwards  sudden  sleep,  with  painful  dreams. — ^Waking  at  midnight 
from  a  profound  sleep,  with  legs  as  heavy  as  lead. — On  awaking,  contusive 
pain  in  the  limbs,  and  dulness  and  confusion  of  the  head. — Headache,  which 
awakens  the  patient. — Sudden  awakening. — In  sleep  the  patient  lies  on  his 
back,  and  is  awakened  by  an  emission  of  semen. — Numerous  dreams,  con- 
cerning the  sleeper  himself,  of  a  painful  and  afflicting  character. 

87.  Fever. — Susceptibility  to  cold :  esp.  at  the  extremities,  with  corrugated 
skin,  disappearing  in  bed  ;  in  the  afternoon,  not  ceasing  even  in  bed ;  chiefly 
in  the  back,  above  all  in  the  abdomen  ;  from  the  feet  to  the  calves  of  the  legs. 
— Coldness  of  the  skin  of  the  body,  which  becomes  hot  as  the  pulse  is  accele- 
rated, with  perspiration. — Heat  and  fever  accompanying  the  cutaneous  erup- 
tion.— Sudden  coldness  and  paleness  of  the  hands  (as  though  dead),  with 
wrinkles  on  the  fingers. — Chilliness,  with  shuddering.— At  night,  shivering, 
which  passes  over  the  whole  body. — Febrile  condition,  sometimes  painful ;  at 
first  with  increase  of  heat  in  body,  afterwards  with  a  sensation  of  coldness  in 


CUBEBA  627 

the  back,  in  the  region  of  the  lumbar  vertebrae. — Increased  heat  throughout 
the  body;  in  the  abdomen. — ^Ascension  of  heat  on  the  body. — Heat,  pro- 
ceeding from  the  lumbar  vertebrae ;  general,  with  perspiration  and  cephalalgia ; 
burning,  smarting,  afterwards  coldness,  proceeding  from  the  lumbar  vertebrae. 
— Pulse  frequent  and  full,  quick  and  irritable ;  feeble,  and  sometimes  frequent 
at  the  same  time ;  or  else  weak  and  small  at  first,  becoming  full  and  strong.— 
Sweat,  sometimes  only  on  the  forehead. 


Cnbeba. 

Piper   cubeba.      Cubeba   officinalis.     Cubebs.     N.  0.    Piperaceae. 
Tincture  of  dried  unripe  fruit 

OUliieaL— Albuminuria.  Aphthae.  Croup.  Diarrhcsa.  Dysentery.  Enuresis. 
(^eet  Gonorrhoea.  Hernia.  Leucorrhoea  in  children.  Orchitis.  Prostatitis. 
Rheumatism.    Roseola.    Urticaria. 

ChaFMterirtioB. — Cubeba  corresponds  to  catarrh.  It  is  an  old- 
world  remedy  for  gonorrhoea  and  gleet,  but  it  affects  the  mucous 
membrane  of  the  nose,  air  passages  and  intestines,  as  well  as  that 
of  the  urino-genital  tract.  It  acts  well  in  persons  of  bilious  tempera- 
ment with  tendency  to  constipation.  Some  of  its  most  characteristic 
symptoms  are  :  Burning  in  throat  with  dryness,  constant  need  to 
swallow  saliva ;  burning  in  stomach ;  in  abdomen ;  in  rectum ;  in 
urethra ;  in  fossa  navicularis.  Nash  defines  its  place  in  gonor- 
rhoea thus :  "  After  the  inflammatory  stage  is  passed  under  the 
usual  remedies  for  that  stage,  if  there  still  remains  burning  in  the 
urethra  after  micturition,  and  the  discharge  remains  thick,  yellow, 
or  pus-like  (with  Puis,  the  discharge  is  bland;  with  Merc. all  symptoms 
are  <  at  night).  Thin  (gleety)  discharge  does  not  correspond  to  any 
of  the  three."  Prickling  in  soles  of  leet.  There  is  a  sensation  of 
downward  weight  and  pressure  in  region  of  femoral  ring,  <  on 
walking,  riding,  or  lifting.  Stools  and  colic  are  <  at  night  in 
bed ;  >  getting  up  and  walking  about.  Skin  diseases  concomitant 
with  kidney  affections.  Urine  foaming,  albuminous,  bloody.  Acrid 
leucorrhoea  in  children. 

BelatioiUk — Compare:  Copaiva  (with  which  it  is  compatible). 
Piper  methyst.  Piper  nigrum  and  Matico  (t)otanical).  Capsic ; 
Camth.  (irritable  bladder  in  females) ;  Tereb. ;  Cannab.  sat. ;  lod. 
(membranous  croup). 

BTHPTOHB. 

X.  Mind. — Exaltation  of  temper  and  of  the  mental  faculties. — On 
violent  agitations  he  was  aroused  for  a  moment;  uttered  some  incoherent 
expression  and  sank  back  into  a  comatose  sleep. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  rolled  upward,  injected ;  pupils  contracted  to  a  pin- 
point 

6.    Face. — Face  red  and  swollen. — ^Veins   of  forehead   and  temples 


628  CUBEBA 

turgid. — Lips  dark  purple. — Lips  pu£Eed,  dry  and  shining. — Extraordinary 
twist  of  mouth  to  one  side  every  time  he  attempts  to  speak  or  smile. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Teeth  slightly  coated  with  brown  sordes. 

8.  Mouth. — Mouth  containing  viscid  frothy  saliva.— Aphthae  of  lips 
and  gums. — Tongue  furred  and  moist  or  very  white. 

9.  Throat. — Constant  need  to  swallow  saliva  to  relieve  dryness  and 
burning  in  throat  and  larynx. 

11.  Stomach. — Nausea  and  vomiting. — Burning  pain  in  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Burning  in  abdomen. — Femoral  hernia. — Colic. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea,  with  rumbling  and  cutting  in  the 
abdomen  and  burning  in  the  rectum. — Suppuration  of  the  rectum. — Burning 
and  itching  of  the  anus. — Stools  :  blackish,  yellowish,  fecal ;  bilious ;  yellow 
transparent  mucus  ;  mingled  with  whitish,  shining  particles  like  rice ;  bloody 
mucous  (dysenteric) ;  involuntary ;  <  at  night  in  bed ;  >  from  risiqg  from 
bed  and  moving  about. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Foaming  urine. — ^Albuminous,  bloody  urine, 
with  increased  uroxanthine. — Burning  and  itching  in  the  fossa  naviculans. 
— Nocturnal  enuresis. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Discharge  from  the  urethra  of  a  dark- 
reddish  colour  (gonorrhoea). — Inflammation  of  the  penis. — Sensation  of 
pressure  and  heaviness  in  the  pelvis. — ^Testicles  swollen. — ^Thick,  yellow- 
green  discharge,  with  frequent  obstruction  of  urethra. — Prostatitis. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Urethro-vaginitis,  severe  and  of  long 
standing,  with  acute  pains  and  abundant  discharge. — Leucorrhcea  profuse, 
yellow,  greenish,  very  acrid,  very  offensive ;  erythema  of  inner  surfaces 
of  thighs,  pruritus  vulvae,  intense  desire  for  coitus;  small  burning 
pimples ;  womb  swollen  and  painful ;  menses  too  early,  preceded  and 
followed  by  leucorrhcea,  or  in  small  quantity  and  consisting  mostly  of 
leucorrhoea. — Acrid  leucorrhcea  of  children. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Respiration  slow,  short  and  gasping; 
hurried  and  noisy. — Chest  feels  full.— Sense  of  su£Focation. — False  mem- 
branes in  larynx. — ^Voice  harsh  and  wheezing. — Incessant  bronchial  cough ; 
<  evening,  by  heat,  in  open  air ;  throat  dry  and  parched  ;  hurried,  noisy 
respiration, — Harsh  cough. — Barking,  croupy  cough. 

19.  Pulse. — Pulse  very  slow,  moderately  full,  but  extinguished  by  least 
pressure. 

21.  Limbs. — Sensation  of  heat  in  the  palms  of  the  hands  and  soles  of 
the  feet. — Numbness  of  fingers  and  toes. 

25.  Skin. — Skin  warm,  moist,  clammy. — Feverish  tingling  heat  over 
whole  body. — ^A  flush  of  red  over  whole  body. — General  eruption  of  roseolous 
papules  without  fever  or  itching,  confluent  on  face,  buttocks  and  upper 
limbs,  more  scant  on  lower. — Intense  itching. — Severe  urticaria  febrilis. 

27.  Fever. — Heat  flushes  on  face,  soles  of  feet  and  palms  of  hands.— 
Fever  with  heat  at  pit  of  stomach. — Cold  sweat  in  chest  and  back ;  burning 
in  abdomen  (in  croup). 


CULEX  MUSCA  629 


Cnoarbita  Pepo. 


Pumpkin.    N.  0.  Cucurbitaceae.    Seeds.    Tincture  of  fresh  plant. 

CMnteal^ — Sea-sickness.    Tapeworm.    Vomiting ;  of  pregnancy. 

Characterigtios. — ^An  excellent  remedy  for  tapeworm  which 
may  be  given  with  safety  to  children.  The  seeds  are  scalded.  The 
outer  skins  being  softened  are  peeled  off,  the  green  inner  pulp  being 
the  part  used.  Two  ounces  of  the  seeds,  yielding  an  ounce  of  the 
pulp,  should  be  used  for  each  patient.  The  pulp  should  be  rubbed 
in  a  mortar  or  some  other  vessel  to  make  a  smootti  mass.  It  may  be 
mixed  with  milk  or  cream,  and  sweetened  and  taken  like  porridge. 
It  should  be  taken  in  the  morning  after  a  twelve  to  sixteen  hours' 
fast,  and  be  followed  in  two  hours  by  a  castor-oil  purge.  Hale's 
method  is  as  follows  :  The  patient  to  eat  but  little  of  the  lightest 
food  all  day,  take  no  supper,  and  on  going  to  bed  eat  one  ounce 
of  the  peeled  seeds,  bruised  with  milk  or  cream.  In  the  morning 
on  walang,  to  take  a  tablespoonful  of  castor  oil,  mixed  with  half 
a  teaspoonf ul  of  pure  Sulphuric  ether.  No  breakfast  to  be  taken — 
only  a  cup  of  tea  or  coffee*  In  two  or  three  hours  the  oil  will 
opoate,  expelling  the  worm.  Hansen  mentions  that  missionaries 
find  the  mother  tinctiu-e  of  great  use  in  sea-sickness  and  vomiting 
of  pregnancy.  Bonino  records  that  Cucurb.  p.  3  cured  salivation 
and  vomiting  in  a  woman  in  whom  the  menses  were  absent,  and 
who  was  erroneously  supposed  to  be  pregnant.  L.  E.  Griste  records 
the  following  case :  A  woman,  four  months  pregnant,  had  vomited 
almost  from  conception,  and  for  six  weeks  had  not  retained  a 
meal.  "  I  am  almost  starved  to  death,"  she  said  ;  was  pale,  haggard  ; 
tongue  clean.  Soon  after  eating  or  drinking  anything  she  became 
intensely  nauseated.  The  doctor  got  a  fresh  pumpkin  stem,  cut 
it  into  thin  slices  and  covered  them  with  alcohol.  At  the  end  of  half 
an  hour  he  poured  off  a  little  and  made  a  ix  dilution,  and  directed 
half  a  drachm  to  be  put  in  half  a  teacupf  ul  of  water ;  a  teaspoonf  ul 
cvory  two  hours.  There  was  no  further  vomiting.  Dr.  Griste's 
indication  is — "  Intense  nausea  inimediately  after  eating." 


Galex  Mnsoa. 

Mosquito.    N.  0.  Culicidae.    Insecta*    Tincture. 

CUnicaL— Vertigo. 

Gharaoteristios. — Culex  was  proved  by  Dr.  Kent,  but  the  only 
verification  I  have  found  is  of  this  symptom  :  vertigo  every  time  he 
blows  his  nose.  W.  P.  Wesselhorft  cured  a  man,  forty,  stout,  thick- 
set, light  brunette,  who  had  swelling  on  upper  jaw  over  first  right 
tricuspid.     Slight   redness    of   cheek.     Abscess    threatened,   with 


630  CUNDURANGO 

paroxysmal  throbbing,  dull  pain.  >  By  warm  applications.  Came 
on  after  exposure  to  wet  weather.  Merc.  soL  and  Rhus  did  no  good. 
The  patient  then  said  that  whenever  he  blew  his  nose  he  had  vertigo, 
with  a  sense  of  fulness  in  the  ears.  Culex  promptly  relieved  the  pain, 
and  in  forty-eight  hours  the  swelling  had  gone,  it  might  be  well  to 
prove  ar  tincture  of  specimens  of  AMpheles  well  charged  with  malarial 
organisms. 


Condorango. 


Gonolobus  cundurango.  Condor  plant.  (High  altitudes  in  Ekniador, 
S.  America.)  N.  0,  Asclepiadaceae.  Tincture  and  trituration 
of  the  dried  bark  of  the  stem. 

OUnleaL— Anus,  rhagades  of .  Breast,  tumours  of.  Cancer,  Cracks.  Epithelioma. 
Fistula.  Headache.  Locomotor  ataxy.  Rodent  ulcer.  Small-poz.  Stomachy  affections 
of.    Syphilis.    Ulcers. 

Oharacteristios.— Ctfiuttinxf^  t)elongs  to  the  "Milk-weed" 
family,  and  is  thus  related  to  AscUpias  Syriaca,  and  Tubcrosa,  and 
also  to  Calotropis^  The  action  of  the  latter  in  syphilitic  conditions 
may  be  compared  with  the  power  of  Cundurango  over  cancer. 
The  Condor  pbnt  was  introduced  into  medicine  as  a  cancer  remedy 
by  Dr.  Bliss,  of  Washington.  Clotar  MuUer  cured  with  it  severed 
cases  of  "old,  obstinate,  foul-smelling,  ichorous  ulcers'';  one  case 
of  "  carcinoma  of  the  lips,  an  unclean  and  sinuous  ulcer.'*  Burnett, 
who  proved  it,  and  whose  symptoms  were  of  a  severe  nature, 
observed  that  it  produced  "a  painful  crack  in  the  right  comer  of 
the  mouth."  These  cracks  he  has  seen  produced  in  several  patients 
who  were  taking  the  drug  ;  and  he  has  cured  similar  cracks  with  it. 
He  regards  them  as  a  keynote  indication,  and  has  cured  patients 
of  tumours,  some  undoubtedly  cancerous^  who  had  that  symptom  as  a 
concomitant.  In  his  opinion  Cundur.  is  antipsoric  (Tumours  of  the 
Breasty  p.  28).  Dudgeon  {H,  W,,  xxiv.  543)  has  recorded  a  cure  with 
Cundur,  i  ot  an  undoubted  case  of  cancer  of  left  breast  in  a  woman 
of  sixty-nine.  The  nipple  was  so  retracted  as  to  be  invisible.  A 
hard  tumour  the  size  of  an  egg  on  the  outer  side  of  the  nipple  was 
the  centre  of  lancinating  pains  radiating  from  it,  the  whole  breast 
being  very  tender  to  touch.  The  tumour  increased  steadily  under 
HydrasL  and  PhytolaCy  and  was  only  checked  temporarily  by  Conium. 
Under  Cundur*  it  entirely  disappeared.  Cundurango  has  found  its 
chief  use  as  a  cancer  remedy,  especially  in  cancers  originating  in 
epithelial  structures.  Rhagades  at  muco-cutaneous  orifices  and  warty 
excrescences  are  a  leading  indication  for  it  Cutting,  stinging,  burning, 
tingUng,  constrictive,  and  piercing  pains  are  complained  of.  The  skin 
manifests  much  of  the  action  of  the  remedy  :  blotches ;  eczema ; 
pimples ;  pustules  ;  indolent  ulcers  ;  lupus ;  varicose  ulcers;  syphilitic 
affections ;  epithelioma,  and  scirrhus.  Burnett  considers  it  has  a  very 
strong  affinity  for  the  tongue.    He  cured  with  it  a  jagged  ulcer  of  the 


CUNDURANGO  631 

tODgue  (doubtful  whether  cancerous  or  syphilitic) ;  tongue  and  lips 
red.  One  prover  had  a  sHght  creeping  pain  along  periosteum  of 
right  humerus ;  and  I  observed  "  a  creeping  sensation  up  the  back, 
and  headache  in  right  temple "  in  a  patient  taking  it  in  the  ix 
tincture.  An  old-school  authority,  Dr.  Guvvenot  (fiu//.  Gen.  de 
Tktrap.  No.  32,  1890)  credits  Condurangin  with  causing  a  ''  veritable 
locomotor  ataxia/'  It  appears  late,  and  he  thinks  it  is  due  to  the 
formation  of  some  toxic  substance  by  the  splitting  up  of  the  alkaloid 
in  the  oreanism. 

Reluioiis. — Compare :  Ant.  tart,  (pustular  eruptions)  ;  Arum  tri. 
(comer  of  mouth  cracked ;  sore  throat) ;  Bapt.  (sore  throat ;  open 
cancers  with  very  offensive  discharges);  Ars.,  Con.,  Hydrast.,  PhytoL, 
Trifol.  prat,  Kreos.  (cancer,  especially  of  breast) ;  Hydrast,  Kali  sul., 
(rodent  ulcer,  lupus,  cancer  of  stomach) ;  Thuja  (epithelial  cancer, 
nssures  at  muco-cutaneous  outlets)  ;  Silic.  (fistulous  ulcers). 

BTHPTOMB. 

I.    Mind. — Feels  miserable. 

9.  Head. — Severe  dull  headache  ail  day.— Violent  pain  in  1.  temple ; 
cntting  in  L  temple  and  through  ball  of  1.  eye. — Sensation  as  if  forehead  were 
broad  and  high  ;  as  if  1.  half  were  bigger  than  r.  (1.  half  feels  heavy,  r.  clear). 

3.  Eyes. — ^Appearance  of  objects  before  eye.-— Flat  epithelioma  on 
lower  eyelid. 

5.  Nose. — Much  glairy  mucus  from  nose  alternating  with  unusual 
dryness.— A  state  of  nose  giving  a  nasal  sound  to  voice. — Stiffness  in  nose. — 
Pressive  full  feeling  in  bridge. — Flat  epithelioma  1.  side  of  nose. 

0.  Face. — ^Deep  crack  in  corner  of  mouth,  warty  growths  occupying 
edges. — Ulcer  on  chin,  r.  side  perforating  to  gums. 

S.  Mouth.— Slight  pain  in  1.  half  of  tongue. — Small  painful  pustule  on 
r.  side  of  tip  of  tongue,  on  upper  surface  towards  edge. — (Cancer  of  tongue.) 

g.  Throat.— Aching  in  throat,  extending  to  stomach,  with  great  burning 
in  stomach. — Persistent  sore  throat. — Sore  throat  with  burning  and  aching, 
and  a  husky  feeling  which  causes  a  dry,  hacking  cough. 

iz«  Stomach. — ^Anorexia. — Slight  nausea  arising  from  r.  hypochondrium. 
—Cancer  of  stomach. 

Z8.    Abdomen. — Pain  in  r.  hypochondrium. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Constipation. — Rhagades  at  anus ;  terrible  pains 
when  bowels  are  moved ;  cracks  at  angles  of  mouth. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Incontinence  of  urine.— Urine  scanty;  high- 
coloured,  loaded  with  phosphates. 

z8.  Chest. — Ulcer  on  false  ribs  as  large  as  hand,  apparently  car- 
dnomatous. — On  r.  waU  of  thorax,  esp.  round  nipple,  several  swellings  in 
size  from  pigeon's  to  hen's  egg,  some  suppurating,  nipple  being  on  a  hard, 
painful  swelling;  axillary  glands  swollen;  emaciation. — ^Tumours  of  breast 
on  either  side. 

19.  Heart.— Constrictive  pain.— On  rising  in  morning  sharp,  distinct 
pain  in  heart,  followed  by  passage  of  flatus. 

so.    Back. — Dull,  heavy,  continuing  pain  in  1.  scapula. 

81.    Limbs. — Soreness  all  over  body,  like  rheumatism,  <  through  1. 


632  CUPRESSUS  AUSTRALIS 

shoulder  and  under  1.  scapula  (burning). — Rhagades  on  hips  and  in  bends 
of  knees. 

25.    Skin.— Some  small  congenital  warty  excrescences  enlarge  and  look 
fresh. — Blotches,  pimples,  and  boils  in  many  parts. 


Guphea  Yiscosissima. 

Lythrum  petiolatum.  Waxweed.  Fluxweed.  Red  PennyroyaL 
N.  0.  Lythraceae  (Loosestrifes).  Decoction  or  tincture  of  fresh 
plants  collected  in  July  or  August. 

GUiiioal.—Cholera  infantum.    Dysentery. 

Oharaoteristios. — ^This  is  a  popular  remedy  in  some  parts  of 
U.S.  for  summer  diarrhoea  and  dysentery,  as  one  of  its  names, 
"  Fluxweed,"  would  imply.  The  entire  plant  has  a  clammy,  sticky 
feel,  and  contains  tannin.  It  was  first  introduced  to  homoeopathic 
practice  by  Dr.  A.  A.  Roth,  of  Frederick,  Maryland,  who  was  induced 
to  try  it  in  his  practice  by  a  lady  patient  (H.  R.,  iii.  242),  and  his 
experiencfe  has  been  confirmed  by  S.  G.  A.  Brown  (Med.  Cent.).  Dr. 
Roth  gave  from  5  to  lo-drop  doses,  according  to  age.  The  two 
chief  forms  on  which  it  is  successful  are :  (i)  Cases  arising  from 
acidity  of  milk  or  food ;  vomiting  of  undigested  food  or  curdled 
milk,  with  frequent  green,  watery,  acid  stools,  varying  in  number 
from  five  to  thirty  a  day  ;  child  fretful  and  feverish ;  can  retain 
nothing  on  stomach ;  food  seems  to  pass  right  through  the  child. 
(2)  Stools  decidedly  dysenteric,  small,  frequent,  bloody,  with  tenesmus 
and  great  pain  ;  high  fever,  restlessness,  and  sleeplessness.  Dr.  Roth 
considers  it  has  "  tonic  "  properties,  as  children  rally  rapidly  under 
it.  In  ordinary  diarrhoeas,  especially  diarrhoea  from  cold,  he  found 
it  useless.  Brown  says:  ''If  you  have  a  child  that  is  fretful 
and  feverish ;  vomits  curdled  milk ;  from  a  hyper-acidity  of  the 
stomach ;  has  frequent  green,  watery,  acid  stools ;  or  even  if  the 
stools  are  dysenteric,  with  great  tenesmus  and  colic  ;  high  fever  and 
restlessness,  give  Cuphea.*'    Compare :  i£thusa. 


Gupressus  Australis. 

N.  0.  Coniferae.    Tincture  of  fruit  and  leaves. 
Glinioal.— Gonorrhoea.    Headache.    Rheumatism. 

GharaoteriBtiofu — Cupress.  Aust.  has  had  a  proving,  which, 
though  not  extensive,  is  sufficient  to  show  the  analogue  of  its  action 
with  that  of  Thuja.  Sharp,  piercing  and  pricking  pains  are  prominent 
General  feeling  of  warmth. 

Belations. — Compare :  Abies,  Sabina,  Thuja. 


CUPRUM  ACETICUM  633 

BTMPTOHS. 

X.    Mind. — Is  in  mach  better  spirits, 
a.    Head.-— Sharp,  piercing  pain  from  1.  occiput  to  1.  temple. 
II.    Stomach.— Increased  appetite   followed   by  loathing  of   food.— 
Voracioas  appetite.— Feeling  of  warmth  in  stomach. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Pricking  pains  from  kidneys  to  bladder,  with 
increased  desire  to  minate,  stream  smaller  than  usnaL — Constriction  along 
course  of  urethra,  esp.  towards  neck  of  bladder. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Itching  of  glans  penis,  and  orifice  of 
urethra. — ^Aching  pains  in  perineum  and  spermatic  vessels  with  feeling  of 
wnght  in  testes. 

so.     Back. — Dull,  aching  pain  in  lumbar  region. 

sa.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  in  shoulders,  esp.  on  joint  of  r.  shoulder, 
extending  down  to  elbow. 

IQ.  Lo^wer  Limbs. — Pinching,  drawing  pain  in  knees  and  along 
lymphatics  of  legs. — Sharp,  shooting  pain  in  patellae  and  in  bend  of  knees. — 
Tension  in  calves,  with  occasional  spasmodic  twitchings  and  general  malaise. 

97.    Fever. — Increased  heat  of  body  without  thirst 


Gnpressus  Lawsoniana. 

N.  0.  Coniferae.    Tincture  of  berries  and  leaves. 

diniML— Keloid.    Tumours.    Warts. 

GhaFaoteristios.— Cu^tfss.  L.  has  been  proved  in  a  fragmentary 
way  by  Burnett,  who  had  to  relinquish  the  proving  on  account  of  the 
"  terrible  pains  it  caused  in  the  stomach."  He  concludes  from  his 
experience  that  the  action  is  very  like  that  of  Thuja,  and  he  has  suc- 
cessfully used  it  as  a  variant  of  that  remedy  and  of  Sabina  in  the 
cure  of  tumours :  cocks-comb  growth  in  the  mouth  ;  lipoma  of  thigh  ; 
keloid. 

Caprom  Aceticam. 

Acetate  of  Copper.    Verdigris.    Cu  2(C,  H3  O,)  H»0.    Solutions. 

CTnldal. — ^Angina  pectoris.  Apoplexy.  Brainy  affections  of.  Brow  ague. 
Cerebn>-«pinal  meningihs.  Cholera  Asiatica.  Chorea.  Croup.  Diarrhoaa.  Erup- 
tions, Erysipelas.  Hallucinations.  Hydrocephalus.  Mania.  Measles.  Paralyses. 
Scarlatina.    Small-pox.    Strabismus.    Tapeworm.    Urotmia.    Whooping-cough. 

CharaotaristioB. — Cupr.  acci.  produces  the  leading  features  of 
Cupr.  m^/.— cramps,  griping  pains,  spasms,  paralytic  affections,  and 
convulsions.  Attacks  come  on  suddenly  and  penodically.  It  corre- 
sponds to  the  results  of  repelled  eruptions.  Dr.  Burnett  has  cured 
with  it  a  case  of  left-sided  brow  ague  of  many  years'  standing.    He 


634  CUPRUM   ACETICUM 

used  Rhademacher's  Tincture  of  Catper.  The  pain  was  described  as 
boring,  screwing  and  was  spoken  of  by  the  patient  as  "  awful/'  Dr. 
Burnett  is  unable  to  say  whether  the  cure  was  strictly  homoeopathic 
or  "  whether  the  Cuprum  acted  on  the  basis  of  the  Panu:elsic  Univer- 
salia  of  which  it  is  one."  A  man,  50,  was  cured  with  Cupr.  ac  5  trit 
of  a  tonic  spasm  of  the  toes  of  the  right  foot,  very  painful,  lasting  for 
hours,  brought  on  by  friction,  standmg  on  cold  floors,  &c.  There 
was  no  traceable  cause,  and  no  other  derangement  of  health.  Com- 
plete cure  in  five  dajrs,  after  months  of  previous  su£Fering  (/f .  12.,  ii«  71). 
Petroz  recommended  its  use  in  small-pox  and  verified  his  induction 
in  practice.  As  pointed  out  by  General  Phelps  (H.  W.,  October,  1896), 
the  ''  Crimson  Cross  Ointment  '*  used  successfully  by  Fielden  in  the 
Gloucester  epidemic  of  small-pox  owes  its  virtues  to  the  Cupr.  acei, 
which  it  contains.  In  epilepsy  the  aura  begins  in  the  knees  and 
ascends  to  hypogastrium,  when  patient  becomes  insensible.  The 
symptoms  are  <  by  heat  and  by  motion.  The  patient  frequentiy 
changes  posture.    It  is  suited  to  the  carbo-nitrogenous  constitution. 

RelationB. — In  poisoning  cases  it  is  aniidot^  by:  sugar,  or  white 
of  egg,  given  freely.  Homoeopathic  antidotes  :  Bell.,  Chi.,  Con.,  Cicut, 
Dulc,  Hepar,  Ipec,  Merc,  Nux  v.  Complementary:  Calc,  Gels. 
(overworked  brain) :  Cicut.  and  Solanaceae  (mental  symptoms) ;  Zinc, 
(hydrocephalus  and  convulsions  from  suppressed  exanthems). 

Oansation* — Overworked  brain.    Repelled  eruptions. 

BTMPTOMB. 

z.  Mind. — Memory  weak ;  brain  functions  decreased. — ^Absent-minded. 
— Fixed  ideas :  he  sees  policemen  come  to  seize  him. — Hallucinations  of  all 
kinds  of  figures  and  grimaces,  esp.  in  evening  when  going  to  bed  and  shutting 
eyes. — Delirium ;  wants  to  go  home. — Maniacal  talk ;  wakes  screaming  and 
scolding  ;  tries  to  escape. — Fear  :  of  falling ;  of  persons  approaching ;  of 
death. — ^Talkative. — Extreme  anguish,  with  vomiting,  colic,  thirst,  o^dness 
of  the  limbs,  and  quick  and  spasmodic  pulse. — Grief  and  dejection,  with  eyes 
sunken,  tongue  humid,  insipid  taste  in  the  mouth,  want  of  appetite,  continual 
hawking,  risings,  with  taste  of  copper,  violent  thirst,  and  smallness  of  pulse. 

2.  Head.— Vertigo  with  stupefaction ;  >  by  evacuation  of  bowels.— 
Violent  cephalalgia,  with  thirst  and  violent  colic— Agonising  headache  at 
distinct  intervals  like  paroxysms,  lancinating  pains,  sometimes  in  forehead, 
sometimes  in  vertex,  sometimes  in  temples  or  ocdput,  <  least  pressure.— 
Inflammation  of  brain  :  prostration,  breathing  short  and  anxious ;  face  pofFed 
and  pale  ;  when  drinking,  child  bit  glass  or  spoon ;  following  disappearance 
of  rash. — Heaviness  in  the  head,  and  slight  deafness. 

3.  Eyes, — ^Af ter  riding  several  hours  in  raihroad  car  sudden  indistinct 
and  double  vision  (paralysis  of  1.  abducens  nerve). 

5.  Nose. — Discharge  of  blood  from  the  nose. 

6.  Face.— Tetanic  condition  of  jaws. — ^Neuralgia  behind  r.  ear,  in 
cheek-bone  and  upper  jaw,  <  moving ;  at  night ;  from  mental  exertion,  >  by 
pressure,  and  by  wrapping  up  head ;  feeling  of  coldness  in  head. — ^The  face 
wears  an  expression  of  great  anguish. 

8.    Mouth.— Constant  protrusion  and  retraction  of  tongue. 


CUPRUM  ACETICUM  635 

9*  Throat.— Inflammation  of  tonsils ;  or,  when  they  are  enlarged  will 
cause  suppuration  and  favour  healing. 

II.  Stomach. — Copper-like  taste,  and  tongue  covered  with  a  greyish 
film. — Loathing  of  food  and  drink  (with  animals),  sometimes  with  retching. — 
Risings,  with  copper-like  taste  and  constant  hawking.~Constant  inclination 
to  vomit,  sometimes  with  cough  and  convulsive  respiration,  or  else  with 
frequent  emission  of  urine. — Vomitings,  sometimes  very  frequent,  with  colic 
and  convulsions. — ^Vomitings,  which  are  greenish,  white,  and  frothy. — Fre- 
quent vomits  of  a  bluish  colour,  followed  by  retching,  dyspnoea,  and  irregular 
and  frequent  pulse.^Vomiting,  with  loose  evacuations. — Bloody  vomiting, 
following  frequent  retching.— Tearings  in  the  precordial  region.— Periodical 
contraction  of  the  stomach. 

M.  Abdomen.— Abdomen  retracted,  slightly  sensitive  to  pressure.— 
Violent  colic,  attended  by  vomiting  and  diarrhoea. — Nocturnal  colic  with 
vonuting. — Great  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  with  copious  evacuation  of  faecal 
matter. — Abdomen  hard,  pufiEed  up,  and  painful  to  the  touch. 

13.  Stools.— Stools  with  many  worms,  blackish  or  mixed  with  bloody 
mucus. — Stools  accompanied  by  tenesmus  and  general  weakness. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  turbid,  of  a  deep  red,  with  yellow  sedi- 
ment, attended  by  much  thirst  and  general  uneasiness. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Catamenia  too  copious  and  violent 

17.  Respiratory  Organs^-Dyspnoea.- Chest  spasmodically  con- 
stricted, impeding  respiration,  and  increasing  her  anxiety. — Frequent  violent 
dry  coi^,  with  tearing  pains  in  head :  cough  followed  by  violent  palpitation 
lading  several  minutes ;  anxiety  and  pressure  in  chest,  <  sitting ;  cough 
between  eleven  and  one  at  night. — Red  face,  blue  round  mouth  and  lips 
during  attack ;  starting  in  sleep ;  fretful  crying  with  paroxysms  of  cough. 

19.  Heart. — Deathly  feeling  behind  ensiform  cartilage. — Frequent 
attacks  of  augina  pectoris  coming  on  from  exertion  or  excitement. 

91.  Limbs. — Violent  drawing  and  tension  in  limbs  with  shuddering  and 
chilliness  though  skin  is  not  cold. — Periodic,  spasmodic,  painful  contraction 
of  fingers  and  toes,  f requentiy  so  severe  that  the  fingers  could  scarcely  be 
extended  by  any  force. — Cramps  and  coldness. 

as.    Upper  Limbs.— Numbness  and  lameness  of  1.  hand. 

23.    Loveer  Limbs. — Cramps  in  calves. — Drags  1.  foot  in  walking. 

S4.  Generalities. — Lassitude,  with  trembling  and  want  of  appetite  ; 
great  weakness*  sometimes  attended  by  convulsions ;  inability  to  stand  up- 
right.— Insensibility  and  weakness ;  stiffness  of  the  limbs  and  of  the  body ; 
paralysis  of  the  limbs. — L3ring  on  the  side  (in  animals),  with  anguish,  with 
intestinal  evacuations,  greenish  and  frothy;  the  animal  is  stretched  out, 
ahnost  without  respiration,  with  inclination  to  vomit  (speedily  followed  by 
death). — In  epilepsy  aura  begins  in  knees,  ascending  till  it  reaches  hypo- 
gastric region,  when  unconsciousness  ensues,  foaming  at  the  mouth  and 
falling  down  convulsed. — ^As  soon  as  patient  goes  into  a  high-ceilinged  room, 
the  head  reels  and  she  loses  her  senses. — Position,  on  the  back,  with  the 
head  thrown  backwards ;  great  agitation  and  frequent  cries. — ^Trismus,  with 
spasms  in  the  palate,  and  dumbness ;  convulsive  starts,  with  movements,  as 
in  eating  and  swallowing,  painful  vomiting  and  dyspnoea. — ^Jaundice. — 
Inflammation  and  swelling  (by  external  applications). 


636  CUPRUM   ARSENICOSUM 

25.  Skin.  — -  Cyanosis. — Scarlatina.  —  Measles. — Miliaria.— Small-pox.— 
Erysipelas. — Psoriasis. 

27.  Fever.— Fever,  with  swelling  of  the  belly  and  constipation ;  heat, 
with  hard  pulse,  cephalalgia,  difficulty  in  swallowing,  and  inflation  of  the 
abdomen ;  pulse  small  and  contracted. — Measles,  with  bronchitis. 


Cuprum  Arsenicosum. 

Arsenite  of  Copper.    (Scheele's  Green.)    Cu  H  As  O3.    Trituration. 

GUaieaL— Cholera.   Cholerine,   Chorea.    Diarrhoea.   Enteralgia.   Paralysis  (left 
side).    Uterine  neuralgia.    Vomiting. 

CSharaoteristios. — Cupr,  an.  combines  the  characters  of  its  two 
metallic  components.  Intense  neuralgic  pains  in  abdomen ;  awful 
distress  in  epigastric  region  ;  burning  along  oesophagus  and  in  urethra ; 
numbness ;  creeping,  itching,  and  chilly  sensations.  According  \o 
J.  N.  Majumdar,  who  ^ves  a  case,  the  great  characteristic  of  Cup.  an. 
in  choleraic  conditions  is  "icy-coldness  of  the  whole  body,  with  cramps 
and  an  obstinate  hiccough."  B.  L.  Bhaduri  pointed  this  out  to  him. 
Salzer  has  shown  that  "cold,  clammy  perspiration  of  intermittent 
nature  "  is  unique  and  characteristic.  He  has  found  it  most  valuable 
in  the  collapse  stage  of  cholera,  where  intermittent  cold,  clammy 
sweat  was  noted.  The  skin  is  very  sensitive  to  touch  ;  and  pressure 
<  all  symptoms.  Rest  >  and  motion  <  most  symptoms  ;  but  motion 
>  stiffness  of  back  and  tingling  of  hands.  Damp  weathers  neuralgia 
of  abdomen.  Weakness  and  restlessness.  There  is  a  periodicity  in 
the  symptom. 

Relations. — For  antidotes  see  under  Arsen.  Compare :  Arsenical 
and  Copper  preparations  ;  Aeon. ;  Act  r.  (angina  pectoris,  numbness 
of  left  side  of  body,  paresis  of  left  arm) ;  Merc.  cor.  (diarrhoea  and 
tenesmus) ;  Iris.  v. 

STMPTOMB. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  confusion  of  ideas  and  headache  between  temples. 
— Fulness  in  head,  brain  seems  to  expand  and  press  against  frontal  bone- 
Sharp  pain  in  temples,  <  in  1. — Headache  between  temples ;  the  pain  seems 
to  meet  in  centre  of  forehead  and  pass  thence  down  nose. — Dulness  and 
soreness  of  head  in  morning  after  washing. 

3.  Eyes. — Dark  spots  before  eyes ;  eyes  very  sensitive. 

4.  Ears. — Boring  pain  in  r.  ear ;  sharp  pain  in  temple,  <  in  1. 

5.  Nose. — Bones  of  nose  very  sore,  esp.  on  pressure. 

6.  Face. — Face  haggard;  expression  of  great  suffering.— Violent 
twitching  and  jerking  of  muscles  of  1.  side  of  face  between  eye  and  corner  of 
mouth. — Soreness  of  bones. 

8.  Mouth. — Mouth  very  dry ;  frequently  called  for  something  to  wet 
his  mouth. — Shooting  in  upper  1.  molars,  extending  upward  into  superior 


CUPRUM  ARSENICOSUM  637 

maziUary  line. — Back  part  of  tongue  thickly  coated.— Tongue,  dry  and 
tremulous. — Bad  breath. 

g.    Throat. — Burning  along  oesophagus  from  stomach  to  mouth. 

iz.  Stomach.— Moderate  thirst ;  but  drink  of  any  kind  increased  the 
nausea ;  a  few  mouthf uls  satisfied ;  desire  for  drink  seemed  rather  due  to  dry 
mouth  than  thirst. — Intense  thirst. — Nausea  and  vomiting,  <  after  eating ;  < 
after  study. — Obstinate  hiccough. — Nausea  and  awful  distress  at  epigastrium. 
—Burning. — Cutting  in  stomach  while  eating. — Cramp  in  stomach  and  bowels, 
followed  by  tonsillitis. 

18.  Abdomen. — Burning,  cramping,  colic  pains.— Spasmodic  and 
neuralgic  pains,  accompanied  by  screams  and  cramps  in  fingers  and  toes. 
— <}ramping  pains  in  lower  bowels,  with  extreme  vesical  and  rectal  tenesmus ; 
micturition  frequent  causing  great  su£Fering. — ^Attacks  of  excruciating  pains 
in  bowels  occurring  every  two  or  three  weeks. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — ^Vomiting  and  purging,  with  cramps  and  collapse. 
—Rectal  tenesmus,  with  almost  constant  mucous  discharges. — Chronic  slimy 
diarrhcea  during  summer,  with  cramps  in  abdomen. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pain  in  sacral  region,  with  frequent  urging  to 
urinate. — Dark  red  urine  ;  burning  pain  during  and  after  urination. — Strong- 
smelling  urine  ;  odour  of  garlic. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— White  purulent  discharge  from  urethra ; 
soreness  of  penis,  with  pain  in  prostate  gland;  tingUng  and  burning  in 
urethra. — Perspiration  of  scrotum,  which  is  constantly  moist  and  damp. — 
Boils  frequently  forming  on  scrotum. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — ^About  close  of  menses,  worked  out  of 
doors  during  a  moist,  drizzling  day ;  during  night  agonising  pains  in  lower 
abdominal  region ;  tender  spot  over  1.  ovary ;  tongue  heavily  coated  white. — 
During  pregnancy  constant  nausea,  rejects  everything ;  weak,  very  nervous ; 
pulse  quick  and  feeble ;  spasmodic  uterine  pain ;  at  one  time  tenesmus  and 
dysenteric  stools. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Voice  altered ;  speech  difficult. — Oppres- 
sion of  chest  as  if  constricted. — ^Weight  on  chest,  with  difficult  breathing. — 
Soreness  of  small  spot  in  1.  scapula,  extending  into  1.  lung,  followed  by  dull, 
sticking  pains  in  1.  chest,  between  sixth  and  seventh  ribs,  <  on  deep  inspira- 
tion ;  w<»Lk,  numb  feeling  in  1.  chest,  1.  side  of  back,  1.  shoulder  and  arm. — 
Dull  soreness  in  r.  side  of  chest,  with  dull  pains  in  back,  <  from  deep 
inspiration. 

19.  Heart. — Heart's  action  weak  and  hurried ;  pulse  small,  compressible, 
weak,  and  frequent,  though  quite  regular. — Sudden  debility,  with  dull  pain  in 
heart,  and  sense  of  oppression ;  1.  chest  feels  too  small ;  long  involuntary 
inspiration ;  empty  feeling  in  stomach,  with  vertigo  and  confusion  of  ideas, 
and  headache  between  temples. — Palpitation  of  heart,  with  trembling  of 
limbs. — Palpitation  moving  walls  of  chest  up  and  down. — Cardiac  chorea  :  at 
one  time  heart  beats  very  irregular  and  feeble,  at  another  time  violent  and 
irregular ;  attacks  appear  in  paroxysms,  action  being  normal  in  intervals. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Soreness  of  glands  of  neck,  with  stiffness  of 
neck ;  pain  <  on  moving  head. — Severe  pains  under  lower  angle  of  1.  scapula 
<  from  motion  or  breathing. — Stiffness  and  lameness  of  back,  <  by  motion 


638  CUPRUM   METALLICUM 

>  by  rest ;  returns  alter  sitting  awhile. — Lameness  ol  lumbar  region. — ^Piain 
in  r.  lumbar  region,  and  in  anterior  portion  of  r.  thigh. 

91.  Limbs. — L.  arm  feels  numb  and  powerless ;  similar  feeling  in  1.  leg. 
— Spasms  in  extremities;  coldness. — ^Itching  ci  arms  and  legs. — ^Pustular 
tumours  in  wrists  and  ankles,  and  excessive  sensitiveness  and  irritabilitj 
of  skin. 

94.  Oeneralltiea.— Tremulousness  of  wb<^e  body,  very  noticeable  on 
attempting  to  walk.— Quivering,  impossible  to  control.--Great  prostratioo ;  as 
from  traumatic  shock. 

87.  Fever.— Whole  surface  covered  with  cold  moisture ;  skin  pale  like 
death.-^Icy  coldness  of  whole  body,  with  cramps  and  obstinate  hiccoo^ — 
Intermittent,  cold  clammy  sweat  (in  cholera  collapse). 


Cuprum  Metallicum. 

Copper.    Cu.  (A.  W.  63).    Trituration. 

ffWftff^^- — ^After-pains.  Angina  pectoris.  Asthma.  Asthma  millari.  Cardialgia 
Catarrh.  Chlorosis.  Cholera.  Chorea.  Omvulsians.  Cough.  Cramts.  Crtm^. 
Cyanosis.  Dentition.  Dyspnoea.  Emissions.  Epilepsy.  Eruptions.  Erysipelas^ 
Painting.  Gastric  disturbance.  Gout.  Haematemesis.  Herpes.  H3rsteria.  Inflam- 
mations. Larynx,  spasm  of.  Mania.  Measles.  Meningitis.  Neuralgia.  Palpita- 
tion. Paralysis.  Pneumonia.  Psoriasis.  Ringworm.  Sleeplessness.  Spasms. 
Spinal  irritation.    Ulcers.    Whooping-cough.    Yellow  fever. 

ChanoteriBiios. — Metallic  copper  is  an  antipsoric  remedy,  work- 
ing from  within  outwards.  It  ranks  with  the  most  important  of  thoae 
which  relieve  states  arising  from  the  **  striking  inward ''  of  diseases,  or 
the  failure  of  eruptions  or  discharges  to  appear.  It  is  this  power  to 
relieve  internal  spasm  which  renders  it  appropriate  to  the  collapse 
stage  of  cholera,  of  which  it  is  also,  like  Sulphur^  a  prophylactic  eitner 
when  worn  next  the  skin,  or  when  taken  internally.  Cuprum  produces 
many  skin  eruptions,  and  also  foot-sweat,  and  it  corresponds  to  these, 
and  also  to  the  effects  of  suppression  of  eruptions,  exanthems,  and 
foot-sweat ;  whether  these  effects  be  internal  pains  or  spasms  or 
oppression  of  the  brain  and  mental  disturbance.  Mackechnie  made 
a  brilliant  cure  of  psoriasis  in  a  young  girl  with  Cuprum,  The  leading 
features  of  its  symptomatology  are :  Cramps,  convulsions,  spasms  of 
the  most  violent  form,  coming  on  from  disappearance  of  pains,  dis- 
charges, eruptions,  mental  derangement.  With  suppression  of  menses, 
patient  screams.  Tonic  spasms  of  thumbs.  Eyeballs  turn  up.  Opis- 
thotonos. Tonic  and  clonic  spasms.  "  Convulsions  during  pregnancy 
and  puerperal  convulsions  which  begin  in  the  fingers  or  toes,  and 
spread  all  over  the  body ;  or  where  there  is  great  restlessness  between 
the  attacks,  either  filling  up  the  entire  interval,  or  only  a  part  of  the 
time.''  Thus  Guernsey.  He  also  says  that  "  a  slimy  metsdlic  taste  in 
the  mouth ''  is  one  of  the  strongest  indications  for  Cupr.  Rhus  is  the 
only  other  remedy  which  has  this  symptom  so  marked.  "  Cramps  or 
spasms  beginning  in  hands  and  feet,  extending  to  belly,"  is  confirmed 


CUPRUM   METALLICUM  639 

fay  J.  C.  McLaren.  Mossa  regards  Cupr.  as  one  of  the  remedies 
for  the  effects  of  fright,  and  relates  the  case  of  a  girl  who,  after 
a  fright,  was  affected  by  involuntary  motions  of  left  arm  and  leg 
developing  into  pronounced  general  chorea.  Cu^.  brought  about 
slow  but  decided  recovery.  Another  girl,  la,  who  had  recovered 
from  whooping-coujgh  got  a  kind  of  chorea  from  repeated  frights 
on  seeing  an  epileptic.  To  the  muscular  movements  was  added  silly 
behaviour :  tongue  heavy,  speech  slow,  gait  unwieldy.  Frightened 
at  night  Greediness  in  eating  and  drinking.  Ign,,  Stram.,  Sul., 
did  little  good.  She  became  ill-natured.  Cupr.  every  four  days 
cured  completely  in  three  months.  Mackechnie  reports  the  case 
of  a  boy  who  became  epileptic  after  being  locked  up  in  school. 
Very  great  improvement  followed  the  administration  of  Cupr. 
Schwencke  cured  a  case  of  epilepsy  of  forty  years'  standing  with 
Cupr,  6  after  Bell,  and  Hyo,  had  done  some  little  good.  The  patient 
was  a  man  aged  45.  The  fits  began  suddenly  towards  morning  with 
chewing  motion  of  lower  jaw  ;  gnashing  of  teeth  ;  becomes  upright 
and  rigid  in  bed  ;  shrieks ;  limbs  convulsed.  After  giving  way  to 
violent  anger,  attacks  become  more  severe ;  arms  and  legs  were 
thrown  outwards  and  trunk  arched  upwards.  Cupr.  was  now  given. 
For  a  time  the  attacks  continued  severe,  but  gradually  improvement  set 
in,  and  in  less  than  three  months  they  ceased  altogether.  The 
"anger''  in  this  case  and  the  '411-humour"  in  Mossa's  are  note- 
worthy. Maliciousness  is  an  indication  for  Cupr,  In  a  second  case 
cured  by  Schwencke,  that  of  a  man,  38,  epileptic  seven  years,  a 

f)re8sive  headache  preceded  the  attacks,  ascending  from  nape  to 
orehead ;  then  there  was  profuse  salivation,  head  turned  to  left,  eyes 
dosed,  tongue  in  active  motion  in  open  mouth,  trunk  arched  upward, 
slight  spasms  of  right  arm  outward.  After  attack,  dulness  of  head, 
and  feeling  in  body  as  if  beaten.  Cupr.  first  removed  the  fits  and  then 
the  dulness  of  the  head.  Cupr.  has  pains  like  knife-thrusts,  <  on  least 
motion  ;  take  away  the  breath,  thinks  he  must  die  if  they  last  Speaks 
in  a  whisper.  The  thrusts  go  tibrough  to  back  from  ensiform  cartilage, 
from  umbilicus.  Restless  tossing  all  night.  Perfect  stupor,  with 
jerking  of  muscles.  Paralysis  of  isolated  muscles.  Many  unusual 
symptoms  are  produced,  including  maliciousness  and  desire  to  injure. 
Sicreaming,  witii  cerebral  or  mental  symptoms.  Loquacious.  Violent 
head  pains  <  over  left  eye.  Brain  seems  paralysed.  Chlorosis  from 
abuse  of  iron.  Vomiting,  hiccoughs,  and  spasms  >  by  drink  of  cold 
water.  Over-sensitiveness  of  slan,  especially  in  region  of  stomach 
and  fourth  and  fifth  dorsal  vertebrae.  Touch  and  pressure  <• 
<  Before  menses ;  from  vomiting.  Symptoms  are  <  evening  and 
night.  Cold  air  and  cold  wind  <  ;  cold  drinks  >  (colic,  cough,  &c.). 
Wrapping  head  >  headache.  <  At  new  moon.  Periodicity  every 
15,  30,  or  60  minutes ;  every  fortnight  Getting  wet  =  epileptic 
attacks.  >  From  being  mesmerised  ;  during  perspiration.  Suited 
to  fair-haired  people ;  and  the  carbo-nitrogenoid  constitution.  Women 
who  have  borne  many  children  (after-pains). 

RalatioiiB. — Is  aniidoted  by  :  Sugar,  or  white  of  egg  mixed  with 
milk  and  eiven  freely.  Hepar,  or  potash  soap  may  be  used  after 
poisoning  Irom  food  prepared  in  copper  vessels.    Aggravations  are 


640  CUPRUM    METALLICUM 

>  by  smelling  Camphor.  Dynamic  antidotes :  Bell.,  Cham.,  ChL, 
Con.,  Cic,  Dulc.,  Hep.,  Ip.,  Merc,  Nux  v.  Antidote  to :  Aur.,  Merc, 
Op.  Cotnplanentary :  Calc.  Compare:  Other  Copper  prepsuations, 
Calc.  c,  Gels,  (overworked  brain) ;  Cicut  and  Solaneacese  (mental 
symptoms) ;  Silic.  (head  pains  >  wrapping  up  head).  Nux,  I%os., 
Coloc,  Camph.,  Secal.,  Verat.,  Arn.,  Apis.,  Zinc,  Puis.,  Arsen.  As  if  in 
a  dream  (Amb.,  Anac,  Calc,  Can.  i.,  &c)  Loquacity  (Hyo.,  Lach., 
Op.,  Stram.,  Ven)  Lack  of  reaction  (Sul.,  Carb.  v.^  Lauro.,  Val., 
Ambra,  Caps.,  Pso.,  Op.,  Bell.,  Stram.,  Bry.,  Apis). 
CansatioiL — Suppressions.    Fright 

SYMPTOMS. 

X.  Mind. — Melancholy,  with  attacks  of  extreme  anguish,  like  fear  of 
death ;  restlessness,  groaning,  and  desire  to  escape. — ^Want  of  moral  courage. 
— Anxiety  and  tears,  alternating  with  buffoonery. — Convulsive  laughter. — 
Incoherent,  delirious  talk. — Mildness,  alternating  with  obstinacy. — Unfitness 
for  exertion,  with  fear  to  be  idle. — Fits  of  abstraction,  with  fixed  ideas  of 
imaginary  occupations  at  which  the  patient  labours,  or  with  lively  songs  ;  or 
else  with  malice  and  moroseness  (with  proud  bearing,  and  at  times  intemtpted 
by  clonic  spasms ;  craziness),  and  often  with  quick  pulse,  red  and  inflamed 
eyes,  wandering  looks,  followed  by  sweat. — ^Attacks  of  rage  (wants  to  bite  the 
bystanders). — Furor, — Dementia. — Loss  of  sense  and  thought — DeliriunL 

9.  Head. — ^Vertigo  on  reading,  and  on  looking  into  the  air. — Whirling 
vertigo,  as  if  the  head  were  going  to  fall  forward  «  during  motion,  >  when 
lying  down). — Sensation  (painful)  as  if  the  head  were  empty. — Pain  in  the 
parietal  bone,  so  as  to  cause  crying  out  on  putting  the  hand  upon  it — 
Pain  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  brain,  and  in  the  orbits,  on  moving  the  eyes. — 
Stupefying  depression  in  the  head,  with  tingling  in  the  vertex. — ^Aching  in 
the  temples,  <  by  the  touch. — Pulling  in  the  head,  with  vertigo,  >  by 
lying  down. — Headache,  in  consequence  of  an  epileptic  attack. — External, 
burning  shootings,  in  the  side  of  the  forehead,  in  the  temples,  and  in  the 
vertex. — Pains  in  the  occiput  and  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  on  moving  the 
head. — Swelling  of  the  head,  with  redness  of  the  face. — Distortion  of  the 
head  on  one  side  and  backwards ;  the  head  is  drawn  to  one  side  or  fails 
forward  ;  aggravated  or  renewed  by  each  contact  (hydrocephalus). — Purplish- 
red  swelling  of  the  head ;  face  purple-red  and  blue  lips ;  convulsion  and 
twitches  in  the  limbs  ;  <  when  touched,  which  causes  the  swelling  to  pain. 

3.  Eyes. — Itching  (violent)  in  the  eyes  towards  evening. — ^Aching  in 
the  eyes  and  in  the  eyelids,  <  by  the  touch. — Eyes,  red,  inflamed,  wandering, 
or  fixed  (staring),  sunken. — Convulsioas  and  restless  movements  of  the  eyes. — 
Eyes  are  turned  upward. — Greater  immobility  of  the  pupils. — Eyes  prominent 
and  sparkling. — Eyes  closed  (weak  and  dim). — Pupils  insensible. — Obscuration 
of  the  sight. — Pains  resembling  a  bruise  in  the  orbits  on  turning  the  eyes. 

4.  Ears. — Itching  in  the  ears. — ^Tearing  in  the  ears. — Pressure  on  the 
ears,  as  from  a  hard  body. — Boring  pain  in  and  behind  the  ear. 

5.  Nose. — Strong  congestion  in  the  nose. — Stoppage  of  the  nose. — 
Violent  fluent  coryza. 

6.  Face. — Face  pale  (changed  features,  full  of  anguish),  with  eyes 
downcast  and  surrounded  by  a  livid  circle. — Face  bluish ;    bluish-red. — 


CUPRUM   METALLICUM  641 

Spasmodic  distortion  of  the  muscles  of  the  face. — Sad  and  anxious  air. — 
Redness  of  the  face. — Lips  bluish. — Excoriation  of  the  upper  lip. — ^Aching  of 
the  lower  jaw,  increased  by  the  touch. — Spasm  in  the  jaw. 

7.  Teeth. — Odontalgia,  with  acute  puUings,  extending  into  the  temples. 
^Difficult  dentition  in  children,  with  convulsions. 

8.  Mouth. — Mouth  clammy  in  the  morning. — ^Accumulation  of  water 
in  the  mouth. — Foam  at  the  mouth. — Sweet  taste  in  the  mouth. — Burning 
sensation  in  the  mouth. — Coldness  of  the  tip  of  the  tongue. — ^Tongue  clammy, 
loaded  with  a  white  coating. — Hoarse  crying  like  a  child. — Cries,  like  the 
croaking  of  frogs. — Loss  of  speech. 

9.  Throat. — Inability  to  talk,  on  account  of  spasms  in  the  throat. — 
Dryness  of  the  throat,  with  thirst. — Inflammation  of  the  pharynx,  with  im- 
peded deglutition. — ^Singultus  and  spasm  of  the  oesophagus. — Desire  for  warm 
food ;  eats  hastily. — Audible  sound  of  drink  (gurgling)  while  swallowing  it. — 
Swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  neck. 

10.  Appetite. — ^Taste,  sweetish,  or  metallic,  acid,  or  salt — ^Watery  taste 
of  food. — Desire  for  cold  things  in  preference  to  hot. 

11.  Stomach.— Constant  risings.— Hiccough.— Singultus  preceding  the 
spasms. — Flow  of  water  like  saliva,  after  taking  milk. — Nausea,  with  inclina- 
tion to  vomit,  extending  from  the  abdomen  to  the  gullet ;  but  chiefly  in  the 
epigastrium,  with  a  feeling  like  intoxication,  loathing,  and  putrid  taste  in  the 
mouth. — ^V^iolent  periodical  vomitings,  mitigated  by  drinking. — ^Vomiting  is 
prevented  by  drinking  cold  water. — ^Vomiting  in  general,  which  is  very 
severe. — ^Vomiting  of  bile,  of  water  (containing  flakes,  offensive-smelling),  of 
slimy  matter,  or  even  of  blood. — Violent  vomitings,  with  pressure  in  the 
stomach,  cramps  in  the  abdomen,  diarrhoea,  and  convulsions. — Cramps  in  the 
stomach. — Excessively  troublesome  pressure  on  the  stomach,  and  on  the 
epigastrium,  <  by  touch  and  by  movement. — Anguish  in  the  epigastrium. — 
Gnawing  and  corroding  sensation  in  the  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  hypochondria,  on  the 
part  being  touched. — Drawing  pains  from  1.  hypochondrium  to  the  hip. — 
Violent  pains  in  the  abdomen,  with  great  anxiety. — ^Abdomen  hard,  with 
violent  pains  on  its  being  touched. — Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  a  hard 
body,  aggravated  by  the  touch. — Retraction  of  the  abdomen. — Spasmodic 
colic,  with  convulsions  and  shrill  cries. — ^Tearing  and  gnawing  (corroding, 
stinging  ulcers)  in  the  intestines. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation,  with  great  heat  of  body.— Violent 
diarrhoea  (with  flakes),  sometimes  sanguineous. — Bleeding  of  haemorrhoidal 
tumours. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urgent  want  to  make  water,  with  scanty  emis- 
sion.— Frequent  emission  of  fetid  (dark-red,  turbid,  with  yellowish  sediment), 
viscid  urine. — Burning  shootings  in  the  urethra,  during  and  subsequent  to  the 
emission  of  urine. — Wetting  the  bed  at  night. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Swelling  of  the  penis,  with  inflammation 
of  the  glans. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Before  the  catamenia,  ebullition  of  blood, 
palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  headache. — Menstruation  too  late  ;  protracted  ; 
complaints  before.— Menses  absent  for  months;  violent  delirium. — Before 
and    during   menses,   cramps,   convulsions,    piercing   shrieks;    spasmodic 

VOL.  I.  42 


642  CUPRUM   METALLICUM 

dyspnoea ;  violent  palpitation. — ^Menses  not  appearing  after  suppression  of 
foot-sweat— Torpid  chlorosis. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Obstinate  hoarseness,  with  great  inclination 
to  lie  down. — Bronchial  rale,  as  if  from  mucus. — ^Tickling  in  the  larynx.— 
Dry  cough,  with  fits  of  sufiEocation,  like  whooping-cough. — Spasmodic  affec- 
tions generally;  whooping-cough  where  the  attacks  run  into  catalepsy; 
movements  of  the  head ;  epilepsy. — Cough,  with  expectoration  of  whitish 
mucus,  during  fits  of  spasmodic  asthma.— Asthma  increases  (at  3  a.ni.)  ^en 
bending  the  body  backwards,  when  coughing,  when  laughing. — Cough,  in  the 
morning,  with  expectoration  of  putrid  matter. 

18.  Chest. — Respiration  accelerated,  rattling,  moaning,  with  convulsive 
efforts  of  the  abdominal  muscles.  Short,  di£Gicult  respiration,  with  spasmodic 
cough,  and  crepitation  in  the  chest. — Cough,  with  wheezing  respiration  at 
each  effort  to  breathe. — Difficulty  of  respiration,  increased  by  coughing, 
laughing,  throwing  back  the  body,  &c.,  as  well  as  in  the  night — ^Asthma 
when  ascending  or  walking  quickly,  with  necessity  to  breathe  deeply.— 
Spasmodic  asthma. — Fits  of  suffocation. — Pressure  on  the  chest — Painful 
contraction  of  the  chest,  esp.  after  drinking. — Cramps  in  the  chest,  which  cat 
short  the  respiration  and  the  voice  (after  fright  and  anger). 

ig.  Heart. — Spasm  of  heart.— Angina  pectoris. — Palpitation  of  the  heart 
(before  the  menses). — Pulse  very  changeable  ;  imperceptible ;  small ;  soft 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  axillary  glands.— 
Swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  neck.— Paralysis  of  muscles  of  back  up  to  necL 
Hyperaesthesia  of  spinal  column. — Backache  top  of  sacrum. 

21.  Limbs. — Cramps  of  limbs ;  contraction  of  joints. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Herpes  in  the  bends  of  the  elbows  (forming  yellow 
scales,  itching,  esp.  in  evening). — Swelling  of  the  hand,  with  inflanmmtion  of  a 
lymphatic  vessel  extending  to  the  shoulder. — The  arms  and  hands  are  bluish 
marbled. — Aching  and  acute  puUings  in  the  metacarpal  bones. — ^Weakness 
and  paralysis  of  the  hand. — Starting  of  the  hands,  in  the  morning,  after  rising. 
— ^Torpor  and  shivering  of  the  fingers. — Convulsions  in  the  fingers,  particu- 
larly which  begin  in  the  fingers  and  toes,  then  spreading  all  over  the  body ; 
spasms  clonic. 

23.  Lower  Limbs.— Pains  in  the  legs,  esp.  in  the  calves  of  the  legs 
during  repose.— Tensive  pain  and  cramps  in  the  calves  of  the  legs. — In  the 
knee-joint  weakness,  pain  as  if  broken. — ^T witching  of  the  muscles  of  the 
lower  extremities. — Pressive  and  drawing  pains  in  the  metatarsus. — Burning 
sensation  in  the  soles  of  the  feet. — Sweat  in  the  feet. — Suppression  of  sweat  in 
the  feet — Painful  weariness  and  stiffness  in  the  limbs. — Convulsions  in  the 
toes. 

24.  Generalities.- Pressive  tearings  or  startings  in  the  limbs. — Pain,  as 
from  a  bruise  in  several  places,  esp.  in  the  joints  and  in  the  limbs. — Aching  in 
the  bones. — Rheumatic  pains. — Many  pains,  esp.  those  which  are  aching,  are 
<  on  being  touched. — Shaking  pains,  which  traverse  the  whole  l)ody.— 
Shocks  or  painful  blows  in  different  parts. — On  weeping,  convulsions,  with 
want  of  breath,  and  retraction  of  the  thighs. — Clonic  spasms. — Tonic  spasms 
with  loss  of  consciousness,  turning  of  the  head  backwards,  redness  of  the  eyes, 
salivation,  and  frequent  emission  of  urine. — Convulsions,  with  piercing  cries. 
^-Epileptic  convulsions. — Epileptic  attacks  (at  night),  followed  by  headache. 


CUPRUM  SULPHURICUM  643 

— -Involimtary  movements  of  the  limbs,  as  in  St.  Vitus'  dance,  with  redness  of 
the  face,  distortion  of  the  eyes,  of  the  face,  and  of  the  body,  tears  and  anxiety, 
bufiEoonery  and  desire  to  hide  oneself. — ^The  convulsions  begin  mostly  in  the 
fingers  and  in  the  toes. — Spasmodic  laughter. — Convulsive  startings,  at  night, 
when  sleeping. — ^Violent  convulsions,  with  great  display  of  strength. — Paralytic 
affections. — Symptoms  which  appear  periodically,  and  in  groups. — Great 
lassitude,  and  sinking  of  the  whole  body. — Obstinate  weakness. — Consumption. 
--Excessive  sensibility  of  all  the  organs. — Fainting  fits. — Outward  appearance 
of  the  face  bluish  ;  bluish-red. — ^Affections  of  the  soles  of  the  feet ;  attacks  of 
sick  feeling ;  blackness  of  outer  parts ;  cyanosis  or  morbus  caeruleus ;  bloated 
skin. 

25,  Skin. — Eruptions  which  resemble  (dry)  itch. — Tetters,  with  yellow 
scales. — Miliary  eruptions,  esp.  on  the  chest  and  on  the  hands. — Old  ulcers ; 
caries. 

A  Sleep. — Profound  sleep,  with  shocks  in  the  body,  and  starting  in  the 
limbs. — Lethargic  sleep. — During  sleep  constant  grumbling  in  the  abdomen. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse  snudl,  weak,  and  slow. — Chilliness  over  the  whole 
body,  mostly  in  the  extremities. — Shiverings  after  attacks  of  epilepsy. — 
Debilitating,  hectic,  internal  heat. — Flushes  of  heat — Slow  fevers. — Cold 
sweat  (at  night). — Many  attacks  (epileptic  attacks,  attacks  of  mania)  end  with 
(cold)  perspiration.— Violent  nocturnal  perspiration. 


Cuprum  Sulphuricum. 

Sulphate  of  Copper.    Cu  SO^  sHaO.    Trituration. 

(ninieal.— Alopecia.   Diarrhoea.   Dysentery.   Eyes,  granular  lids ;  catarrhal  and 
purulent  conjunctivitis.    Itch.    Syphilis.    Trachoma. 

CharaoteristioB. — Sulphate  of  Copper  is  a  well-known  emetic  and 
caustic.  It  causes  forcible  vomiting  and  much  nausea.  Paleness  of 
f2ce ;  or  jaundiced  appearance ;  pale  skin  generally ;  a  peculiar 
diarrhcea  ;  enlarged  liver.  T.  D.  Tyrrell  (Med.  Adv.,  xix.  14)  mentions 
the  case  of  a  lady  who  could  not  use  Cupr.  suL  for  "  stamping  "  fancy- 
work,  because  it ''  made  her  face  hurt  and  swell  so  she  could  scarcely 
see,  and  her  lips  became  everted,  'turned  inside  out,'  she  said." 
It  is  a  well-known  application  in  allopathic  practice  for  stimulating 
flabby  granulations,  and  it  has  cured  itching  eruptions,  and  manifes- 
tations of  syphilis.    Rest  >  pains. 

Selationflu — It  is  antidoted  by  :  Milk  ;  eggs  ;  pure  yellow  prussiate 
of  potash.    Compare :  Kali  bich.  (cough)  and  Merc. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind.— Anxiety ;  or  great  apathy. — Remarkable  disturbance  of 
mind,  every  utterance  distorted. 

8.  Head. — Bald  spot  over  r.  parietal  bone,  not  depending  on  any 
discoverable  cause. 

3.    Eyes.— Twitching  of  closed  lids.— Eyes  stiff  and  dim. 


644  CURARE 

6.    Face.-*-Lips  pale,  bluish,  at  comers  and   internal  edges. — ^Face 
painful  and  swollen  so  she  can  scarcely  see;  lips  turned  inside  out. 

8.    Mouth. — ^Tongue  cold;  coated,  bluish. — Greenish  tint  along  free 
border  of  gums. — Burning  in  mouth  and  oesophagus  in  morning. 

iz.  Stomach. — Excessive  nausea;  forcible  vomiting  retnmiDg  from 
time  to  time ;  vomits  greenish-brown  mucus. — ^Violent  pain  in  stomach 
followed  by  faintness. 

IS*  Abdomen. — ^Tearing  pains  in  hypochondria,  on  inspiration,  painful  to 
touch  as  if  bruised. — Liver  enlarged. — ^Abdomen  drawn  in. 

13.  Stool. — Four  pultaceous  greenish-yellow  stools,  without  the  least 
trace  of  blood. — Stool  pultaceous,  brown-red,  with  streaks  of  blood  and  tenes- 
mus during  stool. — Constipation. 

27.  Respiratory  Organs.— Hacking  cough  which  impedes  respiratioo. 
— Croupy  cough  with  very  tenacious  mucus. 

zg.  Heart. — Feeling  as  of  a  throbbing  lump  in  heart  internally,  beating 
of  heart  seems  louder ;  lasted  five  minutes  and  went  away  gradually. 

sz.  Limbs. — Limbs  cold,  nearly  cyanotic. — Dull  aching  soreness  in 
middle  of  tibia,  when  walking;   >  at  rest;  tenderness  on  pressure. 

95.  Skin. — Pale,  colourless. — Icterus. — Itching  nodules  on  shoulders.— 
Itchiness ;  a  kind  of  dry  itch. 


Curare. 

Curara.  Woorara.  Woorali.  Hoorali.  Oorari.  (An  arrow  poison 
used  by  South  American  Indians.  Accounts  difiFer  as  to  its  actual 
composition,  into  which  the  juice  of  difFerent  species  oiStrycknos 
are  said  to  enter,  or  of  Cocculus  toxiferos  with  serpent  poison. 
Others  have  said  it  is  prepared  from  the  venom  of  toads.  In 
appearance  it  is  something  Like  the  extract  of  liquorice.  That 
used  in  C.  Wesselhoeft's  provings  was  obtained  from  Merck  of 
Darmstadt.)    N.  0.  Loganiaceae  (?).    Tincture. 

CUnioal. — Cancer.  Catalepsy.  Corns.  Cough.  Debility.  Diabetes.  Dys- 
menia.  Dyspncea  Ears,  affections  of.  Eczema.  Emphysema.  Epilepsy.  Face, 
paralysis  of.  Painting.  Headache.  Hydrophobia.  Liver  spots.  Looomofeor 
ataxia.  Nervous  debility.  Neuralgia.  Otitis.  Ozaena.  Paralysis.  Phthisis. 
Pseudo-hypertrophic  paralysis.  Ptosis.  Scrofula.  Tetanus.  Ulceration.  Utems, 
affections  of.    Vaginitis.    Whooping-cough. 

CharaoteriBtioB. — Curare  produces  muscular  paralysis,  probably 
through  its  action  on  the  nerve  endings  in  the  muscles,  without  afiFect- 
ing  either  the  muscle  substance  or  the  nerve  substance,  and  without 
impairing  sensation  and  consciousness.  It  is  thus  in  many  ways  the 
opposite,  in  its  action,  of  Nux  vomica,  though  it  is  said  to  have  the  juice 
of  a  Strychnos  in  its  composition.  It  causes  death  by  paralysis  of  the 
respiratory  muscles.  Reflex  action  is  diminished  or  abolished  (opp. 
Nux) J  and  this  is  one  great  indication  for  its  employment  in  homoeo- 
pathic practice.  A  cure  of  pseudo-hypertrophic  paralysis  by  the  200th 
has  been  recorded.^   A  condition  resembling   catalepsy  has  b^n 


CURARE  645 

induced  by  it ;  immobility  with  fixed  gaze  on  waking.  Petidity 
characterises  many  of  the  secretions  and  discharges.  Two  cases  of 
diabetes  in  middle-aged  men  have  been  cured  by  Burkhardt  with 
Cur.  4.  It  is  suited  to  scrofulous  children  ;  producing  scrofulous 
eruptions  on  skin,  eczema,  especially  of  face  and  behind  ears  ;  also 
liver-spots,  yellow-brown.  It  favours  the  formation  of  corns. 
Debility  short  of  paralysis  indicates  it ;  debility  of  the  aged,  and 
nervous  debility  from  loss  of  fluids.  Its  relation  to  hydrophobia 
and  tetanus  is  probably  antipathic.  It  causes  a  sensation  as  if  the 
brain  were  full  of  fluid.  Piercing,  lancinating  pains.  Throbbing 
pains.  Weakness ;  heaviness ;  numbness  ;  numbness  with  tingling. 
<  By  movement ;  walking ;  ascending.  <  Dampness,  cold  air,  cold 
weather,  cold  wind,  change  of  weather.  <  2  a.m.  and  2-3  p.m. 
Many  symptoms  appear  on  right  side. 

Relations. — In  cases  of  poisoning  artificial  respiration  must  be 
resorted  to.  Bromine  and  Chlorine  antidote  its  effects.  If  the 
poisoning  is  due  to  a  punctured  wound,  rubbing  in  tobacco  or  salt  will 
neutralise  it.  It  is  an  antidote  to :  Strychnia  and  to  the  poison  of 
rabies.  Compatible :  After  Am.  (paralysis  from  injury)  after  Bell, 
(parsdysis  after  epistaxis).  Follows  well  in  debility  of  the  aged  :  Bar.  c. 
Compare :  Nux  v. ;  Aran.  d.  (fever  <  in  damp  weather ;  Ferr. 
(hammering  pains  in  head^.  Crotal  (blows  in  region  of  cerebellum). 
In  yeUow-brown  spots  on  skin  (Sep.,  Lye,  Nux,  Sul.). 


SYHPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Inability  to  think  or  study  ;  forgetful ;  stupid  ;  sleepy  ; 
indolent. — ^Indecision. — Excited,  hurried  feeling. — Depressed;  desire  to  be 
alone. 

8.  Head. — Instant  giddiness ;  falling  in  swoon  while  standing  or  walk- 
ing.— Dizzy  when  looking  at  near  objects  or  at  water. — Head  confused,  great 
wei^t  in  vertex. — Nervous  headache ;  lancinating,  piercing  pains  all  over  head 
compelling  to  lie  down  and  stretch ;  head  drawn  backward  with  stiffness  of 
neck ;  painful  oscillation  of  brain,  as  if  it  were  full  of  fluid ;  neiiralgic  pain  start- 
ing in  front  and  radiating  to  neck  and  face  ;  violent  blows  in  region  of  cere- 
bellum.— Darting  through  temples,  <r.— Headache  from  base  of  brain  up,< 
from  mastication. — Headache  :  despairing  of  power  of  thought ;  <  vigorous 
movement,  or  stooping. — Shattered,  torn  feeling  on  coughing,  side  of  head 
must  t>e  held.— Sharp  sticking  over  r.  eye  extending  backwards  over  r.  side 
of  head. — Head  beats  like  a  hammer,  with  vomiting  of  bile. — Rush  of  blood 
to  head. 

3.  Eyes. — Heavy  eyes ;  lids  can  hardly  be  kept  open ;  ptosis  (r.). — Eyes 
hazard,  sunken. — Red,  hot ;  sensitive  to  light. — Feel  as  if  full  of  sticks. — 
Black  spots  before  vision,  esp.  <  from  reading. 

4.  Ears. — Different  noises  as  of  whistling,  or  crying  of  animals ;  ringing 
in  r.  ear. — Lancinating  pains  starting  from  ears  and  reaching  down  legs,  com- 
pelling to  lie  down. — Otitis  interna,  driving  crazy,  purulent  discharge. 

5.  Nose. — Nasal  catarrh.— Ozaena ;  fetid  lumps  of  pus. 

0.    Face.— Paralysis  of  muscles  of  expression.— Red  face,  head  beats  like 


646  CURARE 

a  hammer;  after  fever;  with  cough. — ^Aching  r.  side  of  face. — ^Facial  aod 
buccal  paraljrsis ;  in  some  cases  with  difficulty  of  swallowing. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  and  mouth  drawn  to  r.^Tongue  coated. — On 
waking  tongue  yellowish  at  base,  papillae  raised,  light  pink  anteriorly,  bitter 
or  bloody  taste,  yellow-white. — Mouth  dry. 

zi.  Stomach.— Thirst  and  great  hunger  with  fever.— Sodden  hunger 
almost  to  faintness. — Great  thirst  esp.  evening  and  night — Craves  adds. — 
Aversion  to  bread. —  >  After  first  mouthful  of  food.--Chill  after  eating. — 
Hiccough  frequent  and  annoying. — Nausea  in  morning ;  after  eating. — Vomits 
green  bile  all  night ;  so  weak  can  hardly  stand.*— Empty,  gone  feeling  in 
stomach. — Sharp  rheumatic  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  followed  by  nausea. — 
Shooting  in  stomach.— Pyrosis,  pain  and  distension  after  eating  ever  so  little. 

xa.  Abdomen.— Weary  ache  from  throat  to  1.  hip. — Bowels  feel  sore 
and  bruised. — Pain  in  groin  low  down  with  heaviness  in  limbs  while  walking. 
— Neuralgic  pain  in  hypogastrium  with  pressure  in  vagina. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea  with  constant  urging;  fetid,  thin 
mush-like  faeces,  excessive  pain  in  piles. — Extreme  watery  diarrhcea. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Clear  and  frequent  urine,  with  digging,  crampy 
pain  in  kidneys  ;  shooting  in  stomach ;  dry  mouth ;  great  thirst,  esp.  evening 
and  night ;  sugar  in  urine ;  great  emaciation ;  (acute  diabetes). — ^Unne  copious, 
urgent ;  bladder  feels  distended. 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  seven  days  too  early,  griping  in 
r.  ovary,  bearing-down,  dragging,  tired,  in  all  pelvic  organs,  severe  (causing 
faintness)  in  lumbo-sacral  spine,  running  down  thighs,  flow  scanty,  very  dark, 
lasting  three  days  instead  of  five. — Ulcerations  of  os  uteri  (scirrhus),  ichorous, 
corroding  discharge ;  bearing-down  pains  in  womb ;  shocks,  sharp  shooting 
stitches,  quivering. — Ulcerations,  smarting  in  vulva  and  thighs ;  shooting  and 
digging  pains  in  womb. — Indolence,  night  sweats,  repugnance  to  sexual  inter- 
course (vaginitis). — During  menses :  colic,  headache,  pains  in  kidne3rs,  malaise, 
hypochondriasis. — Leucorrhcea,  thick,  purulent,  offensive,  in  clots. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Dyspnoea,  stitching  pains  r.  side. — Dyspnoea 
from  weakness  of  motor  nerves  as  in  phthisis  or  emphysema. — ParaJysis  of 
respiration. — Dyspnoea  <  ascending. — Short,  hacking  cough,  always  dry,  with 
soreness  of  chest  walls,  <  damp  weather,  or  laughing;  spasmodic,  ^akes 
whole  body,  as  vomiting,  is  often  followed  by  vomiting ;  ssi  headache,  red 
face. — Cough  always  troublesome  in  morning. — Cough  <  breathing  cold  air ; 
laughing;  moving;  eating.— Burning  heat  in  throat  with  sensation  of  dis- 
tension.—Severe  pains  in  lungs,  esp.  1. ;  sharp,  piercing  pain  through  chest, 
always  much  <  in  damp  weather ;  dyspnoea,  chronic  cough. 

18.  Chest. — Chest  sore,  can  hardly  bear  pressure  of  stethoscope. 

ig.  Heart. — Precordial  anguish,  with  palpitation  and  stinging  pains  in 
heart. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  in  neck,  head  drawn  back. — Stiffness  <rf 
muscles  of  r.  neck  and  shotilder. — Dull,  tired  ache  in  shoulders  and  across 
back  ;  numb,  tired  pains  up  and  down  spine  and  in  head. — Chills  running  up 
back  and  all  over  body. 

91.  Limbs. — Paralysis  of  extremities  burning  with  heat  and  chills. — 
Aching  in  all  the  limbs  and  body. — Numbness  and  tingling. 

99.    Upper  Limbs. — Complete  paralysis  of  r.  deltoid. — ^Pain  and  numb- 


CYCLAMEN  647 

ness  1.  side  of  chest  and  L  arm. — Leaden  heaviness  in  arm  increasing  difficulty 
in  playing  piano. — In  evening,  arms  and  hands  swollen,  more  painful  and 
heavy. — Great  weakness,  esp.  of  wrists  and  hands. 

S3.  Lower  Limbs. — Legs  tremble  and  give  way  in  walking. — Sciatica 
with  great  stifEness. — Corns. 

25.  Skin. — Body  blue,  and  yet  fever. — ^Itching  with  hunger. — Eczema. — 
Liver-spots. 

90.  Sleep. — Drowsy;  cannot  keep  awake. — Nights  restless,  always 
desiring  to  put  feet  out  of  bed,  esp.  towards  morning. — Cannot  sleep  late 
enough  to  obtain  a  good  nighf  s  rest ;  dreams  of  fire  and  the  business  of  day ; 
<  from  lying  long  in  bed,  must  get  up  as  her  feet  and  back  ache. 

27.  Fever. — Chill ;  creeping  up  back  ;  from  stomach ;  on  abdomen,  and 
spreading  all  over  ;  without  thirst. — Heat  <  at  night  and  in  open  air. — Sweat 
with  every  exertion. — Sweat,  cold  and  bloody,  esp.  at  nights. 


Gydamen. 


Cyclamen  Europaeum.    Sow-bread.    N.  O.  Primulaceae.    Tincture  of 
the  root  gathered  in  spring 

CHai^iAl- — ^Anaemia.  Bones,  pain  in.  Chlorosis.  Climacteric  sufferings.  Coryza. 
Diplopia.  Dyspepsia.  Enteralgia.  Eyes^  affections  oj.  Headache.  Heel,  pain  in. 
Hiccough,  Menstruation,  disorders  of.  Mental  derangement.  Pregnancy,  sick- 
ness of;  disorders  of.  Prostatitis.  Rheumatism.  Strabismus.  Thirsty  absence  of. 
Urethritis.    Vertigo.    Weaning,  complaints  after.    Writer's  spasm. 

CharaoteriBtioflk — Cyclamen  has  a  traditional  reputation  as  a 
remedy  for  a£Fections  of  the  uterus  and  appendages.  The  later 
provings  have  demonstrated  the  correctness  of  this.  It  is  in  many 
ways  analogous  to  Pulsatilla,  from  which  it  differs  mainly  in  having 
no  >  from  open  air  ;  and  in  not  having  thirstlessness  as  so  frequent 
an  accompaniment  of  other  conditions. 

It  is  suited  to  the  phlegmatic  temperament ;  blonde  leuco- 
phlegmatic  subjects  with  chlorotic  conditions  ;  disinclined  for  labour 
and  easily  fatigued ;  special  senses  enfeebled  or  their  functions  sus- 
pended. Debility,  torpidity  of  mind  and  body.  Dulness  of  senses  ; 
flickering  before  the  eyes  ;  squint,  especially  in  connection  with 
menstrual  irregularities  or  fevers  ;  after  convulsions,  convergent  squint ; 
left  eye  drawn  inwards.  Amblyopia,  diplopia,  hemiopia.  Many 
digestive  disturbances  ;  saliva  has  a  salty  taste,  which  is  communicated 
to  all  food  eaten.  After  eating  but  little,  satiety,  aversion  to  food,  with 
nausea  in  palate  and  thirst.  Desire  for  lemonade.  Aversion  to  bread, 
butter,  meat,  fat,  beer,  and  ordinary  food  ;  craving  for  inedible  things  ; 
for  sardines.  Frequent  vomiting  in  morning.  Hiccough  is  very 
marked.  Hiccough  during  pregnancy.  Prostatic  troubles,  with 
stitches  and  pressure,  urging  to  stool  and  micturition.  Menstruation 
too  early,  with  some  relief  of  melancholy  mood  and  heaviness  of 
feet.  Scanty  or  suppressed  menstruation,  with  headache  and  vertigo. 
During  pregnancy  :   hiccough  ;  loathing  and  nausea  in  mouth  and 


648  CYCLAMEN 

throat ;  complaints  after  weaning.  Pressing,  drawing,  or  tearing  pains 
at  parts  where  bones  lie  near  surface.  Chilliness.  Itching  leaving  a 
numb  sensation.  Chilblains;  itching  and  pricking,  <  at  night  in 
bed.  Eidherr,  of  Vienna,  has  given  the  best  account  of  this  remedy 
{Allg,  Horn.  ZeiL,  liv.  7,  translated  H.R.j  viii.  558).  Hahnemann 
proved  it  on  males  ordy,  eliciting  as  leading  symptoms :  "  Stupor, 
sluggish  memory,  vertigo^  dull,  pressing  headache,  obscured  sight, 
dilated  pupils,  drawing  pains  in  neck  and  teeth ;  nausea,  emctationy 
disgust  for  food,  hiccough  following  soon  after  dinner ;  stitching, 
pinching  pains  in  abdomen ;  flatulence  and  pressure  to  urinate. 
Oppression  of  chest,  pressing  pain  in  chest,  drawing  and  stitching 
pain  in  back.  Sawing  pressure,  drawing  and  stitching  in  extremities  ; 
prostration  and  itching.  Moroseness,  sleepiness,  lassitude,  troubled, 
heavy  dreams  ;  chilliness  of  whole  body  alternating  with  heat,  thirst- 
lessness,  disinclination  for  work  or  conversation,  great  dejection  and 
melancholy ;  at  times  joyous  sensations  with  lively  phantasies."  The 
Vienna  provings  corroborated  these,  but,  including  both  sexes,  also 
elicited  symptoms  in  the  female  sexual  sphere :  Menstruation  more 
copious ;  more  frequent ;  too  early,  with  severe  abdominal  pains. 
Accompanied  with  labour-like  pains ;  flow  excessive,  black  and  lumpy. 
Recommencement  of  menses  after  protracted  cessation  (cliniod). 
Eidherr's  clinical  experience  illustrates  in  a  remarkable  way 
Cyclamen's  sphere  of  action.  His  cases  include  :  4  of  chlorosis ;  9  of 
retarded  and  scanty  menstruation ;  18  of  complications  with  vertigo 
and  headache  accompanying  scanty  menses ;  2  of  diplopia ;  i  of 
strabismus.  In  numbers  of  cases  CycL  developed  ocular  symptoms  in 
the  patients,  in  15X  and  3X.  In  one  instance  a  higher  potency  of  the 
same  remedy  antidoted  this  efiEect  He  found  the  remedy  especially 
suited  to  blonde  leuco-phlegmatic  subjects.  (But  one  of  the  cured 
was  a  Jewess  and  was  presumably  not  a  blonde.)  It  will  be  noticed 
that  the  '^  sleepiness,  moroseness,  and  lassitude,"  and  also  the  vertigo 
noted  by  Hahnemann,  are  prominent  in  many  of  Eidherr's  cases. 
Josepha  K.,  24,  blonde,  pale  delicate  skin,  pale  lips  and  gums,  had 
menstruated  normally  till  22,  when  she  got  wet  at  a  picnic  just  as 
menstruation  was  starting.  It  stopped  at  once  and  did  not  reappear 
till  ten  months  later,  after  vigorous  use  of  all  kinds  of  domestic 
remedies.  Now  the  periods  were  accompanied  by  terrible  abdominal, 
labour-like  pains,  lasting  eleven  hours.  Menses  recurred  every  two  or 
four  months,  always  with  the  pains,  starting  from  sacrum,  extending 
along  both  sides  of  abdomen  to  pelvis.  They  were  periodical,  every  one, 
two,  or  five  minutes,  during  which  time  there  was  no  flow  ;  the  blood 
appearing  after  these  attacks  was  somewhat  watery.  Other  symptoms 
were :  Eyelids  slightly  oedematous ;  pressing  pain  in  forehead ; 
vertigo  frequently  changing  into  syncope  ;  chilliness  of  whole  body  ; 
disturbed,  unrefreshing  sleep  interspersed  with  terrible  dreams; 
continued  loathing  for  meat ;  longing  for  salt  fish  ;  frequent  vomiting 
in  morning.  After  partial  relief  from  Pul$,y  Cyclamen  made  a  complete 
cure.  The  ocular  symptoms  which  developed  were  remarkable.  The 
vertigo  and  headache  were  untouched  by  Puis.,  but  quickly  subsided 
under  CycL  15X.  On  their  disappearance  she  saw  fieiy  flames  dancing 
before    her    eyes    on  awakening  at  night,  and   in    the    morning 


CYCLAMEN  649 

she    saw    everything   double.      And    she    had    the     hallucination 
as  if  two  persons  lay  in  her  bed,  and  that  the  body  of  the  other  over- 
lapped hers  by  half.    CycL  was  discontinued  and  in  two  days  her  sight 
was  normal.    Anna  F.,  20,  blonde,  menstruated  since  her  tenth  year. 
In  seventeenth  year  suffered  from  chlorosis ;  ever  since,  menstruation 
regular,  but  lasting  only  one-two  days  in  a  moderate  degree.     Is 
troubled  also  at  other  times  by  vertigo  and  pressing  pain  in  forehead 
and  temples,  which  attacks  are  ameliorated  by  footbaths  with  ashes. 
Appetite  poor ;  little  thirst ;  stool  regular ;  sleeps  too  long ;  always 
sleepy ;   is  of  dejected  mood,  morose ;   all  movements,  as  well  as 
speech,  languid ;    palpitation.      Puis,    made    no  change.     CycL   3X 
quickly  improved  headache,  vertigo,  and  spirits.    After  three  days 
sight    became   obscured,  and    there  was  glimmering    before  eyes. 
A  vivacious  Jewess,  16,  menstruated  twice  regularlv  after  the  first 
commencement  in  June,  then  went  six  weeks,  ana  by  the  end  of 
December  the  recurrence  entirely  ceased.     She  lost  spirits,  sought 
seclusion,  was  offended  by  very  trifles  ;  her  usual  work  was  distasteful 
to  her,  and  she  could  not  be  prevailed  upon  to  leave  the  house  for  a 
walk.    She  would  sleep  unusually  long  in  the  morning.    The  hitherto 
blooming  girl  had  become  pale,  anaemic,  with  swollen  eyelids  ;  lips 
and  gums  pale ;  heart  turbulent    She  complained  chiefly  of  great 
lassitude  compelling  her  to  rest  frequently  on  going  up  stairs  ;  palpi- 
tation without  cause  ;  she  was  apprehensive,  had  a  feeling  as  if  all  the 
rooms  were  too  small,  and  yet  would  not  leave  the  house.     All 
pastimes  rejected  ;  was  only  content  when  she  could  seclude  herself 
and  sit  down  and  weep.     During  the  forenoon  often  had  pressing 
pains  in  forehead  with  vertigo  ;  appetite  poor ;  stool  sluggish.     March 
14th  CycL  15X  was  prescribed.    After  several  weeks  the  headache  and 
vertigo  had  become  less  severe  and  the  attacks  less  frequent.    April 
19th  the  period  set  in,  and  with  its  flow  headache  and  vertigo  left  her 
complelely.    May  15th,  menstruation  recurred  rather  copiously,  and 
the  patient  was  well.    Two  cases  of  pulmonary  catarrh  were  cured, 
both  had  pressing  headache  and  vertigo  and  one  scanty  menses  as 
well.    The  following  case  of  hemicrania  was  cured :  Theresa  F.,  37, 
had   menstruated  sparingly  and  irregularly  (often  at  two  or  three 
months'  intervals).    For  four  years  suffered  from  violent  headache 
affecting  right  side  of  head  and  face  ;  coming  every  8-14  days,  spells 
lasting  12-36  hours.    During  menstruation  the  attacks  were  extra 
severe.     Patient  was  emaciated  ;  skin,  gums,  and  lips  pale.     Right 
eye  closed  owing  to  cramps  in  eyelids ;    when  forcibly  opened  a 
stream  of  hot  tears  gushed  out ;   otherwise  the  eye  was  normal. 
Under  CycL  3  the  symptoms  diminished,  but  there  appeared  "  glitter- 
ing sparks  before  the  eyes  "  and  these  remained  after  all  symptoms 
of  headache  had  gone.    CycL  was  given  persistently,  the  periods 
became  regular  and  rather  copious  and  the  headaches  entirely  ceased. 
Another  case  (in  a  wet-nurse  who    had  just    weaned    her   baby) 
presented  imceasing,  violent,  stitching  pain  in  temporal  region  ex- 
tending to  vertex.     Throbbing  temporal  arteries.    BelL  diminished 
the  pain,  but  vertigo  came  on.    Under  CycL  3X  headache  and  vertigo 
disappeared  altogether,  but  the  patient  complained  of  her  sight  having 
become  so  weak  inat  she  did  not  dare  to  walk  alone.    This  passed  off 


650  CYCLAMEN 

when  the  medicine  was  discontinued  and  her  headache  did  not  reciir. 
CycL  15X  cured  a  boy  of  violent  squinting.  Six  months  before,  he 
had  a  fall  from  a  table  ;  convulsions  followed,  and  after  the  second 
attack  the  squinting  came  on.  Arnica  was  given  and  the  convulsions 
did  not  recur,  but  the  squinting  remained.  CycL  15X  was  given,  and 
after  a  few  weeks  the  squint  entirely  disappeared.  Wurmb  cured  a 
case  of  squint  in  a  coachman  with  CycL)  Acute  rneumatism  with 
retrocession  of  menses  was  also  cured  by  Eidherr.  His  last 
case  was  remarkable  and  important.  Theresa  P.,  30,  of  short, 
robust  stature,  had  never  been  ill  till  ten  years  previously.  At 
that  time,  wiUiout  apparent  infection,  an  eruption  appeared  over 
her  whole  body  with  terrible  itching.  It  was  declared  to  be  itch 
and  was  driven  away  with  Sulphur  ointment.  With  the  receding 
of  the  eruption  her  eyesigtit  waned  so  that  she  was  soon  unable 
to  walk  without  a  guide.  She  sees  large  objects  only  in  outline 
and  only  then  if  in  a  strong  light;  in  closed  rooms  she  cannot 
discern  anything.  The  pupils  are  dilated,  but  there  are  no  other 
objective  symptoms.  She  had  never  menstruated.  She  complains 
of  congestions  of  the  blood  about  every  three  or  four  weeks,  accom- 
panied by  headache,  a  pressing  vertigo,  heaviness  and  frequent 
trembling  of  the  lower  extremities  and  of  a  pressure  towards  the  parts. 
For  several  months  she  experienced  an  itching  of  the  skin  over  the 
whole  body,  which  becomes  intolerable,  especially  during  the  time  she 
should  have  her  period.  There  is  nothing  to  be  seen,  however,  on  the 
skin.  In  September  SuL  i^x  was  given  and  ouickly  relieved  the  skin 
symptoms  ;  but  later  (in  the  beginning  of  becember)  she  sought 
relief  for  a  violent  headache  and  vertigo.  CycL  3X  lessened  these  by 
the  fourth  day.  A  week  later  she  reported  both  symptoms  gone ; 
but  now  "  fiery  balls  danced  continually  before  her  eyes/'  Cycl,  15X 
three  times  a  day.  Shortlv  after  (December  27th)  the  fiery  trails 
ceased  to  trouble  her.  Early  in  January  the  menses  reappeared,  with 
considerable  abdominal  pains,  and  the  headache  and  vertigo  had  dis- 
appeared altogether.  Thereafter  menses  appeared  regularly  and 
copiously.  From  Dr.  Eidherr's  account  no  improvement  appears  to 
have  been  effected  in  the  power  of  vision.  Dr.  George  Royal  (of  Des 
Moines,  Iowa)  records  another  use  of  this  drug.  A  medical  man  had 
suffered  from  soreness  of  the  heel  for  over  three  months.  The  sore- 
ness seemed  to  be  in  the  bone,  and  was  <  sitting  or  standing.  Not 
so  much  noticed  on  walking.  Rhus,  Kali  bi,^  and  Phos.  ac.  had  done 
no  good.  CycL  30  cured  in  a  week.  It  also  cured,  in  three  days, 
a  case  almost  identically  similar.  The  only  <  here  was  on  standing, 
CycL  has  cured  migraine  with  scintillations  after  the  failure  of 
Iris  V.  In  the  case  recorded  the  headache  increased  as  the  vision 
returned,  the  head  seemed  about  to  burst  (Kalibi.)    Itching,  pricking 

<  at  night  in  bed.  Many  symptoms  are  <  by  rest,  >  on  walking 
about.  Sitting  <  menstrual  flow.  Drawing  shoulders  forward  <, 
drawing  them  backward  >  twinges  in  back.     Many  symptoms  are 

<  at  night.  Open  air  <,  cold  water  >  headache.  >  From  moisten- 
ing diseased  parts  and  from  bathing.     <  From  eating  at  night. 

Relations. — Fen*,  and  Chi.  resemble  it  in  chlorosis  ;  Crocus  and 
Thuja  in  sensation  of  something  alive  in  abdomen  ;  Am.  mur.  (menses 


CYCLAMEN  651 

<  at  night) ;  Iris  v.  and  Kali  bi.  (migraine  with  scintillations ;  head- 
ache <  as  sight  returns,  Kali  bi.) ;  Coccus  c.  Heucorrhcea  <  sitting  > 
walking ;  CycL  menses  <  sitting  >  walking)  ;  Rhus  t.  (enteralgia)  ; 
Gels,  and  Seneg.  (diplopia),  Am.  (falls) ;  Baryt.  c,  Calc.  c,  Canth. 
(chilly  and  fever) ;  Coccul.  In  speedy  satiety,  Lye,  Nux,  Sep.  In 
prostatitis  and  urethritis,  Lith.  c,  Dig.,  Sel.,  Caust.,  Lye,  Apis ;  in 
squint,  Alum. ;  sudden  vanishing  of  sight  with  menses,  Sep.,  Pul.  (Pul. 
scanty,  Cyc.  profuse  and  dark) ;  nausea  in  throat,  Sep.  Berb.,  pain 
in  heels  on  standing.  Desire  for  lemonade,  Bell.,  Sabi.  Antidoted 
by:  Camph.,  CofF.,  Puis.  (The  modalities  of  Cycl.  are  in  general 
opposite  to  those  of  Puis. ;  the  menstrual  flow  of  Cycl.  is  more 
profuse  while  at  rest ;  with  Puis,  the  opposite  is  the  case). 

STHPTOMS. 

z.  Mind. — ^Taciturn,  depressed,  out  of  humour. — Sudden  change  of  sad- 
ness and  cheerfulness. — ^Weakness  of  memory. — Secret  vexation  and  troubled 
conscience. — Ill-humour  and  slovenliness,  with  dislike  to  conversation,  by  fits. 
— Love  of  labour,  alternately  with  indolence. — Memory  alternately  quick  and 
weak. — Dulness  and  ^confusion  of  mind,  with  unfitness  for  every  kind  of 
labour. — Hallucination  as  if  two  persons  lay  in  her  bed,  and  that  the  body  of 
the  other  overlapped  hers  by  half. 

s.  Head.— Vertigo,  when  standing  (when  ileaning  against  anything), 
as  if  the  brain  were  moving. — ^Vertigo ;  <  when  exercising  in  the  open  air, 

>  when  sitting  in  a  room. — Headache  in  the  morning,  when  rising. — Numbing 
headache,  with  obscuration  of  the  eyes. — Migraine  with  scintillations  before 
the  eyes  ;  as  vision  returns,  head  seems  about  to  burst. — Shootings  in  the 
brain  on  stooping. — Shootings  in  the  temples  (in  the  1.  temple,  the  forehead, 
with  dizziness). — Pricking  itching  in  the  scalp,  which  only  changes  its 
situation  on  the  part  being  scratched  «  in  the  evening  and  when  at  rest, 

>  from  motion).*-Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head ;  increased  sensation  of 
heat  in  the  head. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Eyes  dull  and  hollow. — Shootings  in  the  eyes  and  the  eyelids. 
— Swelling  of  the  eyelids. — Itching  of  the  eyelids. — Pupils  dilated. — ^The  eyes 
lie  deep  in  the  orbits,  look  dim,  and  are  surrounded  by  blue  rings. — Double 
vision ;  strabismus. — Burning  in  the  eyes ;  <  when  reading. — Sight  con- 
fused, as  if  looking  through  a  cloud. — Glimmering  and  glittering  before  the 
sight — Fiery  flames  dancing  before  eyes. 

4*  Bars. — Drawing  in  the  ears. — Diminution  of  hearing,  as  if  the  ears 
were  stopped. 

5.  Nose. —  Diminution  of  smell.  —  Fluent  coryza,  with  sneezing 
(morning). 

7.  Teeth. — ^Toothache,  with  dull  tractions  at  night. — Shootings  and 
piercings  in  the  teeth. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  loaded  with  a  white  coating.— Constant  sensation 
of  ron^ness  and  of  mucus  in  the  mouth. — Sensation  of  torpor  in  the  upper 
lip,  as  if  it  were  hardened. — Dryness  of  the  lips,  without  thirst. — Mouth  and 
throat  redder  than  usual. — Fine  stitches  on  the  suriace  of  the  tongue. — Burn- 
ing on  the  tip  of  the  tongue  (evening).— In  the  evening,  great  drjmess  in  the 


652  CYCLAMEN 

palate,  widi  hanger  and  thirst — ^The  tonsils  and  palate  are  shrivelled  and 
white. 

g.    Throat. — Dryness   in  the   throat. — Sensation  of  painful  constric- 
tion in  the  throat. — Burning  and  scraping  in  throat — Nausea  in  throat 

10.  Appetite. — Putrid  taste  in  the  mouth. — Insipid  taste  of  all  food. — 
No  thirst  all  day,  but  it  occurs  in  evening  as  face  and  hands  become  warm. — 
Hunger  and  appetite  rather  weak,  esp.  in  the  morning  and  in  the  even- 
ing.— Speedy  satiety,  followed  by  disgust,  on  beginning  to  eat — ^After  eating 
but  little,  aversion  to  the  rest  of  the  food,  with  sensation  of  nausea  in  the 
throat. — Repugnance  to  butter  (aversion  to  eat  bread  and  butter),  and  cold 
food  ;  less  aversion  to  warm  food. — Great  inclination  to  sleep  after  a  meat 

11.  Stomach. — Frequent  risings,  empty  or  acid. — Risings,  with  hiccough, 
esp.  after  a  meal. — Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  and  uneasiness  in  the 
region  of  the  epigastrium,  as  after  taking  fat  food,  esp.  after  dinner  and  supper. 
— Nausea  and  fulness  in  the  chest,  with  unusual  hunger  (morning). — Nausea 
caused  by  eating  and  drinking;  could  only  drink  lemonade  without  being 
nauseated. — ^Vomiting  of  mucus  followed  by  sleep. — ^Vomiting  of  blood.— 
Water-brash,  with  nausea,  esp.  in  the  evening. 

IS.  Abdomen. — Fulness  and  pressure  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  it 
were  overloaded.— Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  with  nausea.— -Painful  sensi- 
bility of  the  abdomen,  on  the  slightest  touch. — Sudden  attacks  of  griping,  with 
pinching. — Stitches  in  the  stomach,  region  of  the  liver,  navel,  abdomen. — 
—  Borborygmi  in  the  abdomen,  immediately  after  a  meat 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Evacuations  hard  and  frequent. — Evacuations 
of  the  consistence  of  pap,  with  vomiting  at  night. — Pressure  in  the  rectum. — 
Discharge  of  blood  from  the  rectum. — Drawing  pressure  in  the  anu%  and  in 
the  perineum,  as  from  subcutaneous  ulceration,  when  walking  or  sitting. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  want  to  make  water,  with  abundant 
emission  of  whitish  urine. — Shootings  in  the  urethra,  when  making  water, 
followed  by  a  sudden  discharge  of  a  dark  red  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.-~The  prepuce  and  corona  glandis  feel  sore 
from  slight  rubbing. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Catamenia  too  profuse  and  too  frequent 
— Before  menstruation  (at  night)  labour-like  pains ;  the  abdomen  was  bloated 
and  swollen  on  the  previous  day  ;  the  menstrual  blood  is  black  and  clotted. — 
Secretion  from  the  swollen  mammae  like  milk. — Menses  suppressed. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — ^When  reading  aloud  the  voice  is  weak. — 
Scraping  and  dryness  in  the  pharnyx,  causing  a  su£Focative  cough. 

18.  Chest. — In  the  evening,  shortness  of  breath,  as  from  weakness. — ^Pits 
of  suffocation. — Pressure  in  the  sternum. — Oppression  of  the  chest,  with  diffi- 
culty of  respiration. — Sensation  of  great  weakness  in  the  chest,  as  if  there  was 
not  strength  enough  'to  breathe. — Lancinations,  and  acute  puUings  in  the 
chest,  with  short  and  difficult  respiration. 

19.  Heart. — Pressure  on  the  heart,  as  from  congestion  of  blood,  with 
very  sensible  palpitations  of  the  heart ;  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  heart 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — Pains  of  excoriation  in  the  nape  of  the  neck. — 
Aching,  with  paralytic  weakness,  or  traction  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  in 
the  neck.^Shooting  pains  in  the  loins. — Dull  stitches  in  the  region  of  the 
kidney ;  worse  when  drawing  a  long  breath. 


CYPRIPEDIUM  653 

22.  Upper  Limbs.— Pressurei  as  by  a  hard  body,  on  the  amis,  as  far  as 
the  fingers,  which  hinders  writing.— Tractive  pains  in  the  arms,  and  as  far  as 
the  fingers.— Cramp-lilte,  slow  contraction  of  the  right  thumb  and  index ;  they 
have  to  be  extended  by  force. — Pains  in  bones  of  forearms,  bruise-like,  <  by 
touch,  pressure,  movement. — Pain,  as  after  being  struck,  or  pain  of  bruising  in 
the  arms. — ^Painf ul  traction  in  the  arms,  and  in  the  wrist. — Contraction  of  the 
fingers. — Red  vesicles  in  the  joints  of  the  fingers,  preceded  by  violent  itching 
ceasing  after  scratching. 

^  Lower  Limbs. — Cramp-like  pains  in  the  thighs. — Red  spots  in  the 
thigh,  as  from  a  burn.— Frequent  and  violent  itching  in  the  calves  of  the  legs, 
in  the  ankle-bones  and  in  the  toes. — Pain  of  dislocation  in  the  joints  of  the 
foot — Sensation  as  if  sprained  in  the  1.  foot. — Soreness  of  the  heels  when 
walking. — Pains  of  excoriation  in  the  toes,  when  walking. — Deadness  of  the 
toes  after  walking. — Fetid  sweat  between  the  toes. 

94.  Greneralities.- Pressive  traction,  or  tearings,  chiefly  where  the  bones 
are  covered  by  the  skin. — ^Mections  of  the  inner  temples  ;  want  of  appetite  ; 
nausea  in  the  throat ;  hiccough ;  simple  pressure  in  the  muscles ;  tearing 
with  drawing  and  pressure  in  the  bones;  pain  as  if  paralyzed.— During 
movement,  all  the  sufiFerings,  except  dejection,  disappear;  but  numerous 
symptoms  show  themselves  when  in  a  sitting  posture. — Great  lassitude,  esp. 
evening,  with  painful  weariness  and  stiffness  in  the  legs,  and  drawing 
pressure  in  thighs  and  knees. 

95.  Skin. — Gnawing  itching  in  several  parts  of  the  skin,  esp.  when 
seated. — Darting  and  insupportable  itching,  in  the  evening  in  bed. 

96.  Sleep. — Great  inclination  to  lie  down,  and  to  sleep. — Late  sleep  in  the 
evening,  with  sensible  pulsations  in  the  brain. — Nightmare  on  falling  asleep. 
— Unrefreshing  sleep  interfused  with  terrible  dreams. 

97.  Fever.— Pulse  double-beat — ^Attacks  of  chilliness  in  the  morning  or 
evening. — During  the  evening  chill,  great  sensitiveness  to  cold  air  or  to  being 
uncovered. — Febrile  shivering  and  cold,  followed  by  heat,  esp.  in  the  face, 
with  redness,  augmented  after  a  meal ;  afterwards  anxiety,  with  heat  in  some 
parts,  in  the  back  of  the  hand,  and  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  but  not  in  the  face. 


Gypripedium. 


Lady's  Slipper.    N.  0.  Orcbidaceae.    Tincture  and  infusions  of  fresh 
root  gathered  in  autumn. 

GUnioaL-^Brain  affections.  Chorea.  Conviilsions.  Debility  and  sleeplessness. 
Delirium  tremens.  Ecstasy.  Epilepsy.  Mental  despondency.  Nervous  debility. 
Neuralgia.    Post-influenzal  debility.    Sleeplessness.    SpennatorrhoBa.    Stye. 

Charaoteristics. — Cypr.  has  great  repute  as  a  "  nervine ''  among 
eclectics,  and  in  domestic  practice.  It  ranks  with  Scutellaria  and 
Valerian.  A  strong  infusion  causes  exhilaration  followed  by  calm- 
ness ;  and  is  much  resorted  to  by  women  whose  nerves  are  shattered 
by  long  illness,  or  excessive  indulgence  in  green-tea  or  coffee  (Hale). 
It  is  suited  to  nervous  disorders  from  mental  over-excitement,  or 


654  CYPRIPEDIUM 

reflex  nervous  excitement ;  to  nervous  weakness  following  influeiusa. 
It  is  indicated  in  the  brain-hyperesthesia  of  children  who  wake  in  the 
night  lively  and  full  of  play.  Ecstasy,  preliminary  to  incipient  brain 
disorder.  Epilepsy  from  reflex  irritation.  Jactitation  and  trembling ; 
twitching  of  limbs. 

UtiSkHowL'— Compare :  Ambra,  Coca,  Ign.,  Kali  bro.,  Paull.,  Thea, 
Scutel.,  Valer.,  Zinc.   In  ecstasy,  Coff ea.    AtUidote  to :  Rhus  poisoning. 

STMPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — Irascibility  and  fitfulness ;  hysterical  sjrmptoms ;  sleepless- 
ness ;  agitation. — Indifference. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo  followed  by  heaviness  and  dragging  of  L  foot 

3.  Eyes. — Stye  on  r.  lower  hd. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Spermatorrhoea  with  great  nervous  pros- 
tration and  dejection  of  spirits. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— -Amenorrhoea,  with  hysteria.— Great 
nervous  debility  and  despondency. — Irritability  of  vagina ;  hysterical  symptoms, 
sleeplessness  and  agitation. 

26.  Sleep. — Sleeplessness :  with  desire  to  talk,  a  constant  crowding  of 
pleasant  ideas;  with  restlessness  of  body;  twitching  of  limbs;  after  mis- 
carriage for  several  nights  in  succession. — Ecstasy ;  children  awaken  in  ni^t 
from  sleepi  "  wide-awake/'  unnaturally  playful,  with  no  desire  to  go  to  sleep 
again  (often  a  preliminary  to  some  brain  affection). 


liOSTOX  rXIVKRSITY 


Schc:,'  \ii  ..'.cuicinc 


Damiana,  see  Tarnera  Aphrodisiaca. 
Daphne  Indioa. 

Daphne  odora.    Sweet-scented  Spurge  Laurel.     N.  0,  Thymelaceae. 
Tincture  of  fresh  bark. 

OIlnkaL^Amaurosis.  Amblyopia.  Constipation.  Cough.  Eyes,  affections  of . 
Exostosis.  Fever.  Gastralgia.  Gonorrhoea!  rheumatism.  Gout.  Leprosy.  Mer- 
corio-syphilis.  Prostatorrhoea.  Rheumatism.  Splenitis.  Sleeplessness.  Tooth- 
ache. 

Charaoteristios.— Da^A.  ind.  was  proved  by  G.  Bute.  It  is  like  its 
relative  D.  tnezereon  in  producing  affections  of  muscles,  bones,  and 
skin,  hence  its  relation  to  syphilis  and  the  anti-syphiUtic  remedies 
Aur.^  MerCf  Staph.  Its  pains  are  erratic  and  electric-like.  It  is  like 
Jambos  in  the  craving  for  tobacco.  The  skin  is  clammy.  Red  rash 
m  spots  on  legs  in  evening.  Itching.  Daphne  oleoides  is  credited  by 
Hering  with  relieving  leprosy.  A  peculiar  symptom  of  Daphne  is--^ 
tongue  coated  on  one  side  only  (Rhus  has  the  same,  only  the  Rhus 
coating  is  specified  as  white).  Other  symptoms  are  :  Foul-smelling 
tongue.  Ptyalism  with  hot  saliva.  Cold  feeling  on  buttocks.  Sudden 
stitch  in  region  of  spleen.  Fetidity  is  a  marked  feature — breath, 
urine,  sweat.  The  pains  are  apt  to  be  sudden.  They  wander 
suddenly  from  extremities.  Ball  of  right  great  toe  swollen  and  very 
pamful ;  the  pain  suddenly  shoots  into  the  body  to  region  of  heart,  or 
some  other  part  of  body  to  abdomen.  It  is  probable  that  a  sensation 
of  parts  of  the  body  being  separated  from  one  another  is  characteristic 
of  Daphne,  The  symptoms  of  sensation  as  if  the  head  were  separated 
appeared  in  the  proving  (see  20) ;  and  Erastus  £.  Case  has  recorded  the 
cure  of  a  man,  45,  obese,  rheumatic,  who  presented  these  symptoms: 
*'  Swaying  sensation  in  the  head  when  walking.  Constant  sensation 
as  if  the  head  were  separated  from  the  body.  Sensation  as  if  the 
vertex  were  screwed  up  in  a  vice.  While  driving  a  horse,  sensation 
as  if  the  arms  were  detached  from  the  body,  yet  they  are  under 
complete  control  of  the  will."    The  gastric  symptoms  are  <  from 

655 


656  DAPHNE   INDICA 

alcohol ;  prostatorrhoea  <  from  tobacco.  Most  symptoms  are  <  even- 
ing and  night  (which  further  marks  its  appropriateness  in  sjrphilis). 
<  While  moon  is  on  the  wane.  Pains  are  <  from  warmth  of  bed 
Cold  air  <  wandering  gout  <  From  touch  and  pressure.  Lying 
down  <  gouty  pains ;  backache.  Stooping  or  bending  <  pains  in 
spinal  cord.    Walking  <  rheumatic  pains  in  thighs. 

Relations. — Antidotcd  by:  Bry.,  Dig.,  Rhus,  Sil.,  Sep.,  Zn. 
Antidote  to :  Chrom.  ac,  Merc.  Compare :  Thuja  (effects  of  suppressed 
gonorrhoea)  ;  Benz.  ac.  (fetid  urine) ;  Puis.,  Chi.,  Taxus  (erratic  pains) ; 
Verat.  a.  (lightning  pains) ;  Bapt.  (limbs  seem  scattered  about  the 
bed)  ;  Ars.  (body  seems  divided  at  waist).  Dirca  pal.  belongs  to  the 
same  family. 

STHPTOHS. 

I.  Mind. — Mental  dejection. — ^Timidity. — Irritability,  over-excitement, 
and  trembling,  during  the  pains. — Irascibility,  absence  of  mind,  and  in- 
decision. 

a.  Head. — Headache,  provoked  by  all  kinds  of  intellectual  labour.— 
Pain  behind  the  eyes,  from  one  temple  to  the  other. — Sensation  of  fulness  in 
the  head,  as  if  cranium  were  going  to  burst,  esp.  on  raising  oneself  in 
the  bed. — Sensation,  as  if  the  head  were  too  thick,  with  shootings  in  the 
temples. — Sensation  as  if  the  external  parts  of  the  brain  were  inflamed,  and 
were  striking  painfully  against  the  cranium. — ^Violent  heat  in  the  head, 
esp.  in  the  vertex,  and  sometimes  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  head  were 
compressed. — Painful  pulsation  in  the  temples,  and  the  gums,  sometimes  with 
pain  like,  excoriation  on  being  touched. — Exostosis  in  the  cranium.— 
Tuberosities  in  the  vertex,  soft,  as  if  there  were  water  in  them,  with  trouble- 
some pains,  esp.  at  night ;  the  pains  hinder  sleep,  and  are  <  by  the  toach. 
— Hard  swelling  of  the  whole  left  side  of  the  head,  as  if  in  the  bone,  with 
sensation  of  numbness,  and  acute,  transient,  shooting  pain. 

3.  Eyes. — Scraping  in  the  eyes. — ^Troublesome  sensation  round  the  eyes 
and  eyelids,  with  dryness  and  heaviness  of  eyelids.— Painful  feeling  in  the 
eyes,  as  if  pressed  into  the  head. — Painful  sensation  as  if  the  eyes  were  pushed 
outwards  from  the  head. — ^Violent  pains  in  the  eyeballs,  in  the  evening,  with 
great  nervous  excitement. — Contraction  of  the  pupils. — Eyes  inflamed,  weak, 
dull,  as  it  were  swimming  in  tears. — Sensation  as  if  a  membrane  were  placed 
before  the  eyes. — Weak  sight,  with  confusion  of  the  letters  when  reading. 
— Diplopia. — Pupils  very  much  contracted. 

4.  Ears. — Buzzing  in  the  ears. — Roaring  in  the  ears. 

6.  Face. — Heat  and  burning  sensation  in  the  cheeks,  round  the  ears, 
and  in  the  vertex,  sometimes  with  constant  inclination  to  yawn. — Sensation  of 
swelling,  of  stifFness  and  of  tension  in  the  temporo-maxillary  joint,  with 
burning  smarting  in  the  skin. 

7.  Teeth. — Pulsation  in  the  teeth  and  gums. — ^Acute  drawing  pains  in 
all  the  teeth. — Toothache,  with  and  without  salivation. — ^Tootbache  with 
erections,  or  after  coition. — Toothache  with  fits  of  shivering,  or  disposition 
to  perspire. 

8.  Mouth.—- Tongue  loaded,  on  one.  side  only.—Dryness  of  the  toagae 


DAPHNE   INDICA  657 

after  sleep,  as  if  it  had  been  burned. — Fetor  of  the  tongue. — Salivation ;  ^th 
toothache.^Hot  saliva. — Craving  to  smoke  tobacco. 

II.  Stomach. — Pyrosis  and  sour  vomiting. — ^Vomiting  with  nausea, 
after  breakfast. — Sensation  of  fulness  and  ebullition  in  the  precordial 
region. — ^Aching  in  the  stomach  after  drinking. — Frequent  cramps  in  the 
stomach. — ^Af  ter  each  meal,  burning  pain  and  sensation  of  excoriation  in  the 
stomach,  with  frequent  risings  of  flatus;  the  pains  extend  to  the  left 
bypochondrium  and  to  the  back. 

IS.  Abdomen. — Shootings  and  pains  in  the  region  of  the  spleen. — 
Arthritic  pains  which  pass  rapidly  from  the  limbs  to  the  abdomen. — Pain  in 
the  abdomen,  with  shiverings. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Contraction  of  the  abdomen,  and  constipation. — 
Faeces  scanty,  and  sanguineous  towards  the  end. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Frequent  and  abundant  emission  of  urine. — 
Frequent  wetting  of  the  bed  at  night. — Urine  turbid,  thick,  yellowish,  like 
rotten  eggs. — Urine  of  a  reddish  yellow  colour. — Fetid  urine. — Reddish  sedi- 
ment, which  adheres  to  the  side  of  the  vessel. — Pain,  as  from  excoriation  in 
the  urethra,  when  making  water. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Sweating  of  the  scrotum. — Discharge  of 
prostatic  fluid,  after  making  water. — Erections  during  the  toothache. — ^Tooth- 
ache after  coition. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Voice  weak.— Breath  fetid.— Expectoration 
thin,  slimy,  and  copious. — Sanguineous  expectoration.— Cough,  with  vomiting, 
and  yellowish  frothy  expectoration,  mixed  sometimes  with  streaks  of  blood  ; 
the  cough  fatigues  and  hinders  sleep. 

i^  Heart. — Palpitation  and  starting  of  the  heart,  with  inability  to 
remain  lying  on  the  left  side. — Acute  pains  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  with 
discouragement  and  trembling. — Suffocating  fits  at  night,  with  sensation  as  if 
the  glands  of  the  neck  were  swollen,  and  the  arteries  stiff  with  blood. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  with  headache. — 
Screwing  pain  from  the  ear  to  the  shoulder. — Sensation  as  though  the  cervical 
glands  were  much  swollen  and  the  arteries  excessively  distended,  with  a 
feeling  of  suffocation,  as  if  the  head  were  separated  from  the  body,  at  night. 
—Sharp  pain  beneath  1.  scapula. — Burning  itching  in  the  back. — Painful 
pulling  along  the  spinal  marrow,  <  by  stooping. 

aa.  Upper  Linit>s. — Phlyctenae,  excessive  itching  on  the  arms  and 
hands. — Bone-ache,  piercing  pains  in  the  bones  and  acute  shooting  pains  in 
the  fingers. 

Q.  Lower  Limbs. — Itching  miliary  eruption  on  the  legs. — Rheumatic 
pains  in  the  thighs  and  in  the  knees. — Cold  in  the  knees  and  in  the  feet. — Pain 
as  from  contusion  in  the  toes. — Painful  swelling  of  the  ball  of  the  great  toe, 
with  pains  which  often  pass  rapidly  into  other  parts  of  the  body. 

24.  Generalities. — Shooting  pains,  as  from  blows,  in  different  parts 
of  the  body,  passing  rapidly  from  one  part  to  the  other,  <  by  cold  air, 
and  by  taking  brandy. — Rheumatic  and  arthritic  pains  as  well  in  the  muscles 
as  in  the  bones  (esp.  after  suppressed  gonorrhoea). — Exostosis,  with  shooting, 
or  with  aching  and  dull  pains. — Pain,  resembling  excoriation,  in  the  exostosis. 
— ^The  majority  of  symptoms  exhibit  themselves  on  the  left  side  of  the  body, 
and  are  <  chiefly  by  fresh  air,  also  while  the  moon  is  waning,  in  the  morning, 

VOL.  I.  43 


658  DATURA  FEROX 

or  towards  the  evening,  and  esp.  in  bed. — Great  lassitude  and  painfal 
weariness  in  all  the  limbs. — Necessity  to  remain  lying  down. 

26.  Sleep. — Complete  sleeplessness,  caused,  sometimes,  by  aching  in 
the  bones.— Inclination  to  sleep,  with  inability  to  accomplish  it — ^Dreams  of 
fire  ;  or  of  black  cats,  with  nightmare.-— Agitated,  unref reshing  sleep. — Starts 
with  fright,  on  going  to  sleep,  accompanied  by  shivering,  with  viscid  sweat 

27.  Fever. — Fever,  similar  to  typhus,  with  excessive  shivering,  followed 
by  continued  heat,  by  viscid  sweat  over  the  whole  body,  and  complete  loss  of 
appetite. — Fever,  with  gastric  and  nervous  sufiFering.^Clammy  sweat,  oi  a 
putrid  smell. 


Datura  Arborea. 

Brugmansia    suaveolens.     N.    0.     Solanacese.     Tincture    of    the 

flowers. 

OUnleal.— Brain  afiFections.    Clairvoyance«    Vertigo. 

ChanMteFtstics.— The  odour  of  the  flowers  left  in  the  room  tvro 
days  caused  the  following  remarkable  symptoms  :  Sensation  as  if 
forehead  were  expanded  and  as  if  his  ideas  were  floating  outside  his 
brain.  Strange  feeling  of  pleasant  and  easy  comfort,  and  as  if  he 
scarcely  touched  earth  with  his  feet,  and  had  to  gather  ideas  from 
afar,  as  if  they  were  floating  in  the  clouds.  Involved  in  a  most  beauti- 
ful atmosphere,  bright  calm  as  the  sunlight  at  noon.  Sensible  con- 
fusion of  ideas  across  the  cerebrum,  with  dravdng,  nervous  irritation 
back  to  cerebellum  and  a  spinal  irritation  or  depletion  of  nervous 
circulation  in  medulla  oblongata  (whilst  handling  and  cutting  the 
flowers).  The  odour  is  also  said  to  have  caused  spasms ;  and  the 
juice  instilled  into  the  eye  causes  amaurosis  according  to  Froriep. 

RelatioilB, — Compare :  Stram. 


Datura  Ferox. 

Chinese  datura.    AT.  0.    Solanaceae.    Trituration  of  seeds.    Tincture 

of  unripe  fruit. 

OUnleal.— Delirium.    Mania. 

CharaoterlBties. — Poisoning  with  this  drug  causes  raving  mad- 
ness. A  girl  who  ate  half  an  unripe  fruit  manifested  the  following  : 
Completely  out  of  her  mind  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  dizzy,  sleepy  ; 
slept  with  eyes  open  ;  if  disturbed,  sprang  up  raving  and  uttered 
unintelligible  words  ;  if  one  sang  she  began  to  dance  in  the  Javanese 
fashion.  This  symptom  may  prove  a  keynote  in  certain  cases  of 
mental  alienation.  Dryness  of  mouth  was  also  noted  in  this  case,  as 
with  Bell,  and  other  Solanaceae. 


DERRIS  PINNATA  659 

Datura  Metel. 

Indian  Datura.    N.  O.    Solanaceae.    Trituration  of  seeds. 

CltniftaL — Convulsions.    Delirium.     Epilepsy.     Eye,  affections  of.     Mania. 
Timidity. 

Chapaoteristios. — Datur.  metel  causes  a  soporose  condition,  and 
later  delirium  and  spasms.  The  soporose  state  may  be  absent. 
Delirium  may  be  vociferous,  or  merely  garrulous.  Patient  usually 
manifests  excessive  timidity.  Picks  at  real  or  imaginary  objects.  Per- 
forms ridiculous  antics.  Several  movements  appear  due  to  perverted 
vision,  and  inability  to  judge  distances.  After  the  delirium,  patient 
remembers  nothing  of  what  has  occurred.  Extreme  dilatation  of 
pupils.  Flickering  before  eyes  with  sensitiveness  to  light.  Pulse  and 
temperature  undergo  extremes  of  exaltation  and  depression. 

BelatioiiB. — Compare  :  Other  Solanaceae. 


Derris  Pinnata. 

N.  O.    Leguminosae.    (Cochin  China.)    Tincture  of  plant. 

CHnteal. — Asthma.  Blepharospasm.  Diarrhoea.  Dysentery.  Eyes,  infl^- 
mation  of.  Locomotor  ataxy.  Mania.  Ozaena.  Smell,  sense  of,  affected.  Tic- 
douloureux. 

ChapaoteriBtiOB. — Dr.  X.  Roussel  is  the  authority  for  this  plant, 
and  some  of  the  symptoms  are  of  a  very  peculiar  nature.  "  He  walks 
as  if  stepping  on  down."  "  He  is  afraid  of  killing  some  one  with  a 
knife."  Both  kinds  of  tic  are  noted — painful  and  convulsive.  Sense 
of  smell  is  exalted.  "  He  perceives  celestial  odours ; "  also  "  intoler- 
able smells,  after  frequent  sneezing."  Viscid  urine,  and  viscid  saUva. 
Electric  shocks  and  cramps.  Heat  >  toothache.  Many  symptoms, 
including  diarrhoea,  come  on  at  night     <  From  touch. 

BbIbHowl— Compare :  Anacard.  (sense  of  smell) ;  Sticta,  &c. 
(levitation) ;  Ign.  (ball  in  throat,  hysteria). 

STHPT0H8. 

1.  Mind. — Fancies  he  is  sea-sick. — Suicidal. — Is  afraid  of  killing  some 
one  with  a  knife. — Disposed  to  strike,  and  inveighs  against  his  dearest 
friends. — ^Weeping  and  singing  alternately;  great  flow  of  ideas. — Loss  of 
memory. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo  ;  is  afraid  of  falling  if  he  turns  his  head  to  r.  or  1. — 
Sensation  as  if  needles  and  nails  were  being  driven  into  head  (6  p.m.  at  even- 
ing meal). — Painful  lancinations  1.  side  of  head  with  vomiting  of  mucus  and 
borning  along  oesophagus. — Scalp  excessively  painful ;  slightest  touch  <  the 
pain. 

3.  Eyes.— <)annot  raise  lids  or  eyebrows. — Painful  lancinations  in  both 


66o  DERRIS   PINNATA 

eyes,  extending  to  bottom  of  orbits. — Swdlingof  Lcaninculalachrymalis^th 
large  ecchymosis  of  1.  eye. — ^Vision  dim  ;  black  points  before  eye, 

4.  Ears. — Swelling,  redness  and  heat  of  auricle. — Hearing  impaired  <»- 
excessively  acute. — Cracking  in  ears  when  swallowing. 

5.  Nose. — Tip  of  nose  red. — Fluent  coryza — Sense  of  smell  exalted ; 
celestial  odours. — Intolerable  smells  after  frequent  sneezing. 

6.  Face. — Face  puffy. — ^Tic-douloureux  and  tic  convulave.  —  Burn- 
ing in  1.  cheek. — Pain  in  whole  lower  jaw  as  if  the  teeth  were  being  pulled 
out. 

7.  Teeth.— Teeth  become  loose  ;  previously  loose  teeth  become  very 
painful. — ^Toothache  at  night,  <  by  cold,  >  by  heat. 

8.  Mouth. — Formication  and  trembling  of  tongue. — Painful,  dry, 
cracked  tongue. — Salivation  with  engorged  submaxillary  glands. — Copious 
salivation,  with  aphthae,  and  thready,  viscid  mucus. 

g.  Throat. — Red  swelling  of  tonsils,  uvula  and  velum;  tickling  of 
uvula. — Sensation  as  of  ball  in  oesophagus  with  cramps  there. 

11.  Stomach. — Bad-smelling  eructations. — Hiccough  with  deep  anguish 
and  burning  in  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Sensation  of  swelling  in  liver  and  spleen.-rCramp-like 
pains;  diarrhoea  with  anguish. — Fetid  flatulence.  —  Griping,  >  lying  on 
abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.  —  Haemorrhoids;  constriction;  formication.—' 
Sensation  of  foreign  body  in  anus. — Diarrhoea  and  weakness  after  vomiting.— 
Involuntary  stools  at  night,  white  or  yellowish. — Burning  or  sharp  pains 
with  bloody  stools. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pains  in  kidneys ;  in  bladder  ;  injury  ;  some- 
times incontinence.^Gluey,  fetid  urine  discharged  gutiaUm, 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Swelling  of  uterus;  weight  behind 
uterus;  feeling  as  if  about  to  prolapse. — Leucorrhoea,  with  menstruation 
twice  a  month. — Cramp-like  pains  during  menses. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Feeling  of  suffocation  with  fetid  breath ; 
must  sit  up  in  bed  at  night. — Cramp-like  pains,  and  lancinations  behind 
sternum. 

19.    Heart. — ^Violent  palpitation  ;  heart  seems  to  be  beating  in  water. 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — ^Violent  pains  in  nape  and  neck  with  swelling. 
— Feeling  as  if  a  small  stream  of  water  was  running  from  one  ear  to  the 
other  across  nape  of  neck,  causing  terrible  pain. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Paralytic  pains,  commencing  in  entire  1.  upper 
extremity  (also  in  r.  less  frequently). — Rheumatic  pains  from  shoulder  to 
finger-tips. — Cramp-like  pains  at  insertion  of  deltoid  >  by  pressure. 

23.  LoTver  Limbs.  —  Electric  shocks  in  muscles  of  leg.  —  Intense 
sciatic  pains. — Staggers;  he  walks  as  if  stepping  on  down. 

25.  Skin. — Skin  of  abdomen  painful. 

26.  Sleep. — Sleep  after  a  meal. 


Diadema,  see  Aranea* 


DIGITALINUM  66i 

Diotamnus. 

Fiaxinellau   Dictamnus  fraxinella.    N.  0.  Rutaceae.  Tincture  of  whole 

plant 

dialmL— Constipation.    Flatulence.    Leucorrhcsa.    Metrorrhagia. 

Chanotaristios. — ^The  authorities  for  Dictamnus  are  Stoerck, 
and  Noack  and  Trinks.  The  few  symptoms  recorded  show  relation- 
ship to  Ruta, 

STMPTOHS. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Frequent  emission  of  copiousi  offensive  flatus. 
^Itching  in  anus. — Increased  stools. — Constipation. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Greatly  increased  secretion  of  urine. 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Discharge  of  much  tenacious  mucus 
from  uterus,  at  first  brown,  afterwards  white ;  at  last  streaked  with  blood. — 
Increase  of  leucorrhoea  with  distressing  tenesmus  and  painful  erosion  of 
genitals. — Profuse  metrorrhagia  for  nine  days  (recurring  after  ten  days,  upon 
the  continued  use  of  the  drug,  and  lasting  several  days  with  physical  weak- 
ness). 

27.    Fever. — Profuse  perspiration. 


Digitalinum. 


An  active  principle  (glucoside)  of    Digitalis   purpurea.      C5H8O9. 
(Schimiedeburg) ;  Cay  H45  0,5  (Kosmann).    Trituration. 

OHnteal. — Asthma.    Diarrhoea.    Emissions.    Exophthalmus.    Heart,  affections 
of.    Palpitation.    Spermatorrhoea.    Vertigo.    Vision,  hallucinations  of. 

Charaoterlstics. — Digitalinum  is  a  poison  of  very  great  activity. 
It  produces  a  profound  effect  on  muscular  tissue,  both  voluntary  and 
involuntary,  more  especially  on  the  heart.  It  causes  profound  prostra- 
tion, even  to  inabihty  to  move  a  muscle.  Paralytic  weakness  ;  numb- 
ness ;  tremulousness  of  the  limbs.  Cold,  clammy  surface.  Goose- 
flesh.  The  heart  is  slowed,  or  else  its  action  is  made  rapid  and  feeble 
or  *'  sensation  as  if  the  heart  stood  still."  Digitalis  has  :  Sensation  as 
if  the  heart  would  stand  still  if  he  moved.  According  to  Hale  Dgn.  is 
specially  indicated  in  cases  of  "  overburdened  heart  where  it  is  con- 
stantly labouring,"  Irregular  and  intermittent  action.  A  sinking,  faint 
sensation  is  felt  at  the  epigastrium,  nausea  and  vomiting  of  yolk-of-egg 
matter,  shivering,  diarrhoea,  the  stools  not  being  noted  characteristi- 
cally white  as  are  those  of  the  plant.  Sensitiveness  of  eyes  to  light  and 
nose  to  odours.  Disorders  of  vision  and  hearing  are  very  numerous. 
One  prover  noted  "frontal  headache,  dazzlings,  loss  of  appetite, 
sinking  at  epigastrium,  intestinal  flatulence,  borborygmi,  eructation, 
sUght  abdominal  pains ;  urine  abundant ;  great  fatigue  ;  painful  heat 
in  evening  but  no  thirst."  For  a  whole  day  pressure  in  supra-orbital 
region  towards  frontal  sinus,  and  when  walking  a  feeling  as  if  the 


662  DIGITALINUM 

ground  gave  way  under  his  feet.  Sexual  weakness  is  shown  in : 
"  Deep  sleep  in  which  an  emission  occurs  without  waking  him  ; "  and 
"  Sexual  power  diminished  or  quite  abolished  temporarily."    Dgn.  has 

cured  the  following  case  :  Mrs. had  for  over  a  year  swelling  of 

right  hand  and  fingers,  which  she  thought  to  be  rhemnatic.  Digitalis 
has  the  symptom,  "  swelling  of  right  hand  and  fingers,"  and  this 
would  have  been  given  but  only  Digitalin  was  at  hand.  This  was 
given  in  4X.  After  the  second  dose  the  sweUing  began  to  subside, 
and  in  two  or  three  days  was  completely  gone.  (H.  W.,  xxvi.  552). 
The  heart  pains  are  <  lying  on  left  side.  Many  symptoms  appear  on 
waking  in  the  morning ;  chilliness  and  fever  in  afternoon  and  even- 
ing. Confusion  of  the  head  is  >  walking  in  open  air.  Symptoms 
are  >  after  dinner.  Drinking  s=  nausea,  and  vomiting.  Pains  in  tnmk 
<  during  rest. 

Relations. — Compare :  Digitalis,  Conium,  GratioL,  Tabac., 
Gelsem.,  Secale.    See  under  Digitalis. 

STHPTOHS. 

I.  Mind.— Agitation.— Hallucinations.— Irritability.— Sometimes  dejec- 
tion, sometimes  hilariousness. — Inability  to  fix  attention ;  or  to  take  in  what 
is  read. 

a.  Head.— -Vertigo,  with  unsteady  vision;  inability  to  fix  distant 
objects. — Objects  seem  to  turn  horizontally  from  1.  to  r. ;  >  closing  eyes. — 
Head  thrown  back. — Lancinating  pain  in  head  ;  hot  and  confused  towards 
evening. — Forehead  heavy,  hot — Headache  in  morning,  worse  in  afternoon, 
and  increasing  in  evening  to  a  violent  migraine. — A  peculiar  sensation  of 
drawing,  of  raising  up  in  occiput  and  vertex ;  afterwards  a  pressure  in 
occiput. 

3.  Eyes. — Sensation  as  if  the  eyes  were  becoming  larger  and  were 
starting  from  their  orbits ;  exophthalmus. — Hallucinations  of  vision. — 
Muscae  volitantes,  in  evening  upper  part  of  visual  field  seemed  shaded  by  a 
cloud. — Flickering  and  dazzling. — A  large  bright  spot  advancing,  sometimes 
resembling  a  ring  showing  prismatic  colours ;  <  after  exertion. — Circles 
floating  before  eyes. — ^All  objects  in  a  room  seem  to  run  together. — 
Yellow  vision. — Halo  round  candle  flame. 

5.  Nose. — Frequent  sneezing  and  coryza;  with  pressing,  throbbing 
pains  in  arms ;  nasal  mucus  streaked  with  blood  in  morning ;  smell  lost 

6.  Face. — Face  hot,  red,  and  feverish ;  or  else  very  pale. — Constant 
jerking  of  upper  lip  of  1.  side. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Burrowing  sticking,  pulsating  pains  in  teeth  ;  1.  upper  eye 
tooth  ;  r.  back  lower  teeth  ;  1.  and  r.  upper  incisors. 

8.  Mouth.— Tongue  large  and  smooth  with  a  saburral  coating. — Saliva 
rather  thick,  flows  slowly  from  the  mouth. — Bitter  taste. 

II.  Stomach. — ^Violent  sensation  of  hunger  on  waking. — ^Very  great 
thirst,  esp.  for  beer. — Drinking  renews  nausea  and  vomiting. — ^Nausea. — 
Violent  vomiting ;  yellow  like  egg ;  white  sourish  mucus ;  with  great  sensi- 
tiveness of  eyes  to  bright  light  and  the  nose  to  odours. — Faint,  sinking  sensa- 
tion.— ^Feeling  of  fulness  and  nausea  as  if  contents  of  stomach  rose  up  in 
throat — Pinching  or  contracting  pain. — Stitches  immediately  after  dinner. 


DIGITALINUM  663 

la.  Abdomen.— Abdomen  retracted  without  colic. — Emission  of  much 
offensive  flatus,  in  morning,  immediately  after  rising,  followed  by  copious 
pasty  stools  with  violent  griping. — Stitching  lightning-like  pains.— Violent 
labour-like  pains  from  small  of  back  into  abdomen  as  if  menses  would 
appear. 

13*  Stool  and  Anus.— Urgent  desire  for  stool— Stools :  diarrhceic; 
loose ;  or  soft  without  being  diarrhceic— Constipation ;  stool  like  rabbit's. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Urine  increased ;  very  abundant.— Decidedly 
diminished. — Falling  off  in  urea  and  chlorides,  increase  in  phosphoric  and 
sulphuric  acids. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Activity  greatly  depressed  and  even 
abolished. — During  deep  sleep  an  emission  which  does  not  awaken  him. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Menstruation  two  days  too  early  without 
usual  premonitory  pains. — Menstruation  more  profuse. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Sj^ptoms  of  cold,  hoarse  so  could  hardly 
speak,  with  violent  sticking  pains  in  larynx.— Voice  extinct. — Short  hacking 
cough ;  whitish-yellow  sputa. — Breath  short ;  while  walking ;  on  waking. 

18.  Chest. — Rush  of  blood  to  chest. — Rheumatic  pains;  constriction; 
stitches. — Pains  in  the  r.  or  1.  side. — Rheumatic  pains  1.  chest  just  below  axilla 
only  on  motion. — Boring  1.  chest  from  scapula  forward  to  precordial  region 
<  deep  breathing. — Sticking  in  1.  side  between  nipple  and  axilla,  evening 
in  bed,  while  lying  on  1.  side. — ^Throbbing-sticking,  pulsating  pains. 

zg.  Heart.— Sensation  as  though  heart  stood  still  for  a  moment  while 
playing  the  piano. — Peculiar  sensation  in  heart  with  anxiety,  and  trembling 
witii  standing  still,  in  the  evening  while  sitting. — Stitches  corresponding  to 
heart  pulsations. — Palpitation  with  dull  sticking  in  heart  while  walking. — 
Violent  palpitation  in  bed  lying  on  1.  side. — Action  tumultuous,  irregular. — 
Pulse :  slow ;  irregular ;  intermittent ;  jerking  ;  hurried. — Pulse  not  corre- 
sponding to  heart's  impulse,  small,  thready,  nearly  imperceptible,  while  heart 
is  strong  and  hammering. 

80.  Neck  and  Back. — Neck  stiff  in  morning  (1.).— Violent  pain  in  neck. 
—Violent  padn  between  scapulae  like  cramp  with  oppression  of  breathing. — 
Pamful  sensation  as  though  scapulae  would  be  drawn  together. 

21.  Limbs. — Limbs  tremulous ;  weak  ;  unsteady  ;  heavy  as  if  paralysed ; 
pains  <  during  rest. — Pains  are  sticking,  pressive,  pulsating. 

29.  Upper  Limbs.— Pressure  in  shoulders. — Drawing  pain  in  biceps 
muscle. — Pressure ;  throbbing,  tearing  in  elbows  (r.  at  4  p.m.). — Pressing 
asunder  in  the  fingers.— (Swelling  of  r.  hand  and  fingers.) 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Cramp  in  thigh  and  calves. — Pains  in  knees ; 
above  r.  knee. — Sprained  pain  in  r.  ankle. — On  walking  sensation  as  if  the 
ground  sank  away  under  the  foot. — Numb  sensation  of  1.  foot  obliging  him  to 
move  it  frequently, — Pressing  asunder  of  toes  of  r.  foot. 

27.  Fever.— Chilliness  and  shivering. — Feet  and  hands  cold,  palms 
moist — Shivering  over  back,  esp.  sacral  region. — Heat  in  nape  rising  up  into 
head  and  extending  over  whole  body. — Profuse  sweat  at  night. — Cold  sweat ; 
after  a  cup  of  coffee. — Bathed  in  cold  sweat. 


664  DIGITALIS 


Digitalis. 


Digitalis  purpurea.    Fox-glove.     N.  0.  Scrophulariaceae.    Tincture 
from  the  leaves  of  the  second  year  of  the  plant 

OUnieal* — Amaurosis.  Angina  pectoris.  Asthma.  Bright's  disease.  Cyanosis. 
Deliriam  tremens.  Dropsy.  Fever.  Gonorrhoea.  Headache.  Hearty  affections  9f. 
Hydrocele.  Hydrocephalus.  Impotence.  Jaundice,  hungs^  congestion  of.  Memory 
lost  Meningitis.  Noises  in  head.  Paraphimosis.  Prostate,  enlarged.  Ptyalism. 
Spermatorrhoea.    Toothache.    Urinary  disorders.    Vision,  disorders  of. 

ChaPaoteristioB.— There  are  three  main  symptoms  in  the 
Digitalis  pathogenesis  which  should  be  borne  in  mind :  (i)  Slaw^ 
weak,  irregular  and  intermittent  pulse.  (2)  Enlarged,  sore,  painful 
liver.  (3)  White,  pasty  stools.  Along  with  these  is  prostration  from 
slight  exertion.  The  mental  condition  is  :  anxious  ;  low-spirited  ;  tear- 
ful, wants  to  be  alone  ;  tries  to  escape  if  others  force  themselves 
on  her.  Anxiety  as  if  conscience-troubled.  ''Anxious  and  con- 
centrated sadness,  with  sleeplessness  at  night,  ovtring  to  pains  at  the 
heart :  for  instance,  from  unhappy  love,  especially  in  women  of  brown 
complexions,  firm  and  obstinate  dispositions.  In  such  cases  far  pre- 
ferable to  Ignatia "  (Teste).  Teste  classes  Digit  with  Bryonia  and 
Ignatia.  The  stomach  symptoms  (from  portel  engorgement)  are 
nausea  and  vomiting ;  the  mere  sight  or  smell  of  food  excites  violent 
nausea,  with  clean  tongue,  thirst  for  water,  absence  of  fever ;  the 
complaints  may  come  either  from  excessive  venery  or  from  high 
living.  In  old  men  there  are  :  enlarged  prostate ;  impotence  ;  lascivi- 
ous thoughts.  Malcolm  Macfarlan  {H.  P.,  xiii.  490)  reports  DigiL 
having  produced  severe  urethritis,  phimosis,  and  strangu^.  He  has 
cured  with  it  many  cases  of  gonorrhoea.  Ballard  cured  a  man  of 
headache  and  dizziness  originating  probably  in  gonorrhoea  suppressed 
several  years  before.  He  complained  of  feeling  bad  about  the  head 
after  drinking,  and  this  keynote  symptom  was  elicited  :  "  after  drink- 
ing cold  water  the  pain  would  seat  itself  in  the  forehead  and  extend 
down  the  nose."  DeUrium  tremens  in  high  livers,  stomach  and  liver 
diseases  with  the  mental  state  of  the  drug.  Nausea  <  from  smell 
of  food  ;  not  >  by  vomiting.  The  food  eaten  comes  up  by  monthfuls, 
cannot  expectorate  without  vomiting.  Every  shock,  like  bad  news 
strikes  her  in  the  epigastrium.  Deathly  sinking  in  the  epigastrium. 
The  use  of  Digitalis  as  a  remedy  for  pneumonia  in  the  old  school  is 
well  known.  It  has  proved  a  very  dangerous  remedy,  but  it  has  been 
used  by  homoeopaths  with  very  good  effect  in  senile  pneumonia 
(E.  V.  Ross.,  H.  P.,  xvii.  177).  Ross  regards  the  indications  as  being  : 
"  Dry  cough  with  mucous  rales  and  no  expectoration  or  only  '  prune- 
juice  '  expectoration  ;  cyanosis ;  cold  extremities ;  feeble,  intermittent 
pulse  ;  deathly  nausea  or  gone  sensation  at  epigastrium."  Restlessness 
with  great  nervous  weakness.  Lassitude,  mental  and  bodily.  Faint- 
ness.  Convulsions,  with  retraction  of  head,  syncope,  and  coUapse. 
Among  the  peculiar  sensations  of  DigiL  are  :  Sensation  as  if  the  heart 
would  stand  still  if  he  moved,  must  hold  the  breath  and  keep  still 
(Gels,  has  "  must  keep  moving  or  the  heart  would  stop.'^  As  if  the 
brain  were  loose ;    as  if  something  fell  forward  in  the  head  on 


DIGITALIS  665 

stooping  ;  as  if  the  brain  were  made  of  fine  glass  and  shattered  at  a 
blow  ;  as  if  something  were  running  out  of  urethra  ;  as  of  a  weight 
attached  to  stomach ;  as  if  the  internal  parts  were  grown  together. 
As  if  the  lungs  were  constricted  and  tied  up  in  bundles.  As  u  heart 
stood  still ;  as  if  heart  had  torn  itself  loose  and  were  swaying  to  and 
fro  W  a  thin  thread ;  as  if  the  stomach  would  sink  into  abdomen. 
Terrible  pain  at  root  of  nose  after  vomiting. 

Discharged  blood  coagulates  slowly  or  not  at  all.  Distended  veins 
in  eyes,  ears,  lips,  and  tongue.  Blue  skin.  Digitalis  is  suited  to  the 
climacteric  period :  sudden  flushes  of  heat  followed  by  great  debility ; 
least  motions  palpitation.  Nervous  lymphatic  constitutions.  Children 
with  very  white  complexions,  light  hair,  scrofulous.  Most  symptoms 
are  <  at  night  or  on  waking  in  the  morning.  Symptoms  are  >  when 
stomach  is  empty ;  <  after  meals  ;  from  cold  diet ;  after  drinking 
(anything) ;  <  from  spirituous  liquors.  Motion  <  most  symptoms 
and  may  =:  fatal  collapse.  <  From  being  raised  up  in  bed.  <  From 
touch  or  pressure.  Great  sensitiveness  to  cold  air ;  cold  weather ; 
changes  of  weather ;  cold  food  ;  cold  drinks  ;  all  of  which  <.  Getting 
heated  <  cough.  In  a  room,  lachrymation  is  <.  With  fear  of 
suffocation  there  is  desire  for  open  air,  and  the  symptoms  of  catarrh 
are  >  in  open  air.     <  From  music ;  sadness  from  music. 

Relations. — Antidoted  by  :  Vegetable  acids.  Vinegar,  infusion  of 
galls.  Ether,  Camphor,  Serpentaria.  It  antidotes :  Wine,  Myrica  cerif . 
(jaundice).  Compatible :  Bell.,  Bry.,  Cham.,  Chi.,  Lye,  Nux,  Op., 
Phos.,  Puis.,  Sep.,  SuL,  Verat.  Incompatible:  Chin,  (increases  the 
anxiety) ;  Spirit,  nitros.  dulcis.  Compare :  Aeon,  (anxiety).  Ant.  t. 
(deathly  nausea),  Apocy.,  Arsen.,  Bell.,  Bry.,  Camph.,  Chi.,  Con.,  Zn., 
Kalm.,  Lach.  (sleep),  Lobel.,  Lycopus,  Crataegus  (weak  heart),  Nat.  m., 
(frequent  and  intermittent  pulse),  Phos.  (genital  symptoms),  Spi.,  Sul., 
Tabac.  (deathly nausea),  Verat.  In  gonorrhoea,  Sul.  (prepuce  indurated; 
Dig.,  puffed,  infiltrated  with  serum) ;  paraphimosis,  Coloc.  Palpitation 
with  diarrhoea.  Ant.  t.  Act  on  base  of  brain,  Lob.,  Tab.  One  hand 
coldy  the  other  hot,  Chi.,  Pul.,  Ip.,  Mosch.  Fainting  before  stool,  Sul. 
{after  stool,  Nux,  Crot.  t.^.  Food  eaten  comes  up  by  mouthfuls,  Fer., 
Pho.  Every  shock  strikes  in  pit  of  stomach,  Pho.,  Mez.,  Kali  c, 
Calc.    Cracking  in  head,  Alo.    Headache  extending  into  nose,  Diosc. 

Caoflfttion. — High  hving.  Sexual  abuse,  or  sexual  excess. 
Alcohol. 

SYHPTOHS. 

z.  Mind. — Extreme  anguish,  esp.  in  the  evening,  with  di^osition  to 
weep  and  great  fear  of  the  future. — Gloomy  and  peevish.— -IncUsposed  to 
speak ;  inclination  to  lassitude. — Remorse. — ^Teari ul  moroseness ;  with  sensa- 
tion of  internal  uneasiness. — Indifference. — Great  love  of  labour.— -Weakness 
of  memory. — ^Nocturnal  delirium  and  agitation. — Sadness  from  music. 

9.  Head. — Dizziness.— Vertigo  with  trembling. — Dulness  of  the  head, 
with  limited  power  of  thinking.—Jerking  pressure  in  the  head,  esp.  during 
intellectual  labour. — Pressure  in  the  forehead,  from  mental  exertion. — ^Tension 
in  the  forehead  on  turning  the  eyes. — Tearing  in  temples  and  sides  of  the 
head.--^ootings  in  the  temples  and  in  the  forehead,  sometimes  extending 


666  DIGITALIS 

to  the  point  of  the  nose,  esp.  after  drinking  anything  cold. — Stitches  in  the 
temples  (evening  and  night). — Itching  in  the  brain,  on  one  side  of  the  head 
only. — Sensation  on  stooping,  as  if  the  brain  were  falling  forwards. — Undula- 
tions in  the  brain,  as  if  it  contained  water,  with  confusion  in  the  head. — (Hydro- 
cephalus ;  sensation  as  if  waves  or  water  were  beating  on  the  skull ;  < 
while  standing,  talking,  shaking  the  head  and  bending  the  head  backward, 
>  when  lying  down  or  bending  the  head  forward.) — Swelling  of  the  head. 
— ^The  head  is  constantly  inclined  backwards. — Sudden  cracking  in  the  head 
(during  a  siesta)  with  starting,  as  in  a  fright. 

3.  Eyes.—- Aching  in  the  eyes,  greatly  augmented  by  the  touch. — 
Burning  pain  and  pressure  above  the  eyes,  with  confused  sight. — Burning 
pain  in  the  r.  eyebrow. — Shootings  in  the  eyes. — Inflammatory  redness  of  the 
conjunctiva  and  of  the  eyelids,  with  swelling,  and  sensation  as  if  sand  were 
introduced  into  the  eyes. — Blueness  of  the  eyelids. — Inflammation  of  the 
meibomian  glands. — Smarting  lachrymatioui  increased  by  a  bright  light,  and 
by  cold  air. — ^Agglutination  of  the  eyelids,  with  copious  secretion  of  mucus  (in 
the  morning). — Disposition  of  the  eyes  to  turn  sideways. — Pupils  insensible 
and  dilated. — Sight  confused,  as  if  directed  through  a  mist — Obscuration  of 
the  sight  and  complete  blindness,  as  from  amaurosis. — Opacity  of  the  crystal- 
line lens. — Painless  obscuration  of  the  lens. — Illusion  of  the  sight. — Phantoms, 
visions,  and  the  colours  of  the  rainbow  before  the  eyes. — Dark  bodies,  like 
flies,  hover  before  the  eyes. — Objects  appear  green  or  yellow. — Sparks  before 
the  eyes.— Diplopia. 

4.  Ears. — Hissing  before  the  ears,  like  boiling  water  (with  hardness  of 
hearing). — Single  stitches  behind  the  ears. — Otalgia,  with  tensive  and  con- 
tractive pains  in  the  ears. — Swelling  of  the  parotids,  and  behind  the  ear. 

5.  Nose. — Pain  above  the  root  of  the  nose. — Coryza,  with  hoarseness. 

6.  Face.— Paleness  of  the  face  (bluish  hue  under  the  pale  skin.) — Blue 
colour  of  the  lips  and  eyelids. — Convulsions  on  one  (1.)  side  of  the  face. — 
Cramp-like  and  drawing  pains  in  the  cheek-bones. — Swelling  of  the  cheek, 
with  pain  on  being  touch^. — Eruptions,  with  gnawing  itching  in  the  cheeks 
and  in  the  chin. — Pores  of  the  face  black  and  suppurating. — Bluish  swelling 
of  the  lips. — Eruptions  on  the  lips. — Dryness  of  the  lips. 

8»  9.  Mouth  and  Throat. — Roughness,  excoriation  and  scraping  in 
the  mouth  and  throat,  with  clammy  taste. — Sweetish  and  fetid  saliva. — Profuse 
flow  of  frothy  saliva  compelling  to  spit  all  the  time. — Salivation  with 
excoriation  of  the  tongue,  and  of  the  gums. — Bluish  tongue. — Swelling  of  the 
tongue. — Ulcer  on  the  tongue. — ^Tongue  loaded  with  white  mucus  (morning). 
— Stinging  in  throat  between  acts  of  swallowing. — Peculiar  sensation  in  fauces 
as  if  walls  of  pharynx  swollen,  or  as  if  they  were  constricted  by  swelling  of 
tonsils. — Spasmodic  constriction  of  throat— -Sore  pain  on  swallowing. 

zo«  Appetite. — Sweetish  taste,  esp.  after  smoking  tobacco,  sometimes 
with  constant  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth. — Bitterness  in  the  mouth. 
— Clammy  taste. — Bitter  taste  of  bread. — ^Want  of  appetite,  sometimes  even 
with  a  clean  tongue. — Continuous  thirst,  with  dry  lips. — ^Thirst  esp.  for  add 
drinks. — Gulping  up  of  an  acrid  or  tasteless  fluid.^<Treat  appetency  for  bitter 
things. — ^After  a  meal,  pressure  and  inflation  of  the  abdomen  and  of  the 
stomach. 

II.    Stomaclu— Sour  eructation  and  regurgitations,  sometimes  after  a  meal. 


DIGITALIS  667 

— Pyrosis. — Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  moral  dejection  and  inquietude. 
— Convulsive  retchings. — ^Vomitings  and  nausea,  with  fulness  and  pressure  on 
the  epigastrium. — ^Vomiting  in  the  morning  (of  the  ingesta ;  of  a  green  liquid), 
or  at  night. — ^Vomiting  of  mucus,  of  food,  or  bile,  with  excessive  nausea. — 
Nausea  in  the  morning,  on  waking. — Nausea  and  vomiting  during  a  meal. — 
Vomiting  of  food  on  expectorating. — Sensation  or  retraction  in  the  stomach. 
— Burning  in  the  stomach,  extending  up  to  the  oesophagus. — Pressure, 
burning  pain,  and  heaviness  in  the  stomach  and  in  the  epigastrium. — Nausea, 
as  if  he  would  die  with  it ;  continuous,  and  not  relieved  by  vomiting. — Sensa- 
tion of  weakness  in  the  stomach,  as  if  life  would  be  extinguished,  esp.  im- 
mediately after  a  meal. — Deathly  sinking  in  the  stomach-pit. — Cramp-like 
pains  in  the  stomach,  sometimes  with  nausea  and  vomiting,  mitigated  by 
eructations. — Shootings  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  extending  to  the  sides  and 
the  back. — Fulness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Contractive  tense  pain  in  the  hypochondria. — Sensi- 
bility, and  pressive  pains,  in  the  region  of  the  liver. — ^Twisting,  and  cramp-like 
pinching,  in  the  intestines. — Shooting  and  tearing  colic,  with  inclination  to 
vomit,  esp.  during  movement  and  expiration. — Inflation  of  the  abdomen 
(ascites). — Dropsical  swelling  of  the  abdomen.— Cuttings,  as  from  a  chill,  or  a 
diarrhoea. — Cramp-like  tension  in  the  groins. — Sufferings  from  flatulency. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Faeces  white,  like  chalk,  or  the  colour  of  ashes. 
— Diarrhoea  of  excrement  mixed  with  mucus,  preceded  by  shiverings  and 
cutting  pains. — Dysenteric  evacuatiofis. — Involuntary  stools. — Retention  of 
stool ;  prolonged  constipation. — ^Watery  diarrhoea ;  with  much  thirst. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Retention  of  urine.— Urgent  and  almost  futile 
inclination  to  make  water,  with  discharge  of  hot,  burning,  and  very  scanty 
urine. — Pressure  on  the  bladder,  with  the  sensation  as  if  it  were  too  full,  con- 
tinuing after  micturition. — Frequent  emission  of  small  quantities  of  water- 
coloured  urine. — While  in  a  recumbent  position  the  urine  can  be  retained  for 
a  longer  time. — Difiicult  urination,  as  from  contraction  of  the  urethra. — 
Wetting  the  bed  at  night. — Urinary  flux. — Diminution  of  the  secretion  of 
urine,  sometimes  alternating  with  abundant  emission. — Incisive  pains  in  the 
urethra,  before  and  after  the  urinary  discharge. — Involuntary  emission  of 
urine. — Urine  of  a  deep  colour,  brownish  or  reddish. — Nausea  before  and  after 
urination. — On  making  water,  burning  sensation  and  constriction  in  the 
urethra. — Inflammation  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder. — Prostate  enlarged. 

15^  z6.  Sexual  Organs. — Hydrocele  (1.) ;  scrotum  looks  like  a  bladder 
filled  with  water. — Testes :  bruise-like  pain  in ;  swelling  of. — Gonorrhoea  ; 
phimosis ;  with  burning,  and  dropsy  of  prepuce. — Desire  strongly  excited, 
frequent  erections  and  pollutions. — Dropsical  swelling  of  genitals. — (Nym- 
phomania.— Menorrhagia.) 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness  (in  the  morning  after  a  night 
sweat). — Hollow,  spasmodic  cough,  from  roughness  and  scraping  in  the 
throat ;  expectoration  only  in  the  evening,  of  yellow  jelly-like  mucus,  tasting 
sweet. — Hoarseness  and  coryza  in  the  morning. — ^Much  phlegm  in  the  larynx, 
which  is  detached  by  a  slight  cough. — Cough,  after  a  meal,  with  vomiting  of 
food. — Dry  cough,  with  pains  in  the  shoulders  and  arms. — Cough,  with 
expectoration  of  matter  resembling  starch. — Smarting  in  the  chest  on  coughing. 
— Cough  worse  at  midnight  and  during  the  morning  hours.— The  cough  is 


668  DIGITALIS 

caused  by  talking,  walking,  drinking  anything  cold ;  when  bending  the  body 
forward. — ^Troublesome  choking  sensation  with  cough ;  mostly  at  ni^it,  and 
on  physical  exertion. — Dry,  cramp-like  cough,  excited  by  prolonged  conversa^ 
tion* — Sanguineous  expectoration  on  coughing  (small  quanties  of  dark-blood). 

z8.  Chest. — Sensation  of  soreness  in  the  chest — Respiration  painfully 
restricted,  esp.  at  night,  when  lying  down,  or  in  the  day,  when  walking,  or 
seated. — In  the  morning,  su£Focating  constriction  ctf  the  chest,  forcing  the 
patient  to  rise  up  in  the  bed.~Asthmatic  sufiFerings  as  from  hydrothorax. — 
Pressure  on  the  chest  from  keeping  the  body  bent. — ^Tension  in  the  chest, 
with  necessity  to  breathe  deeply. — Contractive  pain  in  the  chest,  when  sitting 
with  the  body  bent — Smarting  in  the  chest — Sensation  of  weakness  in  the 
chest,  proceeding  from  the  stomach.— Congestion  in  the  chest — Shuddering 
at  the  mammae. 

10.  Heart. — Acceleration  of  the  movements  of  the  heart,  with  palpita^ 
tions  that  can  be  heard  (with  slow  pulse),  anguish,  and  contraction  in  the 
sternum. — ^Very  slow  pulse. — On  rising  up  in  bed  pulse  becomes  much  more 
frequent  and  irregular. — Irregular  and  intermittent  pulse. — Dull  uneasiness  in 
various  parts  of  heart  region,  with  sensation  of  weakness  in  forearm. — Feeling 
of  slight  confusion  of  heart,  esp.  on  moving,  with  painful  sensation  of  weak- 
ness in  wrist  and  forearms. — Sudden  sensation  as  though  heart  stood  still, 
with  great  anxiety  and  necessity  for  holding  breath,  after  dinner ;  must  keep 
perfectly  still. — Peculiar  sensation  as  though  heart  standing  still;  single, 
violent,  slow  heart-beats,  with  sudden  violent  heat  in  occiput,  and  transient 
unconsciousness  (the  whole  lasting  only  a  moment). — Shifting  pains  in  heart 
— Oppression,  must  breathe  deeper. — Heart's  action  has  lost  its  force ;  beats 
more  frequent,  intermittent,  irregular. — Palpitation  easily  excited  on  going 
up  slight  ascent. — Heart  seems  to  dilate  slowly ;  palpitation  at  each  movement 
of  body ;  slight  uneasiness  at  heart,  cold  sweats. — Constant  pain  or  anguish 
at  heart,  with  palpitation,  <  by  exercise  or  mental  emotion ;  at  times  < 
without  apparent  cause,  when  perfectly  at  rest ;  paroxysms  accompanied  by 
sinking  sensation,  face  purple;  fainting,  believes  she  is  dying;  dizziness 
ringing  in  ears ;  sharp  pain  in  1.  shoulder  and  1.  arm,  tingling  in  arm  and 
fingers ;  paroxysms  come  sometimes  at  night,  with  suffocation,  wakes  up  in 
anguish ;  terrifying  dreams. — Heart  so  weak  that  even  sitting  up  in  bed  has 
caused  fatal  syncope. — ^Attacks  of  angina  brought  on  by  any  slight  careless 
movement,  esp.  of  arms  in  an  upward  direction ;  inexpressible  anxiety  with 
fainting ;  for  a  moment  heart  seems  to  stand  still,  and  then  several  rapid  and 
violent  pulsations  occur,  with  sensation  as  if  heart  had  torn  itself  loose  and 
were  swaying  to  and  fro  by  a  thin  thread. — Cyanosis. — Frightful  stitches  in 
region  of  heart,  coming  on  every  fifteen  minutes,  lasting  only  five  or  sx 
seconds  each  time. 

80.  Neck  and  Back.— Stiffness  and  tension  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck 
and  of  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Drawing  pains  in  the  back  and  in  the  loins,  as 
after  a  chill. — Bruise-like  pains  in  the  loins  on  blowing  the  nose. 

28.  Upper  Limbs. — Paralytic  puUings,  and  tearings  in  the  arms.— 
Heaviness  or  paralytic  weakness  of  the  1.  arm. — Sharp  pain  in  1.  shoulder  and 
arm,  tingling  in  arm  and  fingers  ;  with  heart  affection. — Nocturnal  swelling 
of  the  r.  hand  and  of  the  fingers. — Coldness  of  the  hands. — ^Tearings  in  the 
joints  of  the  fingers. — Sudden  and  paralytic  stiffness  in  the  fingers.— Torpor 
and  disposition  to  numbness  of  the  fingers. 


DIQITOXINUM  669 

33.  Louver  Limbs. — Pain  in  the  hip-joint. — Great  stiffness  in  the  legs 
after  being  seated,  which  abates  when  walking. — ^Want  of  energy,  and  para- 
lytic weakness  in  the  legs. — Swelling  in  the  knee,  like  steatoma. — Incisive 
pains  in  the  thigh,  and  burning  sensation  in  the  calf  of  the  leg,  on  crossing 
the  legs.— Tension  in  the  ham. — Coldness  of  the  feet. — Swelling  in  the  feet, 
by  day  only  (diminished  at  night). 

24.  Generalities. — Burning  shootings  and  tearings,  esp.  in  the  limbs. — 
Penetrating  pains,  and  painful  weariness  in  the  joints,  as  after  great  fatigue. — 
Engorgement  of  the  glands. — ^Tense  and  painful  swellings,  esp.  of  the  limbs, 
—Convulsions. — Epileptic  fits. — Dropsical  swellings  of  internal  and  external 
parts.— Emaciation. — Great  dejection  and  nervous  weakness. — Throbbing  in 
every  part  part  of  the  body,  <  by  pressure. — Gouty  nodosities. — Pricking  pain 
in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  and  lower  extremities. — Fits  of  excessive  weak- 
ness esp.  after  breakfast  and  dinner. — Sudden  prostration  of  strength,  as  if 
about  to  faint,  with  general  perspiration. 

25.  Skin. — Gnawing  itching,  which  changes,  if  the  skin  be  not  scratched, 
into  a  burning  and  insupportable  pricking. — Dry,  arid  heat  of  skin. — 
Desquamation  of  the  skin  from  the  whole  body. — Jaundice. — Bluish  skin 
(cyanosis),  particularly  at  the  eyelids,  lips,  tongue,  and  nails. — Dropsy. — 
Elastic  white  swelling  of  the  whole  body. — General  paleness  of  the  skin. 

86.  Sleep. — Continuous  sleepiness  during  the  day  (lethargy). — Uneasy, 
onrefreshing  sleep. — Drowsiness  in  the  day,  and  somnolency  interrupted  by 
fits  of  convulsive  vomiting. — ^At  night,  half-asleep  with  agitation. — Nocturnal 
sleep,  interrupted  by  anxious  dreams,  with  starts  (as  if  one  were  failing  from 
a  height  or  into  water). — Uneasy  sleep  at  night  on  account  of  constant  desire 
to  urinate. — Feeling  of  great  emptiness  of  the  stomach  frequently,  previous 
to  falling  asleep. 

27.  Fever. — Chilliness  with  heat  and  redness  of  face. — Coldness  of  the 
body,  often  with  cold  sweat,  esp.  on  the  forehead  or  one  side  of  the  body 
only.— Coldness  in  the  hands  and  in  the  feet  (with  cold  perspiration). — Heat 
of  one  hand  and  coldness  of  the  other. — Frequent  and  sudden  flushes  of  heat, 
followed  by  weakness. — Copious  nocturnal  perspiration,  preceded  sometimes 
by  shivering  and  shuddering,  with  internal  heat  (beginning  with  coldness  of 
the  extremities,  from  them  extending  over  the  whole  body),  during  the  day. 
—Perspiration  generally  at  night ;  cold  and  clammy. — Perspiration  after  the 
chill,  no  heat  intervening. — Pulse  small,  weak,  and  excessively  slow  (esp. 
when  at  rest,  every  other  beat  intermits),  but  accelerated  by  the  slightest 
movement. — Pulse  irregular  ;  intermitting. 


Digitoxinum. 


Digitoxine.  "Crystallised  Di^taline"  (of  Nativelle).  (Neither  a 
glucoside,  nor  an  alkaloid.)  C^.  H33  O,.  (The  most  active 
principle  of  Digitalis.    Trituration. 

ClhilcfcK — ^Phlegmon.    Suppuration.    Vision,  disordered.    Vomiting. 

ChanetaristiiMk— D^7an>t  has  been  proved  by  Kopfe,  who  took 


670  DIGITOXINUM 

a  single  dose  of  2  millegrammes  at  10  a.m.  '  It  began  to  take  effect  m 
an  hour — ^faintness,  nausea,  and  slight  vertigo,  which  increased  till  he 
was  obliged  to  hurry  home  at  i  o'clock  to  avoid  vomiting  in  the 
street  But  he  was  too  weak  to  walk,  and  had  to  take  a  carriage. 
He  went  to  bed  immediately  and  remained  in  bed  three  days  and 
part  of  the  fourth.  The  pulse  had  remained  regular  and  at  the  usual 
rate,  80  to  84,  but  at  2  o'clock  was  58  and  intermitting.  Excessive 
nausea  was  constant  and  prevented  sleep  at  night  Vomiting  of  dark 
greenish  masses  of  mucus  gave  instant  reUef,  which,  however,  only 
lasted  a  short  time.  The  pulse  went  down  to  42,  intermitting  after 
every  two  beats,  the  heart-beats  and  intermission  being  plainly  felt  in 
the  chest  The  Umbs  refused  service  in  spite  of  the  greatest  exertion 
of  will  power.  Sight  became  weak,  faces  of  friends  were  indis- 
tinguishable, and  he  only  knew  them  by  their  voices.  Objects  ran 
together  without  outlines,  so  that  he  could  only  distinguish  some  very 
dark  or  bright,  or  large  or  small  images  in  the  field  of  vision.  There- 
with all  objects,  especially  all  bright  ones,  seemed  in  a  slightly  yellow 
light  (This  yellow  vision  was  very  persistent,  lasting  eight  days  ;  it 
may  prove  a  keynote  for  this  preparation  of  Digitalis.)  The  nausea 
continued  more  distressing  and  was  aggravated  by  drinking  cham- 
pagne, aerated  waters,  and  ordinary  water.  The  second  night  was 
very  restless  with  partial  sleep,  interrupted  four  times  in  an  hour  by 
confused,  anxious  dreams  and  frightful  phantasies.  In  the  evening  of 
third  dav  he  was  able,  with  effort,  to  eat  a  Uttle,  and  did  not  vomit 
On  the  K)urth  day  he  was  up  a  little  and  felt  better,  was  able  to  eat  a 
little  meat  and  drink  as  much  virater  as  he  wished.  On  the  fifth  day 
he  was  able  to  walk  out  a  little,  leaning  on  the  arm  of  another. 
During  the  three  succeeding  days  the  symptoms  gradually  dis- 
appeared. With  sound  sleep  and  extraordinary  appetite,  physical 
strength  and  normal  vision  returned. 

In  some  experiments  made  on  dogs  it  was  noted  that  sub- 
cutaneous injections  were  invariably  followed  with  phlegmonous 
inflammation  proceeding  to  suppuration. 

BelationB. — Compare :  Digitalis  «  from  drinking  is  marked  in 
both) ;  Digitalinum ;  Cina  and  Santonine  in  yellow  vision. 

8TMPT0M8. 

3.    Head. — Slight  vertigo,  with  nausea  and  faintness. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Weak  sight :  features  of  friends  seemed  to  swim  and  become 
indistinct. — ^All  objects  in  room  run  together  without  any  outlines,  could  only 
distinguish  some  very  dark  or  bright,  or  large  or  small  images  in  the  field  oi 
vision.  Therewith  all  objects,  esp.  all  bright  ones,  seemed  in  a  slightly 
yellow  light.  (This  appeared  on  the  first  day,  was  in  no  way  diminished  on 
third  and  fifth  days,  and  did  not  pass  away  till  the  eighth.) 

6.  Face. — Paleness  and  collapsed  appearance  of  face, 
zz.  Stomach. — ^Aversion  to  every  kind  of  food. — Faintness,  nausea,  and 
discomfort — Constantly  increasing  discomfort  and  tormenting  nausea,  ending 
in  vomiting  a  large  quantity  of  dark  greenish  masses  of  mucus.  Rehef  was 
immediate,  but  lasted  only  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  giving  place  to  the  most 
excessive  nauseous  sensation.    An  hour  later  vomiting  was  renewed  violently. 


DIOSCOREA  671 

bilious-coloured  masses  of  mucus,  accompanied,  preceded,  and  followed  by 
retchings.  Slow,  intermittent  pulse. — In  evening  attempted  to  take  a  glass  of 
iced  champagne,  but  the  nausea  increased  rapidly  and  in  a  few  minutes 
vomited  a  large  quantity  of  a  watery,  slimy  substance  slightly  coloured  with 
bile,  much  retching  followed. — Carbonated  waters  and  ordinary  drinking- 
water  always  aggravated  the  nausea. — ^Third  day  able  to  drink  a  little. — Sixth 
day  extraordinary  appetite. 

z8.  Chest. — Oppression  and  anxiety  in  chest ;  heart-beats  and  inter- 
missions plainly  felt. 

ig.  Heart. — Pulse  at  first  normal  and  regular,  became  later  markedly 
slow,  intermittent,  dicrotic,  and  then  tricrotic. — Pulse  very  easily  excited  by 
the  slightest  excitement  or  physical  exertion. 

94.  Generalities. — Faintness ;  rapid  loss  of  power. — Prostration ;  limbs 
refuse  their  service ;  cannot  rise  from  bed  without  assistance. — (Phlegmonous 
inflammation  going  on  to  suppuration.) 

86.  Sleep. — Not  a  moment's  rest  on  account  of  distressing  nausea  and 
weakness. — Second  night  restless,  with  partial  sleep,  which  was  interrupted 
by  confused,  anxious  dreams  and  frightful  fantasies. — ^Sleep  sound  fourth 
night. 


Dioscorea. 

Dioscorea  villosa.    Wild  yam.    N.  0.   Dioscoreaceae.    Tincture  of 
fresh  root,  or  trituration  of  resinoid,  Dioscorein. 

CUaML-^Abdotnen,  distended.  Acne.  Angina  pectoris.  Biliousness.  Cholerine, 
Chorea.  Colds.  Colic,  Constipation.  Cough.  Cramps.  Diarrhoea.  Dysentery. 
Dysmenorrhoea.  Dyspepsia.  Enteralgia.  Flatulence.  Gall-bladder,  affections  of. 
Gastralgia.  Haemorrhoids.  Headache.  Knee^  Pain  in,  Le^,  pain  in.  Liver^  dis- 
orders  of.  Lumbago.  Mind^  agecUons  of.  Neuralgia.  Paronydiia.  Parotitis. 
Pregnancy,  pyrosis  of.  Renal  oohc.  Rheumatism.  Sciatica.  Side^painin.  Spinal 
irritation.  Spleen,  pain  in.  Smelly  disordered.  Spermatorrhoea.  Tea,  effects  of. 
Toothache.    Whitlow. 

Gharaoteristios. — Burt,  who  made  a  heroic  proving  of  this 
remedy,  says  :  "  The  grand  sphere  for  the  use  of  Dioscorea  is  among 
neuroses  of  the  bowels  and  stomach  ;  where  the  coeliac  and  umbilici 
plexuses  are  in  a  state  of  great  hyperaesthesia,  the  pain  and  spasm 
being  unbearable."  Hale  considers  as  characteristic :  "  A  constant 
pain,  aggravated  at  regular  intervals  by  paroxysms  of  intense  su£Fer- 
ing."  Any  kind  of  coUc  or  neuralgia  with  these  characteristics  may 
indicate  Dioscor,,  which  stands  in  the  highest  rank  among  stomach 
and  abdominal  remedies,  with  important  actions  in  many  other 
spheres.  Dioscorea  causes  pain  in  the  bowels  ;  spasmodic  ;  twisting  ; 
writhing  ;  drawing  ;  lancinating  ;  pulsating  ;  burning.  Pains  radiate 
upwards  and  downwards.  Frequent  sharp,  darting  pains  from  one 
part  to  another.  Pains  spread,  especially  from  abdomen  to  distant  parts. 
Great  faintness  at  stomach.  Morning  diarrhoea.  Pains  <  at  meals  ; 
>  moving  about ;  cannot  sit  still.  Seminal  emissions  (passive)  with 
weakness  of  knees.  According  to  Cushing's  proving  the  primary  effect 


672  DIOSCOREA 

of  Diosc.  was  to  cause  strong-stnelltng  perspiration  of  the  genitals; 
constant   excitement  with  strong   and  frequent  erections  day  and 
night ;  amorous  dreams  with  emissions.    Afterwards  came  relaxed 
genitals,  absence  of  desire,  and  emissions  without  erections.    In  the 
female  sphere  it  has  frequently  cured  dysmenorrhoea,  uterine  colic,  and 
after-pains  ;  also  gastric  disorders  during  pregnancy  and  the  mense& 
J.  B.   Bell  has  pointed  out  how  closely  the  throat  symptoms  of 
Dios.  resemble  the  initial  stage  of  a  cold  when  it  has  attslcked  the 
fauces  and  before  it  has  spread  to  the  nose  or  chest    Peculiar  sen- 
sations are  :  As  if  top  of  head  was  lifted  ofiF.    As  if  temples  were  in  a 
vice.    As  if  head  tied  with  a  band  (also  neck).    As  if  sticks,  &c.,  in 
eyes  ;  as  if  hot  air  streamed  out  of  them.    As  if  tongue  burnt.    As  if 
a  stone  were  in  stomach.    In  small  spot  in  abdomen  sensation  as  if 
drawn  forcibly  upward  and  backward  to  spine.    Diosc,  resembles 
Coloc,  in  coUcky  pains,  but  differs  in  the  Conditions  :  whilst  Coloc,  has 
>  bending  double  and  <  by  motion,  Diosc,  has  >  by  stretching  out 
and  by  moving  about.    Some  of  the  symptoms  of  Diosc,  are  <,  others 
are  >  by  touch  and  pressure.    Many  symptoms  appear,  or  are  <  in 
early  morning  from  2  a.m.  onwards  ;  on  awaking ;  8  a.m.  (cough). 
Symptoms    generally  >  in    open    air.      Pains    are    remittent    and 
paroxysmal.    It  is  one  of  the  first  remedies  in  whitlow ;  and  in 
biliary  and  renal  colic.    Suited  to  persons  of  feeble  digestive  powers, 
old  or  young,  with  flatulence  after  meals,  in  stomach  or  bowels, 
unattended  with  liver  or  bowel  derangement,  who  from  some  excess 
in  eating,  or  from  fasting,  or  from  some  error  in  diet,  as  eating  old 
cheese,  or  uncooked  fruit,  pastry,  &c.,  especially  if  they  are  great  tea- 
drinkers,  may  be  suddenly  seized  with  violent  colic. 

BelationB. — Compare :  Bism.,  Bry.,  Nux  (stomach) ;  Cham., 
Coloc,  Ip.,  Kali  bi.,  Pod.,  Rhus,  Rum.,  Stan.,  Sul.  (abdomen  and 
stool) ;  JEsc*f  Alo.,  Collin.,  Nux  (haemorrhoids) ;  Sarsaf.  (urinary 
symptoms) ;  Calc.  c.  Can.  i..  Gels.,  Calad.,  Agn.  c,  Nux,  Phos. 
(sexual  organs) ;  Act.  r.,  ^sc,  Alo.,  Bry.,  Nux  (headache) ;  Sil. 
(whitlow).  Ver.,  Caps,  (pain  in  ears  on  coughing).  Tamus  belongs 
to  the  same  N.  O.     Ver.  relieved  pain  in  r.  temple. 

CauBatlon. — ^Tea-drinking.  Excess  in  eating.  Fasting.  Errors 
in  diet.    Onanism. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Calls  things  by  wrong  names ;  writes  down  r.  arm  or  leg 
when  he  means  1. — ^Aversion  to  company. — Irritable ;  feels  cross  and  troubled. 
— Great  depression  of  spirits. 

8.  Head. — ^Vertigo  and  dizziness ;  goes  to  r.  while  walking ;  inclined  to 
fall  backward. — Faintness  <  sitting  up  in  bed  ;  numbness  <  lying  down. — 
Vertigo  from  onanism. — ^Vertigo  with  heat  in  head ;  with  sharp  pains  in  r. 
side  of  forehead  extending  to  ears  ;  a  remittent  pain  <  by  pressure. — ^Fukiess 
in  head  speedily  followed  by  spasmodic  pains  in  abdomen. — Head  feels  as  if 
tied  with  a  band. — Headache  in  vertex  and  down  to  both  shoulders.— DoQ 
pain  in  head  and  temples. — Pain  in  forehead,  extending  into  nose,  with  nausea 
and  coryza. — Pain  as  if  lifted  up  in  forehead  and  temples. — Digging,  cutting 
pain  in  the  temples ;  in  occiput ;  over  eye. 


DIOSCOREA  673 

3*  Eyes. — Eyes  weak,  sore,  and  smarting ;  (r.  <)  ;  seems  as  if  hot  air 
streamed  ont,  evening. — ^Agglutination  of  the  lids  mornings. — Sharp  pain  from 
r.  eye  to  occiput. — Feeling  as  of  a  round  or  large  smooth  substance,  or  as  if 
do^  sticks,  or  lashes  in  eye. — Lachrymation,  hot  tears,  eyes  fill  in  open  air, 
smarting,  wants  to  keep  lids  closed. 

4.  Ears. — DuU,  pressing  pains  in  front  of  both  ears. — Sharp  pain  in 
front  and  behind  the  ears. — Small  balls  of  wax  drop  out  of  r.  ear  almost  daUy. — 
Both  ears  feel  suddenly  stopped  up  and  are  sore  to  touch. — Pains  in  ears,  < 
blowing  nose  or  coughing  (8  a.m.). — Itching  in  internal  ears  «  r.). 

5.  Nose. — Irritation  of  nasal  passages  with  much  sneezing;  dry,  or 
watery  discharge. — ^Discharge  of  bright-red  blood  from  1.  nostril ;  followed 
by  a  dark  clot ;  while  sitting  writing. — Soreness  of  the  nostrils. — Frequent  or 
constant  bad  smell  in  the  nose;  like  bilious-fever  patients;  any  bad  smell 
remains  in  nose  a  long  time. 

6.  Face. — Dull,  grinding,  drawing,  digging,  or  sharp  darting  pains  at 
angle  of  L  lower  jaw. — Spasmodic  closing  of  jaws,  biting  tongue  when  neither 
eating  nor  drinking. — Little  pimples  with  black  heads. — Lips  dry ;  commissures 
sort. 

8.  Mouth. — Heavy  brown  coating  on  the  tongue  mornings. — Sides  of 
tongue  sore  as  if  burnt — ^Tip  of  tongue  sore. — Mouth  very  dry,  bitter,  and 
clammy  in  the  morning  (on  waking  4  a.m.). — Mouth  dry,  but  full  of  sticky 
macus;  no  thirst — Soreness  of  gums  and  roof  of  mouth. — Saliva  runs  out 
while  asleep. 

g.  Throat. — Irritation,  burning,  and  smarting  in  throat  and  fauces. — 
Fauces  rough,  dry ;  frequent  inclination  to  swallow  ;  but  it  causes  nausea  and 
shudderings. — Belching  gas,  but  throat  so  dry  it  prevents  escape  of  gas. — 
Constricted  feeling  as  from  something  tight  about  neck ;  makes  breathing 
difficult — Itching  in  1.  tonsil. — Stitches  in  tonsil  up  to  ear. — Constricted 
feeling. — Soreness  and  sharp  aching  pain  in  both  parotid  glands. 

II.  Stomach. — Sour  or  bitter  eructations. — Belching  of  large  quantities 
of  tasteless  wind  momentarily  relieving  the  distress  at  the  stomach. — Nausea. 
^After  eating  :  nausea,  faintness,  distress,  burning  at  stomach  ;  dull,  heavy 
pain  >  by  belching ;  tastes  food  eaten ;  >  of  symptoms. — Faint,  uneasy  feel- 
ing at  stomach. — Headache  <  after  dinner. — Constant  distress  at  stomach, 
with  frequent  sharp  pains ;  had  to  unfasten  the  clothing. — Distressing  pain 
at  epigastrium  relieved  by  raising  sour,  bitter  wind. — Burning  at  the  stomach. 
—Sharp,  cramping  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  followed  by  raising,  belching,  and 
gulping  enormous  quantities  of  tasteless  wind,  followed  by  hiccough  and  dis- 
charge of  flatulence  from  the  bowels. — Sharp,  cutting  pains  in  epigastrium. — 
Faintness  at  epigastrium. 

u.  Abdomen. — Sharp  pain  in  1.  hjrpochondrium. — Dull,  heavy,  grinding 
pain  in  region  of  liver,  worse  evenings."--Cutting  pain  in  region  of  liver ;  (r. 
lobe).— Hard,  dull  pain  in  region  of  gall  bladder. — Constant  distress  in  the 
mnbillcal  and  hypogastric  regions,  with  severe  cutting,  colic-like  pains 
every  few  minutes  in  stomach  and  small  intestines. — Griping,  cramping  pains 
in  the  umbilical  region. — Rumbling  in  the  bowels,  and  passing  large  quantities 
of  flatulence. — Flatulence  after  meals;  wind  colic,  but  with  little  or  no 
hepatic  derangement — Discharges  of  offensive  flatus. — ^Twisting  and  sharp 
VOL.  I.  44 


674  DIOSCOREA 

cutting  pains  in  the  bowels. — Bowels  sor&  and  tender  on  pressure. — Pain  in 
inguinal  regions  extending  to  the  testicles. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Itching  in  the  rectum. — Hasmorrhoidal  tomoors 
as  large  as  red  cherries,  with  pain  and  distress  in  anus. — ^Af ter  stool :  pro- 
lapsus ani ;  weak,  faint  feeling  in  abdomen  ;  colic. — Frequent  urgent  desire 
for  stool. — ^Very  offensive  flatulence. — Diarrhoea  early  in  morning,  driving 
out  of  bed. — ^Just  before  and  during  a  stool,  severe  pain  in  sacral  region  and 
bowels,  of  a  writhing  drawing  character  ;  the  pains  radiate  upwards  and 
downwards,  until  the  whole  body  and  extremities  become  involved  in  spasm. 
— Very  profuse,  thin,  yellow  stool  in  the  morning ;  followed  by  a  very  weak, 
faint  feeling,  without  relieving  pain  in  bowels. — Loose  stools  with  much 
straining. — Stools  slimy  ;  dark-coloured ;  bilious ;  very  offensive ;  light 
mushy. — During  pregnancy,  alternate  constipation  and  relaxation. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — ^Writhing,  with  dry  and  crampy  pains,  with 
passing  of  renal  calculus  (r.)— Spasmodic  stricture  of  urethra,  with  pain  about 
navel  >  by  pressure ;  pressure  on  rectum,  paroxysmal  colic. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Constant  excitement  of  genital  organs, 
with  frequent  erections. — Genitals  cold  and  relaxed. — Strong-smelling  per- 
spiration on  scrotum  and  pubes. — Diminished  sexual  desire. — ^Emission  of 
semen  during  sleep. 

z6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Dysmenorrhoea ;  spasmodic  uterine 
colic ;  pains  suddenly  fly  to  distant  parts. — ^After-pains. — False  pains.— 
Cramps  in  fingers  and  toes  alternating  with  uterine  pains. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hacking  cough  from  irritation  and  tickling 
low  down  in  the  throat. — Sharp  cutting  pain  from  L  axilla  to  nipple  and  down 
side  deep  in  limg. — Cough  with  pain  in  region  of  umbilicus  and  temples, 
brown  tongue,  weak  knees. — Dull,  aching,  or  sharp  cutting  pains  in  both 
^•ungs,  from  front  to  back,  or  vice  versd, 

ZQ.  Heart. — Sharp  pain  in  region  of  heart,  arrests  breathing  ;  <  lying  L 
ide. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Dull  pain  in  back  of  neck ;  stiff. — Back  lame  in 
morning. — Back  in  region  of  liver  so  lame  it  is  almost  impossible  to  turn  in 
bed ;  >  by  motion. — Severe  backache. — Sharp  deep  pain  in  lower  portion  of 
L  scapula,  followed  by  sharp  pain  through  centre  of  r.  lung. — Itching  over  r. 
scapula. — Drawing  pains  in  sacrum:  in  sacro-iliac  joint. — Spinal  hyper- 
aesthesia. — Spinal  cord  feels  bruised  ail  the  way  up  and  down. — Sharp  pains 
in  the  back. 

22.  Upper  Limbs.— Pain  in  1.  shoulder. — Grinding  in  elbows.— Hard 
aching  pains  in  bones  of  forearm,  and  in  wrist  and  hands. — Numbness  of  L 
hand. — Panaritium,  early  stage ;  pain,  pricking,  sharp,  agonising. — Paronychia. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Hard,  dull,  or  tearing  pains  in  the  hip. — ^Pain  in  r. 
leg  from  point  of  exit  of  sciatic  nerve,  felt  only  when  moving  the  limb,  or 
when  sitting  up. — Knees  lame,  weak,  and  painful ;  trembling. — Hard,  dull,  or 
sharp  pains  in  leg. — Ankles  weak  and  painful. 

24.  Generalities.— Restless,  trembling,  faint  feeling. — Languid,  tired 
feeling. — Rheumatic  pains  <  night  and  early  morning. — Chorea ;  with 
seminal  emissions. — Itching  of  various  parts  of  the  body  and  limbs. 

25.  Skin. — Panaritium,  early  when  pains  are  sharp  and  agonising,  or 
when  pricking  is  felt;  nails  brittle. — Little  pimples  with  black  heads. 


DIRCA   PALUSTRIS  675 

flft.  Sleep.— Many  symptoms  are  <  alter  sleep  :  bitter  mouth ;  pains  in 
bowels ;  hard  beating  of  heart— Restless  after  2  a.m. ;  most  move,  yet  it 
hurts,  he  is  so  sore. — ^First  sleep  late ;  wakes  early. 


Diphtherinum. 


A  nosode.    Trituration  of  diphtheric  membrane.    Dilutions  of 
diphtheria  toxin. 

CHiitnal. — Croup.    Diphtheria.    Diphtheritic  paral3rsis.    Myelitis. 

CSiaraoterirticB.— The  well-known  features  of  the  disease  of 
which  this  nosode  is  a  product  must  be  the  guide  to  its  use.  It 
should  be  more  efficacious  in  the  potencies  against  diphtheria,  both 
as  prophylactic  and  cure,  than  the  serum  injections.  In  all  probability 
it  will  be  found  useful  in  the  paralysis  of  diphtheria  and  other  like 
kinds  of  spinal  affection.  It  needs  clinical  development  and  a  proving 
in  the  potencies. 

Dirca  Palustris. 

Leatherwood.    Moosewood.    Wicopy.    N.  O.  Thymelaceae.    Tinc- 
ture of  inner  bark  of  branches. 

GllBieaL — Colic.  Constipation.  Cough.  Debility.  Diarrhoea.  Dyspepsia. 
Eyes,  affections  of.  Flatulence.  Headache.  Heart,  affections  of.  Neuralgia. 
Rheumatism. 

CharaoteriBticB. — Dirca  belongs  to  the  same  family  as  Daphne 
Ittdica  and  Mezcreunty  and  is  the  only  American  member  of  the  family. 
Its  symptoms  show  its  relationship  to  the  other  two,  but  it  has 
not  been  used  extensively  in  practice.  It  produces  much  vital 
depression ;  neiu-algic  pains  in  the  head,  trunk,  and  extremities, 
many  of  the  pains  proceeding  from  without  inward.  Digestion  is 
disordered,  there  is  weight  at  the  stomach,  and  a  peculiar  white 
tongue,  the  coating  being  moist  and  even.  Rumbling  of  flatulence. 
colic  >  by  bending  forward,  diarrhoea  and  tenesmus,  later  consti- 
pation. Oppression  and  pains  in  the  chest,  sweetish  expectoration, 
and  excitability  of  the  heart's  action  from  the  slightest  motion.  Hot 
and  restless  at  night ;  cannot  sleep  ;  dreams  of  dead  bodies.  Motion 
<  most  symptoms ;  walking  <  vertigo  and  pain  in  bowels.  Colic 
is  >  by  t)ending  forward ;  headache  >  by  pressure.  Pains  in  the 
bowels  are  >  by  stool. 

BelationB. — Compare :  Can.  i.  (time  passes  slowly) ;  Ant.  c. 
(tongue) ;  Lye.  (constipation  and  flatulence) ;  Bry.,  Puis.,  Abies,  n.. 
&c.  (weight  at  stomach) ;  Stan,  (sweet  expectoration). 

8TMPT0MS. 

I.    Mind.— Time  seemed  to  pass  slowly.— Absent-minded. 

8.    Head.- Vertigo  on  walking ;  seems  as  if  he  would  fall  to  1. — ^Pains 


676  DIRCA  PALUSTRIS 

all  through  the  head,  vertex,  and  occiput,  extending  down  into  spine. — 
Sensation  as  if  lobes  of  cerebrum  were  drawn  forward  towards  frontal 
sinuses. — Headache  in  temples  extending  inwards ;  >  by  hard  pressure.— 
Headache,  throbbing,  and  beating  in  1.  half  of  head,  <  by  coughing  or 
moving. — Pain  high  up  in  occiput  extending  inwards. — ^Awoke  with  pain  low 
down  in  occiput,  much  <  on  raising  or  accidentally  moving  head  in  morning ; 
<  towards  noon,  and  went  up  over  vertex  to  forehead,  and  there  had  a 
strong  congestive  headache,  with  throbbing  of  carotids,  lasting  tiU  evening 
and  gradually  disappearing. — Scalp  feels  dry  and  tight 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  sore;  and  painful  to  touch. — Sensation  as  if  brows 
corrugated ;  and  as  if  brain  were  also  drawn  down. — Lids  heavy. — ^Much 
photophobia ;  on  waking  and  continuing  all  day ;  esp.  from  gasli^t 

6.    Face. — Face  red,  full,  and  bloated  in  morning. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  coated  smoothly  and  evenly  white. — Smooth, 
dirty,  white  coat. — Sour  taste. 

g.  Throat. — ^Throat  red,  raw  ;  acrid  feeling ;  hurts  to  swallow  food  or 
liquids. 

iz.  Stomach. — No  thirst — Empty  eructations, — Uneasy  feeling  as  if  a 
lump  or  weight  in  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Several  lancinations  in  1.  hypochondrium  with  tym- 
panites.— Burning  below  umbilicus. — Rumbling  in  bowels. — Colic  >  bending 
forward;  and  >  by  stool,  but  smarting  in  anus  remains. — Burning  and 
uncomfortable  sensation  in  bowels. — Pain  in  bowels  on  walking,  also  painful 
on  pressure. — Dull  ache  low  down  in  pelvis;  bearing  down,  not  >  by 
sitting  or  lying,  but  >  when  headache  >. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Throbbing,  stitching  pains  in  anus. — Soreness 
and  smarting,  <  after  stool. — ^Tenesmus  and  straining. — Diarrhoeic  stools; 
sudden,  gushing,  watery ;  thin,  yellowish  f aecaL — Constipation ;  urgent  desiret 
but  passes  only  frothy  mucus. — Dry,  sticky  feces. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pain  and  soreness  in  region  of  bladder. 

z6.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Uterus  seems  too  low,  and  as  if  it  would 
prolapse  during  stool. — Menses  two  days  too  early;  less  copious  and  prolonged 
than  usual. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Stinging  pains  in  larynx  from  without 
inwards ;  very  sharp  pricking  pain  and  sensation  of  suffocation. — Cough  < 
morning. — Raising  sweetish-tasting  mucus  quite  offensive. — Great  dyspnoea 
from  exertion  ;  from  walking  up  a  slight  elevation. — Sharp  pain  in  r.  thorax 
running  down  into  abdomen  and  up  into  1.  shoulder. 

10.  Heart.— Excitability  of  heart's  action  from  least  motion. — Palpitation 
on  going  up  slight  elevation. — Pulse  suddenly  becomes  weak  and  irregular. 

20.  Back. — Heavy  pain  across  back  and  through  loins;  in  region  of 
kidneys. 

23.  Upper  Limbs. — Dull,  neuralgic  pain  in  both  shoulders,  cannot  keep 
them  still. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Muscles  of  thighs  sore  and  stiff. — Neuralgic  pains 
in  legs. 

s6.    Sleep. — Sleepy  but  unable  to  sleep. — Dreams  of  dead  bodies. 


DOLICHOS  677 

Dolichos. 

Dolichos  pruriens.    Mucuna  pruriens.    Cowbage.    Cow-itch.    N.  0. 
Leguminosae.    Trituration  or  tincture  of  whole  pod. 

OUnleftl, — Cough.  Dentition.  Gums,  neuralgia  of.  Herpes  zoster.  Jaundice. 
JaumUce^  irritation  of.    Jaw,  pain  in.    Neuralgia.    Pruritus.    Sore  throat. 

(9iapaoteriBtio8. — ^The  most  characteristic  symptoms  of  Dolichos 
are — a  general  intense  itching  without  eruption,  <  by  scratching ; 
and  a  pain  in  the  throat  on  right  side  below  angle  of  jaw  as  if  a 
splinter  were  embedded  vertically  in  it.  It  is  mainly  a  right-side 
medicine,  and  hence  its  relation  to  the  liver.  It  corresponds  to 
exalted  nervous  sensibiUty,  as  in  dentition.  Gums  intensely  sensitive  ; 
seem  to  itch.  Kraft  has  recorded  {N.  A  J,  //.,  1890,  p.  20)  a  striking 
cure  with  Dolichos  1,200  (Kent)  of  a  woman  who  had  sjonptoms  of 
jaundice,  white  stools,  and  desperate  itching,  preventing  sleep  at 
night.  There  was,  in  addition,  enormous  distension  of  abdomen 
with  continuous  rattling  of  wind,  intolerance  of  anything  tight  round 
neck  or  body  ;  intense  restlessness,  unable  to  sit  still  a  minute.  The 
symptoms  of  Dol,  are  <  at  night.  Warmth  <  itching  at  night.  Cold 
water  bums  on  the  itching  skin.    Colic  from  getting  feet  wet. 

BelationB. — Aconite  antidotes  it,  and  in  ''cases  of  dentition 
with  fever  Aconite  should  be  given  before  DoHchos  to  prevent 
convulsions  "  (Hering).  DoUchos  follows  Rhus  in  herpes.  Compare : 
Bell,  (dentition) ;  Arg.  n..  Hep.,  Nit.  ac.  (throat). 

STHPT0M8. 

3.    Eyes.— Eyes  yellow. 

S.  Mouth.— Oums  (upper)  irritated,  tumid,  excessively  painful;  can 
scarcely  take  food  or  drink  in  the  mouth. — Pain  in  the  gums  prevents  sleep. 
--Soreness  and  tenderness  of  gums  in  teething  children. — Gums  swollen ; 
neuralgic  pains  in  them ;  <  at  night. 

9.  Throat. — Painful  sensation  of  the  throat  below  the  angle  of  the 
lower  jaw  on  r.  side ;  it  was  as  if  a  splinter  three-quarters  of  an  inch  in 
length  was  imbedde4  vertically  in  that  spot ;  pain  <  by  swallowing. 

u.  Abdomen. — Bloated,  swollen  abdomen  (with  constipation).—- Worms. 
—Swelling  of  the  liver. 

13.    Stool.— Constipation  during  teething  or  pregnancy.— White  stools. 
17.    Respiratory  Organs.— Cough  most  troublesome  about  bed-time 
and  for  awhile  after  going  to  bed. — Cough,  with  wheezing  and  dyspnoea. 
z8.    Chest. — Sharp  pain  through  upper  portion  of  both  lungs. 

84.  Generalities. — Neuralgic  pains  following  herpes  zoster. — Twitching 
of  the  muscles. — Clonic  spasms  of  the  extremities,  with  loss  of  consciousness ; 
eyes  motionless ;  eyelids  open. 

85.  Skin. — Intolerable  itching  all  over  the  body;  <  at  night, 
preventing  sleep;  scratching  <  the  itching;  there  is  nothing  per- 
ceptible on  the  skin.— Jaundice,  with  itching  of  the  skin. — Dry,  tcttcry 
eruptions  on  arms  and  legs,  resembling  zona. — Pain  under  1.  axilla  for  three 


678  DORYPHORA 

days,  when  an  herpetic  eruption  breaks  out  on  axilla  of  affected  side, 
spreading;  in  rings  forward  to  sternum  and  backward  to  spine  with  burning 
and  smarting. 


Doryphora. 


Doryphora  decemlineata.  The  Colorado  Beetle.  Potato  Bug.  N.  0. 
Coleoptenu  Tincture  prepared  by  covering  the  crushed  Kve 
beetles  with  alcohol. 

(Uinleal^^Diarrhoea.  Diphtheria.  Dysentery.  Erysipelas.  Fevers.  Gastric 
aCFections.  Gleet  Gonorrhcea.  Myzoedema.  Parotitis.  Spleen,  pain  in.  Typhoid. 
Ulceration.    Urethritis. 

GhavaoteriBtios. — Doryphora  in  its  general  effects  bears  a  strong 
resemblance  to  Cantharis.  An  extensive  proving  has  been  made, 
and  to  this  have  been  added  the  effects  of  poisoning  from  handling 
the  insects,  and  from  inhaling  the  vapour  when  they  have  been 
burned  or  scalded.  Like  Canih.^  Doryph,  produces  burning  in  mouth, 
throat,  gullet,  stomach,  abdomen,  rectum,  and  urinary  passages  ; 
strangury,  urethritis,  and  itching  burning  and  inflammation  of  glans 
penis.  It  has  been  successfully  used  in  urethritis  in  children  under 
ten,  provoked  by  local  irritation.  A  feeling  of  weight  or  heaviness  is 
common.  Fainting,  weakness,  prostration,  collapse ;  great  trembling  of 
extremities.  Prostration  after  typhoid  and  diphtheria  has  been  cured. 
The  weakness  is  <  by  talking.  Local  application  causes  ulceration. 
The  blood  will  not  coagulate  ;  blood  globules  disorganised ;  enormous 
swelling  of  whole  body ;  swelling  of  feet  with  burning ;  elastic 
swelling  of  whole  body  which  will  not  pit  on  pressure  (suggesting  its 
applicability  in  myxoedema).  The  symptoms  are  <  by  motion ; 
<  from  smoking ;  <  in  warm  room  ,*  >  in  open  air ;  pressure  < 
(pain  in  kidneys). 

Relations. — ^The  local  effect  is  antidoUd  by :  Earth  ;  other 
antidotes  are  :  Vinegar  and  other  vegetable  acids,  Stramon.  Compare : 
Agar.,  Ailanth.,  Apis,  Bellad.,  Canth.,  CrotaL,  Laches.,  and  with  the 
Solanaceae  generally,  as  the  beetle  partakes  of  the  properties  of  the 
plants  it  infests.    In  non-coagulation  of  the  blood,  Sanguisuga. 

8TMPT0MS. 

I.  Mind. — Stupor;  with  muttering  and  loud  rumbling  in  bowels.— 
Delirium  ;  talkative  ;  red,  bloated  face,  protruding  eyes. — Irritability. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  red,  sore  ;  protruding ;  pupils  much  dilated ;  sight 
much  impaired. 

6.  Face. — Face  bloated  and  red,  giving  appearance  of  a  confirmed 
drunkard. 

8.  Mouth. — Dark  brown  coating  on  tongue. — Offensive  taste.— Violent 
heat  in  mouth ;  severe  pain  across  kidneys ;  face  red  and  bloated ;  constipa* 
tion  and  retention  of  urine.— {Parotitis.) 


DROSERA  679 

9.  Throat.— -Dry  feeling  in  throat  with  desire  to  swallow. — ^Throat 
raw  and  oonstricted. — Burning  in  throat  and  dowil  oesophagus,  with  stomach- 
ache and  cough. 

II.  Stomach. — Loss  of  appetite,  great  thirst. — Craving  for  something 
sour;  symptoms  <  by  smoking. — Nausea  and  vomiting;  vomits  dark, 
grumous  acrid  matter  ;  of  dirty  brown  fluid  with  diarrhcea. 

IS.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  spleen. — Rumbling  in  bowels  (with  stupor). — 
Pain  in  bowels,  <  by  eating  and  drinking  and  by  deep  inspiration. — ^Abdomen 
feels  heavy  ;  sore  and  tender ;  burning. 

13.  Stool  and  Rectum. — Morning  diarrhcea,  with  pain  in  abdomen 
and  burning  in  rectum.— Bloody,  slimy  stools. — Heaviness ;  intense  pain  in 
rectum. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Retention  of  urine.— Dysuria,  with  burning, 
stinging  pain. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Itching  and  burning  of  glans  penis, 
which  is  swollen  and  bluish  red ;  urethra  inflamed,  with  excruciating  pain, 
esp.  when  urinating. 

iS.    Chest. — Soreness  and  oppression  of  chest  with  sore  throat. 

90.  Back. — Pain  in  lumbar  region. 

91.  Limbs. — Great  trembling  in  extremities  ;  in  r.  arm  and  leg. 

95.  Skin. — An  abraded  surface  on  the  wrist  of  one  engaged  in  picking 
the  bugs  became  painful,  a  deep  sloughing  ulcer  developed,  and  the  bones 
were  laid  bare. 

96.  Sleep. — ^Tossing  about  all  night. — Sleepless  till  12,  then  restless 
sleep  with  terrifying  dreams. — ^While  sleeping,  wild  dreams,  screams  as  if 
in  great  distress. 

97.  Fever. — Skin  alternately  cold,  clammy,  and  hot  with  fever. — Cold- 
ness of  hands  and  feet. — High  fever  during  night,  restless  and  sleepless. — 
Violent  fever  8  a.m.  to  2  p.m. — Of  children  who  inhaled  vapour  from  a  kettle 
in  which  some  beetles  had  been  placed,  one  died  and  the  other  recovered 
after  a  serious  illness  resembling  typhoid^fever. 


Drosera. 


Drosera  rotundifolia.     Round-leaved  Sundew.    N.  0,  Droseraceae. 
Tincture  of  active  fresh  plant. 

OUnieaL— Amblyopia.  Asthma.  Bronchitis.  Catarrh.  Consumption,  Cough, 
Cozalgia.  Epilepsy.  Hsemorrhage.  Headache.  Laryngitis.  Measles.  Nausea. 
Phthisis.    Sciatica.    Vomiting.    Whooping-cough. 

GhaFaoteristlOB. — ^The  chief  feature  of  the  Drosera  effects  is  a 
spasmodic  cough  resembling  whooping-cough^  in  which  affection  it 
is  one  of  the  leading  remedies,  as  it  is  also  in  the  spasmodic  cough  of 
phthisis.  The  characteristic  cough  is :  Frequent  spells  of  barking 
cough ;  <  evening  and  after  midnight ;  patient  holds  his  side ; 
vomits  if  he  cannot  get  up  phlegm ;  every  effort  to  raise  a  little 


68o  DROSERA 

phlegm  ends  in  retching  and  vomiting ;  there  may.  be  bloody  stook. 
Teste,  who  places  Drosera  in  his  Zincum  group  of  medicines,  mentiiMis 
that  it  grows  in  damp  prairies,  along  the  border  of  marshes,  and  is 
avoided  by  animals.    Barrich  states  that  when  eaten  by  sheep  it 
gives  them  a  cough  which  is  fatal  to  them.    Curiously  enough,  it  was 
reconunended  by  German  physicians  of  the  eighteenth  century  as  a 
panacea  for   hoarseness,  chest  affections,  and    even   for    phthisis. 
Serrand,  of  Paris  (translated  H.  R.,  vi.  153)  maintains  that  Drosera  has 
an  important  r6l€  in  the  prophylaxis  of  tubercle.     He  refers  to  the 
fact  that  sheep  eating  Drosera  leaves  acquire  a  nocturnal  cou^  and 
die,  and  that  the  pleurae  of  cats  to  which  Drosera  had  been  administered 
were  found  studded  with  tubercles.    The  indications  calling  for  it  in 
the  premonitory  stage  are :  pallor,  weakness,  loss  of  appetite,  dry 
cough,  emaciation.    Three  laryngoscopic  indications  are  :  (i)  Anaemia 
and  pallor  of  larynx;  (2)  vocal  cords  not  sufficiently  approximated 
from  functional  impairment  of  crico-arytenoid  muscles  ;  (3)  redness 
and    swelling  of   mucous  membrane    covering   and    between   the 
arytenoid  c^tilages.    Dr.    Serrand    commends   Dros.    in    cases  of 
declared  phthisis  as   well.     He  gives  it  in  the  low  attenuations. 
Buchmann    of  Alvensleben  agrees  with  Hahnemann   that  Dros.  in 
high  attenuation  should  not  be  repeated.    He  cured  himself  of  a 
bronchial  catarrh  which  used  to  attack  him  every  spring  and  6dl, 
characterised  by  a  violent  tickling  cough,  which  almost  drove  him  to 
distraction  at  night,  with  Dros,  ix.  and  d.  A  single  dose  as  soon  as  the 
tickling  in  the  larynx  commenced  sufficed  to  allay  it  at  once  and 
allowed  him  to  rest,  and  it  was   only  repeated  when  the  tickling 
returned.     Among  the  characteristics  of  Drosera  are :  Spasmodic 
and  constricting  pains  in  abdomen  ;  larynx ;  throat ;  chest ;  hypochon- 
dria.   Crawling  in  larynx  ;  feeling  as  if  a  soft  substance  were  lodged 
in  larynx,  as  a  feather.    Difficult  swallowing  of  soUds.   Voice  f^. 
Stitching  pains  in  chest  and  all  parts  ;  lancinations  in  brain.    Stitches 
from  left  loin  into  penis  ;  itching  stitches  in  glans.    Haemorrhages  of 
bright  red  blood  ;  from  nose ;  mouth  (bloody  saliva) ;  with  vomit ; 
with  stool ;  expectoration.     Gnawing  stinging  pains  in  joints  and 
long  bones.    Dros.  has  many  pains  about  the  hip-joints  and  has  cured 
sciatica  with  the  following  characters :  "  Pressing  pains,   <  from 
pressure,  from  stooping,  from  lying  on  painful  part,  >  adPter  rising 
from  bed."     Eruption  like  measles ;  prickUng  burning  itching ;  < 
undressing ;  >  by  scratching  ;  bleeding,  burning  ulcers,  cutting  pains. 
Epileptic  attacks  :   with  rigidity  ;   with  twitching  of  Umbs ;  after 
attack,  haemoptysis  and  sleep.    Symptoms  are  <  towards  evening 
and  after  midnight.     <  By  warmth ;  by  warm  drinks  ;  >  in  open 
air.    Many  symptoms  are  <  at  rest  and  when  lying  in  bed.    Support- 
ing the  part  >  pains  in  head  and  chest.    Stooping  <  ;  walking  > ; 
singing  and  talking  <.    Motion  of  eye  <  head  pains.    Motion  > 
stitching  in  chest  and  joints,  and  shivering.    <  Prom  acids. 

BemtionB. — Antidoted  by  :  Camph.  Complementary:  Nux.  Com- 
patible :  Calc  c.  Puis.,  Verat.,  Gnaph.  Compare :  Bell.,  Coral.,  Cup., 
Hyo.,  Ip.,  Sambuc,  Meph.,  Op.,  Coc.  cact  In  inability  to  expectorate, 
Caust.,  Sep.,  Am.,  KaU  c  Teste  considers  Meny.  the  closest 
analogue. 


DROSERA  68i 


8THPT0HS. 

I.  Mind. — Mental  dejection,  caused  by  ideas  of  imaginary  enmity. — 
Anxiety,  esp.  (in  the  evening)  in  solitude,  with  fear  of  ghosts. — Great 
mistrust — ^Restlessness,  which  does  not  allow  prolonged  attention  to  the  same 
object — Inquietude  respecting  the  future. — Discouragement — Inclination  to 
drown  oneself. — Pertinacity  in  executing  resolutions.— The  least  thing  puts 
the  sufferer  beside  himself. 

s.  Head. — Painful  perplexity  of  the  head,  as  after  loud  speaking. — 
Vertigo  on  walking  in  the  open  air,  which  occasions  falling  (to  the  1.). — 
Pressive  pains  in  the  head,  esp.  in  the  forehead  and  in  the  cheek-bones,  some- 
times with  nausea  and  dizziness. — Pressing  headache  (temples),  with  stupe- 
faction and  nausea  (morning) ;  worse  when  stooping  and  from  heart ;  better 
from  motion  and  in  the  cold  air. — Beating  and  hammering  in  the  forehead 
from  the  inside  outwards. — Pains,  as  of  excoriation  in  the  scalp. 

3«  Kyes. — Shootings  in  the  eyes  towards  the  outside,  esp,  on  stoop- 
ing.— Suspension  of  the  sight,  or  confusion  and  paleness  of  the  letters  while 
reading.--Oauze  before  the  eyes. — Presbyopia  and  weakness  of  the  eyes. — 
Contraction  of  the  pupils. — Dazzling  by  candle-light  and  daylight. 

4.  Ears. — Shootings  and  squeezing  in  the  ears,  esp.  on  swallowing. — 
Hardness  of  hearing,  with  buzzing  and  roaring  in  the  ears. — Humming  and 
drumming  in  the  ears.  ' 

5.  Nose*— Bleeding  at  the  nose,  esp.  in  the  evening.— Discharge  of 
blood  on  blowing  the  nose. — Black  pores  on  the  nose. — Constant  dryness  of 
the  nose. — Great  sensibility  to  acid  smells. — Fluent  coryza  with  sneezing. 

6.  Face. — Paleness  of  the  face,  with  cheeks  hollow,  and  eyes  sunken. — 
Small  pustules  here  and  there  on  face,  with  fine  stitching  sensation  <  when 
touched. — Burning  and  pricking  sensation  in  the  skin  of  the  cheeks,  below 
the  eyes. — Lips  cracked  and  constantly  dry. — Pressure  in  the  cheek-bones 
towards  the  outside,  aggravated  by  pressure  and  contact — Black  pores  in  the 
chin. 

8.  Mouth. — Shooting  pains  in  teeth,  after  taking  hot  drinks. — Ulcers  on 
tongue. — Bleeding  of  the  mouth. — Ulceration  of  velum  palati. 

9.  Throat. — Rough,  scraping  dryness  deep  in  fauces,  and  in  region  of 
soft  palate,  inducing  short  and  hacking  cough,  with  yellow  mucous  expectora- 
tion, hoarse  deep  voice,  oppression  in  chest  as  if  breath  could  not  be  expelled 
when  coughing  or  talking. — Shootings  in  the  throat,  after  eating  anything 
salt — Stinging  in  the  throat  during  deglutition. — Difficulty  in  swallowing 
solid  food,  as  from  contraction  of  the  throat — Sensation  c^  dr3mess  in  the 
throat — Sensation  in  the  throat,  as  if  crumbs  of  bread  had  been  stopped  in 
it — Hawking  of  yellowish  or  greenish  mucus. 

ID.  Appetite. — ^Thirst,  esp.  in  the  morning  (during  the  hot  stage  of  the 
fever  and  not  during  the  cold  stage). — Insipidity  of  food. — ^Aversion  to  pork. 
— Bitter  taste  of  food  and  esp.  of  bread. 

XX.  Stomach. — Bitter  risings. — Frequent  hiccough. — ^Water-brash. — 
Vomiting  at  night,  and  after  dinner. — ^Vomiting  of  bile,  in  the  morning. — 
Vomiting  of  blood. — Nausea  after  eating  fat  food.— Vomiting  of  slimy  matter 
and  of  food  during  the  cough. — Shootings  and  beatings  in  the  pit  of  the 
stomach. — Clawing  sensation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. 


682  DROSERA 

Z9.  Abdomen. — Pains  in  the  hypochondriai  on  coughing  and  on  being 
touched  (he  has  to  press  on  them  with  the  hand  when  he  coughs).— 0>lic  after 
taking  acids. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Frequent  evacuations  of  sanguineous  mucus, 
with  cutting  pains ;  after  the  stool,  pain  in  abdomen  and  small  of  the  back. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  want  to  make  water,  with  scanty 
emission,  often  drop  by  drop. — Emission  of  urine  at  night. — Brownish  urine 
of  a  strong  smell. — ^Watery,  inodorous  urine  (with  fetid  stool  of  white  mucus). 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Catamenia  suppressed. — Catamenia 
retarded. — Leucorrhoea,  with  pains  like  those  of  childbirth,  spasmodic  pains 
in  the  abdomen. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— TingUng  in  the  larynx,  which  excites  a 
slight  cough,  and  shootings  extending  to  the  throat.— Sensation,  as  if  there 
were  a  soft  body,  such  as  a  feather,  in  the  larynx. — Sensation  of  dryness,  or 
roughness,  and  of  scraping  in  the  bottom  of  the  gullet,  with  inclination  to 
cough. — Hoarseness,  and  very  low  voice. — Oppressed  breathing  when  talking ; 
mostly  while  sitting. — Sensation  of  oppression  in  the  chest,  as  if  the  voice  and 
breath  were  retarded  when  speaking  and  coughing. — Fine  stitches  in  hrynx 
extending  down  to  r.  side  of  oesophagus. — Cough  without  much  sound. — 
Cough  as  soon  as  the  head  touches  the  pillow.— Accumulation  of  slimy  matter, 
alternately  hard  and  soft,  yellowish,  greyish  or  greenish. — Cough  and  hoarse- 
ness.-—Cough,  proceeding  from  the  depth  of  the  chest,  with  pains  in  the 
hypochondria  and  in  the  chest,  mitigated  by  pressing  the  hand  upon  them. — 
Cough  at  night,  and  in  the  evening,  immediately  after  lying  down. — Dry, 
spasmodic  cough,  with  retching. — Fatiguing  cough  like  whooping-cou^ 
(attacks,  every  one  to  three  hours,  with  barking  or  dull-sounding  coughs, 
choking  the  breathing,  caused  by  tickling  or  dryness  of  the  throat ;  yellow 
and  bitter  expectoration ;  has  to  swallow  this  mucus  down)  with  bluish  face, 
wheezing  respiration,  attacks  of  suffocation,  bleeding  from  the  nose  and 
mouth,  and  anxiety. — ^The  cough  is  excited  by  laughter,  weeping  and  mental 
emotions  ;  after  having  had  the  measles ;  aggravation  after  lying  down,  and 
still  more  increased  after  midnight ;  when  at  rest ;  when  lying  in  bed ;  from 
heat  ;  from  drinking ;  from  singing. — ^Vomiting  of  food  during  the  cough, 
and  afterwards. — Cough,  with  fetid  breath. — Singing,  tobacco-smoke,  and 
drinking,  excites  the  cough. — Cough,  with  expectoration  of  a  bright  red  blood, 
or  of  blackish  clots. — Cough,  in  the  morning,  with  bitter  and  nauseous 
expectoration. — Cough,  with  expectoration  of  purulent  matter,  and  shootings 
in  the  lower  part  of  the  chest. — Greenish  expectoration. — Laryngeal  and 
tracheal  phthisis. 

18.  Chest. — Restricted  respiration  on  speaking,  as  if  the  throat  were 
contracted,  chiefly  when  seated. — Oppression  of  the  chest,  as  if  something 
stopped  the  voice  on  coughing  or  on  speaking,  or,  as  if  the  breath  could  not 
be  expelled.~Tightness  of  the  chest  on  coughing. — Pains  in  the  chest  on 
coughing  and  on  sneezing ;  he  has  to  press  his  chest  with  the  hand. — Pains, 
as  from  subcutaneous  ulceration  in  the  sternum,  on  pressing  upon  it — Black 
pores  on  the  chest  and  shoulder. 

80.  Neck  and  Back.— Stiffness  at  the  nape  of  the  neck,  with  pains 
during  movement. — Bruise-like  pains  in  the  back,  particularly  early  in  the 
morning. 


DUBOISINUM  683 

82.  Upper  Limbs.— ^Twitchings  in  r.  shoulder,  only  when  at  rest. — Pains, 
as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  joints  of  the  aims  and  of  the  hands. — Cramp  and 
sti£Fening  of  the  fingers,  on  grasping  an  object. — Nocturnal  pains  in  the  bones 
of  the  arm,  going  off  during  motion  in  the  day. 

93.  Lower  Limbs. — Paralytic  pains  in  the  coxo-femoral  joint,  and  in 
the  thighs,  on  walking,  which  occasion  limping. — Incisive  shootings  in  the 
legs. — ^Violent  stitch  in  the  os  ischium,  on  rising  from  a  seat. — ^Tearings  in  the 
joints  of  the  foot,  as  if  they  were  dislocated,  only  when  walking, — Stiffness  in 
the  joints  of  the  feet. — Cold  sweat  in  the  feet,  which  are  constantly  cold. 

84.  Generalities. — Rapid  emaciation  (with  acute  laryngitis). — Gnawing 
shootings  in  the  cavities  of  the  bones  of  the  arms  and  of  the  legs,  exceedingly 
violent,  with  violent  shootings  in  the  joints,  during  repose,  rather  than  during 
movement. — Shooting  and  painful  pressure  in  the  muscles  (of  the  limbs), 
mitigated  in  no  position. — Pains  as  from  a  bruise,  excessively  distressing 
sensitiveness,  paralytic  weakness  in  all  the  limbs. — All  the  limbs  feel  sore,  as 
from  too  hard  a  bed. — ^Weakness  in  the  whole  body,  with  cheeks  and  eyes 
hollow. — Epileptic  convulsions,  with  sleep  and  spitting  of  blood,  after  the  fit. 
— ^The  majority  of  the  sufferings  appear  at  night  and  in  the  morning,  as  well 
as  in  a  warm  atmosphere,  and  during  repose.— Gnawing-stinging  in  the  long 
bones;  worse  during  rest. 

25.  Skin. — ^Violent  itching  while  undressing ;  when  scratching,  the  skin 
readily  peels  off. — Black  pores  on  chest  and  shoulder. 

26.  Sleep. — Snoring  during  sleep,  and  when  lying  on  the  back. — 
Frequent  starts  with  fright,  during  sleep. — Nocturnal  waking,  on  the  breaking 
out  of  perspiration. — Frequent  waking  with  perspiration,  or  as  if  too  wakeful. 
— Sleep  at  noon  and  in  the  evening  at  sunset. 

27.  Fever. — Shuddering  over  the  whole  body,  with  heat  of  the  face,  icy 
coldness  of  the  hands  and  absence  of  thirst,  or  shiverings  with  coldness  and 
paleness  of  the  hands,  the  feet,  and  the  face. — In  the  morning  hours,  coldness 
of  one  side  (1.)  of  the  face,  while  the  other  side  (r.)  is  hot. — Chilliness  and 
chill  while  at  rest,  finds  it  everywhere  too  cold,  even  in  bed. — Chilliness 
during  the  day,  heat  during  the  night. — Heat  almost  exclusively  in  the  face 
and  on  the  head. — ^Warm  perspiration  at  night,  esp.  after  midnight  and  during 
the  morning  hours,  mostly  in  the  face. — Heat,  with  headache  and  convulsive 
cough. — (Intermittent)  fever,  with  nausea,  and  inclination  to  vomit,  and  other 
gastric  sufferings,  or  with  sore  throat. 


Daboisinnm. 


Duboisia  myoporoides.  Corkwood  Tree.  (Queensland.)  AT.  0.  Sola- 
naceae.  Tincture  and  solution  of  alkaloid  prepared  from 
extract  of  the  leaves. 

OlittiosL — Delirium.  Drowsiness.  Eyes :  dilated  pupils.  Locomotor  ataxy. 
Mouth,  dryness  of.  Paralysis.  Presbyopia.  Throat,  dryness  of.  Vertigo.  Vision, 
disorders  of. 

Oliaraotarirtios. — Duboisia  belongs  to  the  same  order  as  Bella- 
donna, and  its  alkaloid,  Sulphate  of  duboisia,  has  been  used  as  a 


684  DUBOISINUM 

substitute  for  Atropine.  Its  application  to  the  eye  has  caused  marked 
constitutional  symptoms  of  fever,  delirium,  stupor,  and  diy  mouth. 
A  symptom  which  may  prove  a  keynote  is  "  a  red  qK)t  floating  in  the 
field  of  vision/'  Guided  by  this,  C.  H.  Helfrich  cured  a  case  of 
hyperaemia  of  optic  nerve  with  Duboisin  3  (N,  A.  J.  H.^  xiii.  267). 
Dryness  of  mucous  membranes  is  very  characteristic.  Cool  feeling 
in  the  eyes.  Sensation  as  if  stepping  on  empty  space.  Feeling 
of  largeness  in  eyes,  in  tongue.  Inability  to  stand  with  the  eyes  shut 
gives  it  a  place  in  locomotor  ataxy.    It  has  also  been  proved. 

BalattoilB. — AniidoUd  by :  Co£Fee ;  lemon-juice.  Compare :  Bell., 
Atrop.,  Dulc,  Stram.,  &c.    Anhalonium  (coloured  vision). 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Excitable ;  tries  to  get  off  the  sofa. — Stupor ;  thou^  if 
questioned  replies,  but  with  difficulty. — Picks  at  surrounding  objects  ;  slight 
drawings  up  of  arms ;  very  restless. — Carphology ;  glances  suspiciously  under 
bed-dothes  and  behind  back ;  left  to  himself  .upsets  room  in  a  few  moments- 
towels,  brushes,  shoes  placed  on  bed,  and  boots  on  dressing-table  ;  through- 
out air  of  fun  and  humour ;  on  recovery  remembers  nothing  of  what  he  had 
done. — Busy  delirium ;  plucks  at  collar  of  night-dress ;  gazes  intently  at  foot 
of  bedstead  where  no  one  is,  reaches  out  toward  imaginary  person  or  object. 
— Unable  to  concentrate  thoughts  on  any  subject ;  absent-minded ;  thoughts 
wander  from  subject  to  subject ;  forgets  what  he  started  with ;  thoughts 
silly,  nonsensical. — Unable  to  express  herself. 

2.  Head. — Dizziness  ;  strange  feeling  in  head,  with  nausea  and  darkly 
flushed  face;  the  "strange"  feeling  lasted  longer  than  the  faintness  and 
drowsiness  ensued. — Headache. — Head  feels  light ;  vertigo  on  rising  up  or 
walking ;  great  inclination  to  fall  backward,  esp.  on  going  up  stairs ;  almost 
impossible  to  stand  with  eyes  shut — Head  heavy,  dizzy. — DuU  pain  through 
upper  part  of  eyeballs  and  forehead  like  sick-headache. 

3.  Eyes. — Pupils  widely  dilated. — Eyes  feel  cooL — Sharp  pain  in  upper 
eyeball. — Eyes  feel  tired. — ^Things  seemed  elevated ;  every  time  he  looked  up 
from  his  book  a  dull  pain  flies  through  upper  part  of  eyeballs  and  forehead 
like  sick-headache;  eyes  felt  large  and  protruding. — Faces  repeated  in  all 
directions. — Countenances  of  bystanders  appear  to  have  hollow  cheeks ;  walls 
to  have  great  hollows  excavated  in  them. — Hallucinations  of  vision  :  suddenly 
sits  on  ground  imagining  a  chair  ready  for  him ;  drops  a  glass  in  mid-air 
instead  of  placing  it  on  the  table  ;  grasps  in  the  air  above  his  head  for  his 
watch  which  had  been  taken  from  him. — Imagined  it  was  quite  dark  when  it 
was  a  bright  summer  afternoon. — Cannot  make  out  print  within  two  feet,  and 
it  shows  several  colours — ^blue,  orange,  and  reddish-brown,  as  does  the  ink 
when  writing ;  pupils  nearly  normal ;  a  -h  20  glass  makes  reading  at  normal 
distance  possible,  but  eyes  feel  strained  in  using  it — ^Appearance  of  a  red  qxyt 
in  field  61  vision  moving  with  the  eye. — Hyperaemia  of  optic  nerve ;  optic 
disc  very  red,  small  vessels  visible,  large  vessels  much  enlarged  and  tortuous ; 
accommodation  paralysed  ;  outline  of  disc  indistinct ;  arteries  diminished.— 
Fluttering  sensation  in  eyeball. — ^Twitching  of  orbicularis  palpebrarum.— 
Eyes  for  the  most  part  kept  closed,  but  opened  occasionally  (in  a  prover). 
4.    Ears. — Ringing  in  ears  (esp.  r.),  comes  on  suddenly. 


DUBOISINUM  685 

5.  Nose. — Nose  very  dry  and  stopped  up. 

6.  Face. — Face  deep  red. — Lips  very  dry. 

8.  Mouth.— Tongue  appears  to  swell ;  becomes  too  large  for  mouth, 
impeding  speech. — ^Tongue  feels  "flat" ;  cannot  articulate  distinctly. — Exces- 
sive dryness  in  mouth  and  throat,  can  scarcely  speak  for  it. 

g.  Throat.— Throat  dry  ;  red  ;  capillaries  varicose  ;  no  secretion  of 
any  kind  visible ;  in  consequence  of  the  dryness  the  follicles  are  very  promi- 
nent, and  the  conformation  of  spinal  column  plainly  visible ;  an  almost  perfect 
picture  of  "pharyngea  sicca'* ;  epiglottis  hyperaemic ;  laryngeal  cavity  engorged, 
dry,  with  here  and  there  patches  of  mucus,  viscid,  semi-transparent.  Next 
day  larynx  entirely  dry,  pharynx  having  isolated  patches  of  adherent, 
yellowish-white  mucus.— Constant  desire  to  clear  throat. — Great  difficulty 
in  swallowing,  esp.  empty  swallowing. 

II.  Stomach. — Loss  of  appetite,  nausea. — Deadly  "  gone  "  feeling,  as  if 
at  greater  curvature,  not  >  by  eating  or  drinking ;  pulse  feeble  and  inter- 
mittent. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Constant  desire  to  pass  water,  with  great 
difficulty  in  doing  so. — No  urine  passed  ;  bowels  inactive  ;  bathed  in  sweat. 
— Slight  burning  in  urethra  during  micturition. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness. — Hard,  dry,  hacking  cough 
caused  by  tickling  at  about  bifurcation  of  trachea  ;  cough  mm  feeling  of  sore- 
ness or  rawness  over  whole  of  both  lungs,  esp.  lower  lobe  1.  and  upper  r. ; 
cough  not  >  or  <  by  anything. — Respiration  pu£Fy  and  noisy. 

ig.  Heart. — ^A  rapid  pulse. — Faintness. — Sense  of  oppression  and  longing 
to  get  rid  of  the  medicine  (immediately  after  the  dose  in  a  poisoning  case) ; 
increased  to  agony. — ^Agony  of  breathlessness  and  sense  of  impending  death. 
—Pulse  rate  falls  on  sitting  up  and  increases  on  lying  down. — Pulse  irregular 
and  intermittent 

90,  81.  Back  and  Limbs. — L.  leg  powerless,  r.  leg  rigid.— Arms 
frequently  and  involuntary  jerked  away  from  the  sides. — Dorsal  and  lumbar 
muscles  thrown  into  violent  rhythmic  contractions. — Loss  of  power  in  lower 
limbs ;  staggers  as  if  drunk. — Going  down  stairs  or  kerb-stones  is  difficult, 
every  step  jolting  his  back  "  as  if  he  had  stepped  down  from  the  top  of  a 
boose.** — Severe  pressive  pain  in  lumbar  region  in  each  side  on  waking,  >  on 
moving  about. — Peculiar  sensation  in  legs,  then  in  thighs,  arms,  and  other 
parts  of  the  body,  as  if  they  were  asleep. 

94.  Generalities. — Heaviness  of  limbs,  esp.  lower. — General  weakness, 
disinclination  to  move. — Sense  of  lightness  throughout  body  and  head. — 
Unsteady  gait,  occasionally  a  feeling  as  if  he  had  stepped  on  empty  space, 
and  woi^d  catch  himself  for  fear  of  falling. — Staggered,  had  to  concentrate 
bis  energy  and  look  directly  ahead,  for  on  looking  to  one  side  there  was 
disposition  of  falling  to  the  other.--General  trembling;  unable  to  hold  up 
head ;  hallucinations  and  nausea. 

26.  Sleep. — Stupor  which  is  not  sleep,  he  replies  if  questioned. — Sleepy. 
—Drowsiness  and  rambling. 

27.  Fever. — Complained  of  chilliness. — Temperature  loo'S*.— Cold  **^d 
chilly,  wants  to  wear  extra  clothing,  which  makes  him  feel  comfortable. — 
Bathed  in  sweat 


686  DULCAMARA 


Dulcamara. 

Solanum  dulcamara.  Woody  Nightshade.  Bitter-sweet  AT.  O. 
Solanaceae.  (Not  to  be  confounded  with  "Deadly  Niditshade/' 
Belladonna,  nor  with  "Climbing  Bitter-sweet,"  Celastnis.) 
Tincture  prepared  from  fresh  green  stems  and  leaves,  gathered 
just  before  flowering. 

ClinleaL— Adenitis.  Angina  faucium.  Aphonia.  Blddder.  afftcUcns  of. 
Blepharophthalmia.  Catarrh.  Cholera.  Crusta  Uctea.  DiarrkcM,  Dropsy. 
Dysentery.  Emaciation.  Exostoses.  Haemorrhage.  Haemorrhoids.  Hay-fever. 
Headache.  Herpes.  Influenza.  Irritation.  Lichen.  Lumba^.  Measles. 
Meningitis.  Myalgia,  Myelitis.  NcttU'rash.  Neuralgia.  Ophthalmia.  Paralyses. 
Pemphigus.  Rheumatism,  Scarlatina.  Scrofula.  Stammering.  Stiff-neck,  TmrsL 
TibiaBi  pains  in.  Tongue,  affections  of.  Tonsillitis.  Tumours.  Typhoid.  Urine, 
difficulty  in  passing  ;  incontinence  of.    Warts.    Whooping-cough. 

OhaneteriBtios. — ^The  leading  indication  for  the  homoeopathic 
use  of  Dulcamara  is  found  in  its  modality, ''  <  from  cold  and  damp.'' 
Any  condition  which  has  this  feature  may  find  its  remedy  in  Dulc. 
Effects  of  lying  on  damp  ground  {e.g.,  paralysis)  ;  conditions  which  are 
<  in  cold,  damp  weather  ;  or,  from  changes  from  hot  to  cold  weather, 
especially  if  sudden.  Phlegmatic,  torpid,  scrofulous  patients,  who  are 
restless  and  irritable  and  who  taice  cold  on  damp  changes,  are 
especially  suited  for  Dulc.  Sensitiveness  to  cold  and  damp  runs 
through  the  Solanaceae,  and  is  marked  in  Bell,  and  Caps.,  but  it  is 
supreme  in  Dulc.  This  feature  among  others  renders  them  all  good 
antidotes  to  Mercurius.  Baryta  carb,  is  the  complement  of  Dulc  in 
"  <  from  cold  weather,  especially  in  scrofulous  children."  In  poison- 
ing cases  Dulc.  produces :  Hard,  griping  pains  in  bowels ;  uncon- 
sciousness ;  tetanic  spasm  ;  trismus  ;  loud,  rattling  breathing ;  death. 
Paralyses  are  numerous  :  paralysis  of  tongue ;  of  lungs  ;  of  heart 
(pneumogastric  paralysis).  (I  once  gave  Duk.  30,  with  complete  relief 
to  the  pain,  in  a  case  of  sarcoma  of  the  bones  at  the  base  ot  the  skull, 
in  which  there  were  stabbing  pains  in  the  front  of  the  head,  and 
partial  paralysis  of  the  tongue.  It  was  the  latter  symptom  which 
determined  the  choice  of  me  remedy.)  Paralysis  of  the  bladder. 
Rheumatic  paralyses.  Paral3rsed  part  feels  icy  cold.  One-sided 
spasms.  Convulsions  beginning  in  face.  Trembling,  especially  of 
right  arm.  It  cured :  ''  Paralysis  of  vocal  cords  (aphonia)  n-om 
sleeping  over  a  damp  cellar."  McLaren  cured  with  a  smgle  dose  the 
following  case,  which  was  the  result  of  a  wetting  :  Facial  paralysis 
(1.)  following  neuralgia,  the  eye  having  remained  unclosed  for 
eight  months.  Red  rash  with  itching  <  in  damp  weather.  After 
a  slight  aggravation  improvement  began  in  two  weeks  and  con- 
tinued steadily  {Med.  Adv.,  xviii.  214).  Dulc.  is  a  scrofulous 
remedy  and  has  many  scrofulous-looking  eruptions :  moist  or  dry, 
red,  tettery  eruptions,  especially  on  face  ;  f urfuraceous  ;  herpetic ; 
luticaria ;  skin  callous  ;  warts,  fleshy  or  large,  smooth.  Painless 
ulcers.  (Dulc.  30  cured  in  two  doses  a  rash  like  mosquito-stings 
appearing  every  month  before  the  menses,  <  when  warm;  com- 


DULCAMARA  687 

peUed  to  sit  where  it  is  cx>ld)  It  corresponds  to  results  of  repercussed 
eruptions.  Offensive  sweat ;  effects  of  sudden  cooling  whilst  sweating. 
Dropsical  affections.  Catarrhal  troubles.  Dryness  of  mucous  mem- 
branes strongly  indicate  it  Dulc.  causes  diarrhoea,  and  a  characteristic 
form  is  when  there  is  vomiting  with  the  stool.  It  causes  a  mucous- 
like  sediment  in  the  urine  and  is  particularly  indicated  when  a  muco- 
purulent urine  is  associated  with  general  one-sided  sensitiveness, 
especially  of  the  abdomen.  (Amcr.  Horn.,  xxi.  317,  records  the  cure 
with  six  doses  of  Dulc.  200  of  the  following  case  :  A  prison-warder 
had  difficulty  with  urine  four  years  ;  frequent  micturition,  dribbling  a 
few  drops.  Stains  linen  yellow.  <  Afternoon ;  in  damp  cold  weather. 
Some  pain  over  left  kidney  and  left  iliac  region  ;  >  after  moving 
about  or  in  warm  weather.  Sweats  easily  and  often  takes  cold,  when 
he  suffers  from  sore-throat.  Dislikes  sweets.)  Pains  in  many  parts, 
as  if  from  cold.  Bruised  feeling.  Sensations :  as  of  a  board  pressing 
against  forehead  ;  as  if  head  were  enlarged ;  as  if  hair  stood  on  end ; 
as  if  fire  were  darting  out  of  eyes  ;  as  if  worms  were  crawling  up  and 
down  in  abdomen  ;  biting  in  rectum  as  from  salt ;  as  if  lung  moved 
in  waves  ;  as  if  arms  were  of  wood  ;  as  of  needles  over  whole  body. 
Crawling,  tickling  itching  of  various  parts  ;  of  tip  of  tongue.  <  Lying 
on  back  ;  >  lying  on  side.  <  Stooping,  >  erect  <  Bending  diseased 
part  backward.  Most  symptoms  <  at  rest  and  >  by  motion.  Most 
symptoms  are  <  evening  and  night  Warmth  >  most  symptoms, 
but  <  cough  and  nettle-rash.  <  Cold  air ;  cold  change  of  weather  ; 
damp  weather ;  getting  wet ;  using  water.  <  From  cold  drinks  ; 
from  ice-creams.  Skin  eruptions  are  sensitive  to  touch  ;  pressure  >. 
Small  furuncles  appear  on  places  hurt  by  concussion. 

Belations. — Dulc.  antidotes :  Cupr.  and  Merc.  Is  antidoted  by : 
Camph.,  Cup.,  Ip.,  Kali  c,  Merc.  Follows  well :  Bry.,  Calc.  c,  Lye, 
Rhus  t,  Sep.,  Verat  Incompatible  :  Bell.,  Lach.  Complementary  : 
Batyta  c.  Compare:  Aeon.,  Ars.,  Cham.,  Helleb.,  Nit  ac.  Puis., 
Staph.,  Sul.  In  faintness  during  stool,  Crot  t.,  Ver.  Effects  of  cold, 
moist  winds,  Ars.,  Calc,  Nux  m.  (cold,  dry  winds,  Aco.,  Bry.).  Effects 
of  exposure  to  wet,  and  >  by  motion,  Rhus.  Rheumatic  paralysis, 
Rhus,  Caust.  Hasty  speech  and  actions.  Hep.,  Bell.,  Lach.,  Sul. 
Paralysis  of  lungs,  Solania. 

Caasation. — Damp  with  cold.  Wading.  Washing.  Injuries. 
Checked  eruptions.    Checked  perspiration. 

STMPTOHB. 

I.  Mind. — Mental  agitation. — Great  impatience  and  restlessness. — Im- 
patient desire  for  different  things,  which  are  rejected  as  soon  as  they  are 
obtained. — Inclination  to  scold,  without  being  angry. — Combative  disposition, 
without  anger. — Nocturnal  delirium,  with  aggravation  of  pains. 

8.  Head. — ^Vertigo  when  rising  from  bed,  with  darkness  before  the 
eyes. — Giddiness  early  in  the  morning,  >  on  getting  up. — Giddiness 
so  as  to  occasion  falling,  with  trembling  of  the  whole  body,  and  general 
weakness. — Giddiness,  with  heat  ascending  to  the  face. — Dull  pressure,  as  if 
a  board  were  resting  heavily  on  the  forehead. — Pressive  stunning  pains  in 


688  DULCAMARA 

different  parts  of  the  head.— Piercing  and  burning  pain  in  the  forehead,  with 
digging  from  the  inside  outwards,  with  the  sensation  as  if  the  brain  were 
enlarged ;  <  in  evening  till  midnight  and  when  becoming  cold ;  > 
when  lying  down. — Bursting  pains  extending  from  forehead  to  bridge 
of  nose. —  The  headache  is  <  by  the  slightest  movement,  and  even 
by  speaking. — Boring  headache,  from  within  to  without,  in  the  temples  and 
forehead;  <  before  midnight  and  when  lying  quiet;  >  when  talking. 
— Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  head. — Congestion  in  the  head,  with  bozsing 
in  the  ears,  and  hardness  of  hearing. — Sensation  in  the  occiput  as  if  it  were 
enlarged. — Stupefying  headache  ;  heaviness  of  the  head. — Stupefying  ache 
in  occiput  ascending  from  nape  of  neck. — Unpleasant  sensation  of  chilliness 
in  the  cerebellum  and  over  the  back,  with  the  sensation  as  if  the  hair  were 
standing  on  end ;  returning  every  day  in  the  evening. — ^Thick  crusts  on  the 
scalp,  causing  the  hair  to  fall  off. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Aching  in  the  eyes,  esp.  when  reading. — Sensation  as  if  fire 
were  issuing  from  the  eyes  when  walking  in  the  sun  or  in  the  room.— 
Inflammation  of  the  eyes  (ophthalmia  from  catching  cold). — Itching  of  the 
eyelids  in  the  cold  air. — Ptosis. — Eyelids  dry. — Sparks  before  the  eyes.— 
Confused  sight,  as  from  incipient  amaurosis,  sees  everything  as  through  gaoze. 

4.  Ears. — Otalgia,  at  night,  with  nausea. — Acute  puUings,  with  shootings 
in  the  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis  of  a  very  hot  and  bright  red  blood,  with  presstve 
pain  above  the  nose. — Coryza ;  dry ;  with  stoppage  of  the  nose,  <  in 
cold  air. 

6.  Face* — Paleness  of  the  face,  with  circumscribed  redness  of  the 
cheeks. — Eruptions  and  warts  on  the  face. — ^Thick,  brownish  or  yellowish, 
scabs  on  the  face,  on  the  forehead,  on  the  temples,  and  on  the  chin. — Cmsta 
lactea. — Moist  tettec  in  the  cheeks. — ^Twitching  of  the  lips  in  the  cold  air.*- 
Paralysis  of  the  lower  jaw. — Swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands. — Redness 
of  the  face. — Distortion  of  the  mouth ;  it  is  drawn  to  one  side. 

8.  Mouth. — Salivation;  saliva  tenacious,  soap-like. — Dryness  of  the 
tongue  and  roughness,  with  much  thirst  and  increased  flow  of  saliva.— Tongue 
loaded  with  thick  mucus. — Swelling  of  the  tongue,  hindering  speech  and 
impeding  breathing. — Stammering  from  time  to  time  as  if  drunk  ;  indistinct 
articulation,  though  he  tried  constantly  to  speak. — Pimples  and  ulcers  in  the 
mouth. — Gums  loosened  and  fungous. — Paralysis  of  the  tongue,  and  ob- 
structed speaking,  esp.  after  taking  cold. — Itching,  crawling  on  the  tip  of  the 
tongue. 

g.  Throat. — Sore  throat,  as  if  from  elongation  of  the  uvula,  with 
pressive  pain. — Burning  heat  in  the  palate. — Sore  throat,  as  after  a  chilL— 
Continual  hawking  up  of  very  tough  saliva,  with  much  rawness  in  the 
fauces. 

10.  Appetite. — Sickly  and  saponaceous  taste  in  the  mouth. — Bitterness 
in  the  mouth. — Burning  thirst  for  cold  drinks,  generally  with  dryness  of  the 
tongue,  joined  to  a  more  abundant  secretion  of  saliva. — Hunger  after  the 
fever-heat — Hunger,  with  repugnance  to  all  food.— Distension  of  the  abdomen 
and  epigastrium  after  eating  moderately. — Nausea,  with  vomiting  of  visdd 
phlegm.— Vomiting  of  (white)  tenacious  mucus  (morning). 

11.  Stomach. — ^Aching  in  the  stomach,  extending  to  the  chest— Cramp- 


DULCAMARA  689 

like  contraction  in  the  stomach,  so  as  to  suspend  respiration. — Retraction  of 
the  epigastrium,  with  burning  pain. — Sensation  of  inflation  in  the  pit  of  the 
stomach,  with  disagreeable  sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  abdomen. — 
Retraction  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  burning  pain. 

la.  Abdomen. — Pains  in  the  umbilical  region. — Shooting,  pinchings, 
and  cuttings  in  the  umbilical  region,  esp.  at  night. — Pinchings,  gnawing,  and 
sensation  as  if  a  worm  were  wriggling  in  the  abdomen. — Pain  in  the  abdomen 
as  from  the  effects  of  cold. — Inflammatory  congestion  and  induration  of  the 
inguinal  glands,  with  drawing  and  tensive  pains. — Swelling  of  the  inguinal 
glands. — Dropsy  of  the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation. — Difficult,  dry,  infrequent  stool. 
— Diarrhoea,  as  after  a  chill,  with  cuttings,  or  with  vomitings,  risings,  and 
thirst — Diarrhoea  of  greenish  (white)  or  brownish  mucus. — Slimy  diarrhoea, 
with  faintness. — Chronic,  bloody  diarrhoea,  with  biting  at  the  anus. — 
Sanguineous  diarrhoea,  with  itching  in  the  anus,  and  prolapsus  of  the 
rectum. — Nocturnal  watery  diarrhoea,  with  colic,  particularly  in  the  summer  ; 
also  when  the  weather  suddenly  becomes  cool — ^with  prolapsus  recti. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Retention  of  urine. — Scanty  and  fetid  urine. — 
Clear  and  viscid  urine,  or  troubled,  with  sediment-like  mucus. — Red,  burning 
urine. — Involuntary  discharge  of  urine,  as  from  paralysis  of  the  bladder. — 
Difficult  (painful)  urination,  water  issuing  drop  by  drop.— Thickening  of  the 
bladder. — Dischstrge  of  mucus  from  the  urethra. — Stricture  of  the  urethra. — 
Tnrbid  and  whitish  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Tetters  on  the  genitals. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Catamenia  retarded,  and  too  abundant ; 
blood  watery,  thin. — ^Tettery  eruption  of  the  labia. — Miliary  eruption  before 
the  catamenia. — Suppressed  menstruation  from  cold. — ^Tetters  on  the  breast 
in  nursing  women. — Suppression  of  milk  from  a  cold. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Oppressed  breathing,  from  a  cold ;  from 
accumulation  of  mucus. — Catarrh  and  hoarseness,  as  from  having  taken  cold. 
—Cough,  with  hoarseness. — Moist  cough. — Cough,  with  expectoration  of 
bright  red  blood. — Cough,  similar  to  whooping-cough,  excited  by  taking  a 
deep  inspiration,  with  profuse  secretion  of  mucus  in  the  larynx  and  trachea  ; 
during  each  attack  easy  expectoration  of  tasteless  mucus,  which  is  often 
streaked  with  blood. 

x8.  Chest. — Great  oppression  of  the  chest,  esp.  when  breathing. — Dull 
shooting,  as  from  blows  in  and  upon  the  sides  of  the  chest. — Troublesome 
undulating  pain  in  the  1.  side  of  the  chest.— (Impending  paralysis  of  lung.) 

19.  Heart. — Strong  palpitation  of  the  heart,  at  night,  perceptible 
externally. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  at  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Stiffness  of 
the  neck  from  a  cold. — Engorgement  and  induration  of  the  glands  of  the  nape, 
x;  and  of  the  neck. — Violent  pains  in  the  lumbar  region,  above  the  hips,  digging, 
^  i  shooting,  or  drawing,  chiefly  at  night  during  repose. — Lameness  of  the  small 
v\  of  the  back,  from  a  cold. — Shooting  puUings  in  the  loins,  shoulders,  and  arms. 
f^  tt.    Upper  Limbs. — Paralysis  of  the  arms,  with  icy  coldness  (esp.  during 

r       rest),  as  from  apoplexy. — Paralytic  pain  in  the  arms,  as  from  a  bruise,  chiefly 
during  repose. — ^Tettery  eruption,  and  warts,  on  the  hands. — Perspiration  in 
Z       the  palms  of  the  hands. 

vou  I.  45 


690  DULCAMARA 

S3.  Lower  Limbs.— Tractions  and  tearings  in  the  legs,  esp.  in  the 
thighs. — ^Tetters  on  the  knee. — Puffing  and  swelling  of  the  leg  as  far  as  the 
knee. — Burning  sensation  in  the  feet,  and  in  the  toes. — Erysipelatous  des- 
quamation and  itching  in  the  feet— Tingling  in  the  feet,  as  from  formication. 

84.  Generalities.— Tearing,  shooting,  or  drawing  pains  in  the  limbs.— 
Sufferings,  as  from  a  chill  in  various  parts. — Rheumatic  pains  and  other 
complaints,  from  a  cold. — ^Aggravation  of  sufferings,  chiefly  in  the  evening 
or  at  night,  and  during  repose ;  >  by  movement — Pains,  with  coldness 
of  the  body. — Immoderate  secretion  and  excretion  of  mucous  membranes 
and  glands,  the  activity  of  the  skin  being  suppressed. — Swelling  and 
induration  of  the  glands. — Emaciation. — Dropsical  swelling  of  the  whole 
body,  limbs,  and  face. — Rapid  swelling  of  the  whole  body. — ^Weakness  and 
painful  weariness  of  the  whole  body. — Semilateral  convulsions,  with  loss  of 
speech. — Paralytic  affections  of  the  limbs  (of  different  single  parts).— <jreat 
lassitude. 

25.  Skin. — Dryness  and  heat  of  the  skin. — Miliary  nettle-rash,  with  fever. 
— ^Tetters  of  different  kinds,  such  as  humid,  scaly,  pale  tetters,  oozing  after 
having  been  scratched ;  reddish  tetters,  with  red  areola,  bleeding  after  having 
been  scratched  ;  tetters  with  red  edges,  painfully  sensitive  to  the  touch,  and 
to  cold  water ;  small,  round,  yellowish-brown  tetters,  bleeding  after  having 
been  scratched;  dry,  furfuraceous  tetters. — ^Tettery  scabs  over  the  whole 
body.— Tettery  eruptions,  with  swelling  of  the  glands.— Warts. — ^Tetters  in 
the  joints. — Eruption  of  itching  pustules,  which  pass  into  suppuration,  and 
become  covered  with  a  scab,  esp.  in  the  lower  limbs  and  the  hinder  part  of 
the  body. — Red  spots,  as  if  caused  by  flea-bites. 

aO.  Sleep. — Great  inclination  to  sleep  during  the  day. — ^Nocturnal  sleep, 
agitated,  restless,  in  consequence  of  heat  and  startings  in  the  body,  esp.  after 
midnight — ^Waking  very  early. — Cannot  sleep  because  of  impossibility  of 
remaining  in  a  position  long  enough. — Frightful  dreams. — ^Visions  in  the 
morning  on  waking. 

87.  Fever. — In  the  evening,  frequent  shiverings  and  coldness,  not  even 
relieved  by  the  heat  of  the  0re. — Cold  during  the  pains. — At  first,  febrile 
shivering,  then  burning  heat  with  stunning  pain  in  the  head,  face  red,  burning 
heat  in  the  palate,  and  insatiable  thirst  for  cold  drinks. — Dry,  burning  heat 
over  the  whole  body. — Heat  and  burning  in  the  back. — Dry  heat  and  burning 
sensation  in  the  skin,  with  delirium  and  thirst — Heat  with  delirium  without 
thirst. — Fever,  with  aggravation  in  the  evening. — Pulse  small,  hard,  and  tight, 
esp.  at  night. — General  sweat,  esp.  at  night. — Fetid  sweat,  with  discharge  of 
much  urine. — Fetid  perspiration,  at  night  and  in  the  morning,  over  the  whole 
body ;  during  the  day,  more  on  the  back,  in  the  armpits  and  hands. — ^Per^ira- 
tion  suppressed  and  entirely  wanting. 


Echinacea  Angnstifolia. 

(Ekrhinacea  angastifolia  is  the  Western  species  of  E.  ;  not  to  be 
confounded  with  E,  purpurea^  or  Black  Sampson,  the  Eastern 
species.)  N,  O.  Compositae,  allied  to  Rudbeclda.  Tincture  of 
whole  fresh  plant. 

miiti^^i. — ^Appendicitis.  Bites  of  rabid  animals.  Blood-poisoning.  Car- 
buncles. Diphtheria,  Enteric  Fever,  Gangrene,  Poisoned  wounds.  Pyannia, 
Rhus  -  poisoning.  Scarlatina.  Sefticcemia,  Snake  -  bites.  Struma.  Syphilis. 
Typhoid.    Ulcers.    Vaccination,  effects  of. 

CSiapaoteristioB. — Echinacea  angustifolia  has  long  been  prized  by 
eclectics  in  low  typhoid  conditions,  diphtheria,  malignant  scarlatina, 
carbuncles  and  boils,  and  as  a  remedy  in  snake-bites.  A  remarkable 
case  of  vaccinal  poisoning  is  recorded  (H.  /?.,  x.  527)  in  a  man,  45, 
cored  mainly  by  Echin.  in  20-drop  doses.  The  symptoms  were  : 
vitality  ebbed ;  he  became  so  weak  he  could  not  sit  up ;  hair  fell 
out ;  an  eruption  of  psoriasis  appeared  on  extremities  extending  to 
body.  The  disease  advanced  rapidlv  ;  the  nails  fell  o£F.  Left  iritis 
supervened,  and  then  keratitis  of  the  right  eye.  Under  Kali  iod,f 
and  phospho-albumen  as  a  food,  the  hair  ceased  to  fall  off,  but  other 
svmptoms  became  rapidly  worse.  Echin.  was  now  given,  and  slowly 
the  disease  was  arrested ;  then  gradual  improvement  and  ultimate 
cure  ensued.  The  report  does  not  mention  if  the  sight  of  the 
left  eye  was  recovered.  Homoeopathists  have  generally  followed  the 
eclectics  in  using  substantial  doses.  Fortunately  we  are  now  much 
better  placed  to  understand  Echin,^  thanks  to  an  extensive  proving 
undertaken  by  J.  C.  Fahnestock,  with  additional  symptoms  con- 
tributed by  T.  C.  Duncan  (H.  /?.,  xiv.  337,  386).  With  one  exception 
the  provers  were  males.  The  first  symptom  noticed  was  a  biting, 
tingling  sensation  on  the  tongue,  lips,  and  fauces  (compare  Aeon,) 
with  a  sense  of  fear  and  pain  about  the  heart.  Febrile  symptoms, 
full  head,  flushed  face  and  accelerated  pulse  followed.  Languor  was 
experienced  by  many  provers,  and  neuralgic,  sharp,  darting,  shifting 
pains.  Catarrh  of  the  digestive  and  respiratory  tracts.  Griping 
pains,  offensive  flatus  and  loose  yellowish  stooL  Drowsiness  was 
a  very  marked  feature.  The  symptoms  were  <  after  eating ;  in 
evening ;  after  physical  or  mental  exertion  ;  >  by  Ipng  down,  and 
by  rest.  In  two  provers  there  was  found  a  diminution  of  red 
blood  corpuscles  after  the  proving.  There  is  much  chiUiness  (cold- 
ness of  right  leg),  and  sensitiveness  to  cold,  <  from  exposure  to  cold 

691 


692  ECHINACEA   ANGUSTIFOLIA 

air.      Pains  in  abdomen   come  and  go  suddenly,  and  are  >  by 
bending  double. 

RdatloilB. — ^The  closest  analogue  of  Ek:h.  a.  is  Baptisia.  In 
snake-bites  it  compares  with  Lobelia  purpurascens ;  in  boils  with 
Anthracin.i  &c.  Head  feels  enlarged,  Arg.  n.,  Bapt,  Bovist,  Glon., 
Nux  mosch.,  Nux  v.  Cases  of  Rhus-poisoning  have  been  cured 
with  Ek:h.  a.  Compare  also :  the  vulnerary  Compositae,  Arnica, 
Calendula  and  Bellis. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Dulness  in  head,  with  cross,  irritable  feeling.-*^  nervoas 
could  not  study. — Confused  feeling  of  the  brain. — Felt  depressed  and  much 
out  of  sorts. — Felt  a  mental  depression  in  afternoons.— Sense  of  fear  with 
pain  about  heart  and  accelerated  pulse. — Senses  seemed  to  be  numbed. — 
Drowsy,  could  not  read. — Drowsy  condition  with  yawning. — Becomes  angry 
when  corrected,  does  not  wish  to  be  contradicted. — General  depression,  with 
weakness. — Generzd  dulness  and  drowsiness. — General  dulness,  unable  to 
apply  the  mind. — Does  not  wish  to  think  or  study. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo  when  changing  position  of  head. — Dull  headache, 
felt  as  if  brain  was  too  large,  with  every  beat  of  heart. — Dull  pain  in 
brain,  full  feeling. — Dull  frontal  headache,  esp.  over  1.  eye,  which  was 
relieved  in  open  air. — Severe  headache  in  vertex,  >  by  rest  in  bed. — ^Dnll 
headache  above  eyes. — Dull,  throbbing  headache,  worse  throu^  temples. 
— Head  feels  too  large. — Dull  headache,  <  in  evening. — Dull  headache, 
worse  in  r.  temple,  with  sharp  pain. — Full  feeling  in  temples. — Sudden  pain 
in  1.  temple. — Sudden  pain  in  1.  head  above  coronal  suture. — Brain  weary,  felt 
most  in  1.  hemisphere, — Dull  pain  in  occiput. — Chilly  sensation  in  L  occiput— 
Dull  headache,  with  dizziness. — Constant  dull  pressing  pain  in  both  temples. 
— Shooting  pains  through  temples. — Dull  occipital  headache. — Constant  dull 
pain  in  temples,  >  at  rest  and  by  pressure. — Head  feels  as  big  as  a  windmill, 
with  mental  depression. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  ache  when  reading. — ^Tires  me  dreadfully  to  hold  a 
book  and  read. — Eyes  pain  on  looking  at  an  object  and  will  fill  with  tears, 
>  by  closing  them. — Sleepy  sensation  in  eyes,  but  cannot  sleep. — Eyes  feel 
brighter  than  natural. — Pains  back  of  r.  eye. — Sense  of  heat  in  eyes  when 
closing  them. — Dull  pain  in  both  eyes. — Lachrymation  from  cold  air. — Sharp 
pains  in  eyes  and  temples. 

4.  Ears. — Shooting  pain  in  r.  ear. 

5.  Nose. — Stuffiness  of  nostrils,  with  mucus  in  nares  and  pharynx.— 
Full  feeling  in  nose  as  if  it  would  close  up. — Full  feeling  of  nose,  obliged  io 
blow  nose,  but  it  does  not  >. — Nostrils  sore. — Mucous  discharge  from  r. 
nostril. — Rawness  of  r.  nostril,  sensitive  to  cold,  which  causes  a  flow  of 
mucus. — Bleeding  from  r.  nostril. — R  nostril  sore,  when  picking  causes 
haemorrhage. — Headache  over  eyes,  with  sneezing. 

6.  Face. — Paleness  of  face  when  head  aches. — Face  flushed. — Fine 
eruptions  on  forehead  and  cheeks. — Neuralgic  pain  in  L  upper  branch  of  fifth 
nerve. — ^Vomiting  with  pale  face. — Biting  tingling  on  lips. 

7.  Teeth. — Darting  pains  in  the  teeth,  worse  on  r.  side. — ^Neuralgic 
pains  in  superior  and  inferior  maxilla. — Dull  aching  of  the  teeth. 


ECHINACEA  ANGUSTIFOLIA  693 

8.  Mouth. — ^White  coating  of  tongue  in  the  mornings,  with  white 
frothy  mucus  in  mouth. — Slight  burning  of  tongue. — Biting  tingling  sensation 
of  tongue^  lips,  and  fauces. — ^Whitish  coat  of  tongue,  with  red  edges. — 
Accumulation  of  sticky,  white  mucus. — Burning  of  the  tongue,  with  increased 
saliva. — Dry  sensation  in  back  part  of  mouth. — Burning  peppery  taste  when 
taking  remedy. — Bad  taste  in  the  mouth  in  the  morning. — ^A  metallic  taste. — 
Dryness  of  the  mouth. 

9.  Throat. — ^Accumulation  of  mucus  in  throat — Mucus  in  throat,  with 
raw  sensation. — Biting  tingling  in  fauces. — ^After  vomiting  of  sour  mucus, 
throat  bums. — Soreness  of  throat,  worse  on  1.  side. 

10.  Appetite. — Loss  of  appetite. — Desire  for  cold  water.— Nausea, 
could  not  eat. 

11.  Stomach. — Nausea  before  going  to  bed,  which  was  always  > 
lying  down. — ^After  eating,  stomach  and  abdomen  fill  with  gas. — ^After 
eating,  belching,  which  tastes  of  food  eaten. — Nausea,  with  eructation  of 
gas. — Stomach  distended  with  gas,  not  >  by  belching. — Belching  of 
tasteless  gas. — Sour  eructation. — Sour  eructation,  which  caused  burning  of 
throat — Sense  of  something  large  and  hard  in  stomach. — Belching  of  gas 
and  at  same  time  passing  flatus. — Sour  stomach,  "  heartburn,"  with  belching 
of  gas. — Relaxed  feeling  of  the  stomach. — Pain  in  stomach,  going  down 
through  bowels,  followed  by  diarrhoea. — Dull  pain  in  stomach. 

18.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  r.  hypochondrium. — Full  feeling  in  abdomen, 
with  borborygmus. — Pain  about  umbilicus,  >  by  bending  double. — Pain 
in  abdomen,  sharp  cutting,  coming  and  going  suddenly. — Pain  in  1.  ihac 
fossa. 

13.  Stool. — Griping  pains  followed  by  passing  o£Fensive  flatus,  or  a 
loose  yellowish  stool,  which  always  produced  great  exhaustion. — Diarrhoea 
following  pain  in  stomach,  going  through  bowels. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Desire  for  frequent  urination.— Involuntary 
urination  "in  spite  of  myself." — Sense  of  heat  while  passing  urine. — Pain 
and  burning  on  urination. — Urine  increased. — Urine  pale  and  copious. — Urine 
scanty  and  dark  in  colour. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Soreness  in  perineum. — Pain  across  peri- 
neum.— Perineum  seems  stretched. — Pain  in  r.  spermatic  cord. — Testicles 
drawn  up  and  sore. — Pain  in  meatus  while  urinating. 

10.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Mucus  from  vagina  in  evening. — 
Pain  in  r.  iliac  region,  which  seems  deep,  lasting  but  a  short  time. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Irritation  of  larynx.-— Voice  husky.— <k>n- 
stant  clearing  of  mucus  from  throat. — Mucus  comes  in  throat  while  in  bed, 
must  cough  to  dear  throat. 

i&  Chest. — Full  feeling  in  upper  part  of  lungs.~Pain  in  region  of 
diaphragm.— Pain  in  r.  lung. — Pain  in  pectoral  muscles. — Sore  feeling  in  the 
chest — ^Feels  like  lump  in  chest. — Feeling  of  a  lump  under  sternum. — Sharp 
burning  pain  under  sternum. 

xg.  Heart.— flight  pain  over  heart. — Stitching  pain  in  1.  chest  (apex  of 
heart). — Rapid  beating  of  heart. — Hearf  s  action  increased. — Pulse  80,  full  and 
sbrong,  later  decreased  and  again  increased. — Heart's  action  decreased. — 
Affldety  about  the  heart. 

ao.    Neck  and  Back. — Pain  in  back  of  neck. — Pain  in  small  of  back 


694  ELiEIS  GUINEENSIS 

over  kidneys.— Dull  pain  in  small  of  back. — Pain  in  lumbar  region*  <  from 
stooping. 

21.  Limbs.— General  weakness  of  limbs.-»Pain  between  shouldera^ 
which  extends  to  aadlla  and  down  the  arms. 

sa.  Upper  Limbs.— Pain  in  1.  shoulder,  >  by  rest  and  warmths— Pain 
in  r.  shoulder,  going  down  to  fingers. — Sharp  pain  in  1.  arm,  going  down 
to  fingers,  with  loss  of  muscular  power. — Sharp  psun  in  L  elbow. — Cokl 
hands. — Pain  in  r.  thumb. — Pain  in  wrists  and  fingers. 

a^  Lower  Limbs.— Pain  in  r.  thigh.— Pain  in  back  of  L  knee. — Sharp 
shooting  pain  in  legs. — Extremities  cold.— Chilliness  in  r.  1^. — L.  hip  and 
knee  pains. — Pain  in  r.  leg. — Cold  feet 

84.  Generalities.- Exhausted,  tired  feeling.— Muscular  weakness.— 
Felt  as  if  I  had  been  sick  for  a  long  time. — General  aching  all  over,  with 
exhaustion. — ^Af ter  proving  found  a  diminution  of  red  corpuscles. — Pains  and 
sickness  of  stomach  >  by  lying  down. 

25.  Skin. — Intense  itching  and  burning  of  skin  on  neck. — little 
papules  on  skin,  with  redness,  feeling  like  nettles ;  this  occurred  on  the  fifth 
day  of  the  proving.— Skin  dry. — Small  red  pimples  on  neck  and  face.— (Boils.) 

86.  Sleep. — General  languor,  sleepy. — Sleep  disturbed,  wakes  often.— 
Sleep  full  of  dreams. — Dreams  about  exciting  things  all  night — Dreams  of 
dead  relations^ 

97.  Fever.— Chills  up  the  back.— General  chilliness  with  nausea.— Cold 
flashes  all  ova*  the  back.^Temperature  raised  a  degree,  vnfh  flushed  face  and 
fulness  of  head,  accelerated  full  *pulse. — Sweat  chiefly  on  upper  part  of 
body. 

Echinacea  Purpurea. 

Echinacea  purpurea.    Black  Sampson.    (Eastern  States  of  America.) 
N.O,  (Dompositae.    Tincture  of  fresh  root. 

OlialeaL— Diphtheria.    Putrid  fevers. 

Oharaotaristios. — I  mention  this  plant,  which  is  a  popular  remedy 
in  the  Eastern  States,  because  it  has  been  used  in  place  of  Ech.  ang. 
It  has  probably  a  very  similar  action,  and  the  root  causes  the  same 
pungent  sensation  on  lips  and  tongue  as  the  tincture  of  Ech.  ang.  It 
well  deserves  a  proving.  The  black  root  has  been  taken  as  a  "  sig- 
nature "  of  the  remedy  in  cases  of  low  fevers  where  a  black  tongue 
was  observed. 


ElsBis  Goineensis. 


Elaeis  guineensis.    Aouara.    Avoira.    N.  0,  Palmae  (yields  Palm  Oil). 
Triturations  of  the  fruit 

OllniosL— Diarrhcsa.  Elephantiasis  arabum.  Gastric  affections.  Headadie. 
Leprosy.  Sderiasis.  Scleroderma.  Sight,  defective.  Skin,  affections  of.  Sore 
throat 

OharaeteriBtios. — Proved   by  Mure,  it  produced  lancinations, 
burning,  bruised  and  throbbing  pains.    Notable  symptoms  of  leprosy 


ELiEIS  GUINEENSIS  695 

and  of  scleroderma  appear  in  the  provings:  anaesthesia;  swelling 
and  hardening  of  skin.  Among  other  symptoms  are :  sensation  as  if 
a  peg  stuck  in  false  ribs.    Swelling  of  parts.    The  greatest  number.of 

ntoms  appeared  on  the  lower  extremities  and  skin.    <  From  cold 
s  (colic) ;  from  descending  stairs  (lancinations) ;  from  breathing. 
>Re8t. 

Bdatioiis.— Com^ar(0 :  Anacard.,  Rhus  t 

STHPT0M8. 

I.    Mind. — Merry  mood. — Disobedient. 

3.  Syes. — Swelling  of  eyes. — Sight  weak ;  confused  vision  by  candle- 
light— He  makes  letters  mudi  too  large. — Unable  to  look  steadily  at  an 
object 

8.  Mouth. — Burning  in  tongue ;  has  to  stop  eating. — Bad  odour  from 
mouth. 

9.  Throat. — Lancinations  in  throat  when  swallowing ;  stinging  when 
swallowing  saliva. 

XI.  Stomach. — Foul  eructations.— Vomiting  of  a  cake  immediately  after 
eating  it 

ift.  Abdomen.-— Colic  after  a  cold  drink.— Pain  with  bruised  sensation 
in  abdomen. 

13.  Stool. — Frequent  diarrhoea. — Black  stools. 

14.  Urine. — ^White  urine. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs,— Breathing  embarrassed.— Pricking  in  larynx 
on  breathing. — Cough  with  lancination  in  sides.— Pain  in  middle  of  chest  as 
if  pricked  by  needles. — Lancinations  every  five  minutes  in  r.  chest 

ao.  Neck.— <k>nstrictive  pains  round  neck  as  if  from  tight  string.— 
Throbbing  in  nape. 

n.  Upper  Limbs.— Swelling  of  1.  arm.— Beating  in  1.  arm.— Insensi- 
bility of  hand  to  fire-heat  when  approached  to  fire,  but  an  hoiu-  after  he  feels 
it  badly. 

S(3.  Lower  Limbs.— Staggering  gait— Weakness  of  legs.— Swelling  of 
r.  leg.— Sharp  pain  lower  part  of  1.  leg  as  if  a  pen-knife  were  stuck  in. — 
Throbbing  in  calves. — Hammering  in  tibia,  nape  of  neck,  and  r.  foot — Soreness 
of  soles  of  feet  when  walking  and  when  touched. 

<4.  Generalities.- Lancinations  in  various  parts,  esp.  when  going 
downstairs. 

25.  Skin. — Skin  seems  thicker.— On  each  side  of  epigastrium  skin  seems 
thickened,  with  pain  in  last  false  ribs  as  if  a  peg  were  stuck  in  them. — Swell- 
ing, roughness,  and  itching  of  skin  of  1.  leg.— ^mall  vesicles  appear  on  swollen 
r<  leg ;  and  1.  arm  ;  and  on  other  parts  without  swelling. — Itching  all  Over, 
preventing  sleep. 


696  ELAPS 

Elaps. 

Elaps  corallinus.  Brazilian  Coral  Snake.  N.  O.  Elapidae.  Poison 
pressed  from  the  venom-sac  of  the  living  snake  and  triturated 
with  sugar  of  milk.  Higgins  used  the  gall  of  the  snake,  Fd 
Elapidis  Corallinu 

dliiioal.— Amaurosis.  Axilla,  itching  in.  Cancer.  Deafness.  Ear,  aCFedioiis 
of.  Ear^  wax  in,  Epistazis.  Haemorrhages.  Headache.  Hemiple^  Knee, 
cain  in.  Metrorrha^.  Naso-pharyngitis.  Nose,  stuffed.  Ozsena.  Phthisis. 
Pneumonia.    Throat,  ulcerated. 

OhanoteriBtlos. — Elaps  is  distinguished  from  the  other  serpent 
venoms  by  the  pre-eminent  blackness  of  its  discharges  and  haemor- 
rhages ;  black  ear-wax.  Characteristic  symptoms  are  :  Fruit  and  cold 
drinks  he  hke  ice  on  stomach  and  cause  a  cold  feeling  in  chest. 
Sensation  as  if  all  the  blood  were  collected  in  head.  E.  V.  Mo£Eat 
has  found  Elaps  6  almost  a  spMcdfic  in  chronic  naso-pharyngeal  catarrh, 
with  greenish  crusts  and  subjective  disagreeable  odour.  Rumbling  in 
ears  as  of  thunder.  Sensation  in  brain  as  if  shaken.  Sensation  as  if 
food  turned  like  a  corkscrew  on  swallowing;  as  if  intestines  were 
twisted  by  a  cord  and  strung  together  in  a  knot.  Pains  in  the  lungs 
(especially  right^  are  very  marked  :  '^  Sensation  within  chest  and  at 
sternum,  as  if  pleuras  were  pulled  off  and  the  lungs  violently  dra^xm 
apart.''  Sensation  as  if  a  heavy  load,  iron  bar,  or  weight  on  parts. 
Fluids  roll  audibly  into  stomach.  The  glands  and  skin  of  axilla  are 
affected.  (I  cured  with  Elap,  200  a  very  old-standing  case  of  irritating 
rash  in  axilla  (right)  with  recurrent  suppuration  of  axillary  glands?) 
Periodicity  is  marked.  Rest  >,  exertion  <  ;  but  walking  >  epis- 
taxis,  pain  in  stomach  and  lungs.  Lying  on  abdomen  >  pain  in 
stomach.  Many  symptoms  are  <  at  night.  (Sudden  deahiess  at 
night  with  roaring  and  cracking  in  ears.)  Dreams  of  dead  persons. 
Warmth  of  bed  <.  Great  sensitiveness  to  cold  :  draught,  wind,  wet 
weather  <.    Horror  of  rain.    Touch  <. 

RelationB. — AntidoUd  by :  Radiated  heat,  Alcohol,  Arsen.  Cam-- 
part :  Arsen.,  Carb.  v.,  Crotal.,  Lach.,  Mur.  ac.,  Nit  ac.,  Rhus  t ;  (red 
spot  before  sight)  Duboisia  ,*  (effects  of  cold,  wet  weather)  Dulc. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — ^Absence  of  mind. — Depression  of  spirits ;  desire  for  solitude. 
— Fear  of  being  left  alone,  as  if  something  horrible  might  happen. — Appre- 
hensive of  some  fatal  disease. — ^Angry  about  one's  self,  and  does  not  wish  to 
be  spoken  to. 

a.  Head,— Vertigo ;  falls  forward. — Pain  in  the  cerebellum,  r.  side. — 
Fulness  in  head,  as  if  all  the  blood  were  collected  in  it ;  fears  apoplexy  ;  with 
cold  hands. — Severe  stitching^  pains  in  forehead,  with  heaviness  of  head  ; 
occasionally  pain  intermits,  8-10  days,  thundering  in  1.  ear,  deafness,  lachry- 
mation. — ^Violent  pain  in  vertex  (afternoon),  as  if  the  brain  were  shaking,  with 
nausea,  which  prevents  her  from  keeping  the  head  quiet. — Congestion  of 
blood  to  the  head  on  stooping. — Stinging  headache,  with  sleeplessness.-^ 


ELAPS  697 

Wei^t  in  the  forehead ;  pain  in  the  forehead. — Lancinating  headache,  first 
in  L  side  of  the  head,  extending  to  r.  side. — Headache  in  occiput  after  mental 
exertion* 

3.  Kyes.—- Stye  on  1.  eye,  with  landnation. — ^Red  eyelids.— Tickling  and 
red  streaks  of  the  sclerotica. — Large  red,  fiery  spots  before  the  eyes ;  red  bar 
before  the  eyes,  when  opening  them. — Dryness  and  burning  in  both  eyes  on 
waking ;  bloated  around  the  eyes  in  the  morning. — Eyes  red  and  inflamed  ; 
blear-eyed.— Glassy  look.— When  ctosing  the  eyes  everything  looks  (dirty) 
red ;  dotted  with  black  points. — ^Violent  itching  in  the  1.  eye. — ^Aversion  to 
light ;  desire  to  close  the  eyes ;  everything  seems  white  even  at  night ;  grey 
veil  before  eyes ;  on  stooping  rush  of  blood  to  head  with  vertigo  and  pain  at 
root  of  nose ;  can  scarcely  distinguish  light  from  dark. — ^Amaurosis. 

4.  £ar8. — Buzzing  in  r.  ear. — Crackling  in  ears  on  swallowing. — Itching 
in  the  ears. — Cerumen  black  and  hardened. — Illusions  of  hearing;  hears 
whistling  and  ringing ;  imagines  he  hears  some  one  talk. — Discharge  of  a 
serous  fluid  or  greenish-yellow  liquid  from  (1.)  ear  (in  the  morning). — Offen* 
sive  otorrhoea  with  eruptions.— Crusty  eruptions  on  ear  and  cheek.— Discharge 
of  blood  from  the  ear. — Sudden  deafness  at  night  with  constant  roaring  and 
cracking. — Hearing  of  both  ears  impaired ;  otalgia  of  r. 

5.  No8e.-*-Bad  smell  (like  putrid  herring  pickle)  from  the  nose. — Stop- 
page of  the  nostrils  (high  up,  with  dull  aching  in  forehead) ;  coryza  from  the 
least  current  of  air. — White  and  watery  mucus  is  discharged  from  the  nose. — 
Epistaxis:  sudden,  profuse,  while  walking;  after  a  blow. — Blood  black, 
copious,  in  steady  stream. 

0.  Face. — Dark  complexion. — Lancinations  from  root  of  nose  to  ear. — 
Redness  and  swelling  of  r.  cheek,  with  chilliness  all  over  the  body. — Redness, 
heat,  and  formication  in  r.  cheek. — Swelling  of  face,  extending  to  r.  side  of 
the  nose. — ^Red  blotches  on  bloated  face. 

8.  M Ottth.— Tongue  black  or  dark  red— Tongue  swollen  and  whitish 
in  morning. — Pricking  at  tip  of  tongue. 

9.  Tliroat.— Naso-pharyngeal  catarrh,  greenish  crusts,  subjective  dis- 
agreeable odour. — Dull  pain  from  nares  to  ears ;  <  by  swallowing ;  posterior 
wall  of  pharynx  dry,  fissured,  covered  with  crusts.— The  beverage  is  arrested 
in  GBsophagus,  as  from  a  spasmodic  contraction. — Constriction  in  pharynx 
with  pressure  in  the  throat. — Ulceration  of  throat,  <  L  side,  difficult  swallow- 
ing of  liquids ;  recurring  from  exposure  to  wind  or  rain. 

II.  Stomach.— Vomiting  of  green  bile,  followed  by  diarrhcea.— Acidity 
of  the  stomach,  with  nausea  and  faint  feeling;  sour  eructations.— Violent 
thirst ;  cold  feeling  in  the  chest  after  drinking.— Hunger,  with*  violent  head- 
ache if  not  satisfied  at  once. — Vomiting  of  mucus,  with  fainting. — Fruit  and 
coM  drinks  feel  like  ice  in  the  stomach. — Burning  in  stomach.— Weight  in 
stomach,  with  nausea,  after  eating. — Sudden  pains  in  stomach,  as  if  she  must 
sink  down  ;  <  while  sitting,  >  on  walking  about 

n.  Abdomen. — Lancinations  from  both  groins  to  symphysis  pubis.— 
Colic,  with  urging  to  stool.— The  intestines  feel  twisted,  as  if  by  a  cord,  and 
strung  together  in  a  knot,  with  strangulating  sensation.— Sensation  as  if  the 
blood  in  the  abdomen  were  flowing  backward. 

i^  Stoot  and  Anus.- Diarrhoea,  blackish,  frothy,  yellowish,  watery, 
with  mucus  and  rumbling ;  bile ;  bloody  mucus.— Discharge  of  black,  liquid 


698  ELAPS 

blood  from  the  bowels  and  at  stool,  with  colic  and  sensation  as  if  the  bowels 
were  twisted. — Prolapsus  ani. — Constriction  of  the  sphincter,  after  bloody 
stooL — Crawling  at  anus  as  if  from  worms. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Red  urine,  with  doody  sediment— Thick  nrine» 
with  red  sediment — Supfvession  of  urine ;  strangury. — ^Dischai^  of  mocas 
from  urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Orgaa8.^Impotence.— Weight  and  swelling  of  ttie 
testes. — Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid.— The  skin  of  the  prepuce  is  thick  and 
inflamed. 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Discharge  of  black  blood  between  the 
menses. — Menses  every  two  or  three  weeks ;  flow  profuse,  dark.— Wei^t  at 
the  uterus ;  at  the  vagina,  after  an  hysteric  attack. — Itching  in  the  vagina  ; 
formication  at  the  vulva. — Sensation  as  of  something  burst  in  womb,  followed 
by  continuous  stream  of  dark-coloured  blood  on  attempting  to  urinate. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Dry  cough,  which  ends  in  raising  black 
blood.— Taste  of  blood  in  the  mouth,  before  coughing.— Constant  000^ 
with  frightful  pains  throughout  lungs  as  if  they  were  torn  out «  r.  apex). — 
Stitches  in  the  upper  part  of  each  lung ;  better  when  walking. — Oppressed 
breathing  in  the  evening ;  <  on  going  up  stairs. 

18.  Chest. — Feeling  as  of  heavy  load  on  chest— Constriction  of  the 
chest — Coldness  in  chest  after  drinking. — Sensation  in  chest  and  at  stemam 
as  if  pleurae  were  pulled  o£F  and  the  lungs  violently  torn  apart. — Stitches  in  L 
chest ;  worse  when  breathing. — Pleuritic  pain  r.  side,  felt  in  axilla. — Cannot 
lean  to  r.  side  on  account  of  a  very  painful  pulling  in  r.  lung. — Sensitiveness 
of  r.  side. 

19.  Heart. — Spitting  of  black  blood,  with  painful  tearing,  as  .if  proceed- 
ing from  the  heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  anxiety  and  trembling  of 
the  hands. 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  in  the  r.  side  of  neck. — Landnations  in 
L  side  of  neck. — Painful  pressure  at  nape  of  neck. — Landnations  in  the  whcde 
spinal  marrow,  from  ocdput  to  sacrum. — Pressure  between  the  shoulders. — 
Coldness  in  back. — Pain  in  the  back,  with  chilliness,  ocAd  feet,  and  strangury. 

88.  Upper  Limbs.— Itching  under  axilla,  with  tetter.— Inflamed  and 
suppurating  glands  in  axilla. — ^The  arms  and  hands  are  swollen,  Uuish, 
covered  with  red  spots ;  also  r.  leg  and  f  oot— Crampy  constriction  at  bend  of 
elbow,  extending  to  hand,  as  if  one  had  carried  a  heavy  weight — Pricking  in 
the  1.  upper  arm. — Hot  rash  on  r.  wrist— The  r.  hand  feels  as  if  paralysed. — 
The  tips  of  the  fingers  ped  off. 

83.  Lower  Limbs. — Cramps  in  the  calves. — ^Icy  coldness  of  r.  leg. — 
Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  leg. — Sensation  of  spraining  and  stiffness  in  knee-joint 
— ^The  L  foot  is  swollen  and  blue,  with  red  spots. — ^Pricking  under  toenails. 

85*  Skin. — Red  pimples  at  the  tips  of  the  fingers.— The  tips  of  the 
fingers  peel  off. — Little  pimples,  followed  by  desquamation. — ^Yellow  spots 
on  the  hands  and  fingers. — ^Red  tetter  from  the  comer  of  the  r.  nostril  to  the 
cheek. 

80.  Sleep.— Sleeplessness  from  lancinating  headache. — ^Dreams  of  busi- 
ness, of  dead  persons. 

87*  Fever. — Sensitive  to  cold. — ^The  arm  shudders  when  dipping  the 
hand  into  Water. — Coldness  in  the  back. — Dry  heat,  at  midnight;  cannot 


ELATERIUM  699 

endure  any  cover.— With  the  fever,  oppression  of  breathing,*-Flushes  of  heat 
in  evening,  with  redness  and  heat  of  face  and  ears.— Chill  at  noon,  without 
thirst,  followed  by  dry  heat  in  afternoon,  without  perspiration.— Cold  perspi- 
ration all  over. 


Elateriom. 

Echalliam  elateriuni.  Momordica  elaterium.  Squirting  Cucumber. 
N.  O.  Cucurbitaceae.  Tincture  of  unripe  fruit.  Trituration  of 
Elaterinum,  C^  Ha  O5. 

Catnlcal,— Abscesses.  Bilious  fever.  Bladder,  affections  of.  Boils.  Cholera. 
Colic.  Cramps.  Diarrhoea.  Dropsy.  Dysentery.  Erysipelas.  Intermittent  fever. 
Taondice.  Measles.  Nettle-rash.  Neuralgia.  Rheumatism.  Sciatica.  Scurvy. 
Vomiting.    Yawning. 

CharaeteristioB.— The  *' signature"  of  ElaL  is  too  obvious  to 
be  missed  :  Profuse  watery  stools,  coming  out  with  a  gush,  which 
is  the  main  characteristic  of  the  drug,  is  plainly  typified  in  the 
explosion  by  means  of  which  the  ripe  fruit  scatters  its  seeds. 
EUiL  has  been  used  with  good  effect  in  scurvy  of  which  gushing 
diarrhcea  is  a  marked  symptom.  Beriberi,  also  a  scurvy  disease,  has 
been  greatly  helped  by  ElaL  according  to  Cooper.  Dull  olive  ^een 
discharges  ;  and  frothy  stools  are  also  characteristic.  Many  cases  of 
cholera,  cholerine,  and  infantile  diarrhoea  are  met  by  ElaL;  also 
the  jaundice  of  the  new-bom  with  bilious  stools.  The  property  of 
ElaL  to  cause  draining  of  the  tissues  of  their  watery  contents  has 
been  used  to  cause  the  absorption  of  dropsical  fluids.  Minute  doses 
will  often  effect  this.  Gaping  and  yawning  are  well  marked,  and 
when  present  with  fever  ben)re  the  chill  or  before  the  chill  of 
cholera,  Elater.  is  indicated.  The  yawning  lasts  all  through  the  chill. 
ElaL  promotes  the  opening  of  abscesses  and  boils.  Sensations  as  if  a 
splinter  in  left  eye ;  as  if  posterior  nares  and  upper  part  of  oesophagus 
were  enlarged  Effects  of  damp  weather  or  standing  on  damp 
ground  ;  <  by  damp. 

Rebltloiis.— C(7m^ar<0 ;  Bry.  and  Coloc.  (sciatica) ;  Verat  (neu- 
ralgia) ;  Colch.,  Crot  t,  Verat.  (choleraic  affections) ;  Sec  (olive- 
green  diiarrhoea) ;  Canth.  (dysenteric  diarrhoea  with  painful  micturition) ; 
Apis,  Hep.,  Ign.,  Rhus  t  (urticaria  during  intermittent  fever). 

SYMPTOMS. 

X.  Mind«"»Depression  of  spirits. — Irresistible  propensity  to  wander 
from  home. 

9.  Throat. — ^A  feeling  as  if  the  posterior  nares  and  upper  part  of  the 
oesophagus  were  enlarged. 

zi.  Stomach. — Nausea ;  vomiting  of  a  watery  substance,  or  of  greenish, 
bilious  matter,  with  great  weakness. 

13.    Abdomen.— Cutting,  griping  pains  in  the  bowels. 

13.    Stool  and   Anus. — Copious  liquid  stools. — Discharges  from  the 


700.  ELECTRICITAS 

bowds  of  frothy  water ;  coming  oat  with  a  gush. — Squirting  diarrhoea. — ^Dull 
olive-green  discharges. — Bleeding  of  haemorrhoidal  tumors. 

83.  Lower  Limt>8. — Shooting,  also  dull  aching  pains  in  the  coarse  of  L 
sciatic  nerve  to  the  instep  and  toes. 

80.    Sleep.— Incessant  gaping. 

87.  Fever. — Chilliness,  with  continual  gaping,  as  if  an  attack  of  inter- 
mittent fever  were  approaching. — Before  the  chill,  gaping. — During  the  chill, 
pain  in  the  head  and  limbs. — Fever,  with  violent  tearing  pains  throughout  the 
head ;  increased  pains  in  the  bowels  and  extremities ;  pains  shooting  to  the 
tips  of  the  fingers  and  toes,  and  then  shooting  back  into  the  body. — Perspirar 
tion  relieves  all  the  symptoms. — If  the  intermittent  fever  is  suppressed, 
urticaria  break  out  all  over  the  t)ody. 


Eleotricitas. 

Electricity.  The  effects  of  atmospheric  electricity  and  static  electricity. 
Attenuations  are  made  from  sugar  of  milk  saturated  with  the 
current 

Gliaieal*— Chorea.    Headache.    Hysteria.    Paralysis.    Rheomatism. 

Oharaoteristlcs. — Caspari  is  the  authority  for  the  symptoms 
caused  by  electricity,  but  every  one  knows  the  powerful  effect  exer- 
cised on  some  persons  by  the  approach  of  a  thunderstorm,  and  the 
influence  of  an  electric  current.  Nervous  tremors ;  anxie^  ;  fear ; 
restlessness,  anxiety,  and  anguish ;  violent  headaches ;  palpitation  ; 
swelling  of  parts,  are  among  the  most  prominent  symptoms.  Dr. 
Seward  (Idea.  Adv.f  xxvi.  150)  has  related  a  numt)er  of  cases  in  which 
the  iniuaicious  use  of  electric  baths  brought  on  phthisis.  In  another 
case  the  chest  and  arms  became  stiff  and  paralysed.  A  young  married 
woman,  who  had  general  and  local  (uterine)  electric  treatment,  com- 
plained after  it  of  feeling  very  heavy,  as  if  she  weighed  a  ton.  One 
patient,  after  a  bath,  said  his  chest  and  shoulders  ''  felt  like  marble/' 
He  became  phthisical  and  died.  The  paralysis  caused  by  electricity 
was  in  several  cases  quickly  relieved  by  Idorph.  ciccL,  both  in  the 
solution  and  in  the  potencies. 

RelatipnB. — Antidoied  by :  Morph.  acet  I  have  found  Phosphoms 
the  best  antidote  to  the  effects  of  storms.  Electricity  antidotes 
Mercury.    Compare :  Galvanismus  and  Magnetismus. 

STHPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — ^Tears,  sometimes  with  timidity.— Sighs,  sometimes  with 
tears;  the  patient  cries  aloud. — Restlessness,  anxiety,  anguish,  sometimes 
more  particularly  in  the  chest ;  internal  anguish ;  violent  agitation ;  timidity ; 
fear  on  the  approach  of  a  storuL — Ill-humour. — Involuntary  laughter. — Furor. 
— Loss  of  consciousness ;  insensibility ;  foolish  actions ;  haggard  eyes. — Errors 
in  the  appreciation  of  time ;  loss  of  memory. 


ELECTRICITAS  701 

9.  Head. — Giddiness,  esp.  on  stooping.— Confusion  of  head.^-Dulness. 
— ^Embarrassment  in  the  head.— Vertigo. — Cephalalgia. — Pains  in  the  head, 
sometimes  drawing.-i— Bruise-like  pain  in  occiput  —Crushing  pressure  in  fore- 
head, as  from  a  stone. — Shootings  in  r.  side  of  head,  or  from  vertex  to  the 
temple,  and  r.  side  of  forehead ;  tearings  in  the  occiput,  from  the  nape  of  the 
neck  to  the  forehead. — Piinf ul  cramps  in  the  head. — Disagreeable  shaking, 
most  frequently  from  behind. — ^Violent  pulsations  (beatings),  or  else  heat 
throaghout  the  head. — Murmuring  throughout  the  top  of  the  head. — Dartings 
in  the  head,  as  from  pins. — ^Tingling  in  the  teguments  of  the  head. — Ebullition 
under  the  scalp. — Sensation  of  cold  in  the  vertex. — Sensation  of  torpor  in  a 
part  of  r.  side  of  head. — Darting  itching  on  the  head  and  legs. — Scurf  on  the 
scalp. — The  growth  of  the  hair  much  promoted. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Aching  in  the  eyes,  as  from  dryness. — Gnawing  sensation  in 
1.  eye,  or  else  violent  drawing  pains,  extending  to  forehead. — Sensation  as  if 
the  eyes  were  much  sunken. — Sensation  as  if  something  were  passing  out  of 
the  eye. — Redness  of  the  vessels  of  the  conjunctiva,  as  far  as  the  cornea ;  of 
the  edges  of  1.  eyelid,  at  the  exterior  angle. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes. — 
Swelling  of  edges  of  eyelids,  at  the  external  angle. — Considerable  lachryma- 
tion. — Lachrymation,  esp.  of  r.  eye. — ^Wandering  and  haggard  looks. — 
Contraction  of  pupils,  which  were  abnormally  dilated. — Clouded  vision. — 
Everything  appears  pale. — Blindness. — Sight  improved  (curative  symptom). — 
Little  black  spots  before  r.  eye. — Objects  all  appear  yellow  to  the  sight. — ^A 
dark  room  appears  to  be  illuminated. 

4.  Ears. — Pains  in  the  ear. — Drawing  pains  from  the  javTs  to  the  ears. 
— Landnations  in  r.  ear,  proceeding  from  the  neck. — Pulsations  in  the  ear. — 
Redness  and  heat  of  the  ear. — Swelling  of  the  interior  of  the  ear. — Suppura- 
tion, and  a  small  pustule  in  the  auditory  duct.— Vesicles  full  of  acrid  serum 
behind  the  ear. — ^Augmented  secretion  of  wax. — ^Murmuring,  sometimes  with 
a  sensation  as  if  a  flock  of  wool  were  before  the  ears. 

5.  Nose. — ^Tingling  in  the  nose,  or  else  with  pressure  outwardly. — 
Epistaxis. — Loss  of  smell. — Sneezing. — ^Augmented  secretion  of  nasal  mucus. 
— Discharge,  on  blowing  the  nose,  of  a  liquid  like  milk  ;  aggravation  of  pre- 
existing coryza. 

6.  Face. — Colour,  bright  red. — Expression  of  alarm  on  the  face. — 
Increase  of  sweat  on  the  face.— Violent  drawing  pain  above  1.  eyebrow. — 
Contraction  of  the  muscles  of  the  face,  esp.  of  the  mouth. — Swelling  of  the 
face. — Scabby  eruption  on  the  face,  on  the  arms,  and  over  the  body. — Large 
blisters  on  the  cheeks. — ^Lips  cracked ;  the  upper  lip  pu£Fed  out — Eruption 
about  the  mouth  and  on  the  chin. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Tearing  pains  in  upper  teeth,  proceeding  from  the  head.*- 
Pain  as  of  subcutaneous  ulceration  in  places  once  occupied  by  molar  teeth. 
— Quick  dartings  in  a  hollow  molar  tooth. — Quick  growth  of  the  teeth  in 
children. — Drawings  in  the  gums,  proceeding  from  r.  ear. 

8.  Mouth. — Increase  of  excoriation  abeady  existing  in  the  interior  of 
the  mouth. — Pain  of  excoriation,  and  excoriation  in  the  interior  of  r.  cheek. — 
Great  dryness  of  the  mouth.^Augmented  secretion  of  saliva* — Foam  at  the 
mouth. — Sensitiveness  of  the  tongue,  esp.  at  the  point,  which  is  also  red. — 
Papillae  very  prominent. — Dry  tongue,  charged  with  a  yellow  coating.— -^ 
Swelling,  thickness  of  the  tongue.— Vesicles  on  the  tongue,  with  pain  of 


702  ELECTRlCITAS 


excoriation.— -Dumbness,  inability  to  uttor  a  sound.— On  the  palate,  Tesicies 
with  desquamation  of  the  epidermis. 

g.    Throat.-*Con8tant  tickling  in  the  throat — Pressure  on  swallowing. 
— Difficult  deglutition. — Inflammation  of  the  gullet 

10.  Appetite.— Sour  taste. — Increase  of  appetite.-— Great  indinatioo  to 
eat  between  meals. — Thirst  during  febrile  shivering. — Pyrosis.— Abundant 
accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth. — Loathing. — Nausea,  sometimes  after  a 
meal,  with  a  more  abundant  accumulation  of  saliva. — Retching,  with  inflam- 
mation of  throat,  and  cough.— Vomiting,  and  inflammation  of  the  throat — 
Vomiting  of  blood. 

11.  Stomach. — Fulness  of  the  stomach,  after  eating  the  least  thing. 

12.  Abdomen, — Spasmodic  tension  and  contraction  in  the  abdomen. — 
Aching  in  the  abdomen.— Colic. — Cutting  pains  on  the  approach  of  a  storm, 
or  else  with  diarrhoea. — Dartingsfrom  1.  to  r.  side. — Shivering  in  the  abdomen, 
or  else  burning,  sometimes  with  tension. — Inflation  of  the  abdomen,  borborygmi 
in  the  abdomen,  sometimes  with  fermentation. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Fruitless  inclination. — ^The  stools  are  at  first 
facilitated,  and  afterwards  restricted. — Stools  frequent  and  liquid,  of  a 
blackish  yellow,  and  of  a  fetid  smell. — Diarrhoea,  sometimes  entirely  liquid, 
hot. — ^Tenesmus  and  cutting  pains. — Diarrhoea  with  colic,  or  else  at  the 
approach  of  a  storm. — During  the  diarrhoea,  retraction  of  the  testicles. — ^After 
the  diarrhoea,  constriction  in  anus,  with  dry  stools. — Heat  in  the  whole  body. 
— Violent  pressure  in  the  rectum  (during  the  stools). — Burning  in  anus. — 
Haemorrhoidal  flux. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Sensation  as  though  the  bladder  were  going  to 
burst. — ^Augmented  secretion  of  lu-ine. — ^Very  frequent  emission  of  urine. — 
Involuntary  emission  of  urine. — Urine,  in  the  morning,  an  orange-yellow ; 
during  the  day,  like  water  in  which  meat  has  been  washed. — Urine  thick, 
deep-coloured. — Red  like  blood,  abundantly  charged  with  mucus. — ^Discharge 
of  blood  with  the  urine. — ^White  sediment. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — ^Appearance  of  the  catamenia  (in  the 
electric  bath). — Copious  menses,  sometimes  with  pressure  in  the  rectum. — 
Blood  of  the  catamenia,  black  and  thick. — Leucorrhoea,  at  first  serous,  after- 
wards thick,  in  pieces  of  the  size  of  a  hazel-nut. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Roughness  of  the  lar3aiz. — Cough,  with 
much  tickling  in  throat,  or  else  with  pressure  in  forehead  from  within  out- 
wards.— Short  irritable  cough. — Spitting  of  blood. — Feeble  and  faint  respira- 
tion.— Respiration  arrested. — Dyspnoea. — Respiration  accelerated. — ^Asthma, 
sometimes  lasting  for  life,  with  palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  disposition  to 
syncope ;  oppression  of  the  chest. 

18.  Chest. — Constriction  of  the  chest. — Pains  in  the  chest ;  sensation  of 
coldness  in  the  1.  side. — Chest  and  shoulders  feel  like  marble. 

19.  Heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart,  sometimes  esp.  at  the  approach  of 
a  storm,  or  else  with  a  disposition  to  fall  in  syncope. — Palpitation  of  the  heart 
with  fever,  or  with  headache,  or  else  with  restlessness  and  vivid  redness  of 
the  face. — Painful  and  rapid  lancinating  pain  proceeding  from  the  heart 
across  the  chest 

so.  Neck  and  Back.— Difficulty  in  moving  the  neck.— Tingling  in  a 
muscle  shortened  by  suppuration. — Dartings  in  an  enlarged  gland  of  the  neck. 


ELECTRICITAS  703 

— ^Tingling  in  the  vertebral  column. — Furunculi  on  the  back,  and  nape  of  the 
neck. — Drawing  pains  across  the  shoulder-blades,  as  by  a  thread, — Burning 
in  the  shoulder. 

S2.  Upper  Limbs.— Tearings  in  r.  shoulder,  which  disappear  in  the 
heat  of  the  bed. — Excruciating  pains  in  arms  (and  legs). — Intense  pains  at 
night— Startings,  or  else  tearings,  in  articulations  of  arms  and  i.3nds, — 
Paralysis  of  the  arms,  one  being  much  swollen. — Scabby  ulcer  in  the  arms 
(and  on  the  legs). — ^Violent  starting  in  the  upper  part  of  the  arms. — Drawing 
pain  in  the  radius  of  r.  forearm. — ^Violent  tearing  in  hand. — ^Trembling  of  the 
hands. — Sensation  of  paralysis  in  the  articulation,  on  the  slightest  movement. 
— Prominence  of  the  veins. — Swelling  of  the  hand,  sometimes  red,  or  itching. 
— Red  smooth  spot  on  the  hand. — ^Whitish,  itching  place  in  the  palm  of  r. 
hand. — ^Tension  or  drawing  pain  in  the  fingers. — Sensation  of  torpor  at  the 
ends  of  the  fingers. — ^Vesicles  full  of  a  greenish  liquid,  sanguineous  at  the 
articulation  of  the  finger  which  has  received  the  shock. 

$3.  Lower  Limbs. — Heaviness  of  the  legs. — Lassitude  of  the  thighs  on 
going  up  an  ascent. — Sensation  as  though  the  flesh  were  detached  from  the 
bones. — Red  itching  place  on  r.  thigh. — Sensation  of  heat  over  the  whole 
thigh. — ^Trembling  of  the  knees. — ^Tearings  in  the  knees. — Dartings,  or 
tension,  or  else  tingling,  extending  to  the  foot. — Pain  as  of  a  wound  in  the 
knees  and  great  toe. — Red  place,  with  pain  of  excoriation,  or  else,  a  red  and 
itching  protuberance  in  the  knee. — In  the  tibia,  sensation  of  turning  round,  or 
else  lassitude. — Red  spot  on  the  skin. — Burning  in  the  feet,  sometimes 
reaching  to  the  knees,  esp.  at  night ;  great  internal  heat,  internal  coldness, 
extended  by  a  cool  summer  wind  to  the  abdomen. — Sensation  of  fatigue,  with 
trembling  in  the  feet. — Sensation  of  swelling,  of  numbness,  and  torpor ; 
rotative  sensation  in  the  soles  of  the  feet. — Sensation  as  if  a  large  ring 
were  round  the  malleoli. — Itching  of  foot,  or  else  red  and  itching  vesicles  on 
foot 

84.  Caeneralities. — Pains  in  the  limbs ;  grievous  pains ;  pains  in  old 
womids,  or  in  enfeebled  bodies,  from  a  change  of  temperature. — ^Draggings 
in  all  the  limbs,  as  far  as  the  ends  of  the  fingers  and  toes  ;  nocturnal  shoot- 
ings, in  parts  which  are  paralysed,  or  else  in  those  which  have  been  electri- 
fied ;  shaking  of  the  whole  body,  commencing  in  the  maxillary  bones ; 
tingling  in  the  parts  electrified ;  violent  burning  in  those  which  touch  the 
chain. — General  depression  and  weariness,  sometimes  with  giddiness  or  with 
drowsiness ;  lassitude  and  stiffness  of  the  limbs  ;  general  depression  after  a 
meal ;  uneasiness  during  a  storm. — General  relaxation  of  the  powers,  some- 
times with  moral  depression  and  headache ;  relaxation  of  the  nerves  and 
muscles ;  diminution  of  the  weight  of  the  body ;  weakness  of  the  parts 
shaken.— Syncope,  and  tendency  to  fall  down.— Stiffness  oi  the  limbs; 
paral3rsis  of  some  of  the  limbs,  esp.  of  the  inferior  extremities. — Trembling  of 
the  limbs,  chiefly  of  those  which  have  been  shaken ;  general  trembling. — 
Springing  up  of  the  tendons. — Convulsions  of  the  limbs. — Painful  spasms 
along  the  back. — St.  Vitus'  dance.— Epileptic  fits  hastened  and  aggravated. 

85.  Skin. — Itching,  or  else  tingling  over  the  whole  body  (violent  pains 
and  swelling  of  one  of  the  feet  which  had  been  frozen  twelve  years  before). — 
Eruption  of  small  nodosities  on  the  spots  touched  by  the  sparks ;  eruption 
like  miliary  or  measles ;  white  vesicles ;  itch-like  eruption  at  the  joints ;  of 


704  EPHEDRA  VULGARIS 

carbuncles,  which  proceed  to  sappuration.— The  skin  becomes  black ;  wheals 
on  the  skin. 

96.  Sleep.— Yawning  and  stretching,  sometimes  with  shnddering  over 
the  whole  t)ody. — Great  drowsiness. — Profound  sleep. — Seeplessness,  some- 
times with  tossing. — Sleeplessness  for  two  months. — Dreams  confused  and 
disquieting. 

97.  Fever. — Shuddering  over  whole  body,  every  morning,  with  yawning. 
— Coldness  of  1.  side. — Fever :  at  first  general  shivering,  afterwards  heat, 
transient  and  dry ;  frequent  alternations  of  shivering  and  heat,  with  inflam- 
mation of  the  throat;  heat  mingled  with  shivering;  shivering,  with  much 
sweat ;  painful  cramps  in  head  and  along  back ;  fever  in  the  evening.— 
Augmentation  of  natural  heat ;  internal  heat  of  the  parts  which  have  sustained 
the  electric  shock  ;  blood  much  over-heated ;  heat,  with  cephalalgia,  or  else 
with  anxiety  (at  night),  or  else  with  strong  and  quick  pulse  ;  heat  of  whole 
body,  with  shivering  brought  on  by  motion ;  heat  of  the  parts  struck  by  the 
electric  spark  ;  intermittent  pulse,  lively,  quick  and  strong ;  circulation  of  the 
blood  accelerated ;  prominence  of  the  veins  of  the  hands. — Increased  per- 
spiration ;  excessive  nocturnal  sweat,  in  gouty  persons,  without  mitigation ; 
copious  sweat  during  sleep,  with  anxiety  during  a  storm. 


Ephedra  Vulgaris. 

E.  vulgaris.    N,  0.  Gnetaceas.    Tinctm^  of  branches  and  flowers. 

Clinieal.— Exophthalmic  goitre.    Headache. 

OharaoteristiOB. — Ephedra  has  been  proved  in  Russia  by  Dr. 
B.  H.  Mouravow  {Universal  Homcsopathic  Annual^  p.  56).  It  produced 
symptoms  when  twenty  drops  of  a  strong  alcoholic  extract  were  taken 
five  times  a  day ;  fifteen  drops  four  times  a  day  having  been  taken 
without  apparent  effect.  Extreme  apathy  was'produced,  stiff-neck,  and 
backward  pulling  of  whole  body  on  turning  the  head.  There  was 
also  starting  of  the  eyes  from  the  orbits  as  if  pushed  out  This 
suggested  exophthalmic  goitre  to  Mouravow,  who  considered  that  the 
drug  acted  on  the  ganglions  of  the  sympathetic  nerve,  and  caused 
congestion  of  the  spinal  cord. 

Relationfl.  —  Compare :  Ferr.,  lod.,  Lycopus  v.,  Spong, 
Thyroid,  (exophthalmos). 

STHPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Extreme  apathy. 

2.  Head. — ^Violent  headache,  nausea,  general  weakness ;  slow  pulse.— 
L.-side  hemicrania  with  numbness  of  entire  1.  arm. 

3.  Eyes. — Heavy  eyes,  starting  from  their  orbits,  as  if  pushed  out,  pain 
in  the  eye  (after  second  dose  on  third  day.  On  fifth  day  exophthalmos  was 
increased). 

za.    Abdomen. — Dull  pain  in  region  of  spleen. 


EPILOBIUM   PALUSTRE  705 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — From  early  morning  great  fatigue,  retention  of 
the  urine  (fourth  day). 

1x9.  Heart. — ^Abatement  of  pulse  (from  68  to  62  in  one  case),  notwith- 
standing increased  rapidity  of  action  of  heart. — Strong  heart-beat  with 
weakening  of  pulse;  respiration  accelerated. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  of  neck  (with  exophthalmos). — Stiffness 
of  neck  and  backward  pulling  of  all  the  body  on  turning  head  and  a  dull  pain 
in  region  of  spleen. 

21.    Limbs. — ^Towards  evening  heaviness  in  all  the  limbs. 

23.  Upper  Limbs. — Numbness  of  entire  1.  arm,  with  l.-side  hemicrania. 

24.  Generalities. — General  weakness ;  from  early  morning  great  fatigue. 
26.    Sleep. — Longing  for  sleep. 


Epigea  Repens. 


Trailing  Arbutus.    N.  0.  Ericaceae.    Tincture  of  fresh  leaves. 
Cliideal. — Calculi,  urinary.    Dysuria.    Gravel.    Strangury. 

Characteristios. — Hale  mentions  Epigea  as  having  been  a  popular 
remedy  in  renal  calculi  throughout  the  United  States  ever  since  the 
settlement.  ''  It  has  been  successful  in  removing  dysuria  and 
strangury  as  well  as  urinary  tenesmus.''  Hale  once  gave  to  a  patient 
who  had  a  bloody  muco-purulent  sediment  in  the  urine  with  intense 
dysuria,  ten  drops  of  the  tincture  six  times  a  day.  A  copious  deposit 
of  fine  brown  sand  was  observed  and  all  symptoms  were  relieved. 

RelationB. — Botan. :  Arbutus,  Uva  ursi.  Compare  also:  Mitchella, 
Chimaphila,  Cannabis,  Calc.  ren.,  Urtica  urens,  Uric  acid. 


Epilobiom  Palustre. 

Epilobium  lineare.    Willow  Herb.    N.  0.  Onagraceae. 
CUaicaL— D3'sphagia.    Fever.    Larynx,  affections  of.    Ptyalism.    Throat,  sore. 

CharaoteristioB.— £^i7.  p,  was  proved  by  Dr.  J.  S.  Wright,  a 
tincture  of  the  root  being  used.  Symptoms  of  filling  up  of  throat, 
inability  to  swallow,  fever  and  headache  were  produced.  A  boy 
poisoned  with  the  fiowers  of  Epil.  hirsutum  had  strong  epileptiform 
convulsions  in  rapid  succession. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2.    Head. — Headache  with  fever. 
6.    Face. — Face  red. 

8.    Mouth. — Ptyalism. — Dull  and  sleepy  but  could  not  sleep,  the  saliva 
would  choke  him. 
VOL.  I.  46 


7o6  EPIPHEGUS 

g.  Throat. — In  morning  throat  hegui  filling  op ;  at  noon  ooold  not 
swallow  water;  larynx  sore  to  pressure  with  hard  lamps  on  eadi  side 
externally. 

13.  Stools. — ^Three  loose  stools  on  eighth  day  ;  none  the  day  after. 

14.  Urine.—- Urine  red. 

87.  Fever. — Hard  chill  began  11  a.m.,  lasted  an  hour ;  high  fever  came 
on  with  aching  all  over  and  severe  headache  ;  this  lasted  all  night ;  conld  not 
sleep. 


Epiphegus. 


Epiphegus  Virginiana.  Beech  Drops.  Cancer-root.  N.  O.  Oro- 
faanchaceiae.  (A  slender  branching  herb  without  leaves,  of 
a  dull  purple  or  yellow-brown  colour  growing  as  a  parasite 
on  the  roots  of  beech-trees. — H.  /?.,  iv.  10.)  Tincture  of  whole 
fresh  plant  in  full  flower. 

Cllnleal. — Cancer.   Diarrhoea.  Gonorrhoea.  Headache.  Palpitation.  Salivation. 

OharaotoriAtios. — The  Orobanche  family  to  which  Epiphegus 
belongs  is  nearest  to  the  Scrophulariaceae  in  botanical  features.  In  addi- 
tion to  the  name  of  " canur-rooi**  it  is  also  called  "clap-rooi*'  and  *'flux- 
piant"  showing  the  virtues  with  which  it  is  popularly  accredited. 
Its  homoeopathic  use  has  been  almost  exclusively  confined  to  the 
treatment  of  headaches  of  the  neurasthenic  type,  brought  on  by  any 
extra  exertion,  relieved  bv  a  good  sleep.  The  pain  is  pressing  from 
within  outward.  A  very  characteristic  symptom  is :  "  Constantly  wants 
to  spit,  saliva  viscid  ; "  when  this  symptom  occurs  in  connection  with  a 
headache  Epiphegus  will  almost  certainly  cure.  It  is  said  to  have 
entered  into  the  composition  of  ''  Martin's  Cancer  powder,"  and  has 
been  used  by  eclectics  as  a  local  application  in  obstinate  ulcers  and 
aphthae.  Symptoms  take  the  direction :  Right  to  left ;  right  upper, 
left  lower.  Right  temple  more  afiFected  than  left.  It  hzis  been  used 
mostly  in  the  3X  potency.  It  has  been  proved  by  Dr.  Ralf  Morden. 
Dr.  S.  A.  Jones  has  been  chiefly  instrumental  in  defining  its  place  in 
therapeutics.  I  have  cured  with  it  many  cases  of  headache,  some  of 
them  desperately  severe.  The  conditions  are  :  <  from  working  in 
open  air  ;  from  rising  up  in  bed  ;  >  from  a  good  sleep. 

Relattons. — It  is  allied  to  the  Scrophulariaceas.  Compare :  Phos. 
in.,  >  from  sleep  (Lach.,  Sulph.,  and  Nat  mur.  have  the  opposite — 
<  from  sleep— in  the  most  marked  degree) ;  Fagus. 

Cauflation. — Physical  or  nervous  over -strain.  Any  unusual 
exertion  or  excitement,  as  going  on  a  visit,  or  doing  a  day's  shopping. 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Makes  wrong  letters  or  words  in  writing. — Fears  death  from 
palpitation  of  heart — Fears  injury  to  her  health  from  the  drug. 

2.  Head. — Pain  in  temples ;  mostly  in  r. ;  in  forehead ;  pressing  from 


EQUISETUM  707 

without  inward ;  piercing  pains ;  fulness ;  pain  coming  on  suddenly ;  scalp 
feels  tight  during  headache. 

3.    Eyes. — Smarting. — Could  not  read  because  the  words  seemed  to  be 
blurred. 

8.    Mouth.— Saliva  viscid.— Almost   constant   desire   to   spit— Sticky 
viscid  taste  in  mouth. — Bitter  taste. 
XI.    Stomach. — Nausea. 

13.    Stool. — Stool  passed  with  difficulty  though  faeces  soft. 
19.    Heart. — Palpitation  which  makes  her  feel  very  weak. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  in  1.  shoulder. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Pain  in  1.  knee. 

24.  Generalities.— Languid  feeling. 


Eqaisetum. 


Equisetiun  hyemale.  Scouring  Rush.  A  rush  growing  in  damp  soil  in 
Europe  and  America.  N,  0.  Equisetaceae.  Tincture  of  fresh 
plant  chopped  and  pounded  to  a  pulp. 

GlinioaL — Cystitis.  Dropsy.  Enuresis.  General  paralysis.  Gleet.  GonorrhcBa. 
Gravel.    Haematuria.    Urine,  retention  of. 

ChaFaoteristios. — The  chief  effects  of  Equisetum  are  found  in  the 
urinary  organs.  Pain  in  the  kidneys  (especially  right),  in  the  bladder 
and  urinary  passages.  Constant  desire  to  urinate,  and  passes  large 
quantities  of  clear,  light-coloured  urine  without  relief.  Pain  in  bladder 
as  from  distension.  Retention  and  dysuria ;  especially  in  women 
during  pregnancy  and  after  confinement.  Enuresis.  Wets  bed  at 
night ;  when  he  dreams  he  always  sees  a  crowd  of  people.  Equis. 
has  :  Severe  dull  pain  which  does  not  lessen  after  urination  ;  irritation 
of  the  bladder,  especially  in  women.  Linaria  has  enuresis,  with 
frequent  painful  urging  to  urinate,  causing  the  patient  to  rise  at  night 
(Farrington).  It  relieved  loss  of  control  over  bladder  and  rectum  in 
a  case  of  general  paralysis.  Carcinoma  uteri  is  said  to  have  been 
cured  by  it.  Pain  in  sacro-iliac  joints.  <  From  pressure  or  contact  ; 
moving  ;  sitting.  Eating  >  pain  in  temples  ;  lying  on  back  >  pain  in 
back  :  continued  motion  >  pains  in  back  and  knees. 

Relations. — Compare :  Apis,  Cannabis,  Canthar.,  Fer.  phos.,  Puis. ; 
Canth.  comes  closest ;  there  is  less  bleeding,  tenesmus,  scalding,  and 
fibrinous  flakes  than  with  Canthar.,  but  more  mucus. 

SYMPTOMS. 

X.    Mind. — ^Very  irritable  and  easily  fatigued. 

2.  Head. — Severe  headache  with  intense  pain  in  upper  part  of  eyes  or 
roof  of  orbit. — Headache  with  heat  of  face  without  redness. — Constrictive 
feeling  across  forehead. — Sticking,  darting  pains  changing  locality. — Con- 
striction of  whole  scalp,  as  if  drawn  tightly  over  whole  skull ;  continual  desire 


7o8  EQUISETUM 

to  wrinkle  up  forehead. — Skin  over  frontal  bone  very  tight,  with  feeling  of 
skin  continuing  to  contract. 

3.  Eyes. — Severe  pain  in  roof  of  r.  orbit. — Sharp  pain  in  outer  angle  of 
r.  eye. 

4.  Ears. — Dull,  transient  pain  and  stiff  feeling  behind  1.  mastoid.— 
Confused  feeling  in  ears. — Confusion  of  sounds ;  confused  noises ;  fearful 
rumbling. 

6.  Face. — Face  flushed,  feeling  of  heat.— As  if  blood  pressed  into  face. 
— Heat  and  burning  without  redness. 

9.    Throat.-— Sharp  sticking  in  throat. 

II.  Stomach. — Excessive  hunger ;  appetite  greatly  increased  through- 
out the  proving. 

la.  Abdomen. — Distended  feeling.— Dull,  heavy  pains  in  either  side  of 
lower  abdomen  and  bladder,  with  frequent  desire  to  urinate ;  the  desire  to 
urinate,  which  is  constant,  is  not  >  by  urinating. — Slight  pain  in  bowels  with 
desire  for  stool,  not  urgent,  early  in  morning ;  three  stools  during  the  morning, 
quite  thin ;  during  the  whole  day  frequent  inclination  for  stool  with  slight 
pain  in  bowels  ;  no  diarrhoea.— Severe  pain  in  lower  abdomen  with  passage  of 
fetid  flatus. — Sharp  pain  in  hypogastrium  with  sticking-like  pains  in  anus 
(11  a.m.). — Sharp  pains  on  either  side  of  hypogastrium  ;  extending  to  middle 
line. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Smarting  in  anus  during  and  after  stool. — Stool 
with  great  flatulence. — Stool  with  aching  in  anus  and  feeling  as  if  rectum 
would  protrude,  followed  by  smarting  in  anus  and  a  feeling  as  if  some  faeces 
still  remained. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Slight  pain  in  r.  kidney,  then  in  1.,  extending 
down  1.  side  of  sacrum. — Dull  pain  in  r.  kidney,  with  urgent  desire  to  urinate ; 
had  urinated  only  a  few  minutes  before  and  now  passed  four  ounces  of  clear 
light-coloured  urine. — Pain  in  bladder  as  from  distension. — Severe  dull  pain 
in  bladder  not  >  by  urinating ;  continued  some  days  after  taking  the  drug, 
and  caused  him  to  fear  inflammation  of  the  bladder. — ^Tenderness  in  region  of 
bladder,  and  r.  side  of  lower  abdomen,  extending  upward  from  groin ;  same 
but  less  marked  1.  side. — Pain  and  tenderness  in  bladder  region  with  soreness 
of  testicles,  extending  up  spermatic  cords. — Excessive  burning  in  urethra 
while  urinating. — Sharp,  cutting  pain  in  urethra. — Pricking  in  urethra  a  short 
distance  back  from  meatus. — Biting  itching  in  meatus  <  scratching.— Great 
desire  to  urinate  but  only  a  small  quantity  passes. — Urgent  desire  to  urinate 
with  prickling  and  soreness  of  meatus  from  contact  and  pressure. — Obliged  to 
rise  several  times  at  night  to  urinate. — Profuse  urination,  with  burning  in 
urethra  and  sharp  pain  at  root  of  penis. — Later  passes  smaller  quantities  and 
darker. — Passed  small  amount  but  felt  as  if  he  had  not  urinated  for  hours ; 
the  amount  grew  less  each  time  but  the  desire  increased. — Urine  cloudy. — 
Great  excess  of  mucus  on  standing. — Enuresis,  nocturnal  and  diurnal. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Violent  erections  ;  in  the  afternoon. — Sore- 
ness of  testicles  and  cords ;  <  1. 

189 19.  Chest  and  Heart. — Sharp  stitch  in  1.  breast  one  inch  to  1.  and 
over  nipple. — Sharp  pain  in  region  of  heart  <  by  inspiration. 

90.  Back. — Pains  in  back  esp.  while  sitting,  >  lying  on  back  and  walk- 
ing.— Heavy  sensation  like  a  lump  in  r.  lumbar  region. — Severe  rheumatic 


ERECHTHITES.  709 

pains  in  region  of  sacro-lumbar  joint,  and  through  1.  hip-joint  extending  down 
outer  side  of  1.  leg,  ending  in  front  three  inches  above  knee. 

22.  Upper  Limbs.— Pain  in  upper  part  of  shoulders  and  in  region  of 
vertebra  prominens,  <  by  least  motion  or  contact. — Pain  in  r.  shoulder  to 
middle  of  upper  arm. — Pain  in  1.  shoulder  with  shivering  over  body  and  great 
heat  of  head. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Pain  in  r.  hip-joint  and  near  knee-joint. — Knees 
very  weak  on  least  exertion. — Dull,  heavy  pain  under  1.  patella. — On  awaken- 
ing, sharp  pain  inner  side  of  1.  knee,  >  after  moving  about  a  short  time. 

26.  Sleep. — ^Very  sleepy,  eyelids  heavy. — Sleep  much  disturbed  by  tire- 
some dreams  of  many  persons,  places,  and  things. 

27.  Fever. — Creeping  chills  beginning  below  and  creeping  up  back. 


Erechthites. 


Erechthites   hieradfolia.    Senecio    hieraclfolia.    Fireweed. 
N.  0.  CompositaB.    Tincture  of  whole  fresh  plant. 

Olinioal^— Diarrhoea.    Gonorrhoea.    Haemorrhages.    Metrorrhagia.    Orchitis. 

0hai*acteFi8ti08.--Belonging  to  the  Compositae,  and  closely 
allied  to  Erigeron  and  the  Groundsel  family  (Senecio),  "  Fireweed " 
(so  called  because  it  grows  abundantly  in  clearings  which  have  been 
burnt  out)  has  been  used  empirically  in  haemorrhages,  especially 
metrorrhagia,  and  as  a  local  application  in  skin  affections,  herpes, 
eczema,  psoriasis,  and  indolent  ulcers.  A  short  proving  has  shown 
an  action  over  the  circulatory  apparatus,  producing  fiushes  of  heat 
which  suddenly  give  way  to  coldness.  Another  marked  feature  is 
increased  appetite  ;  and  also  increased  feeling  of  strength  and  desire 
for  exercise.  According  to  Hale,  "  Oil  of  Fireweed  *'  is  also  extracted 
from  Erigeron,  and  is  said  by  chemists  to  be  identical  with  turpentine. 
All  three  cause  active  and  passive  haemorrhages,  the  former  being  the 
primary  and  the  latter  the  secondary  action.  Erech.  is  indicated  in 
haemorrhages  of  bright  red  blood  from  nose,  mouth,  bowels,  kidneys, 
uterus,  and  lungs.  These  are  attended  with  excitement  of  the 
circulation.  It  is  also  indicated  in  passive  haemorrhages  of  dark 
fluid  blood.     Hale  also  commends  it  in  gonorrhoea  and  orchitis. 

Belatioiuu — Compare:  Senecio,  Erigeron,  Hamam.,  Millefol., 
Calc,  Canth.,  Tereb.,  Puis.,  Clematis. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2.  Head. — Giddiness  with  nausea. — Dull  frontal  headache.— Throbbing 
of  temporal  arteries,  with  flushes  of  heat  running  across  the  back  from  one 
shoulder  to  the  other. — ^The  sensation  of  heat  suddenly  gives  way  to  that  of 
coldness. 

g.  Throat. — Sore  throat ;  legs  feel  stifE  and  painful,  aching  across 
small  of  back. 


7IO  ERGOTINUM 

II.  Stomach. — Enormous  appetite. — Feeling  in  stomach  as  if  it  would 
be  dissolved,  after  drinking  cold  water. — Eructations  and  heart-bum  after 
eating  warm  bread  and  cofiFee  (cured). 

12, 13.  Abdomen  and  Stool.— Griping  followed  by  three  copious  dis- 
charges of  semi-solid,  yellow  fsecal  matter. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Increased  flow  of  urine.— Slight  boming  at 
meatus  during  micturition. 

15.  Male  Sesraal  Organs.— Towards  morning  prolonged  erection  with 
dreams  of  nudity. — (Gonorrhcea  with  scanty  discharges  and  great  pain. — 
Orchitis  from  suppressed  discharge.) 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Metrorrhagia. — Premature  and  profuse 
menses. 

20.    Neck. — Stitches  on  middle  of  back. 

23.    Lower  Limbs.— Cold  feeling  in  back  of  legs. — Legs  feel  stiff. 

26.    Sleep. — Dreams  of  nudity  and  shame. 


Ergotinum. 


Ergotin.    The  alkaloid  of  Secale  comutum,  Ergot  of  rye. 
Trituration. 

GUnieaL— Anal  incontinence.    Gangrene.    Haemorrhages.    Heart,  paralysis  of. 
Sphincters,  paralysis  of. 

CharaoteriBtios. — Ergotin  is  best  known  by  its  physiological  use 
as  a  haemostatic  in  uterine  and  pulmonary  haemorrhages.  It  acts  by 
causing  contraction  of  the  arterioles,  and  its  effect  is  produced  most 
promptly  when  it  is  administered  by  subcutaneous  injection.  Its 
homoeopathic  uses  are  in  the  main  identical  with  those  of  Secale^  but 
Ergotin  will  sometimes  succeed  when  Secale  fails.  Koeck,  of  Munich, 
has  recorded  a  case  in  point  (H.  Monatsbldtter,  Sept.,  1898).  SecaU^ 
like  Phosph,^  has  "wide-open  anus"  in  its  symptomatology.  Koeck's 
patient  had  suffered  from  diarrhoea  since  the  Franco-German  war, 
and  latterly  had  lost  all  power  of  retention.  It  was  for  this  that  the 
doctor  was  consulted.  The  rectum  had  lost  all  sensation,  so  that  the 
patient  had  no  warning  and  was  never  clean.  The  odour  may  be 
imagined.  Old-school  treatment  had  failed  to  relieve  himu  He 
was  about  to  be  pensioned  by  his  employers,  and  had  thoughts  of 
suicide.  Secale  3X  ameliorated  slightly  ;  the  2X  had  the  same  result 
"  Remembering  Kafka's  advice  to  use  the  alkaloid  when  the  indicated 
drug  did  not  seem  to  act,  he  prescribed  Ergotin  2x."  After  taking 
this  for  four  days  days  the  patient  regained  control.  Demange  {La 
Semaine  Med.^  January,  1886)  records  the  case  of  a  young  lady  suffering 
from  typhoid  fever  and  threatened  with  heart  paralysis.  Stimulating 
injections  of  ether  and  of  rum,  and  frictions  completely  failed  to  rally 
her.  Cyanosis  increased  rapidly  and  threatened  the  trunk.  Fainting 
spells  occurred  in  rapid  succession,  pulse  filiform.  Ergotin  was  then 
injected  and  the  pulse  rose,  and  the  s3rmptoms  of  collapse  disappeared. 
(Most  of  the  symptoms  of  this  patient  may  be  found  under  Secale,) 


ERIGERON  7n 


Erigeron. 

Erigeron  Canadense.    Canada  Flea-bane.    N.  0.  Composite. 
Tincture  from  the  fresh  plant  when  in  bloom. 

Clfaliml. — ^Black  eye.  Bruises.  Cough.  Dysuria.  Gleet  Gonorrhoea. 
Haematocele.  Haemorrhages.  Haemorrhoids.  Placenta  praevia.  Proctalgia.  Sper- 
matorrhoea.   Wounds. 

CSiaFaeteristios. — Erigeron  is  chiefly  known  as  a  remedy  for 
haemorrhages  and  congestions  in  pretty  well  all  parts  of  the  body. 
Its  characteristic  haemorrhages  are  bright  red.  The  Indians  use  it  as 
an  application  to  wounds.  It  compares  as  a  vulnerary  with  Arnica, 
It  has  been  proved  by  Burt  and  others.  The  throat  and  genito- 
urinary organs  are  specifically  afiFected.  Sensation  as  if  something 
had  lodged  in  upper  part  of  oesophagus.  Pains  in  umbilical  region 
were  very  prominent.  Feeling  as  if  anus  had  been  torn.  Urination 
is  painful  or  suppressed ;  sharp  stinging  pains  in  region  of  left 
kidney.  Gonorrhoea  and  gleet  have  been  cured  by  Erig.  Wilmot 
Moore  has  given  it  with  success  in  three  cases  of  placenta  praevia. 
He  gave  the  ix  trituration  (of  what  part  of  the  plant  is  not  mentioned) 
on  the  tongue.  Rest  <  ;  every  movement  <  now  ;  ss  bloody  lochia 
to  return.     Rainy  weather  <  all  symptoms. 

Belatioiuu — It  is  related  to  Senec,  Erech.,  botanically  and  in 
efifects.    Compare :  Ipec,  Ham.,  Am.,  Canth.,  Copaiv.,  Sabi.,  Tereb. 

SYMPTOMS. 

z.    Mind. — Great  despondency. 

2.  Head. — Congestion  of  the  head,  red  face,  nose-bleed  ;  febrile  action. 
—Awakened  with  dull  headache  [forehead  and  r.  eye]  ;  with  aching  distress 
in  all  the  large  joints. — Dull  frontal  headache  with  smarting  in  eyes. 

3.  Eyes. — Smarting  of  eyes,  all  afternoon  and  evening. — Slight  agglu- 
tination of  lids  in  morning. 

4.  £ars. — Loud  singing  in  r.  ear. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis  of  bright-red  blood. — Increased  secretion  of  mucus 
all  forenoon. 

8.    Mouth. — Bad  taste  in  mouth. 

g.  Throat. — Increased  secretion  of  mucus  in  nostrils  all  forenoon,  with 
a  feeling  of  roughness  of  pharynx  and  sensation  as  if  something  had  lodged 
in  the  upper  part  of  the  oesophagus  that  caused  frequent  inclination  to 
swallow. — Rough  feeling  in  pharynx  in  morning. 

II.  Stomach. — ^Violent  retching  and  burning  in  the  stomach,  with 
vomiting  of  blood. — Eructations  of  air. — Sharp  cutting  pains  in  epigastric 
region  every  few  minutes  followed  by  dull  pains. 

13.  Abdomen. — Frequent  distress  in  umbilicus  with  hard,  aching 
distress  in  whole  dorsal  region. — Frequent  dull  pain  in  umbilical  region, 
with  a  feeling  in  anus  as  if  it  had  been  torn. — Constant  dull  pain  in  r. 
umbilicus ;  twice  the  pains  were  severe  and  cutting  (first  day,  second  day 


712  ERIODICTYON   GLUTINOSUM 

pain  was  in  1.  umbilicus). — Rheumatic  pains  in  abdominal  muscles. — Sudden 
pain  in  hypogastrium,  followed  by  mushy  stool  (7  p.m.  first  day,  8  p.m.  third 
day). — Dull  pain  in  1.  hypogastrium  and  umbilicus. — Dull  pain  in  hypogas- 
trium  followed  by  dark-coloured,  hard,  lumpy  stool. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Natural  stool,  followed  by  severe  neuralgia  in 
anus  with  tenesmus. — Stools  small,  streaked  with  blood ;  tormina ;  burning 
in  the  bowels  and  rectum  ;  hard  lumps  of  faeces  mixed  with  the  discharges. — 
Mushy  stools. — Haemorrhage  from  the  bowels. — Haemorrhoids;  bleeding; 
with  hard,  lumpy  stools ;  burning  in  the  margin  of  anus ;  it  feels  as  if  torn. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urination  painful  or  suppressed. — Dysuria  of 
teething  children ;  frequent  desire ;  crying  when  urinating ;  urine  profuse, 
of  very  strong  odour ;  external  parts  (female)  inflamed  or  irritated,  with  con- 
siderable mucous  discharge. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sticky  sweat  on  genitals. — Pain  in  r. 
lumbar  region  passing  down  to  testicle. — Gonorrhoea  and  gleet. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Metrorrhagia,  with  violent  irritation  of 
rectum  and  bladder ;  after  abortion,  with  diarrhoea  and  dysuria ;  with  pro- 
lapsus uteri. — ^Very  profuse  flow  of  bright-red  blood ;  every  movement  of 
patient  increases  the  flow  ;  pallor  and  weakness. — Leucorrhoea  profuse,  with 
spasmodic  pains,  and  irritation  of  the  bladder  and  rectum. — Bloody  lochia 
return  after  the  least  motion ;  >  during  rest. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.--Cough ;  bloody  expectoration ;  incipient 
phthisis. 

19.  Heart. — Palpitation. 

20.  Back. — Dull  aching  distress  in  whole  dorsal  region. — Dull  pains  in 
lumbar  and  sacral  regions. — Severe  sticking,  stabbing  pain  in  region  of  1. 
kidney ;  passing  to  r.  kidney. 

SI.    Limbs.— Aching  dulness  in  all  the  joints  and  limbs. 
24.    Generalities. — Excessive  languor  in  morning ;  ail  day  with  great 
depression  ;  no  ambition  to  move  in  afternoon  and  evening. 

86.    Sleep. — Frequent  disposition  to  yawn  in  afternoon  and  evening. 


Eriodictyon  Glatinosnm. 

Eriodictyon  Califomicum.    Yerba  Santa.    N,  0.  Hydropbyllaceae. 
Tincture  of  whole  plant. 

ClinioaL— Asthma.    Bronchitis.    Catarrh.    Influenza.    Phthisis. 

CharaoteristiOB. — EriodycL,  says  Allen,  ''has  a  strong  tereben- 
thine  taste,  and  abounds  in  a  resinous  matter  which  sometimes  exudes 
so  copiously  that,  in  drying,  the  specimens  stick  firmly  together  and 
to  the  paper."  "Yerba  Santa"  (holy  plant)  is  a  popular  expectorant 
remedy  in  Mexico  and  California.  By  homoeopaths  it  has  been  chiefly 
used  in  phthisical  conditions,  especially  bronchial  phthisis.  Asthmatic 
breathing  ^th  accumulation  of  mucus ;  the  asthma  being  relieved 
when  the  mucus  is  got  rid  of.    Wasting,  night-sweats,  intolerance  of 


ERODIUM  713 

food.  Phthisis  the  result  of  frequent  bronchial  catarrhs.  Coryza  and 
catarrh.  J.  Perry  Seward  gave  it  with  great  success  in  two  cases  of 
cough  remaining  after  influenza  (Amer.  Hom,^  xxiv.  248).  G.  M. 
Payne's  proving  brought  out  marked  preference  for  the  right  lung. 
Foul  mouth  in  the  morning  on  rising.  Most  symptoms  <  in  after- 
noon. Nausea  <  on  running.  Symptoms  come  at  intervals ;  or  on 
any  sudden  changes  of  position. 

Relations. — Compare:  Balsam  of  Peru,  Pix  liquida,  Stannum ; 
(afternoon  aggravation)  Lycop.  ;  Grindelia,  Phos.,  Hep.,  Rumex, 
Caust.,  Dros. 

SYMPTOMS. 

s.  Head.— 'Dizziness  and  sense  of  intoxication. — ^Aching  at  base  of 
cranium,  8  a.m. — Sensation  of  pressure  outwards  on  all  sides  of  head, 
greatest  at  cerebellum  upwards. — Intense,  dull,  heavy  pain  in  back  of  head 
and  over  eyes. — Burning  in  occiput ;  heavy  pain  as  if  occiput  was  being 
pressed  out. 

4.  Bars. — Sharp  pain  in  r.  ear  at  intervals ;  or  on  suddenly  changing 
position  of  head  to  r.  or  L — Shooting  pains,  after  changing  to  just  below 
external  ear,  removed  to  just  above  and  back  of  it  at  intervals  of  one  or 
two  minutes. 

5.  Nose. — Sneezing. — Catarrh,  yellowish-green. — Coryza  permanent ; 
with  more  or  less  dizziness. 

8.  Mouth. — Foul  mouth  on  rising  in  the  morning. 

9.  Throat. — Burning  sensation  in  fauces  and  throat. 

II.    Stomach. — Great  appetite. — Deathly  sickness  ;  <  by  running. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sore,  dragging,  tender  feeling  of  testicles 
« 1.) ;  could  not  bear  any  pressure,  and  dreaded  to  move  because  of  its 
tenderness ;  >  by  gentle  support,  felt  in  after  part  of  day. — Slight  fluttering 
at  intervals  at  bottom  of  testicles. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— -Wheezing  voice,  5  p.m.— Asthmatic  symp- 
toms; with  coryza  and  mucous  secretions. — DuU  pain  in  r.  lung,  front — 
Sharp  pain  in  r.  lung  in  front,  near  nipple,  occurring  at  short  intervals  or  on 
sudden  changes  of  position. 

27.    Fever.— Slight  fever,  cheeks  flushed  and  burning. 


Erodimn. 

Erodium  cicutarium.  Hemlock  Stork's  Bill.  N,  0.  Geraniacese. 
Decoction  (half  ounce  of  the  herb  to  six  ounces  of  water). 
Tincture  of  fresh  plant. 

CUnlesI.— Haemorrhages.    Uterine  polypus. 

CharaoteristiOB. — Erodium  is  a  popular  haemostatic  remedy  in 
Russia,  and  is  especially  used  for  metrorrhagia  and  menorrhagia. 
Komorowitch  cured  with  it  numbers  of  cases  in  which  Ergot  and 


714  ERYNGIUM   AQUATICUM 

Hydrastis  had  failed.  One  was  a  case  of  cervical  polypus.  After 
three  days'  use  of  the  decoction  the  polypus  was  found  lying  free  in 
the  vagina.    Compare  Geran.  in. 


Erj^igiom  Aqaatioom. 

Button  Snake-root.    N,  0.  Umbelliferae.    Tincture  of  fresh  root. 

ClinieaL — ^Anus,  prolapse  of.  Conjunctivitis.  Constipation.  Cough.  Diar- 
rhoea. Dropsy.  Gleet.  Gonorrhoea.  Haemorrhoids.  Influenza.  Laryngitis. 
Leucorrhoea.  Renal  colic.  Sclerotitis.  Sexual  weakness.  Strabismus.  Spemoa- 
torrhcea.    Urine,  incontinence  of.    Wounds. 

Chanoteristios. — Eryngium  acts  on  the  mucous  membranes, 
producing  thick  yellow  mucous  discharges  from  eyes,  ears,  nose, 
mouth,  bowels,  urethra,  and  vagina.  Haemorrhages  from  stomach 
and  bowels.  It  is  a  vulnerary,  antidoting  the  effect  of  blows.  It 
causes  headaches ;  expanding  sensation  in  forehead ;  dull,  dragging 
pain  in  occiput,  neck,  and  shoulders.  Seminal  and  prostatic  weak- 
ness. I.  J.  Whitfield  has  cured  three  cases  of  renal  coUc  with  calculi 
(two  left  side,  the  other  not  stated)  with  Eryng.  a.  W.  K.  Leonard 
reports  the  following  case :  A  young  Methodist  minister,  apparently 
healthy,  was  just  over  his  twelfth  attack  of  renal  cohc.  The  attacks 
had  recurred  at  intervals  of  two  to  four  weeks  and  lasted  from  one  to 
three  days,  and  they  were  so  weakening  as  to  keep  him  incapacitated 
in  the  intervals.  He  had  had  old-school  treatment,  including  Morphine 
and  Quinine,  with  no  benefit.  Eryng.  a.  ^,  five  drops  three  times  a  day, 
put  an  end  to  the  trouble.  The  attacks  had  been  attended  with  severe 
nervous  chills,  and  it  was  for  these  that  the  Quinine  had  been  pre- 
scribed. Eryng.  has  a  cough  with  a  sense  of  constriction.  (Hale  found 
it  useful  in  epidemic  influenza  when  there  was  raw  smarting  burning 
in  throat  and  larynx,  with  constant  irritating  cough  and  expectoration 
of  yellow  mucus.)  Loss  of  energy  and  nervous  erethism.  Most 
symptoms  occur  on  left  side,  and  extend  or  move  from  part  to  part. 
Motion  <  all  symptoms.  Bending  head  forward  <  head  symptoms  ; 
turning  eyes  =  pain  in  them.     <  From  mental  exertion.    Heat  >. 

Relations. — Eryngium  compares  with  the  other  Umbelliferae :  with 
.£thus.  in  inability  to  concentrate  thoughts  ;  with  Conium  as  a  vul- 
nerary J  in  discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  from  slight  causes.  Compare : 
In  pollutions,  Chi.,  Gels.,  Phos.  In  urinary  and  urethral  affections, 
Cannab.  sat.,  Canthar.,  Dioscorea,  Ocim.  can.  In  constipation  and 
rectal  symptoms.  Nit.  ac.    In  influenza,  Gelsem.,  Sticta. 

STMPTOMS. 

1,  Mind. — ^Thoughts  confused ;  cannot  concentrate  them  on  any  sub- 
ject ;  the  effort  ass  heavy  full  pain  if  persisted  in. 

2.  Head.— Vertigo.—- Expanding  sensation  in  frontal  region  above  eyes, 
<  stooping ;  causing  dimness  of  sight — Sharp,  shooting  pain  over  L  eje ; 


ERYNGIUM  AQUATICUM  7^5 

when  sitting  in  stooping  posture  leaves  eye,  passes  into  neck  and  along 
muscles  of  shoulder,  and  beneath  scapula. — Shooting  in  coronary  region  and 
in  r.  side  of  face  from  eyes  to  teeth  in  morning. — Dull  dragging  pain  in 
occiput,  neck,  and  shoulders ;  when  less  severe  in  head,  is  worse  in  shoulder. 
— Scalp  sore,  combing  hair  as  pain, 

3.  £yes. — Burning;  sensitive  to  light. — Effects  of  exposure  to  strong 
fight :  squinting ;  sclerotitis ;  watery  or  purulent  discharges. — Purulent  in- 
flammation of  1.  eye ;  purulent,  sticking  discharge  causing  gumming  of  lids ; 
conjunctiva  grani^  and  rough. — Muscles  of  eyes  feel  stifF,  pain  on  moving 
them  quickly. 

4*  Ears. — Bruised  tearing  pain  ;  as  if  ears  being  torn  off. — Inflamma- 
tion of  Eustachian  tube ;  1.  ear  swollen  in  and  out,  tender  to  pressure,  constant 
aching,  bleeding  readily,  thick  white,  bloody,  foul-smelling  pus. — Continued 
singing  and  ringing,  with  creaking  sound  in  1.  ear. 

5-     Nose. — Profuse  thick  yellow  mucous  discharge. 

8.  Mouth. — Thick,  tenacious,  disagreeable  mucus  in  mouth. 

9.  Throat. — ^Smarting  raw  pain  along  1.  side  of  throat ;  dry  tongue. — 
Intense  redness ;  slight  swelling  without  pain ;  profuse  secretion  of  thick 
whitish  mucus. 

11.  Stomach. — Partial  anorexia. — Nausea  followed  by  acrid  eructations. 
— Hollowness  or  emptiness  in  stomach  with  heavy  dragging  pain. — Spitting 
op  €>f  bright  arterial  blood,  mixed  with  black  clots,  with  burning  in  epigas- 
trium after  a  blow  on  stomach. — Burning  in  stomach  or  oesophagus  after 
taking  the  drug. 

12.  Atxlomen. — Severe  colicky  or  cramping  pains  in  small  intestines. — 
Severe  pain  in  1.  groin  and  testicle. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Mucous  diarrhcea  of  children. — Constipation. — 
Stools  dark  leaden  colour,  dry,  and  very  hard ;  tenesmus  at  stool  with  a 
sensation  of  cutting  as  they  pass  through  anus. — Haemorrhoids  and  prolapsus 
ani. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  desire  to  urinate ;  stinging  burning 
pain  in  urethra,  behind  glans,  during  urination. — Must  urinate  every  five 
minutes;  urine  dropping  away  all  the  time  and  burning  like  fire.— Renal 
colic. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Desire  suppressed,  then  excited  with  lewd 
dreams  and  pollutions.— -Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  from  slightest  causes. — 
Spermatorrhoea  from  onanism  and  excessive  indulgence. — Emissions  at  night 
with  erections ;  followed  by  great  lassitude  and  depression ;  partial  impotence. 
— Emissions  without  erections,  day  and  night,  followed  by  great  lassitude ; 
after  injury  to  testicles. — Gonorrhcea  with  painful  erections. — Gleet. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organ8.^Leucorrhoea. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Chronic  laryngitis ;  short,  hacking  cough.— 
Cough  with  sensation  of  constriction  in  throat — Oppression  of  chest,  feeling 
of  fulness,  inability  to  take  a  long  breath. 


7i6  ERYNGIUM   MARITIMUM 


Erynginm  Maritimum. 

Sea  Holly.    N.  O,  Umbelliferae.    Tincture  of  whole  plant, 
including  root. 

Cli]ilcal.*-Cough.  Debility.  Fever.  Herpes.  Sexual  weakness.  Skin 
eruption. 

ChapaoteriBtios. — ^The  maritime  Eryngium  (the  beautiful  plant 
growing  on  sand-hills  by  the  sea,  with  holly-like  leaves  of  a  pale  blue 
colour  with  metallic  lustre,  in  general  appearance  much  more  resem- 
bling a  thistle  than  an  umbellifer)  has  been  proved  by  one  prover 
only,  E.  B.  Ivatts,  but  the  symptoms  show  considerable  resem- 
blance to  those  of  Eryng,  aquaL  Pains  in  the  eyes,  groins,  larynx, 
nape  of  neck,  sinking  at  epigastrium,  and  weakness  of  the  male  sexual 
organs  appear  in  both.  But  the  Eryng,  m.  has  its  symptoms  more 
prominently  on  the  right  side.  Compare  also  Phelland,  aquat.^  Conium, 
and  other  Umbellifers. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I,  Mind. — Light  and  unusually  cheerful ;  on  awaking  in  the  morning  so 
merry  commences  to  sing  in  bed  (usually  heavy  and  drowsy). 

3.  Eyes. — Pain  at  back  of  r.  eye,  1.  eye  feeling  weak. — Inclination  to 
close  eyes  to  shut  out  moving  objects. 

9.    Throat. — Great  dryness  of  throat,  larynx,  and  lips. 
II.    Stomach. — Loss  of  appetite. — Sinking  feeling  at  pit  of  stomach. 
IS.    Abdomen. — ^AU  viscera  seemed  prostrated  and  as  heavy  as  lead. — 
Dull  continuous  pain  in  bowels. — Pain  in  one  spot  in  r.  groin. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Increased  flow  of  urine ;  very  red ;  thick  on 
standing. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Insensibility  of  corona  glandis ;  absence  of 
desire  (secondary  action) ;  power  of  erection  quite  gone. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Voice  low ;  larynx  feels  weak. — Occasional 
stomach  cough  during  the  day,  sending  a  spasmodic  pain  to  the  head- 
Occasional  darting  pains  through  lungs  to  back. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Pain  at  nape  compelling  the  support  of  head  on 
hand  or  against  something. — Occasional  shooting  pains  under  left  scapula. 

22.  Upper  Limbs.— Veins  of  hands  at  back  appear  contracted  and 
depressed  so  as  to  be  hardly  visible,  though  generally  full  and  prominent. 

23.  LoTver  Limbs. — Sore  pain  in  muscles  inside  r.  thigh  just  above 
knee. 

24.  Generalities. — Circulation  deadened,  or  as  if  stagnated  ;  still  great 
determination  of  blood  to  surface. 

25.  Skin. — Patch  of  eruption  half  the  size  of  palm  of  hand  came  out  in 
cluster  where  pain  had  been  the  day  previous,  like  fine  pin-heads,  points 
feeling  rough  to  fingers ;  died  away  next  day  leaving  red  areola. 

27.  Fever. — Chills  commencing  at  nape,  going  down  shoulders  and 
back. — Chills  predominate,  little  fever  heat. 


ESERINUM  717 

Erythrinus. 

A  kind  of  Red  Mullet.    South  America.    N.  O.  Erythrininae.    Tincture 

of  the  fish. 

CniiiieaI.-^Pityriasis  rubra.    Syphilis. 

CharacteristiOB. — Dr.  Burnett  is  the  authority  for  this  medicine. 
He  bases  his  use  of  it  on  an  account  of  its  effects  on  some  sailors  who 
ate  the  fish.  They  came  out  with  a  peculiar  red  rash  which  became 
chronic,  and  which  the  doctors  took  for  a  form  of  syphilis.  Dr. 
Burnett  cured  with  it  a  case  of  pityriasis  rubra  appearing  in  a  large 
patch  on  the  chest,  and  benefited  other  cases.  He  beheves  this  form 
of  skin  affection  to  be  a  manifestation  of  syphilis  in  the  second  gene- 
ration, the  father  of  the  patient  he  cured  having  had  syphilis.  Aurum 
muriaticum  is  the  complementary  remedy. 

Erythroxylon,  see  Coca. 
Eserinom. 

Eserine.     Physostigmine.    The  alkaloid  of  Physostigma  venenosum, 
Calabar  Bean.    C^j  Ha,  N3  Oa.    Trituration  or  solution. 

Cli]ilGaL--Blepharospasin.     Ciliary   spasm.     Glaucoma.     Headache.     Pupil, 
contracted.    Salivation.    Sweat,  excessive. 

CharaoteristiOB. — Eserine  is  best  known  as  used  by  oculists  to 
procure  contraction  of  the  pupils  in  glaucoma.  It  has  been  used  by 
Fenoch  of  Berlin  (if.  /?.,  iv.  127)  in  a  case  of  chorea  in  a  child  of 
nine.  Half  a  millegramme  of  Eser,  sulplu  was  injected  into  the  right 
upper  arm,  and  the  following  proving  was  the  result :  In  fifteen  minutes 
the  child  cried  out  loudly,  vomited  profusely,  and  complained  of  violent 
headache.  Soon  the  face  and  upper  part  of  the  body  became  covered 
'with  profuse  sweat.  Half  an  hour  later  the  flow  of  saliva  was 
increased.  The  heart-beats  sank  to  64,  radial  artery  contracted,  pulse 
small  and  thready.  After  repeated  vomitings  signs  of  cardiac  weak- 
ness increased  in  spite  of  remedies,  whilst  sweat  and  saliva  decreased, 
and  in  one  half-hour  had  disappeared.  A  moderate  contraction  of 
the  pupil  took  place,  reaction  slow.  The  child  lay  apathetic  on  the 
bed,  pale  and  collapsed.  Antidotes  were  administered,  and  the  child 
was  well  next  morning.  A  remark  of  Mittendorf  that  **  spasm  of  the 
accommodation  is  also  produced  artificially  by  EserinJ^  led  R.  B. 
Leach  (Med,  Adv.,  xix.  262)  to  prescribe  successfully  the  6x  tritura- 
tion in  cases  of  ciliary  spasm,  and  of  astigmatism  due  to  irregular 
action  of  the  ciliary  muscles.  Eserin,  has  also  produced  blepharospasm. 
A  solution  of  one  grain  to  the  drachm  (mixed  in  mistake  for  a  grain 
to  the  ounce)  was  instilled  into  the  eye  of  a  lady  of  60  suffering  from 


7i8  ETHERUM 

cataract.  Sweating  and  lachrymation  followed,  and,  as  these  passed 
off,  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ♦'clonic  spasm  of  the  eyelids"  set  in, 
"the  upper  lid  falling  down  on  the  lower  every  few  seconds." 
Spasmodic  feeling  in  Ups  and  the  same  sensation  under  jaw  of  left 
side  followed.  FeeUng  of  tremor  and  spasm,  without  retinal  move- 
ment, followed  in  an  hour.  Pupils  contracted  to  small  point. 
Relations.— nCom^are ;  Physostigma,  Pilocarpine. 

STKPTOMS. 

1.  Mind.—Child  cried  out  loudly. — ^Apathetic. 

2.  Head. — ^Violent  headache  with  repeated  vomiting. 

3.  Eyes. — Moderate  contraction  of  pupils ;  reaction  slow,  by  shading 
the  eyes  they  did  not  enlarge ;  on  exposure  to  strong  light  they  contracted 
slightly,  but  returned  to  their  normal  size. — Spasm  of  acconmiodation;  dliary 
spasm. — Pain  and  irritation  of  eyes  on  continued  reading. — Blepharospasm. 

6.    Face. — Face  pale. 

8.    Mouth. — Saliva,  first  increased,  later  arrested. 

II.  Stomach. — ^Vomited  profusely  and  complained  of  headache.— 
Repeated  vomiting  with  signs  of  cardiac  weakness. 

19.  Heart. — ^After  repeated  vomiting  signs  of  cardiac  weakness  in- 
creased.— Heart-beats  sank  to  64 ;  radial  artery  contracted ;  pulse  small  and 
thready. 

34.  Generalities.— The  child  lay  apathetic  on  the  bed,  pale  and 
collapsed. 

27.  Fever. — Face  and  upper  part  of  the  body  covered  with  profuse 
perspiration. 

Etherom. 

£thyl  oxide.    Ethylic  Ether,  sometimes  called  Sulphuric  Ether. 
(C3H5),0  (Alcohol  is  C,  HcO). 

CUnioal.— Bronchitis.  Catalepsy.  Convulsions.  Cough.  Delirium  tremens. 
Hiccough.    Mania.    Meningitis.    Nausea.    Vomiting. 

CharaoteristiOB.— £iA(^  is  the  well-known  anaesthetic,  and  the 
effects  are  those  observed  in  patients  under  the  action  of  its  vapour, 
administered  for  the  purpose  of  operation,  in  habitual  ether  drinkers 
(of  whom  there  are  numbers  in  Ireland),  and  on  some  who  have 
voluntarily  experimented  with  the  drug  upon  themselves.  Closely 
allied  to  alcohol,  it  possesses  very  similar  intoxicating  properties, 
produces  visions  frequently  pleasurable,  hallucination,  and,  in  some 
instances,  a  persistent  maniacal  condition.  Convulsions,  spasms,  and 
a  cataleptic  state  have  also  been  observed.  Bronchitis  is  a  not  uncom- 
mon after-result  of  ether  ana^thesia,  and  for  this  Belladonna  has 
been  observed  to  be  the  best  antidote.  Chilliness  is  complained  of  by 
many.  Macfaclan  reports  the  cure  of  a  woman  of  60,  who  had  been 
confined  to  bed  for  weeks  with  severe  neuralgia  of  the  head,  raised 
welts  on  scalp  Uke  ridges  accompanying  the  pain.  Eih^  200  cured 
quickly. 


ETHYLUM   NITRICUM  719 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Exhilaration ;  furious  excitement ;  flushed  face. — Pleasant 
dreams  of  rapid  flight  through  the  air,  gorgeous  visions  and  unearthly  music. 
— ^Frightful  dreams ;  fancied  he  heard  the  ringing  of  his  own  f unerad  bell. — 
Low-spirited,  fearful  of  some  disease,  desponding  (lasting  some  months). — 
Complete  loss  of  consciousness. 

2.  Head. — Muzziness ;  dizziness ;  headache  with  partial  blindness 
follow  ether  anaesthesia. — Meningitis. — ^Temporal  arteries  enlarged;  beat 
violently. — Head  drops  to  one  side  or  is  thrown  back. — Severe  neuralgia  of 
head  with  raised  welts  on  scalp. 

3.  £ye8. — Eyes  sufFused;  lids  closed;  conjunctivae  injected. — Pupils 
dilated. — Dim  vision  as  if  mist  or  thin  cloud  before  eyes. 

4.  Bars. — Sounds  indistinct ;  seem  far  oS,  yet  resound  violently  in  the 
ears. 

6.    Face.— Face  flushed. 

8.  Mouth. — Mouth  often  open. — Salivation ;  slight  frothing  at  mouth. 
—Pronunciation  difficult  and  indistinct 

II.    Stomach. — Hiccough  persistent. — Nausea. — ^Vomiting. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Violent  cough  from  stinging  or  heat  in 
bronchia. — Expectoration  of  blood. — Breathing  quickened;  stertorous. — 
Congestion  of  lungs  and  brain. — Extreme  coldness  of  the  chest,  wants  it 
covered. — ^Tightness;  irritation  and  pain. 

19.  Heart. — Excitement  and  invigoration  of  heart's  action. — Pulse  full 
and  bounding. 

23.    Lower  Limbs. — Paralysis  of  lower  extremities. 


Ethylnm  Nitricom. 


Nitric  Ether.  C,  H5  NOj  (not  to  be  confounded  with  nitrous  ether, 
C3  H5  NO9,  which  is  the  principal  ingredient  in  Sweet  Spirit 
of  Nitre). 

CUaioaL — Heart,  hypertrophy  of.    Vertigo. 

Cluuraoterlstios. — This  is  one  of  the  anaesthetics  experimented 
on  by  J.  Y.  Simpson  and  later  by  B.  W.  Richardson.  It  has  produced 
a  few  definite  symptoms. 

Relations. — Compare :  Glon.,  Amyl.  nit. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2.  Head. — ^A  tendency  to  pitch  forward. — Sense  of  fulness  in  vessels  of 
brain.— Much  headache  and  giddiness  for  some  time  after  its  employment. 

6.    Face. — Extreme  sufFusion  of  face. 

19.  Heart. — Excessive  over-action  of  the  heart. — Rapid  and  painful 
respiration. 


720  EUCALYPTUS 


Eucalyptus. 

Eucalyptus  globulus.     Blue  Gum.      Fever-tree.       N.  O.    Myrtaceae. 
Tincture  of  fresh  leaves.     Essential  oil,  Eucalyptol. 

Clinical. — ^Aneurism.  Aortitis.  Asthma.  Bladder,  afifections  of.  Brondiitis. 
Diarrhoea.  Dysentery.  Dyspepsia.  Dysuria.  Fistulse.  Gonorrhoea.  Gotit  Inter- 
mittent fever.  Kidney,  diseases  of.  Quinine  cachexia.  Rheumatism.  Spleen, 
affections  of.  Strychnine  poisoning.  Syphilis.  Tumours.  Typhoid.  Urethra, 
stricture  of.    Urethral  caruncle.    Varicose  ulcers.    Worms. 

ChapaoteristiOB. — The  gum-tree  is  a  native  of  Australia  and  is 
transplanted  to  marshy  districts  in  mild  climates  on  account  of  its  capa- 
bility of  absorbing  water  and  its  alleged  power  of  destroying  malarial 
poisons.  It  has  been  familiarised  to  everybody  during  the  influenza 
epidemic  as  a  prophylactic  and  disinfectant.  The  provings  show  that 
it  causes  most  of  the  ordinary  influenzal  symptoms.  It  is  therefore 
homoeopathic  to  the  disorder.  It  produces  coryza,  headache  of  a  dull, 
congestive  character,  sore-throat,  indigestion,  with  excessive  develop- 
ment of  fetid  gas,  and  fever.  Slow  digestion  is  the  characteristic. 
The  fever  may  be  of  the  relapsing  or  intermittent  type.  It  has  also 
proved  useful  in  convalescence  from  intermittents.  It  produces 
odorous  sweat.  C.  E.  Fischer  has  cured  with  it  many  cases  of  dysen- 
tery. Certain  vascular  conditions  come  within  its  sphere  :  a  distinct 
beating  in  the  stomach  region,  accompanying  a  sense  of  goneness  ; 
one  prover  referred  this  to  the  abdominal  aorta.  Vascular  tumours  of 
the  female  urethra  have  been  cured  by  it ;  also  glandular  enlarge- 
ments and  nodular  swellings  over  joints.  It  has  cured  a  tumour,  the 
size  of  a  Albert,  with  stabbing  pains  below  left  nipple.  Eucal.  has  been 
largely  used  for  bronchitis  and  bronchial  asthma.  Dr.  Arthur  Dalzell 
{H,W,,  XXV.  £o6)  relates  two  striking  cases  of  bronchial  asthma 
promptly  relieved  with  five-drop  doses  of  Oil  of  Eucalyptus  given  in  a 
tablespoonful  of  water.  The  dose  was  given  last  thing  at  night  It 
also  reUeved  the  dyspnoea  in  a  case  of  mitral  insufficiency.  Burning 
pains  and  sensations  predominate  ;  pricking,  stabbing,  sharp  aching 
are  common.  Periodicity  is  marked.  Most  pains  occur  at  night.  It 
has  an  intoxicating  effect  and  produces  desire  for  exercise. 

Relations. — It  compares  with  Ant.  crud.  in  action  on  mucous 
membranes  ;  Ant.  t.  in  bronchial  asthma  and  bronchorrhcea ;  Arsen. 
and  Chi.  in  intermittents.  Silica  in  fistulous  ulcers  ;  Tereb.  in  urinary 
symptoms.  It  follows :  Ars.  in  relapsing  fevers.  A  cup  of  coffee 
relieves  the  effects.  Phytolacca  removed  tumour  of  right  breast. 
Compare  also  the  "  Red  Gum,"  Angophora  lanceolata.  It  is  said  to 
be  an  antidote  to  Strychnine  poisoning.  (Monfrida  Musmecin  found  a 
decoction  of  Eucalyptus  leaves  formed  with  a  solution  of  a  strychnine 
salt  a  flocculent  precipitate  devoid  of  bitter  taste.  Animals  dosed  with 
the  two  drugs  together  survived  when  the  quantity  of  strychnine  was 
such  that  given  alone  it  would  have  been  lethal.  Even  when  the 
Eucalyptus  decoction  was  given  after  strychnine  convulsions  had 
developed  the  symptoms  became  greatly  modified.) 


EUCALYPTUS  721 


STHPTOMS. 

X.  Mind. — Exhilaration,  desire  to  move  about,  feeling  of  increased 
buoyancy  and  strength. — Intoxication  followed  by  depression. 

9.  Head. — Full  feeling  in  head ;  congestive  headache  ;  in  plethoric 
subjects,  followed  by  fever. — Headache  in  anasmic  persons ;  relieves  pain 
and  causes  sleep. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  hot,  burning,  smarting;  catarrhal  and  gonorrhceal 
ophthalmia. — Lids  heavy. 

5.  Nose. — Stiffness  of  nose;  tightness  across  bridge  as  if  profuse' 
epistaxis  would  come  on. — Stuffed-up  sensation. — Coryza  :  thin,  watery  ; 
chronic  catarrh,  purulent  and  fetid. 

6.  Face. — Flushed,  congested  face. 

8.  Mouth. — Relaxed  aphthous  condition. — Excessive  secretion  of  saliva. 
— Slightly  burning  taste  extending  into  throat  and  oesophagus  with  thirst. 

9.  Throat. — Burning  in  throat ;  feeling  of  fulness  and  soreness  on 
swallowing. — Constant  sensation  of  phlegm  in  throat,  with  expectoration  of 
slightly  thick  white  frothy  mucus,  not  profuse. 

II.  Stomach.  —  Increased  appetite ;  tormenting  thirst.  —  Burning, 
strong-smelling  eructations. — Burning  in  stomach.— Fulness,  pressure,  and 
weight,  as  if  he  had  eaten  too  much. — Faintness  and  goneness ;  with  a  distinct 
sensation  of  beating  synchronous  with  the  pulse  (abdominal  aorta). — Slow 
digestion ;  eructations  and  bloating. — Difficult  and  painful  digestion. — Spleen 
becomes  hard,  resistent,  contracted. 

IS.  Atxlomen. — Burning  in  epigastrium  and  umbilical  regions. — Uncom- 
fortable, uneasy  feeling  in  umbilical  region  extending  through  bowels; 
skirmishing,  aching  pains  in  upper  portions  of  bowels ;  sensation  as  if  he 
would  have  diarrhoea. — Sharp  aching  in  hypogastrium  after  dinner. — Gastro- 
intestinal derangements  with  sleeplessness  and  restlessness. — Condition  of 
mucous  membrane  favouring  worms. — Flatulent  distension. 

13.  Stool  and  Rectum. — Sharp  aching  in  lower  bowels ;  thin,  watery 
yellow  diarrhoea  on  rising  in  morning. — Chronic  diarrhoea,  mucous  and  bloody. 
— ^D3rsentery,  with  heat  in  rectum,  tenesmus,  discharge  of  mucus,  great  prostra- 
tion ;  haemorrhages. — ^Typhoid  diarrhoea. — Fetor  of  stools  and  flatus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — (Chronic  desquamative  nephritis;  granular 
kidney ;  pyelonephritis ;  hydronephrosis.) — Catarrh  of  bladder ;  sensation  as 
if  it  had  lost  its  expulsive  force. — Burning  and  tenesmus  on  urinating. — 
Spasmodic  stricture. — Diuresis ;  incontinence ;  increased  urea. — Urine  smells 
of  violets. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Increased  sexual  appetite. — Subacute 
and  chronic  gonorrhoea. — Recent  chancres. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organ8.~Vascular  tumours  of  urethra. — Ulcer 
round  orifice  of  urethra. — Leucorrhoea  of  acrid,  fetid  mucus. — Swellings  in 
different  parts  of  body ;  one  below  nipple  in  r.  side,  size  of  filbert,  with 
stabbing,  darting  pains. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Bronchitis  in  old  and  feeble  persons.— 
Bronchorrhoea. — Breathing  quickened. — Asthma  in  debilitated,  anaemic 
subjects,  with   terrible  dyspnoea,  the  heart  sympathising  strongly. — Moist 

VOL,  I.  47 


722  EUGENIA  JAMBOS 

asthma  in  bronchitic  subjects ;  it  relieves  cough  and  aids  in  expulsion  of 
thick  mucus. — Expectoration  :  white,  thick,  frothy  mucus. 

ig.  Heart. — Painful  palpitation. — Palpitation  of  heart — Sudden  flushing 
of  face  with  much  flatulence  in  women  at  climacteric— ^Strong  beating  of 
abdominal  aorta. — Aneurisms  pressing  on  vagus  nerve. 

21.  Limbs. — Many  nodular  swellings  over  metarcarpal  and  metatarsal 
joints. — In  both  upper  and  lower  extremities  pricking  sensations  were  first 
noticed,  followed  by  a  painful  aching  in  both  arms  and  legs,  together  with  a 
sense  of  fulness  in  the  veins,  and  a  stiff,  weary  sensation  as  if  too  weary  to  move. 

25.  Skin. — Eruptions  of  an  herpetic  character,  glandular  enlargement, 
and  development  of  foul  and  indolent  ulcers. 


Eugenia  Jambos. 


Eugenia  vulgaris.  Malabar  Plum-tree,  Rose-apple.  N,  O.  Myr- 
taceae.  A  tree  native  to  the  tropics,  never  without  flower 
or  fruit.    Tincture  of  fresh  seeds. 

ClinioaL— Acne  rosacea.  Catarrhal  fever.  Catarrhs.  Comedones.  Constipa- 
tion. Coryza.  Cough.  Diarrhoea.  Diplopia.  Hernia.  Hiccough.  Impotence. 
Influenza.    Otitis.    Pimples.    Throat,  sore. 

Charaoteristioa. — Like  Eucalyptus^  Eugenia  causes  a  condition  of 
drunkenness.  It  makes  the  prover  very  talkative  but  indolent  The 
most  characteristic  s3rmptom  of  the  proving  is  :  "  >  after  urination." 
Sudden  great  change  in  him  after  micturition.  Everything  seems 
more  beautiful  and  bright,  sky  and  trees  more  joyous  and  clear ;  but 
after  a  quarter  of  an  hour  everything  became  gloomy  again.  There  are 
many  symptoms  relating  to  the  eyes  and  vision  :  whirling  in  head 
while  sitting ;  houses  at  a  distance  seem  to  turn  bottom  upwards. 
Darkness  and  double  vision ;  on  looking  intently  double  vision 
disappears.  Whirling  before  right  eye  as  if  it  would  become  dark ; 
eye  becomes  inflamed.  It  seems  as  though  lire  came  out  of  eyes, 
and  tears  ran  out  in  streams  in  evening  and  night.  <  By  sun ; 
causes  eyes  to  fill  with  water.  <  By  closing  eyes ;  it  makes  the 
burning  worse,  prevents  sleeping  at  night.  Nausea  >  by  smoking. 
Pain  in  small  of  back  and  calves.  Aching  in  sacrum  and  knees. 
Sticking  pain  in  back  as  if  something  were  sticking  in  spine,  >  by 
bending  back.  Among  the  peculiar  sensations  are  :  Headache  as  if 
a  heavy  board  were  lying  on  right  side.  Sensation  as  of  cramp  in 
orifice  of  stomach  ;  as  if  a  ten-pound  weight  were  hanging  on  rectum, 
and  as  if  everything  below  would  fall  out  An  old  wound  from 
a  thrust  became  painful  again.  Rheumatic  pain  wanders  from  place 
to  place  with  catarrh.  Open  air  :  much  e^austion,  yawning  whilst 
walking  in  morning.  Cold  vt^ter  does  not  >  burning  in  eyes.  Skin 
disease  is  <  during  catamenia. 

Relations.-— ^om^^rd ;  Eucalypt.  (a  myrtaceous  tree)  in  catarrhal 
conditions ;  Lauroc.  and  drugs  containing  Hydrocyanic  acid  ;  Puis, 
(fugitive  rheumatic  pains),    Antidotcdby:  Coffee;  by  smoking  tobacco. 


EUGENIA  JAMBOS  723 


STHPTOMB. 

I.  Mind. — Continued  state,  like  intoxication,  with  great  loquacity  and 
indolence. — Disposition  to  isolation.— The  patient  is  uncomfortable  wherever 
be  may  be ;  desires  to  lie  down  when  seated,  and  to  rise  up  when  lying 
down. — Sudden  great  change  in  him  after  micturition;  everything  seems 
more  beautiful  and  bright;  after  quarter  of  an  hour  everything  gloomy 
again. 

9.  Head.— Vertigo,  during  which  all  objects  seem  to  be  reversed. — Fits 
of  megrim  in  the  evening,  and  rolling  and  burning  pain  in  the  head,  with 
forcing  towards  the  eyes,  lachrymation,  nausea  and  vomiting,  during  which 
the  pains  are  aggravated. — Pains  in  the  head  at  night,  with  burning  pain  in 
the  eyes,  violent  thirst,  and  copious  discharge  of  urine. — Cramp-like,  pressive 
pains  in  the  head. — Neuralgia  in  forehead  over  eye. — Headache  as  from  a 
sticking  from  all  sides  at  once,  or  as  if  everything  was  drawn  together  from 
within,  recurring  like  a  slow  pulsation. 

3.  £yes. — Lachrymation,  with  burning  and  gnawing  pains. — Burning 
pain  in  the  eyes  in  the  afternoon. — Suddenly  biting  in  the  eyes  as  from 
pepper. — Needle-like  stitches  in  inner  canthus  r.  eye. — ^Violent  internal  itching 
in  eyes  and  nose,  evening. — Darkness  before  eyes,  everything  seems  double ; 
>  looking  intently. — ^Whirling  before  r.  eye. — Eyes  look  sleepy  and  drunken. 

6, 8.  Face  and  Mouth. — Pimples  on  the  face,  with  painful  sensibility 
of  their  circumferences. — ^Abundant  accumulation  of  frothy  and  viscid  saliva 
in  the  mouth,  esp.  before  a  meal ;  and  when  talking. 

9.  Throat. — ^At  night,  burning  in  eyes,  violent  thirst  from  dr3mess  low 
down  in  throat,  so  that  he  did  not  feel  the  drink,  which  also  did  not  >  the 
dryness. — Pain  in  small  spot  in  region  of  1.  corner  of  hyoid  bone. — Inflamed 
throat  (in  catarrhal  fever). 

10.  Appetite. — ^Appetite  increased. — ^Agreeable  taste  of  tobacco,  when 
smoking,  of  food,  and  of  drink. — Great  thirst. — Great  desire  to  smoke  tobacco. 

II,  12. — Stomach  and  Abdomen. — Cramp  in  orifice  of  stomach, 
causing  nausea. — Nausea  rising  up  from  end  of  oesophagus. — Flatulence 
rumbling  in  bowels. — Drawing  about  navel. — Inguinal  hernia  from  a  fall. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Loose  evacuations,  followed  by  vomiting. — 
Scanty  evacuation  of  excrement,  of  the  consistence  of  pap,  and  sandy. — 
Urging  to  stool  and  colic. — Evacuations  scanty,  spurting,  and  fetid,  with 
burning  pain  in  the  abdomen. — Constipation. — Scanty,  hard  stool,  after  much 
pressing,  followed  by  spasmodic  closure  of  anus. — Tenesmus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Deep-coloured  urine.— After  making  water, 
shuddering  ;  or  sudden  increase  of  brightness  and  of  light  before  the  eyes. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Impotence. — Emission  of  semen  too  slow, 
or  entirely  wanting  during  coition. — ^After  coition,  perspiration  and  thirst. 

18.  Chest. — Moist  cough,  without  expectoration  in  the  evening  and  at 
mght— Expectoration  of  yellowish  sanguineous  mucus. 

21.  Limbs. — Desquamation  and  suppuration  of  the  skin  round  the  nail 
of  the  thumb. — Hot  hands. — Cramp-like  and  paralytic  pains  in  the  tibia  and 
in  the  heels. — Nocturnal  cramps  in  the  sole  of  the  foot 

24.    Generalities. — Sufferings  occur  esp.  in  the  evening  and  at  night. — 


724  EUONYMINUM 

An  old  wound  from  a  thrust  became  painful  again. — Rheumatic  pain  wanders 
from  place  to  place  with  catarrh. 

9d.  Sleep.— Profound  stupef3ring  sleep,  even  at  noon,  with  confused 
dreams. 

27.  Fever. — Shiverings  run  over  him  after  micturition. — Coldness,  as 
if  the  body  were  naked. — Perspiration  in  the  morning,  with  burning  thirst. — 
Hot  hands.— Fever ;  heat  before  midnight,  with  little  thirst  and  much  sweat ; 
during  fever  for  several  hours  in  morning,  pain  in  back,  >  bending  inward. 


Euonyminum. 


A  concentrated  extract,  so-called  active  principle,  from  the  bark 
of  Euonymus  Americana,  £.  atropurpurea  and  other  American 
species  of  Euonymus. 

ClinlcaL— Albuminuria.     Bright's    disease.      Cholera.     Diarrhoea.     Dropsy. 
Dysentery.    Gall-stones.    Indigestion.    Liver,  affections  of. 

Gharaotaristioa. — Euonymin  is  largely  used  by  eclectics  in  cases 
of  constipation,  indigestion,  and  torpid  liver.  It  has  not  been  proved, 
but  Hale  quotes  from  Coe  the  following  account  of  its  efiFects  :  "  In 
very  large  doses,  it  proves  a  drastic  cathartic,  its  operation  being 
attended  with  a  death-like  nausea,  excessive  tormina  and  cold  sweats. 
The  dejections  from  the  bowels  are  profuse,  violent,  and  accompanied 
by  much  flatus."  This  clearly  outlines  the  sphere  of  the  remedy, 
which  does  not  seem  to  di£Eer  much  from  diat  of  the  Euonymus 
Europcea.  Lutze  records  {Med.  Adv.,  xxiv.  227)  a  case  of  albuminuria 
of  pregnancy  with  dropsy  cured  with  the  i  x ;  and  also  a  case  of 
albuminuria  and  dropsy  in  a  young  man  of  seventeen.  This  patient 
had  had  eczema,  and  was  cured  by  Lutze  with  Arsen,  200.  Later  he 
got  a  chill  from  standing  in  the  water  fishing.  He  suffered  from 
malaise,  and  iinally  dropsy  developed.  After  a  week  of  treatment  the 
condition  was  as  follows :  Indifferent,  drowsy,  sleeping  most  of  the 
day  and  night ;  sometimes  with  heavy  breathing.  Anasarca  general, 
chiefly  in  face  and  extremities.  Pulse  full,  slow,  50  to  60.  Occa- 
sionally dull  frontal  or  occipital  headache,  face  sallow,  sclerotics 
yellow ;  temperature  102^  to  i03*>.  Urine  scanty,  1,017  (later  1,009), 
containing  large  quantities  of  albumen,  epithehal  casts  and  granular 
debris,  no  bile  or  chlorides.  Stool  greyish.  He  had  no  pains  or 
subjective  symptoms.  There  were  all  the  evidences  of  a  fully-developed 
case  of  acute  Bright's  disease.  He  was  given  Euonymus  i  x,  2  grains 
in  half  a  tumbler  of  water,  a  spoonful  every  hour.  In  three  days 
there  was  evident  improvement.  The  treatment  was  continued  for 
a  month,  when  he  was  nearly  well,  the  cure  being  completed  with 
Puis.,  Cak.^  Sulph.  at  long  intervals. 


EUONYMUS   EUROPiEA  725 

Euonymus  Atropurpurea. 

Wahoo.     Burning  Bush.     N.  0.  Celastraceae.     Tincture  of  fresh 

bark  and  root 

CHwtcal. — ^Albmninuria.    Bilious  fever.    Biliousness.    Cholera  morbus.    Gall- 
stones.   Levitation.    Liver,  affections  of.    Vertigo. 

CharaoteristiOB. — Euon.  atro.j  like  Euonimin  and  Euon.  Europ,, 
is  a  favourite  liver- remedy  among  eclectics.  It  has  not  been  proved,  but 
clinical  experience  shows  that  its  action  is  very  like  that  of  its  botanical 
relatives.  A  lady  who  tasted  the  juice  of  the  bark  related  her 
experience  to  Hale  :  "  I  felt  immediately  a  sick  weakening  feeling  all 
through  the  nervous  system  ;  dull,  heavy  pain  through  upper  portion 
of  head,  together  with  enlarged  blurred  feeling,  and  I  seemed  so 
drawn  up  from  the  floor,  that  it  seemed  difficult  to  place  my  foot  down 
when  walking  with  sufficient  firmness  to  stand  up ;  a  tipping-over 
sensation  when  sitting  and  walking  ;  a  deathly  sickness  at  stomach, 
with  p)erspiration  and  heat  in  face,  in  alternation  with  chills  in  the 
back,  and  back  part  of  the  arms."  Some  of  the  symptoms  returned 
next  day,  but  were  dissipated  by  vinegar,  which  must  be  looked  upon 
as  its  antidote. 

Relations. — Compare:  Sticta  pul.,  Phos.  ac,  &c.,  in  levitation. 


Euonymus  Enropsea. 

Spindle-tree.    A^.  0.  Celastraceae.    Trituration  of  dried  seeds  ;  tinc- 
ture of  fresh  seeds. 

CUnieal. — Cholera.    Convulsions.   Diarrhcea.   Gall-stones.    Headaches.   Liver 
disorders. 

CharaoteristiOB. — The  Celastracece^  to  which  order  Euonymus 
belongs,  are  closely  related  to  the  Rhamnaceae  which  include  the 
well-known  purgative  Cascara  sagrada.  A  case  of  poisoning  with 
the  seeds  of  Euon,  eur.  (Allen)  recalls  the  effects  of  Euonymin : 
"A  man,  forty-three,  took  eighteen  seeds  one  morning,  and  as 
many  the  following  evening.  He  was  seized  with  frightful  abdominal 
pain,  profuse  diarrhoea,  eventually  bloody.  He  was  not  seen  till  the 
evening,  when  he  was  in  a  state  of  profound  collapse,  with  involun- 
tary evacuations  of  blood  and  mucus.  On  lifting  him  up  tetanic 
convulsions  were  induced  which  immediately  preceded  death." 
Euon,  has  been  used  successfully  in  cases  of  engorgement  of  the  Uver, 
"biliousness,"  headache,  coated  tongue,  bad  taste,  constipation, 
passive  constipation  with  haemorrhoids  ;  also  with  severe  pain  in  back 
like  lumbago.  In  diarrhoea  the  stool  is  generally  very  profuse  ; 
variable  in  colour.  In  gastric  derangements  with  alouminuria  ; 
headache ;  weakness ;  vertigo  and  obscuration  of  sight    Euon.  euK 


726  EUONYMUS   EUROPCEA 

has  been  proved.  'Cutting,  sticking  and  drawing  pains  predominate. 
The  left  side  is  more  affected  than  the  right.  Cutting  pains  in  the 
malar  bones  ;  in  the  tongue.  Cutting  in  the  penis  extends  up  to  the 
bladder.  The  pains  compel  lying  down,  and  are  then  relieved  or 
reappear  in  other  parts.  Violent  shivering  chill  over  whole  body. 
Pains  in  chest,  head  and  abdomen  are  <  after  eating.  Tingling  in 
the  skin  which  provokes  scratching  is  followed  by  a  burning  sensation. 
Eruption  of  small  dry  pustules. 

RelatioiUU — Compare :  Podoph.,  Rhamnus,  Iris,  Euon.  atrop. 

STKPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Morose ;  peevish  ;  fretful. — Disinclined  for  work— Vanishing 
of  thoughts  on  exerting  the  mind  when  reflecting  about  anything  (or 
reading)  and  ill-humour  thereat. — ^Absence  of  mind. 

2.  Head. — Whirling  vertigo  (with  mistiness  of  the  sight,  in  forepart  of 
head)  when  seated. — ^Violent  and  frequent  lancinations  in  the  head.— ^Sensa- 
tion,  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  the  side  of  the  crown  of  the  head. — 
Stupefying  pressure  above  the  arch  of  the  eyebrows,  which  seems  to  compress 
the  eyeballs. — Headache,  with  shivering. — ^Tension  in  the  teguments  of  tlie 
forehead,  which  are  convulsively  contracted. — Headache  after  a  meaL 

3.  Eyes. — Obscuration  of  the  sight,  as  though  the  gaze  were  directed 
through  a  cloud,  and  black  spots  before  the  sight. 

4.  Ears. — Buzzing  in  the  ears. 

6.  Face. — ^Tearing  in  the  (1.)  side  of  the  face. — Incisive  lancinations  and 
paralytic  pain  in  the  cheek-bone. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tearing  pains  in  the  teeth  (r.)— Cutting  in  the  tongue ;  in 
muscle  under  tongue. 

11.  Stomach. — Nausea,  vomiting,  and  diarrhoBa.~Violent  shootings  in 
region  of  epigastrium. 

12.  Abdomen. — Cuttings  and  constriction  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the 
abdomen  would  be  cut  off  below  the  ribs. — ^The  abdominal  sufiFerings  are 
<  after  a  meal. 

13.  Stool. — Profuse  diarrhoea ;  eventually  bloody. — Involuntary  evacua- 
tions of  bloody  mucus. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Cutting  in  penis ;  seeming  to  extend  to 
bladder  ;  not  hindering  micturition. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs. — Sighing. 

189  ig.  Chest  and  Heart. — ^Want  to  breathe  deeply,  provoked  by  an 
impediment,  and  a  sensation  of  fulness,  in  the  chest. — Drawing,  jerking,  and 
stunning  shooting,  in  region  of  nipples. — ^The  whole  chest  is,  as  it  were, 
compressed. — Pain,  as  from  excoriation,  and  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  chesL— 
Incisive  lancinations  below  the  ribs,  on  r.  side. — Small,  dry  pimples  on  the 
chest. — ^The  sufferings  of  the  chest  are  <  after  a  meal. — ^Anxiety  at  heart ; 
like  an  internal  pressure;  affecting  the  spirits. 

so.  Back. — ^Tingling  in  1.  side  of  back. — Shootings  in  the  1.  side  of 
back,  near  the  dorsal  spine.— Small  papulae  on  the  back. — ^Acute  puUings, 
with  digging  in  the  shoulders. — ^A  stitch  like  an  electric  shock  in  the  small 
of  the  back,  and  extending  upward  in  a  zigzag  along  the  spine  and  the 
scapular  region ;  frequently  repeated. 


EUPAtORIUM   PERFOLIATUM  727 

88.  Upper  Limbs. — Frightful  tearing  in  1.  shoulder  at  the  point  where 
the  arm  joins  the  scapula. — ^Tearing  in  shoulders. — Paralytic  pains  in  fingers. 

83.  Lov^er  Limbs. — Paralytic  tractions  and  shootings  in  region  of  hips 
(aroond  the  pelvis). — Paralytic  pain  in  knees  (after  sitting),  which  hinders 
walking,  and  impedes  standing  upright. 

84.  Generalities. — Shooting,  drawing  pains. — ^The  su£Ferings  compel 
lying  down,  and  are  then  mitigated,  or,  at  least,  change  their  situation. — ^The 
pains  in  the  chest,  head,  and  abdomen  are  <  chiefly  after  dinner. 

85.  Skin. — ^Tingling  in  the  skin,  which  provokes  scratching  followed  by 
a  burning  sensation. — Eruption  of  small  dry  pustules. 

87.    Fever. — Shivering  and  shuddering  over  the  whole  body. 

Eapatorinm  Aromaticom. 

E,  urticifolium  (Rafinesque).  Deerwort  boneset.  White  Snake-root. 
(In  low  woods  from  Massachusetts  to  Louisiana.  Flowers  are 
white  and  aromatic.)    N.  0,  Compositae.    Tincture  of  root. 

Oliaical. — Ague.    Aphthae.    Gravel.    Neurasthenia. 

CSharaoteristics* — E.  aromat,  when  chewed,  produces  in  the 
mouth  a  warm,  aromatic,  pungent  sensation,  and  is  regarded  as  a 
'^  Mrarm,  stimulating  tonic.''  H^e  quotes  eclectic  authorities  as  com- 
mending this  plant  in  *'  aphthous  stomatitis  "  in  women  and  children  ; 
also  for  burning  in  the  stomach  with  "  nursing  sore  mouth,"  before 
and  after  connnement.  Some  commend  it  as  a  '^nervine,"  like 
Scutellaria  and  Cypripedium  for  "  restlessness  and  morbid  watchful- 
ness, morbid  irritability  of  the  nervous  system,  tremors,  jactitations, 
chorea,  and  hysteria."  It  is  doubly  indicated  where  nervous  erethism 
and  aphthous  disease  are  combined.  Liocally  it  is  useful  as  a  wash 
for  the  mouth.  Like  E.  purpur.  it  has  also  been  used  for  gravel ;  and 
the  Indians  use  it  as  a  cure  for  ague.  In  a  case  of  sore  mouth  in  a 
™5ui,  57,  recorded  by  P.  S.  Duff,  Eup,  aromaU  ^  caused  soon  "a 
general  aggravation,  like  a  cold  or  catarrh  ;  annoyed  by  pain  in  left 
shoulder,  posterior  scapular  region  ;  pulse  94  unnatural ;  tight  in  left 
bronchia ;  felt  ill,  dull,  and  oppressed."    {H.  R.,  xi.  129.) 

Eapatorinm  Perfoliatum. 

Eupatorium  perfoliatum.     Boneset.     Thoroughwort,     N.  0.  Com- 
positae.   Tincture  of  whole  plant. 

CUnical. — Anus,  herpes  of.  Back,  pain  in.  Bilious  fever.  Bones^  pains  in. 
Cough.  Dengue.  Diarrhoea.  Fractures.  Gout.  Hiccough.  Hoarseness.  In- 
digestion. Ir^uema.  Intermittent  fever.  Jaundice.  Liver,  soreness  of.  Measles. 
Mouth,  cracks  of.  Ophthalmia.  Relapsing  fever.  Remittent  fever.  Rheumatism. 
Ringworm.    Spotted  fever.    Syphilitic  pains.    Thirst.    Wounds. 

CharaoteristiOB. — Eupat.  ferfol,  is  an  old-world  remechr,  having 
been  recommended  by  Dioscondes  for  ill-conditioned  ulcers,  (fysentery, 


728  EUPATORIUM   PERFOLIATUM 

stings  of  reptiles,  chronic  fevers,  obstructed  liver.  The  leading 
characteristic  for  its  homoeopathic  use  is  the  distressing  bone-pains 
it  causes,  such  as  are  found  in  connection  with  malarial  fevers 
and  influenza.  Soreness  will  be  found  running  throughout  the 
proving  :  headache  with  soreness  internally,  parietal  protuberances 
sore ;  with  pain  and  soreness  in  eyeballs ;  cough  with  extreme  soreness 
down  trachea,  soreness  of  chest,  aching  in  limbs  throughout  the  body. 
A  characteristic  cough  of  Eup.  petf,  has  >  by  getting  on  hands  and 
knees.  W.  P.  Defriez  reports  a  case  in  point  :  Every  winter 
for  several  years  the  patient  had  been  annoyed  by  a  dry,  hacking 
cough,  with  paroxysms  lasting  some  time,  only  relieved  by  getting 
on  hands  and  knees.  EupaL  perfoL  cured.  The  chills  of  Eu.pcrf.  begin 
in  the  small  of  the  back,  with  aching  in  the  limbs  as  though  every 
bone  in  the  body  were  being  broken  ;  high  fever  with  increased 
aching,  followed  by  sweat  scanty  or  profuse  ;  sweat  >  all  pains 
except  headache,  which  is  <.  Periodicity  is  marked.  There  may  be 
a  double  periodicity :  Chill  morning  one  day,  evening  the  next 
The  liver  is  strongly  affected  by  Eup,  peffoL\  bilious  vomiting  and 
diarrhoea ;  bilious  sick-headaches  ;  cough  arising  from  irritation  of 
liver.  Catarrhal  symptoms  are  prominent.  No^umal  loose  cough. 
Hoarseness  with  aching  soreness  of  trachea.  Hoarse,  rough  cough 
with  scraping  in  bronchia.  Cough  with  soreness,  compelling  the 
patient  to  hold  his  chest  with  his  hands.  Stiffness  and  general 
soreness.  Cannot  twist  body  either  while  standing,  sitting,  or  lying. 
Cannot  lie  in  bed  on  account  of  a  feeling  as  if  every  bone  was  bruised, 
causing  despair,  moaning,  and  crying  out.  Bone-pains  of  all  descrip- 
tions appear  under  Eupat,  petf.  Sleepiness  and  yawning.  Sensation 
as  if  falling  to  left.  Pain  and  extreme  tenderness  of  left  glutei  muscles. 
Hale  describes  the  fever  of  JE.  petfol.  as  follows  :  "The  chill  is  nearly 
always  in  the  mornings  and  is  preceded  for  several  hours  by  ihini, 
soreness  and  aching  oiF  the  bones.  The  thirst  continues  during  the 
chill  and  heat.  The  chill  is  attended  by  nausea,  vomiting  of  bile, 
intense  aching  and  soreness  in  the  flesh  of  the  extremities,  and  often 
all  over  the  body.  These  symptoms  continue  during  the  heat, 
especially  the  vomiting,  which  is  often  painful  and  incessant.  The 
heat  is  apt  to  be  prolonged  until  evening  or  into  the  night,  and  may 
be  followed  or  not  by  sweat  (with  chilliness).  If  no  sweating  occurs 
the  apyrexia  is  short  and  attended  by  chilliness,  nausea,  thirst,  and 
debility,  showing  that  the  febrile  action  never  altogether  subsides, 
giving  a  true  type  of  Remittent  fever — ^  fever  in  which  Boneset  is  often 
our  best  remedy,  especially  if  occurring  in  summer  and  autumn,  and 
is  attended  by  very  severe  bilious  symptoms."  Lying  on  back  < 
cough.  Kneeling  with  face  towards  pUlow  >  cough.  Rising  up 
>  headache.  Eating  =  violent  distressing  pains  which  are  only 
relieved  by  vomiting.  There  is  intense  thirst,  but  drinking  cold 
water  :=  shuddering  and  vomiting  of  bile.  Chilliness  predominates, 
wants  to  be  covered  ]  >  in  house,  <  in  open  air  ;  <  after  being  in 
ice-house.     I  have  found  Eup.  petf.  most  useful  in  influenza. 

SelatlonB. — Bryonia  is  the  closest  analogue ;  but  Bryonia  has 
free  sweat,  and  the  pains  make  the  patient  keep  still.  Eup.  perfol.  has 
scanty  sweat,  and  its  pains  cause  restlessness.    Compare  also :  Am., 


EUPATORIUM   PERFOLIATUM  729 

Caps,,  Chd.,  Symph.,  Podoph,,  and  Lycop, ;  nausea  from  smell  of  food, 
Colch.    Compatible  :  Nat.  mur.  and  Sepia,  which  also  follow  well. 

STHPTOH&L 

I.  Mind. — Feels  at  night  as  if  going  out  of  his  mind.— Moaning ; 
anxiety ;  despondency. — ^Vcry  restless  ;  cannot  keep  still,  though  wishes  to. 

8.  Head. — Early  in  morning  whirling  around  in  brain  as  if  he  had 
been  whirled  in  cool  screen :  repeated  after  a  short  cessation. — Headache, 
with  a  sensation  of  soreness  internally  ;  >  in  the  house  ;  <  when  first  going 
into  the  open  air ;  >  by  conversation. — Headache  and  nausea  every  other 
morning,  when  awaking. — Pain  in  occiput  after  l3ring,  with  sense  of  weight ; 
must  aid  with  hand  in  lifting  head. — Beating  pain  in  forehead  and  occiput, 
after  rising. — Soreness  and  pulsation  on  the  back  part  of  the  head. — Heat  on 
the  top  of  the  head. — ^Violent  headache,  comes  on  before  the  chill  and  lasts 
through  all  the  stages,  and  is  worst  during  the  sweat. 

3.  Eyes. — Painful  soreness  of  eyeballs. — Great  aversion  to  light. — 
Painful  soreness  of  lids. 

5.    Nose. — Coryza,  with  sneezing ;  aching  in  every  bone. 

8.  Mouth. — Paleness  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth — ^Tongue 
covered  with  white  fur. — Soreness  of  the  corners  of  the  mouth. 

XI.  Stomach.— Nausea  from  smell  of  food  or  cooking. — Indigestion 
from  alcohol ;  of  old  people. — ^Thirst  for  cold  water. — ^Thirst  for  large  draughts 
of  cold  water  before  and  during  chill. — ^Vomiting  immediately  after  drinking, 
and  preceded  by  thirst. — Nausea  and  vomiting  of  food. — ^Vomiting  after  every 
draught. — Vomiting  of  bile,  with  trembling  and  great  nausea,  causing  great 
prostration. — ^Tight  clothing  is  oppressive. 

12.  Abdomen. — Soreness  in  region  of  liver ;  on  moving  or  coughing. — 
Colicky  pains  in  upper  abdomen,  with  headache  and  other  pains. — ^Abdomen 
full  and  tympanitic. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation,  with  catarrh. — Morning  diarrhoea. 
— Purging  stools,  with  smarting  and  heat  in  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. —  Dark-coloured,  clear  urine.  —  Dark-brown, 
scanty  urine,  depositing  a  whitish,  clay-like  sediment. — Itching  of  the  mons 
veneris. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness.— Hoarseness  <  mornings; 
soreness  in  trachea  and  bronchia. — Cough  with  soreness  and  heat  in  bronchia ; 
flushed  face,  and  tearful  eyes. — Hacking  cough  in  the  evening. — Cough  from 
a  cold,  <  2  to  4  a.m. ;  excited  by  tickling  in  chest,  causing  tightness  of  chest ; 
cough  <  lying  on  back,  >  kneeling  with  face  towards  pillow;  scanty 
expectoration  ;  painful  fulness  in  head  on  coughing  or  blowing  nose ;  lowness 
of  spirits. — Hectic  cough,  from  suppressed  intermittent  fever. — Difficulty  of 
breathing,  attended  with  perspiration,  anxious  countenance,  sleeplessness. — 
Soreness  in  chest ;  <  from  inspiration. — Inability  to  lie  on  the  1.  side. — Sharp 
pain  through  r.  chest  on  deep  inspiration  ;  feels  at  night  as  if  going  out  of  his 
mind  ;  disturbed  breathing  frightens  him. 

19.  Heart. — ^Pressure  as  if  heart  was  in  too  small  a  space. — Pain,  sore- 
ness, and  heaviness  behind  sternum  and  in  cardiac  region  ;  <  by  least  motion 
or  taming  body  around. 


730  EUPATORIUM   PURPUREUM 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Beating  pain  in  nape  and  occiput ;  better  after 
rising. — ^Aching  pain  in  the  back,  as  from  a  bruise. — Weakness  in  small  of 
back. — ^Trembling  in  back  during  fever. 

21.  Limbs. — ^Aching  in  bones  with  soreness  of  the  flesh. — Intense  sore- 
ness and  aching  in  limbs,  as  if  bruised  or  beaten. — ^Wrists  pain  as  if  broken 
or  dislocated. — Heat  in  the  hands,  sometimes  with  perspiration. — Dropsical 
swelling  of  both  feet  and  ankles.— Heat  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  in  the 
morning. 

25.  Skin. — ^Jaundice. 

26.  Sleep. — Stretching  and  j^wning ;  yawning  before  chill ;  sleepiness 
with  difficult  breathing. — Has  to  lie  with  head  high. — Headache  on  awaking. 

27.  Fever.— Thirst  a  long  time  before  the  chill,  which  continues  during 
the  chill  and  heat. — ^At  the  conclusion  of  the  chill,  vomiting  of  bile,  or  after 
every  draught. — Pain  in  the  bones  (as  if  broken)  all  over,  before  the  commence- 
ment of  the  chill. — Headache,  backache,  and  thirst  during  the  chilL — During 
the  chill  and  heat,  throbbing  headache. — The  chill  is  induced  or  hastened  by 
taking  a  drink  of  cold  water. — Distressing  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis, 
throughout  the  chill  and  heat. — ^Aching  pains,  with  moaning  during  the  cold 
stage. — Coldness  during  nocturnal  perspiration. — Chilliness  throughout  the 
night  and  morning ;  trembling  and  nausea  from  least  motion  ;  intense  aching 
and  soreness  in  back  and  limbs ;  more  shivering  than  the  degree  of  coldness 
warrants. — ^The  intermittent  fever  paroxysm  generally  commences  in  the 
morning. — Fever  commences  in  morning ;  attended  with  painf ulness,  tremb- 
ling, weakness,  and  soreness ;  but  little  or  no  perspiration. — Great  weakness 
and  prostration  during  the  fever. — Headache  and  trembling  during  the  heat 
— ^Vomiting  of  bile  at  the  close  of  the  hot  stage. — Vomiting  of  bile  after  the 
chill. — The  fever  goes  off  by  perspiration  and  sleep.  During  the  apyrexia, 
loose  cough.— When  there  is  perspiration  it  relieves  all  the  symptoms  except 
the  headache. 


Eapatorinm  Parpureom. 

Joe  Pye  Weed.   Trumpet  Weed.  Gravel  root.   Queen  of  the  Meadow. 
N,  0.  Compositae.    Tincture  of  the  root 

ClinieaL — ^Albuminuria.  Calculi.  Cystitis.  Diabetes.  Dropsy.  Enuresis.  Graird. 

Headache.   Home-sickness.  Hysteria.    Impotence.   Indigestion.  Intermittent  fever. 

Renal  colic    Rheumatism.  Sciatica.    Strangury.     Throat,  sore.    Urine,  retention 
of.    Vomiting. 

Charaoteristics. — ^The  fever  symptoms  of  £.  purpureum  resemble 
those  of  E,  pcffoliatunif  but  E,  purpur.  has  many  more  symptoms  in 
the  urinary  and  sexual  regions.  The  general  soreness  is  less  marked 
with  purpureum.  Both  have  chills  beginning  in  the  back,  those  of 
purpureum  (as  also  the  pains)  run  upwards,  and  with  them  there  is 
much  shaking  and  comparatively  little  coldness.  Bone  pains,  nausea, 
and  vomiting  accompany  fever.  Sweat  is  sUght  Restless,  tossing, 
moaning,  unable  to  lie  down.  The  common  name, "gravel  root," 
indicates  the  traditional  use  of  the  drug,  and  in  the  hands  of  eclectics 


EUPATORIUM   PURPUREUM  731 

it  has  done  good  work  in  cases  of  irritable  bladder,  diabetes  insipidus, 
incontinence  of  urine  and  calculous  affections.  Hale  mentions  that 
impotency  has  been  cured  in  the  male,  and  sterihty  and  uterine 
atony  in  the  female.  It  is  similar  in  action  to  Cimicif,  and  Helonias 
here.  JE.  purpur,  has  been  well  proved  by  a  Mrs.  Dresser,  and  she 
experienced  a  feeUng  of  home-sickness  even  when  Uving  in  her  own 
house.  Motion  <  ;  changing  position  ever  so  little  =  chilUness  down 
back.  Symptoms  are  <  left  side,  and  there  is  sensation  as  if  falling 
to  left  side,  as  with  E,  petfoL  Cystitis  in  pregnant  women  from  riding 
over  rough  roads.   Distressing  dyspnoea  from  dropsy. 

RelatioilB. — Compare:  Apocy.  (dropsy)  ;  Apis.,  Can.  sat.,  Canth., 
Copaib.,  Ferr.,  Hydrct.,  Mitch.,  Senec,  Vespa  (renal  symptoms).  Caps., 
Phos.  ac.  in  home-sickness.    £.  perf.,  Colch.  (nausea  at  smell  of  food). 

STHPTOHS. 

I-  Mind.— The  mind  is  encompassed  by  various  delusions. — Sighing. — 
Home-sickness,  although  in  her  own  house.— Great  fear  of  sickness. — De- 
pressed and  sleepy. — Hysterical,  low-spirited  state. 

2.  Head. — Head  feels  light  and  dizzy,  as  though  flying  round  and 
round ;  cannot  get  rid  of  sensation  as  if  falling  to  1.  side ;  the  whole  body 
seems  to  participate,  <  morning,  disappearing  at  noon. — Illusions  of  sight 
and  hearing,  with  vertigo.— Much  headache  and  constriction  over  frontal 
region ;  with  chill. — Dizzy,  with  deep,  dull  aching  pains  through  1.  temporal 
region. — Sick  headache  ;  dull  hammering,  stitching,  or  boring  1.  side  ;  press- 
ing from  r.  to  1.  ;  beginning  morning,  increasing  during  afternoon  and 
evening;  <  in  cold  air;  >  while  walking  slowly  in  fresh  air. — ^Violent 
headache ;  before  chill ;  during  morning ;  with  fever. — Sore  scalp  with 
itching. — Sweat,  principally  about  head,  esp.  profuse  on  forehead. 

3.  Eye8.— Staring. — Red  and  swollen  (with  headache). — Lachrymation. 

4.  Ears.— Ears  feel  full. — Illusions  of  hearing. — Crackling  <  on  swal- 
lowing. 

6.    Face. — Face  flushed. — Lips  blue. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  furred,  brown  along  centre. — ^Tongue,  prickling 
and  stinging  in  tip ;  on  back. — Numbness  of  tongue. — Saliva  abundant. 

9.  Throat. — Choking  fulness,  must  swallow  often. — Burning,  as  if  had 
swallowed  some  hot  substance ;  most  at  back  of  throat. — <  Swallowing. — 
Pain  1.  side  of  throat,  causing  pain  on  swallowing ;  before  chill. — Fluttering 
in  throat  pit. 

11.  Stomach. — Thirst :  before  chill ;  none  during  ;  with  fever ;  with 
dropsy. — Desire  for  warm  drinks.  —  Much  wind  in  stomach ;  eructations 
almost  constant. — Nausea  at  smell  or  sight  of  food  or  cooking. — Great  nausea 
but  no  vomiting  with  chill ;  vomiting  with  fever  ;  with  sick  headache. — 
Swelling  and  fulness,  mostly  1.  side. — Griping,  crampy  pain. 

12.  Abdomen. — Rumbling,  rolling,  and  twisting  pain  in  bowels. — Severe 
colic  after  voiding  urine. — Pain  and  soreness  of  abdomen,  much  <  1.  side. — 
Hypogastric  region  swollen  and  hot. 

13.  Stool  and  Rectum. — Bilious  diarrhcea. — Pressure  and  weight  on 
rectum. 

14.  Urinary   Organs.— Dull  deep  pains  in  kidneys;    also  cutting. — 


732  EUPATORIUM   PURPUREUM 

Intense  smarting  and  burning  in  bladder  and  urethra. — De^  dull  aching  in 
bladder. — Uneasiness  in  bladder  while  suffering  from  severe  cold. — ^Increased 
mucus ;  large  deposit  of  lithates. — Enuresis. — Constant  urging ;  passes  a  few 
drops  at  a  time. — Strangury  from  uterine  displacement — ^Dysuriaina  pregnant 
woman  after  riding  over  rough  road  and  taking  cold. — ^Vesical  irritability  in 
women. — Nephritis. — Diabetes  insipidus. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Impotency  from  exhaustion  or  abuse. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Tense  cutting  pain  two  inches  above 
1.  ovary. — Smart,  quick  jerking  motion  in  1.  ovary. — Heavy  pressure  during 
day,  directly  above  1.  ovary. — Sterility  from  ovarian  atony. — Uterine  leucor- 
rhoea  caused  by  exhaustion  and  chronic  metritis. — Leucorrhoea  abundant, 
leaving  no  stain. — External  genitals  feel  as  though  wet  (a  delusion). — ^In- 
flammation of  meatus  urinarius. — Numbness  <  in  groin. — ^Threatened  abor- 
tion.— Habitual  abortion  at  third  or  fourth  month. — Inefficient  labour-pains. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Coryza ;  hoarseness ;  hacking  cough,  even- 
ing ;  cough,  with  soreness  and  heat  in  bronchi. — Sighing  every  few  minutes. 
— Strong  desire  to  inflate  the  lungs,  which  she  continued  to  do  from  time  to 
time  without  noticing  particularly  that  she  was  doing  so. — Grating  sensation 
in  chest  at  every  deep  inspiration. 

19.  Heart.— Violent  palpitation ;  fluttering  in  heart  and  throat— Pulse 
accelerated  and  full. 

20.  Neck  and  Back.— Cutting  pain  in  neck  running  from  L  shoulder 
to  occiput. — Between  shoulder-blades  chilly  feeling. — Cutting  pains ;  hibour- 
like  pains. — Pains  running  upward ;  from  sacnun  into  kidneys ;  from  1.  side 
of  back  and  hip. — Chill  begins  in  lower  dorsal  region  and  runs  up  back.— 
Distressing  pain  in  lumbar  region  before  chill. 

21.  Limbs. — ^Tired,  weak  uneasiness  in  limbs,  with  numbness  and  gnaw- 
ing pains. — Rheumatic  pains  shifting  from  place  to  place,  always  from  below 
upward. — Pains  in  arms  and  legs  before  chill ;  during  fever  limbs  cold- 
Neuralgia  of  r.  shoulder  or  r.  knee,  passing  over  to  1. — Soreness  of  bones, 
aching  of  limbs  as  if  bones  were  broken,  pains  come  and  go  suddenly;  very 
restless,  but  not  >  by  motion. 

sa.    Upper  Limbs.— Arms  perspire  most ;  hands  cold,  finger-nails  Wue. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Gnawing  in  hip-bone. — Numbness  of  legs  after  or 
with  severe  bone  pains. — Severe  shooting  pains  in  1.  sciatic  nerve,  producing  a 
palsied  sensation,  esp.  after  motion  ;  legs  feel  tired,  esp.  1. — Feet  feel  as  if  she 
had  walked  a  long  journey;  it  seems  as  though  her  heels  were  crowding 
through  her  boots. 

26.  Sleep.— Yawning,  gaping,  and  sighing.— Sleepy  and  depressed- 
Sleep  restless  and  mind  disturbed,  frightful  dreams. 

27.  Fever. — Chilly  down  back  when  changing  position  ever  so  little- 
Chill  begins  in  small  of  back  and  spreads  over  body ;  violent  shivering  with 
comparatively  little  coldness ;  bone  pains ;  thirst  in  chill  and  heat ;  nails 
blue.— Skin  hot  and  dry  with  fever ;  hot  to  touch  in  face.— Fever  protracted, 
with  bone  pains,  nausea,  and  vomiting,  followed  by  slight  sweat,  mostly  about 
forehead  and  head. — Sweat :  principally  about  forehead ;  chills  when  attempt- 
ing to  change  position. 


EUPHORBIA  AMYGDALOIDES  733 

Euphorbia  Amygdaloides. 

Wood  Spurge.  N.  0.  Euphorbiaceae.    Tincture  of  plant. 

CUaical.— Antrum,  pain  in.  Anus,  spasm  of  ;  prolapse  of.  Debility.  Diarrhoea. 
Dysentery;  Haemorrhoids.  Skin,  eruptions  of.  Smell,  illusion  of.  Spleen,  affec- 
tions of.    Throat,  soreness  of. 

Charaoteristlofl. — Euphorb.  amyg.  has  the  same  general  charac- 
teristics as  Euphorbium,  producing  irritation  and  burning  sensations 
of  the  intestinal  tract,  with  vomiting  and  diarrhoea  and  skin  affec- 
tions. Peculiar  symptoms  are :  An  illusion  of  smell,  "  odour  of 
mice  "  ;  and  seething  sensation  in  the  head  and  thigh.  Rheumatic 
pains  come  on  when  heated.  Cold  water  relieves  burning  in  back  of 
throat  (burning  <  from  cold  water  Caps.).  Symptoms  go  from  right  to 
left.  Malaise;  tired  weak  feeling  during  and  after  walking.  Restlessness 
all  night,  turning  about  half  awake  and  half  asleep.  Many  symptoms 
are  <  evening  ;  <  walking ;  >  after  eating.  For  comparisons  see 
under  Euphorbium. 

STHPTOHS. 

2.  Head. — Seething  sensation  backwards  and  forwards  in  head,  extend- 
ing down  back  and  going  off  during  sleep. 

5.  Nose. — Strong  odour  of  mice  in  nose. 

6.  Face. — Burning  pain  in  1.  antrum,  extending  upwards  to  floor  of  orbit 
and  into  head. 

g.  Throat.— Burning  in  back  of  throat,  >  by  cold  water,  >  by  break- 
fast ;  followed  by  heat  all  over  chest  and  in  stomach. — Stinging  and  peppery 
sensation  back  of  throat. 

IX.  Stomach. — Nausea ;  <  moving  about  indoors ;  >  sitting  still ;  > 
by  supper. 

12.  Atxlomen. — Severe  stitches  in  liver;  when  walking  up  hill. — 
Tightness  in  region  of  spleen. — Stitch  in  region  of  spleen. — Sensation  as  if  a 
long  worm  writhing  in  region  of  transverse  colon  or  duodenum. — Throbbing 
in  groins. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Stool  difEcult  from  painful  spasm  of  anus,  which 
was  continued  after  the  evacuation  ;  faeces  small,  lumpy,  slimy;  with  prolapsus, 
though  there  had  been  no  straining. — Slight  prolapsus  after  the  stool. — Offen- 
sive diarrhoeic  stool,  preceded  by  griping  and  followed  by  prolapsus. — 
Diarrhoea  returns  at  lengthened  intervals. — Feeling  of  action  of  the  liver, 
followed  soon  by  griping  and  passing  of  offensive  flatus,  then  offensive  diar- 
rhcea,  after  which  the  feeling  of  the  liver  passes  off,  followed  by  slight 
prolapse  rendering  sitting  uneasy,  going  off  gradually. — Dark  brown,  watery, 
mucous  stool,  sometimes  mixed  with  solid  faeces,  sometimes  offensive,  some- 
times with  blood,  mostly  in  afternoon  from  4  to  10  p.m.  If  it  lasts  two  or 
three  days  there  is  prolapsus  returning  very  gradually ;  if  replaced  within 
half  an  hour  the  bowel  generally  prolapses  again ;  if  the  diarrhoea  lasts  longer 
external  piles  appear,  not  returning  with  the  prolapsus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  hot  during  micturition. 


734  EUPHORBIA  COROLLATA 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness. — Heat  in  chest ;  radiatkigfroni 
stomach. — Feeling  as  if  lungs  remained  partly  inflated. 

ig.    Heart. — Slight  throbbing  in  region  of  heart. 

20.  Back. — Peculiar  seething  sensation  in  region  of  spine,  sometimes 
extending  from  occiput  to  loins. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pains  in  r.  arm  just  above  olecranon, 
on  becoming  warm  and  perspiring.^— Rheumatic  pains  in  elbows  and  elbow 
joints. 

23.  Lower  Limbs.— Seething  sensation  in  lymphatics  of  r.  leg,  at  times, 
from  foot  to  groin,  as  if  circulation  were  felt ;  afterwards  to  a  less  extent  in  L 
leg ;  chiefly  felt  from  foot  to  knee,  only  when  sitting,  <  in  evening.— Sudden 
sharp  pain  about  middle  of  r.  tibia,  which  was  tender  to  touch. 

25.  Skin. — Pimple  just  under  lobe  of  r.  ear. — Hard  white  itching  vesi- 
cular pimples  on  r.  internal  malleolus  and  foot. 

27.  Fever. — Chill  11  p.m.,  increased  to  violent  rigor  when  undressing ; 
lasted  till  next  morning,  and  was  not  followed  by  heat  or  sweat. 


Euphorbia  Corollata. 

Large  Flowering  Spurge.    N.  0.  Euphorbiaceae.    Tincture  and  trihi- 

rations  of  the  root 

Omi^L — ^Cholera.  Cholera  infantum.  Cholerine.  Diarrhoea.  Gastritis. 
Sea-sickness. 

Characteristics. — E.  CoroL  produces  gastro-enteric  disturbances 
like  other  Euphorbias,  but  with  peculiarities  especially  in  the  sequence 
and  character  of  the  vomit :  (i)  deadly  nausea,  (2)  sudden  and  power- 
ful vomiting  of  food  in  stomach,  (3)  throws  up  large  quantities  of 
water  mixed  with  mucus,  (4)  then  of  clear  fluid  like  rice-water,  (5) 
copious  watery  evacuations  of  the  bowels.  These  symptoms  are 
accompanied  by  great  anxiety,  deadly  prostration,  and  cold  sweat. 
Attacks  recur  after  short  intermissions. 

STHPTOHS. 

I.    Mind. — Great  anxiety — Wants  to  die. 

II.  Stomach. — Sudden  deathly  nausea  and  prostration,  without  previous 
pain. — Sudden  powerful  vomiting  of  food,  then  quantities  of  water  mixed  with 
mucus,  then  clear  rice-water-like  fluid ;  followed  almost  immediately  by 
diarrhoea. — Inflammation  of  stomach  and  bowels. 

12, 13.  Abdomen  and  Stool.— Great  commotion  in  bowels,  followed 
immediately  by  copious  watery  evacuations. 

ig.    Heart. — Pulse  soft ;  sinks  to  40. 

24.  Generalities. — Death-like  faintness  and  exhaustion. — Felt  like  an 
attack  of  sea-sickness. — Symptoms  pass  away  in  a  short  time. 

27.  Fever. — Cool  skin  covered  with  beaded  sweat. — Cold  hands,  feet,  and 
nose. — Diaphoresis. 


EUPHORBIA   HYPERICIFOLIA  735 


Euphorbia  Cyparissias. 

Cypress  Spurge.    N.  0.  Euphorbiaceae.    Tincture  of  fresh  plant. 

Clinical* — ^Erysipelas.    Miliaria.    Vesicles. 

Charaoteristios. — ^The  effects  of  E.  cyparis,  have  been  observed 
on  persons  pulling  the  plants  and  getting  the  juice  on  hands  and 
face.  It  acts  as  an  intense  irritant  of  the  skin,  and  produces  at  the 
same  time  a  feeling  of  chilliness. 

STHPTOHS. 

6.  Face. — R.  cheek  much  inflamed,  covered  sparsely  with  fine  vesicles 
filled  with  a  thick  white  lymph ;  erysipelatous  inflammation  most  marked  in 
molar  region,  livid  or  dark  red,  leaving  skin  rough. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — R.  wrist  somewhat  inflamed  and  abundantly 
covered  with  miliary  eruptions. 

27.  Fever. — Frequent  sensations  of  chilliness  which  induced  her  to  put 
a  shawl  about  her  shoulders  though  in  midsummer. 


Enphorhia  Heterodoxa. 

Alveloz.    N.  0.    Euphorbiacae.    A  soft  resin,  insoluble  in  alcohol  or 

water.    Trituration. 

Clinical^— Cancer. 

CharactoristioB* — The  resin  has  been  used  allopathically  as  an 
external  application  in  cases  of  cancer,  and  has  produced  the  most 
terrible  pains.  Conversely  in  homoeopathic  attenuations  it  has  been 
found  to  alleviate  the  burning  pains  of  cancer,  which  is  the  keynote 
for  its  employment    Compare  Euphorbium. 


Enphorhia  Hypericifolia. 

Large  Spotted  Spurge.    N.  0,  Euphorbiaceae.    Tincture  of  whole 

plant. 

Clinical. — Constipation.    Headache. 

Ghapaoteristios.— Dr.  True  took  infusion  and  tincture  of  Eu. 
hyper,  and  obtained  these  symptoms  from  both  :  Headache  in  fore 
psurt  of  head,  pain  centering  at  crown,  with  heat  above  the  eyes  and 
fulness  and  oppression  at  epigastrium  ;  followed  by  languor  and 
drowsiness.    Constipation. 


736  EUPHORBIA   PEPLUS 

Euphorbia  IpeoacuanhsB. 

Ipecacuan  Spurge.    N.  0.  Euphorbiaceae.    Powdered  root 

ClinioaL— Gastritis.    Vomiting. 

CharaoterlBtioB. — £.  ipecac,  is  a  more  active  emetic  than 
Ipecacuanha. 

STHPTOHS. 

IX.    Stomach.— Active  and  long-continued  vomiting  with  a  sense  of 
heat,  vertigo,  indistinct  vision,  and  prostration. 

Euphorbia  Lathyris. 

Caper  Spurge.    N.  0.  Euphorbiaceae.    The  symptoms  are  the  effects 
of  poisoning  by  seeds.    A  tincture  of  the  whole  plant  is  made. 

Clinteal.— Cholera.    Diarrhoea.    Dysentery. 

Charaotaristios. — The  chief  symptoms  of  £.  lath,  are :  Retching 
and  vomiting  and  bloody  stools  with  brilliant  eyes,  flushed  &ce ;  the 
abdomen  is  drawn  inward.  The  whole  body  is  stifiF  and  icy  cold. 
Uneasiness. 

STHPTOHS. 

3.  Eyes. — Brilliant  eyes. — Staring  look. — Pupils  dilated  with  wide-open 
eyes. 

6.    Face.— Deadly  pale. — Glowing  hot  cheeks. 

11.  Stomach. — Retching  and  vomiting. — Sudden  violent  vomiting  with 
bloody  stools. 

12.  Abdomen. — ^Abdomen  drawn  inward. 

13.  Stools. — Copious,  frequent ;  violent  purgation. — Bloody  stools, 
ig.    Heart. — Pulse  small,  irregular. 

27.    Fever. — Pallor  and  coldness  of  surface. — Skin  burning  hot ;  glowing 
hot  cheeks. 


Euphorbia  Peplus. 


Petty  Spurge.    N.  0.  Euphorbiaceae.     Effect  of   juice  and  local 
application  of  leaves. 

OUnloaL — Ecthyma.    Erysipelas.    Sore  throat 

Charaoteristios. — ^The  application  of  the  juice  and  leaves  sets  up 
intense  and  painful  inflammation,  erysipelatous,  phlegmonous,  pus- 
tular, with  intense  burning  pain.  In  one  of  the  cases  observed,  a 
boy  applied  the  juice  of  the  stem  to  an  inflamed  gum.  In  another,  a 
boy  applied  the  leaves  as  a  poultice  to  a  black  eye.  Burnett  pro- 
duced a  sore  throat  in  himself  by  chewing  the  herb  ;  and  he  cured 
with  the  3x  a  case  of  simple  sore  throat  with  swelling  and  painful 
swallowing. 


EUPHORBIUM  737 

STMPTOMeL 

6.  Face*— After  a  week,  phlegmonous  erysipelas  under  1.  eye,  spreading 
downwards  and  forwards. — Five  or  six  pustules  are  on  forehead,  one  on  each 
ala  nasi,  one  on  root  of  nose,  one  on  1.  elbow,  burning  pain  in  all. — Lower 
half  of  nose  red,  swollen,  inflamed,  shiny.— Lips  parched,  slightly  swollen, 
covered  with  a  crop  of  small  pustules ;  another  large  pustide  appears  on 
upper  lip  midway  between  mouth  and  nose. 

8.  Mouth.— Mouth  so  much  inflamed  the  doctor  thought  it  due  to 
mercurial  remedies. — In  several  days  pain  intolerable,  compelling  cries  and 
indescrit»ble  agitation,  patient  unable  to  sleep  or  drink. 

0.    Throat.— Sore  throat  ,*  throat  swollen  with  psdnful  swallowing. 
90.    Neck. — More  pustules  developed  1.  side  oip  neck,  becoming  hard 
boils,  and  slowly  going  away  without  breaking. 

Euphorbia  Pilnlifera. 

E.  pilulifera.    N.  0.  Euphorbiaceae.    Tincture. 

Olfatoal. — ^Asthma.    Gonorrhoea.    Leucorrhcea.    Sunstroke.    Traumatism. 

ChanoteristlOB.— In  the  Medical  Press  of  May  3,  1893,  Dr. 
George  Foy  gives  an  account  of  this  medicine.  Gray  in  1817 
mentions  it  as  a  remedy  for  syphilis  and  for  venomous  bites. 
Marsset,  of  Paris,  experimented  with  the  aqueous  extract  on  guinea- 
pigs.  None  of  the  irritant  effects  common  to  most  Euphorbias  were 
produced,  but  a  powerful  action  on  the  heart — first  an  alarmingly 
quick  pulse  and  then  a  sudden  chill.  It  has  been  used  by  old-school 
practitioners  in  asthma,  hay  asthma,  and  bronchitis,  chiefly  in  con- 
siderable doses.  In  the  Universal  Honuecfathic  Annual^  p.  57,  Dr. 
Cartier  gives  this  account :  ^*  Euphorbia  pilulifera  has  given  excellent 
results  in  cases  of  acrid  leucorrhcea,  aggravated  by  the  least  motion, 
especially  useful  for  pale,  delicate,  and  sensitive  women  (JFacaranda). 
In  gonorrhea,  when  there  are  intense  pains  at  each  micturition, 
burning  pains  which  oblige  the  patient  to  sit  down  or  to  keep  quiet ; 
violent  desire  to  pass  water  {Cannabis^  Cantharis).  Humid  asthma 
with  prostration  and  restlessness.  Haemorrhages  caused  by  sun- 
stroke or  traumatism." 


Euphorbium. 


Euphorbium  officinarum.  Gum  Euphorbium.  The  resinous  exuda- 
tion or  juice  of  Euphorbia  resinifera  exported  from  Morocco. 
Euphorbia  resinifera  is  a  cactus-like  plant  of  the  Euphorbiaceae. 

COlaleaL— Bone,  diseases  of.  Canoer.  Cataract.  Coccygodynia.  Cough. 
Crnsta  lactea.  Erysipelas.  Eyes,  inflammation  of.  Gangrene.  Hay -fever. 
Headache.  Heartburn.  Influenza.  Peritonitis.  Sciatica.  Syphilis.  Teeth,  affec- 
tions of.    Toothache.    Ulcers.    Vision,  disorders  of.    Warts.    Writer's  cramp. 

Ohanurteriitios. — Gum  euphorbium  is  one  of  the  remedies  of 
Hahnemann's  chronic  diseases.    It  is  the  principal  member  of  the 
VOL.  I.  48 


738  EUPHORBIUM 

group  of  Euphorbian  drugs,  and  should  be  studied  with  Crolon 
tiglium  and  Ricinus,  Like  these  it  produces  gastro-intestinal  irrita- 
tion and  all  degrees  of  irritation  of  the  skin.  It  also  affects  the  eyes, 
teeth,  and  bones.  Burning  pains  in  the  bones  is  an  indication,  and 
along  with  Euphorb.  heterodoxa  it  is  a  remedy  for  the  pains  of  cancer. 
(In  a  desperate  case  of  sarcoma  of  the  pelvic  bones  under  my  care 
nothing  gave  greater  relief  to  the  pains  than  repeated  doses  of 
Euphorb,  6.)  Painfulness  of  the  coccyx.  Caries.  Old  torpid  ulcers. 
Hartmann  says  Euphorb,  often  affords  excellent  service  in  gangrene 
of  internal  parts,  **  especially  when  consequent  on  inflammation  of 
the  stomach  or  bowels,  &c.,  and  the  temperature  of  the  body  is  con- 
tinually diminishing,  a  great  degree  of  torpor  being  present  and  the 
affected  parts  without  sensation."  Gangrene  of  old  persons.  Ery- 
sipelas bullosa.  Burning,  which  characterises  the  Euphorbias 
generally,  is  well  marked  in  this.  Among  the  peculiar  sensations 
are  :  Sensation,  as  if  teeth  were  being  screwed  together.  Jerking  in 
tooth  as  if  it  would  be  torn  out.  Taste  as  if  mouth  were  lined  with 
rancid  grease.  Burning  in  throat  as  from  a  hot  coal.  As  if  flames 
were  rushing  out  of  mouth  and  throat.  Feeling  in  middle  of  chest 
as  if  hot  food  had  been  swallowed.  As  if  left  lobe  of  lung  were 
adhering.  (Miinninghoff  records  a  case  in  which  the  patient  had  two 
violent  attacks  of  night  cough.  They  occurred  as  soon  as  she  touched 
the  bed  in  lying  down,  and  continued  as  long  as  she  remained  in  it. 
Accompanying,  symptoms  were  :  Pain  in  right  temple,  cold  feet,  and 
pain  in  heel.  After  failure  of  many  remedies  Euphorb,  off,  f,  one  drop 
in  a  glass  of  water,  to  be  sipped  occasionally,  gave  instant  relief ;  but 
she  had  to  continue  the  remedy  or  the  cough  returned.)  Sudden 
starting  up  in  bed  as  from  an  electric  shock.  As  if  a  thin  cord  lay 
under  the  skin.  Prostration  is  present  as  with  the  other  Euphorbias  ; 
but  Euphorbium  has,  in  addition,  periodic  cramp,  writer's  cramp,  and 
convulsions  with  loss  of  consciousness.  Most  symptoms  are  <  at 
night  and  in  the  morning.  Rest  <,  motion  >.  Pau^ytic  weakness 
in  joints  <  on  beginning  to  move.  Painfulness  of  coccyx,  <  on 
rising  from  sitting.     Heat  <  ;  cool  applications  >.    Touch  <. 

Relations. — Antidoted  by:  Camph.,  Op.,  large  quantities  of  lemon- 
juice.  It  antidotes :  Ars.,  Nux  v.  //  follows  :  Graphit.,  Lach.,  Puis., 
Sep.,  Sul.  Compare:  Colch.,  Elat.,  Ant.  t,  Verat. ;  also  the  Euphor- 
biacious  plants — ^Acaljrph.,  Grot,  tig.,  Jatroph.  c,  Mancin.,  Mercurialis, 
Ricinus,  Yucca  fil.,  and  the  various  Euphorbias. 

STHPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — Anxious  apprehensions. — Seriousness  and  tacitomity. — 
Earnest  quietness,  reflective  ;  seeks  quiet,  though  with  inclination  to 
work. 

2.  Head.— Turning  vertigo,  which  causes  falling  sidelong. — ^Vertigo 
when  standing  or  walking  in  the  open  air.— Pressive,  shooting  headache. — 
Pain,  as  from  a  bruise  in  occiput ;  <  in  morning ;  when  lying ;  from  heat ; 
>  by  motion  and  cooling  the  head. — Screwed-in  sensation  in  whole  biain. 

3.  Eyes. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  with  itching  and  dryness  of  the 


EUPHORBIUM  739 

eyelids,  and  of  the  canthi. — Chronic  inflammation  of  the  eyes. — Smarting 
]achr3rmation,  and  nocturnal  agglutination  of  the  eyelids. — Copious  secretion 
of  mucus  in  the  canthi. — Opacity  of  the  cornea. — Clouded  vision. — Myopia. — 
Diplopia;  seeing  a  person  walk  before  him  he  imagines  he  sees  the  same 
man  walking  after  him. 

4.  Ears. — Otalgia  in  the  open  air. 

5.  Nose. — ^A  suffocating  itching  in  the  nose,  extending  to  the 
brain,  with  abundant  flow  of  mucus  from  the  posterior  nares. — Frequent 
sneezing. 

6.  Face. — Erysipelatous  swelling  of  the  cheek,  with  eruption  of  yellowish 
vesicles  (full  of  yellowish  humour),  and  piercing  and  digging  pain. — Red,  in- 
flamed, painful  swelling  of  the  face,  with  yellowish  blisters  secreting  a  thick 
yellow  fluid. — Pale  (white  oedema-like)  swelling  of  the  cheek. — Burning  pain 
in  the  face. 

7.  Teeth. — Pressive,  shooting  toothache,  or  with  piercing  pain,  aggra- 
vated by  contact  or  mastication,  or  else  at  the  beginning  of  a  meal,  with 
shivering  and  pain  in  the  head,  and  in  the  cheek-bones. — Brittleness  of  the 
teeth. 

8.  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth,  without  thirst. — Salivation  with 
shuddering,  inclination  to  vomit,  and  pinchings  in  the  stomach. — Saltness 
of  the  saliva. 

g.  Throat. — Burning  pain  from  the  throat  (as  from  a  hot  coal)  to  the 
stomach,  accompanied  by  heat  (as  if  a  flame  were  rushing  out),  anxiety, 
trembling,  and  water-brash. 

11.  Stomach. — Sickly,  rancid,  bitter  taste. — Strong  thirst  for  cold 
drinks. — Empty  risings. — Hiccough.— Water-brash,  with  heat,  anxiety,  and 
trembling. — ^Vomiting  (with  diarrhoea). — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the 
stomach. — Relaxation  and  flaccidity  of  the  stomach,  with  retraction  of  the 
abdomen. — Contractive  cramps  in  the  stomach. — Pinchings,  and  sensation 
of  clawing  in  the  stomach. — Burning  pain  in  the  stomach  and  in  the 
epigastrium. — Inflammation  of  the  stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Constrictive  pains  in  the  abdomen. — Spasmodic  colic, 
flatulent,  with  pains  as  if  the  tissue  were  being  separated,  or  of  pressure 
upwards,  generally  >  by  supporting  the  head  on  the  knee  and  the 
elbow.— Sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  abdomen  as  after  an  emetic  (morning). 
— Burning  pain  in  the  abdomen.— Tearing  in  the  groins,  such  as  follows 
dislocation. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Hard  stool  to  pass. — Urgency  to  evacuate,  with 
itching  in  the  rectum  (stool  like  glue). — Liquid  diarrhoea,  with  tenesmus. — 
Stool  first  thin,  then  knotty. — Sensation  of  burning  in  the  anus,  and  pain  as 
from  excoriation  in  the  abdomen. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urgency  to  make  water,  with  difiicult  discharge, 
scanty  and  drop  by  drop. — ^White  sediment  in  the  urine. — Itching  stitch  in 
the  external  portion  of  the  urethra  between  the  acts  of  urinating. — Flow  of 
blood  from  the  urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Tearing  lancinations  in  the  glans  penis. — 
Voluptuous  itching  in  the  prepuce. — ^Tearing  in  the  testes. — Burning  pain  in 
the  scrotum. — Constant  erections,  without  sexual  desire. — Discharge  of  pro- 
static fluid  from  a  relaxed  penis. 


740  EUPHORBIUM 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Dry,  hollow  cough,  excited  by  a  baming 
tickling  in  the  trachea  and  the  chest— Dry  cough,  day  and  night,  as  from 
oppression,  with  frequent  expectoration  in  the  morning.— Attacks  of  violent 
cough  commencing  as  soon  as  patient  touches  the  pillow  and  continuing  as 
long  as  she  remains  in  bed. 

x8.  Chest. — Difficult  respiration  and  short  breath,  with  tensive  pain  in 
the  muscles  of  the  chest.^-^ppression  of  breathing,  as  if  the  chest  were  not 
wide  enough,  with  tension  in  the  pectoral  muscles,  esp.  when  turning 
the  body  to  the  r.  side. — Sensation  of  spasmodic  distension  in  the  chest- 
Sensation  as  if  one  of  the  lobes  of  the  liver  were  adherent — Sensation  as  if 
the  1.  lobe  oi  the  lung  were  adhering.— Aching  in  the  muscles  of  the  chest— 
Pressive  lancination  on  the  sternum. — Lancination  in  the  1.  side  of  the  chest, 
during  repose,  mitigated  by  movement. — ^Warm  feeling  in  the  middle  of  the 
chest,  as  if  hot  food  had  been  swallowed. — Burning  pain  in  the  chest 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Sweat  in  the  neck.— Cramp-like  pain  in  the 
dorsal  spine,  in  the  morning,  in  bed,  when  lying  on  the  back. 

23.  Upper  Limbs. — Paralytic  tension  in  the  joint  of  the  shoukler, 
during  repose,  >  by  walking. — Scarlet  streaks  on  the  front-arm,  itching 
when  touched.— Cramp-like  tractions  in  the  hand,  after  writing. 

S3.  Lo^rer  Limbs. — Pains  of  dislocation  in  the  hips. — Burning  pain 
at  night  in  the  thigh  bones. — Great  weakness  of  the  legs. — Cramp-like  con- 
traction of  the  toes. — Cold  perspiration  of  the  legs  in  the  morning— Sore 
pain  in  (r.)  heel  when  walking  in  the  open  air. — ^The  feet  go  to  sleep 
frequently  when  sitting. 

94.  Generalities. — 'fearing  or  pressive,  or  shooting  pains  in  the  limbs, 
esp.  during  repose,  mitigated  by  movement — Rheumatic  pains  <  when 
at  rest. — Shooting  and  tensive  pains  in  the  muscles. — Burning  pains  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  body,  esp.  in  the  internal  organs. — Cancer  pains.— 
Paralytic  weakness  in  the  joints,  with  difficulty  in  rising  from  a  seat,  or  when 
beginning  to  move. — Great  relaxation  and  lassitude. — ^The  majority  of  the 
symptoms  are  <  during  repose,  by  a  sitting  posture,  and  by  the  touch.— 
Burning  in  the  bones. — Caries. 

25.  Skin. — Gnawing  and  burning  itching,  which  provokes  ahnost 
constant  scratching. — Streaks  of  a  purple-red  on  the  skin. — FurunculL— 
Indolent  ulcers.— (Sphacelus  ?)— Cold  gangrene. — Blood-boils. — ^Warts. 

26.  Sleep. — Drowsiness  during  the  day,  accompanied  by  frequent 
yawnings. — Drowsiness  after  dinner. — Comatose  somnolency  during  the 
day. — Difficulty  in  sleeping  in  the  evening,  with  trembling  and  starts.— 
Frequent  waking. — Sleeps  with  his  arms  extended  over  his  head. 

27.  Fever. — Shuddering  and  want  of  vital  heat,  esp.  in  affections  of 
the  internal  organs. — Shivering  at  the  commencement  of  a  meal  and  when 
walking  in  the  open  (not  cold)  air. — Shuddering  and  shivering,  with  coldness 
in  the  hands  and  heat  of  the  cheeks,  without  thirst — Perspiration  in  the 
morning  with  heat,  without  thirst 


EUPHRASIA  741 


Euphrasia. 

Euphrasia  officinalis.    Eye-bright.   N.  0.  Scrophulariaceae.    Tincture 

of  whole  plant 

CliBi«aI.— Blepharitis.  Cataract  Cold.  Colia  Condylomata.  Conjunctivitis. 
Cough.  EyeSfaffisctionsof.  Glandular  swellings.  Granular  lids.  Influenza.  Iritis. 
Lachrymation.  Lips,  stiffness  of.  Measles.  Nasal  catarrh.  Nose,  cancer  of. 
Parotitis.  Phlyctenulae.  Pimples.  Ptosis.  Prolapsus  ani.  Prostate  gland, 
affections  of.    Scrofula.    Staphyloma.    Sycosis. 

CharaoteristkMU— According  to  Grauvogl,  the  "signature''  of 
"a  black  spot  in  the  corolla  which  looks  lUce  the  pupil/'  marked 
Euphrasia  as  an  eye  medicine  to  the  ancients,  and  homoeopathic 
experiments  have  fully  confirmed  its  old-time  reputation.  Eye- 
symptoms  appear  in  great  variety,  and  the  irritation  extends  to  the 
skin  around  the  eye,  and  to  the  nose,  producing  nasal  catarrh  and 
afiFections  of  the  external  nose.  Hering  mentions  ''  flat  cancer  on  right 
side  of  nose  "  as  having  come  within  its  curative  range.  The  catarrhal 
effect  is  prolonged  into  the  chest,  producing  hoarseness  and  cough 
with  profuse  expectoration.  "  Vomiting  from  hawking  mucus,"  and 
"  vomiting  breakfast  on  clearing  throat  of  offensive  phlegm,"  have 
been  cured  by  Eufhras.  Cough  after  the  disappearance  of  haemor- 
rhoids. In  the  digestive  trade  there  are :  Colic,  haemorrhoids,  and 
condylomata  at  anus.  Sensations  :  as  if  dust  or  sand  in  eyes  ;  as  if  a 
hair  hung  over  eyes  ;  as  if  upper  lip  were  made  of  wood ;  stiffness  of 
left  cheek ;  of  tongue.  Ames,  of  Rockland,  Ohio,  has  recorded  the 
case  of  an  old  man,  of  79,  to  whom  he  gave  Euphras.  3X  for  lachry- 
mation and  sneezing,  with  the  result  that  it  relieved  him,  in  addition, 
of  a  prostatic  trouble  he  had  had  for  some  years,  compelling  him  to 
rise  frequentty  in  the  night  to  urinate.  This  led  Ames  to  give  Euphr. 
in  other  cases  of  prostatic  trouble,  vidth  good  results.  As  an  eye-lotion 
Euphr.  has  great  value.  I  have  seen  corneal  opacities  removed  by 
its  prolonged  use.  Among  the  noteworthy  symptoms  of  Euphras.  is 
"  frequent  yawning  when  walking  in  the  open  air."  There  is  drowsi- 
ness without  being  able  to  sleep  ;  frequent  waking  in  the  night  as 
from  fright  Lying  down  <  coryza  ;  >  cough.  Walking  =s  stitches 
and  itching  in  female  sexual  organs ;  walking  in  open  air  s:  yawning. 
<  After  sleep.  Most  symptoms  are  <  during  night  and  in  the 
morning ;  cough  >  at  night.  >  In  bed  ;  >  getting  out  of  bed. 
Cold  air  and  wind  =s  lachrymation.    <  From  touch. 

RelatlomL — Antidoted  by  :  Camph.,  Puis.  Compatible :  Aeon., 
Calc.  c.,  Con.,  Nux.,  Phos.,  Puis.,  Rhus.,  Sil.,  Sul.  Compare:  ^thus., 
Cepa  (tears  bland;  of  Euphr.,  corrosive),  Apis,  Arg.  n.,  Ars.,  Hep.,  Kali 
bi.,  Kali  iod,  Merc,  Merc,  cor.,  Puis. ;  Grat.,  Dig.,  Tabac.    {Botan,) 

8THPT0HS. 

X.  Mind.— Taciturnity,  and  repugnance  to  conversation ;  abstraction  of 
mind. — Hypochrondriacal  indifference. — Indolence. — Melancholy. 

8.    Head. — Confusioni  and  pain  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  head  (with 


742  EUPHRASIA 

coryza),  in  the  evening,  augmented  by  lying  down. — Pressive  headache,  with 
photophobia,  and  heat,  chiefly  in  the  forehead ;  with  sensation  as  if  the  head 
would  burst. — Shootings  in  the  temples  and  in  the  forehead. — Beating  in  the 
head,  perceptible  on  the  outside. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Aching  in  the  eyes. — Gnawing  sensation  in  the  eyes.— 
Inflammatory  redness  of  the  eyes. — Inflammation  and  redness  of  the  eye  from 
being  wounded. — Inflammation  of  the  cornea. — Obscuration  of  and  pellicle 
over  cornea  (after  mechanical  injuries). — Bluish  obscuration  of  cornea.— 
Inflammation  and  ulceration  of  the  edges  of  the  eyelids,  with  headache.— 
Scars  from  ulcers  and  specks  in  the  cornea. — Abundant  flow  of  corrosive 
tears,  so  as  to  prevent  seeing,  esp.  when  exposed  to  the  wind. — Swelling  and 
agglutination  of  the  eyelids.— Swelling  of  the  lower  eyelid. — Smarting  in  the 
eyes,  as  from  sand. — Lancinations  in  the  eyes  (ball),  excited  by  too  bright  a 
light. — Eruption  of  small  miliary  pimples  round  the  eyes. — Copious  secretion 
of  mucus,  sometimes  sanguineous,  from  the  eyes  and  eyelids. — Drjrness  and 
pressure  in  the  eyes. — Compression  in  the  eyelids. — Contraction  in  the  eyes 
and  eyelids,  which  occasions  winking. — ^The  light  seems  obscure  and  vacilla- 
ting.— Photophobia,  esp.  in  daylight  and  in  the  sunshine. 

4.  Ears. — Otalgia,  with  piercing  pains  in  the  region  of  the  tympanum. 

5.  Nose. — Purulent  pimples  on  the  alae  nasi. — Excoriation  and  painful 
sensibility  of  the  nostrils. — Epistaxis. — Fluent  coryza,  by  day ;  obstruction  of 
the  nose,  at  night. — Violent  fluent  coryza,  with  abundant  secretion  of  mucus 
(from  the  anterior  and  posterior  nares),  excessive  confusion  in  the  head, 
corrosive  tears  in  the  eyes,  and  photophobia.— Profuse  fluent  coryza,  with 
cough  and  expectoration  in  the  morning. 

6.  Face. — Stiffness  of  the  cheeks  when  speaking  and  during  mastication, 
with  sensation  of  heat  and  burning  pains. — Redness  of  the  face. — ^Miliary 
eruption  on  the  face,  with  sensation  of  burning  and  redness,  on  wetting  the 
face. — Lip  stifiF,  as  if  made  of  wood. — Shootings  in  the  lower  jaw  and  chin. 

7.  Teeth. — Shooting  pains  in  lower  teeth.— Copious  bleeding  of  gums. 

8.  Mouth. — Stammering,  and  frequent  interruptions  in  the  speech.— 
Speech  difflcult,  in  consequence  of  a  paralytic  stiffness  of  the  tongue,  and  of 
the  cheeks. — Sensation  of  clucking,  which  mounts  into  the  throat. 

II.  Stomach. — Mawkish  taste. — Nausea  and  bitterness  in  the  month 
after  smoking. — Risings,  with  taste  of  food. — Hiccough. 

18.  Abdomen. — Pinchings  in  abdomen  by  short  fits. — Pressive  squeez- 
ing and  burning  across  abdomen. — Colic,  alternately  with  affections  of  eyes. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Evacuations  hard  and  scanty. — Pressure  in 
anus  while  sitting ;  haemorrhoids. — Old  flat  condylomata  at  anus  with  severe 
burning ;  <  at  night. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  and  copious  emission  of  clear  urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Spasmodic  retraction  of  the  genital  parts 
(with  pressure  above  the  ossa  pubis),  in  the  evening  in  bed. — Lancination  and 
voluptuous  itching  in  the  glans,  and  in  the  prepuce. — Condyloma.— Retraction 
and  tingling  of  the  testes. — Sycotic  excrescence,  itching,  stinging,  with  sore 
and  burning  pain  when  touched. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  at  the  regular  period,  but  they 
last  only  one  hour. 

17, 18.    Respiratory  Organs  and  Chest.— DifiGiculty  of  breathing, 


EUPIONUM  743 

shortness  of  breath. — Stitches  under  the  sternum,  esp.  during  an  inspiration. 
— Cough  only  during  the  day,  with  mucus  in  the  chest,  which  cannot  be 
detached  ;  mucus  frequently  blood-streaked,  thin  ;  expectoration  only  in  the 
morning. — Cough  loose  during  the  day,  dry  at  night. — Cough,  esp.  by  day, 
with  difficult  expectoration. — Cough,  with  suspension  of  respiration. — Cough 
in  the  morning,  with  copious  expectoration  of  mucus,  and  fluellt  coryza. — 
DifBculty  of  respiration,  even  when  seated. 

90.    Back. — Cramp-Uke,  pressive  pains  in  the  back. 

22.  Upper  Llxnbs. — Numbness  in  the  arms  and  hands. — Cramp-like 
pressive  pains  in  the  hands,  and  the  fingers. — Fits  of  (painless)  swelling  in  the 
joints  of  the  hand,  or  of  the  fingers  on  moving  them. — Cramp  pain  in  the 
metacarpus. — ^Torpor  of  the  fingers. 

23.  Lo'wer  Limbs. — Shootings  in  the  legs  during  repose. — Stitches  in 
the  hip  and  knee-joints  when  walking. — ^Tension,  as  from  contraction  of  the 
tendons  in  the  ham,  and  the  tendo  Achillis,  on  walking. — Sensation  of  heavi- 
ness and  cramp-like  pain  in  the  calves  of  the  legs,  after  remaining  long 
standing. — Succussions  (shocks,  like  electric  shocks),  which  ascend  along  the 
thigh,  followed  by  paralytic  torpor  of  that  part. — Cracking  in  the  outer  ankle 
of  L  foot,  when  stepping. 

24.  Generalities. — Cramp-like  pains  over  the  whole  body. — Pricking  in 
the  extremities,  as  from  a  gnat,  with  sensation  of  torpor. — Crawling  as  of  a  fly 
in  one  or  the  other  limb,  from  below  upwards  in  a  straight  line,  with  numb- 
ness of  the  part. — ^Aggravation  of  symptoms  in  the  evening. — Great  drowsiness 
in  the  day,  as  from  fatigue  of  the  eyes. — ^Violent  lancinations  in  difiFerent 
parts,  which  prevent  sleep. — Shooting,  itching  stitches  (the  whole  night). 

25.  Skin. — Consequences  of  blows,  bruises,  and  contusions. — Condy- 
lomata, itching  when  walking,  burning  when  touched. 

26.  Sleep. — ^Yawning,  when  walking  in  the  open  air. — Frequent  waking 
(as  from  fright)  at  and  after  3  a.m.,  lasting  till  6  a.m.,  when  he  falls  in  a  stupor, 
from  which  he  wakens  with  many  complaints. — Frightful  dreams,  with 
frequent  waking  and  starting  with  fright. 

27.  Fever. — Chill  in  the  forenoon. — Chilliness  predominating.— Copious 
nocturnal  sweat. 


Eupionum. 


On  distilling  wood  tar  a  volatile  oil  is  obtained,  which  separates  into 
a  lighter  and  heavier  oil ;  the  heavier  oil  is  Kreasote,  the 
lighter  is  Eupion.    C5  Hxa. 

OUnieaL — Amenorrhoea.  Cough.  Cramps.  Dreams.  Epistaxis.  Glandular 
swellings.  Groins,  pdin  in.  HaBmorrhages.  Headache.  Leucorrhoea.  Menorrhagia. 
Neuralgia.  Night-sweats.  Phthisis.  Pruritus.  Toothache.  Tumours.  Vicarious 
menstruation. 

CharaeteristicB.— The  eflFects  of  Eupion.,  which  was  proved  by 
Wable  in  Rome,  who  also  proved  Paraffin,  bear  a  close  resemblance 
to  those  of  Kreasote^  but  are  by  no  means  identical  with  them.  A 
large  number  of  the  symptoms  centre  in  the  female  sexual  organs. 


744  EUPIONUM 

some  of  them  being  very  characteristic.  Menstruation  is  too  early 
and  too  copious,  the  flow  being  thin  and  fluid.  During  the  time  there 
is  great  irritability,  headache,  and  chilliness;  painless  pulsation  in  the 
head,  wabbling  sensation  in  upper  part  of  body  ;  everything  becomes 
dark  to  her.  Nose-bleed  occurs  when  menstrual  flow  intermits. 
Cutting  in  abdomen  ceases  when  flow  comes  on.  Yellow  leucorrhcea 
follows,  colouring  linen  yellow.  Leucorrhcea  with  severe  backache  ; 
has  to  lean  against  something  to  give  relief ;  when  the  backache 
ceases  the  di^arge  gu^es  out  Pulsations  all  over  body  while 
sitting  quietly.  Haemorrhages  occur  from  nose  and  bowels.  Sticking 
pains  in  head  and  other  parts.  Weak  eyes  and  obscured  vision. 
Pressing  in  ears  as  if  wind  were  blown  in  with  force  and  for  a  long 
time.  Teeth  stick  together  when  jaws  are  closed  ;  in  morning  sensa- 
tion as  if  teeth  were  embedded  in  some  soft  matter.  Tongue 
covered  with  raised  nodules.  Pain  in  inguinal  region.  Many  painful 
glandular  swelling  in  groins.  Spasmodic,  periodic  pain  an  inch  up 
rectum.  Palpitation  with  slow  pulse.  Nodules  appear  on  inner  side 
of  right  cheek,  left  side  of  neck,  and  left  forearm.  Sensations :  of  dis- 
location of  joints ;  as  if  muscles  torn  from  bones ;  as  if  skin  and 
muscles  were  too  short.  Cramps  in  the  calves  when  accompanying 
uterine  or  chest  complaints.  Soles  of  feet  numb  as  if  walking  on 
needles ;  sticking  in  heels.  Coldness  of  whole  right  side  of  body. 
Colliquative  perspiration.  Perspires  from  least  exertion  ;  when  eat- 
ing ;  all  night  (with  tuberculosis).  Most  symptoms  are  <  morning ; 
many  appear  in  evening  and  night.  Cough  returning  every  winter. 
Blowing  nose  <.  Coughing  and  sneezing  <  pains  in  abdomen. 
Hot  drink  <  toothache.  Rest  >  headache  and  pains  in  abdomen ; 
<  other  symptoms.  Bending  backwards  >  backache.  Bending 
forward  >  pain  in  abdomen. 

Relations. — Compare  :  Kreasote,  and  the  Carbons ;  Graphites 
anUdoted  effect  on  eyelids;  Laches,  (pain  ceases  when  discfaaiges 
appear). 

8THPT0H8. 

I.  Mind. — Cheerful,  joyous  disposition.~Irritabie,  angers  easily. — Great 
weakness  of  memory. 

a.  Head.— Vertigo ;  everything  becomes  black  before  eyes,  when  turn- 
ing upper  part  of  body  from  r.  to  L  ;  everything  turns  round  when  she  sits  up 
in  bed. — Dulness  of  the  head  as  if  too  full. — Painful  pulsations  in  forehead, 
>  lying  down. — On  1.  superior  part  of  forehead,  a  pain  as  if  a  cyst  would 
form. — Burning  pains  in  forehead,  with  pressing  down  of  lids  and  moisture  in 
eyes  as  from  tears. — Heat  at  vertex  ;  sensation  as  if  hairs  were  pulled,  with 
headache ;  lachrymation  and  drawing  on  muscles  of  neck. — Stitches  radiating 
from  vertex  down  limbs  and  into  abdomen  and  genitals,  producing  painful 
sensation  of  squeezing  together. — Sticking  pains  from  occiput  along  cervical 
muscles  to  back  of  chest  and  in  middle  of  chest  with  every  breath  ;  sticking 
in  1.  shoulder-blade. — Some  painful  spots  on  head  as  if  small  f urundles  wonld 
form. 

3.  Eyes*— Eyes  weak  as  if  she  had  cried. — Sensation  as  if  something 
hung  down  over  eyes,  must  wipe  them  continually.— Pressure  above  eyes  as  if 


EUPIONUM  745 

the  globes  would  be  poshed  out. — Bumingi  pressive  pains  in  eye  with  copious 
lachiymation. — Swelling  of  r.  upper  lid  on  waking  in  morning,  <  during  walk 
in  fresh  air ;  lower  lid  also  swells  up  and  then  the  1.  (Graphites  6  quickly 
removed  this). — Lachrymation  <  in  fresh  air,  >  in  room. — Everything  appears 
pale,  as  if  a  thin  veil  were  before  eyes. 

4.  Ears. — Pressing  in  ears  as  if  the  wind  was  blown  forcibly  into  them 
for  a  long  time,  the  external  parts  being  equally  affected. — Shooting  and 
tearing  in  1.  ear,  extending  to  external  temporal  region. 

5.  Nose. — L.  nostril  cracked  and  the  crack  bleeds.— Sneezing ;  each 
time  he  blows  his  nose  the  sneezing  reappears. — Sneezing  with  fluent  coryza 
in  morning. — Bleeding;  blood  thin  and  fluid;  when  blowing  nose. — 
Menstrual  flow  intermits  and  bleeding  from  nose  occurs. — Soreness  in  upper 
nose  on  drawiog  air  through  nostrils  in  evening. 

6.  Face. — On  lower  portion  of  inner  side  of  r.  cheek  a  hard  nodule  size 
of  a  pea. — Upper  lip  fissured  and  painful  as  if  raw. — Lips  and  throat  always 
dry,  yet  without  thirst. — Lips  painful  as  if  sore. 

7.  Teeth. — ^The  teeth  stick  together  when  the  jaws  are  closed. — In  the 
morning,  sensation  as  if  the  teeth  were  embedded  deeply  in  some  soft  matter, 
without  pain ;  >  by  eating. — ^Teeth  painful  as  if  loose,  gums  swollen, 
scorbutic ;  <  by  hot  soup. — ^Toothache  like  numbness  in  carious  molars, 
coming  on  inunediately  on  lying  down,  >  on  rising  and  moving  about — 
Grumbling  in  front  teeth;  sensation  as  if  gums  swollen  and  teeth  (which  are 
firm)  would  drop  out — ^Tearing  in  all  teeth  in  morning  on  rising ;  tearing 
extends  to  temples ;  to  forehead ;  to  nose. — Gums  swollen. — Painful  jerking- 
tearing  in  gums. 

S.  Moiith.-^Whole  tongue  red,  covered  with  raised  pimples  like  herring 
roe.— Tip  of  tongue  dry,  back  covered  with  thin  dirty  white  coating.— Anterior 
part  of  tongue  rough  like  a  grater. — Insensible  feeling  in  mouth  as  if  scalded 
by  fat — Pappy  and  sticky  in  mouth  early  in  morning. — ^Taste  sour  after 
eating;  putrid. 

g.  Throat.— In  morning  much  white  bad-tasting  mucus  in  throat, 
expectorated  after  slight  paroxysms  of  coughing. — Sensation  of  mucus  in 
throat  without  being  able  to  expectorate. — Sensation  of  drjmess  on  uvula. 

II.  Stomach.-— Eructations :  tasting  of  food.— Vomiting  of  food.— 
Nausea :  till  3  a.m. ;  on  becoming  erect ;  with  much  thirst  and  copious 
menstruation,  and  trembling  through  all  limbs ;  lancinating  pains  under  r. 
breast — ^Vomiturition  emanating  from  lower  abdomen ;  dark  green  tasteless 
mucus. — Bloatedness  and  sensation  of  fulness  of  stomach,  with  internal  chilli- 
ness in  evening. — Region  of  stomach  feels  internally  sore  and  distended ; 
pains  under  t>oth  short  ribs. 

la.  Abdomen . — Frequent  bort>orygmus. — Passing  flatus  >  pains. — Pains 
<  by  coughing,  sneezing,  blowing  nose. — In  muscles  of  1.  side  of  abdomen, 
from  pelvic  bones  obliquely  downwards,  a  painful  tension  like  what  she  formerly 
felt  during  pregnancy w — Contracting  pain  and  twisting  >  by  bending  over ; 
one  day  before  menstruation. — Cutting  pains  during  menstruation,  when  the 
pains  cease  discharge  is  always  copious ;  blood  red  and  very  thin. — In  1.  side 
of  abdomen,  immediately  over  crista  ilii,  when  walking,  raising  arm,  or  cough- 
ing^ a  severe  pain  nearly  taking  breath  away  ;  she  feels  nothing  when  at  rest ; 
after  a  few  hours  pains  move  low  down  into  abdomen  and  then  pass  o£F. — ^In 


746  EUPIONUM 

1.  anterior  crest  of  ilium  stitches  when  walking. — Squeezing,  pressing  pain  in  L 
groin  when  quiet. 

13.  Stool  and  Rectum. — Spasmodic  pains  a  few  inches  up  into 
rectum,  radiating  up  and  down,  extending  into  labia,  with  such  severity  she 
cannot  sit  down,  >  after  sleep,  but  backache  and  nausea  come  on. — Spas- 
modic periodically  returning  pains  one  inch  up  rectum,  extending  to  vagina 
and  producing  there  a  spasmodic,  contracting  pain. — Drawing  and  tearing  in 
rectum,  <  during  (natural)  stool. — Itching  after  natural  stooL — Ineffectual 
inclination  and  straining. — ^Tenesmus  ;  >  when  blood  is  passed  ;  this  weakens 
her.— Three  or  four  times  daily,  bloody  stools. — Hard,  dry  stools,  with  great 
straining. — Dark  blood  in  painless  stools. — Constipation  :  stool  every  three  ot 
four  days,  with  great  straining  and  prolapsus  uteri. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  inclination,  scanty  discharge;  worse 
when  standing  than  sitting. — Frequent  and  copious  ;  lemon  colour  ;  chestnut 
brown  before  menses. — Hot  urine  passed  without  pain. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — During  urination  some  pain  between 
labia. — Burning,  stinging,  itching  and  swelling  between  labia,  momentarily 
>  by  rubbing,  afterwards  burning  and  < ;  after  washing  with  cold  water 
genitals  feel  stiff  and  numb,  with  sensation  of  soreness  and  rawness. — Pmritos 
pudendi ;  <  evening  ;  with  raw  pain  in  sternum  unendurable  when  touched.— 
Discharge  of  blood  between  pains  with  backache. — Eight  days  after  period, 
leucorrhcea  staining  linen  yellow  in  spots  size  of  sixpence ;  lassitude  ;  emacia- 
tion ;  stitching  in  soles  of  feet  when  walking ;  trembling  all  over  (as  if  a  jelly) 
when  at  rest — ^When  backache  ceases  leucorrhcea  gushes  out  alnnptly,  with 
sticking  pains  in  forehead.— Copious  leucorrhcea,  running  from  her,  remits 
evening,  returns  morning. — Menses  a  few  days  too  soon,  without  the 
leucorrhoea  which  usually  precedes  them. — Menses  too  soon ;  too  copious ;  a 
flooding ;  bruised  sensation  in  chest ;  when  breathing,  stitches  in  middle  d 
chest  and  in  heart ;  taking  away  breath  ;  pains  decrease  the  third  day.— 
Copious,  thin,  fluid  menstrual  discharge ;  with  severe  backache,  painless 
pulsating  in  head,  pressing  towards  forehead,  with  full  sensation.— During 
menstruation  painful  twisting  deep  in  abdomen  extending  to  rectum,  inter- 
mitting and  returning  ;  as  soon  as  the  pains  cease  the  flooding  sets  in  a^in. 
— Menses  stopped  twenty-four  hours ;  returned  and  continued  twenty-four 
hours,  with  sensation  as  if  whole  upper  part  of  body  from  short  ribs  to  head 
were  wabbling  ;  she  has  slightly  the  same  soaring  sensation  in  her  feet.~On 
third  day  courses  cease  and  she  suffers  from  severe  headache  and  chilliness ; 
fourth  day  flow  returns  copiously  for  a  few  hours  and  headache  and  chilliness 
cease.— On  menses  ceasing  abruptly,  nausea,  salivation,  and  irritability  come 
on,  ceasing  completely  when  flow  returned. — Scanty  menses,  the  usual  draw- 
ing abdominal  pains  to  genitals  did  not  appear. — In  a  case  of  suppressed 
menses  Eupian  9  caused  severe  cutting  abdominal  pains  emanating  from 
sacrum,  as  if  something  would  press  out  of  genital  parts ;  pains  passed  and 
returned  at  intervals  ;  after  twenty-four  hours  she  was  well,  and  the  courses 
appeared  without  any  trouble. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Sensation  below  larynx  as  if  something 
was  sticking  there,  with  short,  dry,  hacking  cough. — Smarting  in  a  spot  size 
of  bean,  on  internal  r.  side  of  larynx. — Crawling  in  upper  bronchi  causing  dry 
cough.— Tickling  r.  side  larynx  causing  continual  cough  ;  paroxysms  causing 


EUPIONUM  747 

short  breath  which  ceases  after  expectoration  of  tasteless  white  mucus. — 
Roagh,  scraping,  metallic,  dry  cough,  as  if  he  had  eaten  rancid  fat  and  taken 
brandy  afterwards. — Hard,  sufEocating,  dry  cough  with  stitches  in  chest; 
returning  every  winter. — Cough  partly  dry,  partly  loose,  with  thick  yellow, 
greenish  or  grey,  sometimes  foul-tasting  expectoration ;  great  lassitude  and 
thirst. — Cough  >  by  warm  drinks  ;  by  sitting  up  in  bed  ;  with  breaking  out 
of  perspiration. 

18.  Chest. — Heaviness,  oppression,  stitches,  and  tickling  in  chest. — 
Stitches  and  pressure  in  sternum. — Mammae  increase  in  size,  with  pressive  pains 
in  them,  as  if  something  painful  were  drawn  through  them  with  oppression. 
— Stitches  under  r.  mamma,  in  the  skin ;  <  by  lying,  breathing,  or  walking ; 
beginning  7  p.m.  and  lasting  till  midnight,  followed  by  stitches  close  under 
heart,  and  with  malaise  and  hot  rising  from  stomach. 

19.  Heart. — Palpitation  with  slow  pulse ;  believes  her  heart  must  be 
heard  some  distance  away. — Four  hours  before  menses  appear  severe  palpita- 
tions, ceasing  when  the  flow  begins. 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — Pulsating  and  burning  node  on  muscles  of  neck, 
1.  side,  two  inches  below  mastoid  process,  preventing  turning  neck. — Back- 
ache one  day  before  menses,  >  bending  backward,  lasts  all  the  first  day. — 
Backache  alternating  with  leucorrhcea. — Backache  during  menses,  >  by 
leaning  up  against  something. — Stiffness  and  horripilations  between  shoulders. 
— Pressive  heaviness  in  lumbar  vertebrae. — Pains  in  back  extend  to  pelvis ; 
when  she  stoops  she  can  hardly  rise  again ;  sacrum  pains  as  if  broken. 

fti.  Limbs. — Lassitude  with  yawning  sleepiness. — ^Tearing  in  extremities 
and  restlessness  in  legs  preventing  sleep. 

82.  Upper  Limt>s.~Trembhng ;  paralytic  pain  ;  crampy  pain  in  r.  arm. 
— As  if  muscles  beaten  ofiF  bone  (axillary  side  of  r.  arm). — Paralysing  stitches 
in  r.  deltoid. — Stitching  pains  in  elbows  radiating  to  fingers. — In  centre  of 
r.  palm,  severe  stitch  radiating  to  elbow,  and  leaving  sensation  of  numbness 
in  ring  and  little  fingers. — Hands  go  to  sleep  easily. — Dislocation  pains  in 
joints  of  r.  hand. — Heads  of  bones  of  fingers  feel  too  large. 

23.  Lcwer  Limbs. — In  both  thighs  a  tensive  pain  as  if  skin  and  muscles 
were  too  short. — From  upper  end  of  r.  hip  painful  drawing  to  middle  of  thigh, 
where  it  ends  with  a  stitch. — Sensation  at  back  of  thigh  as  if  muscles  were 
torn  from  bones,  <  by  ascending,  stooping,  sitting,  and  by  touch. — Paralytic, 
dislocation  pain  in  r.  knee. — Stitches  in  either  knee. — Cramps  in  calves. — 
Sensation  of  warmth  in  1.  anterior  leg,  upper  part  (as  from  hot  vapour)  ;  burn- 
ing in  calves. — In  morning  stitching,  burning,  and  twitching,  beginning  in  the 
calves,  going  to  the  toes,  most  severe  in  the  heels ;  in  evening  the  pains  lessen 
in  the  calves  but  stitches  continue  to  shoot  back  and  forth  in  the  heels,  gradu- 
ally ceasing  after  an  hour. — Dislocation  pain  in  joints  of  r.  foot. — Soles  of 
feet  numb  as  if  she  walked  on  needles. — Stitches  in  middle  of  sole  first  day  of 
menses. — Drawing  stitching  in  r.  heel  running  up  to  calf. 

24.  Generalities. — R.  cheek  cold,  tip  of  tongue  cold,  whole  r.  side  of 
body  cold. 

25.  Skin. — Nodule  on  1.  forearm. — Itching  biting  in  skin ;  in  genitals 
penetrating  whole  body ;  <  night ;  >  during  motion. 

26.  Sleep. — ^Yawning  with  chilliness  and  shivering.— Sleepiness  towards 
Doon. — Dreams  of  disgusting  things ;  of  naked  persons ;  anxious  dreams ;  of 


748  EUPIONUM 

her  child  falling  into  the  water. — Frightful  dreams,  the  same  dream  repeated. 
— Dreams  that  she  is  pursued  by  oxen;  of  falling  into  an  abyss.— Wakes 
bathed  in  perspiration. 

97.  Fever.— Chilliness  with  headache  ;  with  stitching ;  >  by  wanndrinL 
— Dry  heat  towards  noon. — Sweat  of  foul  odour  on  least  exertion.— Cdliqoative 
sweating  on  least  exertion ;  when  eating ;  all  night — Copious  ni^t-sweat 
towards  morning. 


Fagopyrmn. 


Fagopyrum  esculentum.    Polygonum  fagopyrum.    Buckwheat.   N.  0, 
Polygonaceae.    Tincture  of  the  whole  mature  plant. 

ClialoaL— Arteries,  throbbing  of.  Diarrhoea.  Eczema.  Eyes,  affections  of. 
Genitals,  ctfensive  sweat  of.  Granular  lids.  Hands,  sweat  of.  Headache.  Heart, 
affections  of.  Heartburn.  Intertrigo.  Itching  eruptions.  Liver,  affections  of. 
Munips.  Nausea.  Nose,  soreness  of;  crusts  in.  Ophthalmia.  Palpitation. 
Pruritos  pudendi.    Rheumatism.    Styes.    Taste,  altered.    Throat,  sore. 

CharaetariBtioB. — Fagopyrum  has  had  an  extensive  proving,  and 
though  there  is  little  clinical  experience  with  the  drug  on  record, 
some  features  are  sufficiently  well  marked  to  justify  their  being 
classed  as  characteristics.  One  of  the  most  marked  symptoms  is  a 
visible  pulsation  of  the  carotids  and  other  arteries.  Onensiveness 
distinguishes  many  excretions.  Headaches  involving  eyes,  root  of 
nose,  and  back  of  neck ;  hot  head  \  <  bending  head  forward,  > 
bending  head  backward.  Headache  with  tired  neck.  Itching  is 
general ;  scalp,  eyes,  margins  of  lids  ;  ears  ;  nose.  The  nose  is  sore 
and  has  crusts  in  it.  Lips  dry  and  cracked.  Many  symptoms  of 
sore  throat.  Rheumatic  symptoms  are  >  by  motion.  Heat  and 
restlessness  after  retiring.  Perspiration,  often  ofiFensive.  The 
symptoms  are  <  in  afternoon  from  3  to  6 ;  <  ii  p.m. ;  <  after  re- 
tiring ;  <  from  warmth  ;  <  from  motion  ;  >  by  cold  applications  ; 
from  cold  air.;  >  from  pressure.  Berridge  has  recorded  two  cases  in 
which  Fogo.  was  of  service.  In  one  it  removed  the  following 
symptoms  after  aggravating  the  pain  in  the  shoulder :  On  waking, 
dull,  bruised  pain  in  top  of  left  shoulder,  rather  posteriorly,  extend- 
ing up  neck,  <  on  moving  the  part,  going  off  after  breakfast  and 
returning  later  in  the  day  ;  constipation  ;  nausea  a  little  before  11  a.m., 
afterwards  dull  pain  in  left  temple,  feeling  of  heat  all  over.  In  the 
other  case  it  permanently  removed  (after  a  week's  aggravation),  sinking 
in  the  stomadi  about  6  or  7  p.m.,  and  temporarily  removed  a  chronic 
diarrhoea  about  6  or  7  a.m.  The  diarrhoea  was  increased  later  and 
was  met  by  Laches.  Hale  mentions  that  there  is  a  popular  belief  that 
indulgence  in  buckwheat  cakes  is  a  prolific  cause  of  skin  eruptions. 
He  has  found  it  curative  in  cases  of  eczema,  erythema,  and  intertrigo. 

Ralatto]lS.--Co#n^artf :  Rhus  (>  by  motion) ;  Senega  (>  bend- 
ing head  back) ;  Lye.  (hours  of  aggravation  3  to  6  p.m.) ;  Puis. ; 
Polygonum.    Coffee  relieve  stomach  symptoms. 

749 


750  FAGOPYRUM 


STHPTOHS. 

I.  Mind. — Exceedingly  happy.  —  Depressed;  cross;  irritable.  —  In- 
ability to  fix  attention. 

a.  Head.— Dull  headache. — Head  hot  and  neck  tired ;  dull  pain  all 
through  head  in  evening. — Bursting  headache;  pressure  from  vdthin  out- 
wards ;  feeling  as  if  eyes  were  pressed  out  from  behind. — Headache  on 
waking ;  >  by  eating ;  <  after  retiring  in  evening ;  >  bending  head  back  ; 
>  walking  in  open  air. — Itching  of  scalp  <  sitting  still  in  warm  room. — Sharp, 
thread-like  pains  of  scalp. 

3.  Eyes.— Eyes  swollen,  red,  hot,  itching;  as  if  sand  in  eyes. — 
Meibomian  glands  of  1.  lower  lid  inflamed  ;  itching  in  margins. — Lachryma- 
tion,  <  by  reading. — ^Aching  deep  in  eyeballs. — Feeling  as  if  eyeballs  were 
being  pushed  out  and  at  the  same  time  held  back  by  cords. 

4.  Ears. — Heat,  itching  and  neuralgic  pains  in  external  ears. — Itching 
along  Eustachian  tubes. 

5.  Nose. — Soreness  of  nose. — Nose  red  and  sore  externally. — Septum 
deeply  cracked. — Fluent  coryza. — Crusts  in  nostrils. 

6.  Face. — Face  flushed. — Soreness  of  1.  malar  bone,  also  of  temporal 
region. — Lips  dry  and  cracked  ;  longitudinal  crack  on  upper  lip. 

7.  8.  Teeth  and  Mouth.— Soreness  of  teeth  in  closing  them;  < 
by  cold  water. — Gums  sore  and  bleed  easily. — Swelling  in  roof  of  mouth. 
— Bad  taste  in  mouth  in  morning. — ^Taste  of  ingesta  after  dinner  with 
eructations. 

g.  Throat.— Thick  mucus  collects  in  throat  on  rising.— Throat  sore, 
dry,  raw,  inflamed,  aching ;  feeling  as  if  a  lump  in  oesophagus ;  painful  on 
swallowing. — Tonsils  swollen ;  badly-smelling  cheesy  mass  coughed  up. — 
Throbbing  of  carotids. — Parotid  and  submaxillary  glands  swollen,  sore,  and 
painful. 

II.  Stomach. — During  the  day  occasional  eructations  of  scalding, 
acid,  watery  substance,  so  hot  as  almost  to  cause  strangulation. — Nausea  > 
by  eating. — Uneasy,  empty  feeling  in  stomach. — Bruised,  sore  feeling  in 
stomach. 

13.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  region  of  liver  on  stooping,  and  a  bruised,  sore 
feeling  at  10  a.m. ;  <  lying  on  r.  side. — Sharp  sticking  through  liver  from 
before  backward. — ^Abdomen  distended  with  flatulence ;  tympanitic  ;  <  by 
pressure  of  clothes. — Soreness  in  hypogastrium ;  sharp  pains  through  hypo- 
gastric region  extending  into  1.  inguinal  region. 

13.  Stool  and  Rectum. — Burning  in  rectum  after  stool ;  creeping ; 
urging ;  tenesmus. — Diarrhoea  with  tenesmus ;  stools  watery  or  pappy ;  with 
flatulence ;  very  offensive. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Cutting  in  urethra. — Difficulty  in  voiding  last 
drops  of  urine ;  several  drops  pass  after  he  thinks  he  has  finished. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Profuse,  offensive  sweat  of  genital  organs. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Pains  in  r.  ovary  ;  on  walking  in  after- 
noon.—Pruritus,  >  by  cold  water. — Leucorrhoea  staining  yellow. — Mamma 
less  painful  than  usual  before  period. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Breath  very  offensive. — ^Touching  the  neck 


FAGUS  751 

occasions  a  cough  with  a  smarting  sensation  extending  to  the  ear  and  throat, 
under  lobe  of  r.  ear. 

18.  Chest. — Heavy  feeling,  bruised  pains  and  stitches  in  chest. — ^After 
retiring,  severe  sticking  through  breast  from  nipple  backv^ard,  >  by  pressure. 
— Sharp,  stitch-like  needle  prick  in  r.  breast  on  inspiration. — ^Twinges  of  pain 
up  and  down  1.  breast,  outer  side. 

19.  Heart. — Pain  around  heart ;  >  lying  on  back  ;  extending  to  1.  shoulder 
and  arm. — ^Throbbing  of  heart  and  all  arteries,  even  those  of  lips,  comes  on 
after  retiring ;  sour  perspiration  breaks  out. — Palpitation  with  oppression. — 
Pulse  irregular  and  intermittent. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  of  neck  and  soreness  of  all  neck 
muscles. — Neck  tired ;  as  if  unable  to  support  head. — Dull  pain  in  back  of 
neck,  at  base  of  occiput,  >  bending  head  backwards. — Stitching  pains  in 
region  of  r.  kidney. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  in  shoulder  every  morning,  greatly  <  by 
getting  chilly. — From  5  to  6  p.m.  pain  in  1.  axilla  extending  down  biceps 
muscle  and  also  into  pectorals. — Numbing  pain  in  1.  axilla  extending  down 
arms. — Pain  in  hands  as  if  in  bones  ;  <  touching  cold  table  ;  visible  throbbing 
of  arteries. 

23.  Lo'wer  Limbs. — Pain  from  hips  up  to  small  of  back ;  also  down  to 
feet. — Numbness  from  knees  down. — Feet  numb  and  pricking,  esp.  toes. — 
Pain  in  1.  os  calcis. 

25.  Skin. — General  and  excessive  itching,  with  or  without  eruption,  most 
marked  on  pubes,  pudenda,  whiskers  and  hairy  portions  of  body  generally  ; 
<  in  afternoon,  5  to  7. 

26.  Sleep. — Constant  desire  to  yawn  and  stretch,  5  to  6  p.m. — Restless 
night ;  wakes  5  a.m.  and  sleeps  again ;  many  dreams. 

27.  Fever. — Chills  along  back  in  afternoon. — Heat  4  to  6,  soon  perspir- 
ing.— Heat  and  restlessness  after  retiring. — Face,  head,  and  hands  burn  in 
afternoon. — Hands  and  feet  alternately  hot  and  cold.— Cold,  clammy  sweat 
at  night ;  very  profuse. — Sweat  of  hands,  though  cold. — Soles  of  feet  moist ; 
disagreeable  odour  in  axillae. 


Fagus. 


Fagus  sylvatica.    Beech.    N.  0.    Cupulif  erse.    Trituration  of  the  nuts. 

GUnieal, — Epilepsy.    Headache.    Hydrophobia.    Vertigo. 

Charaoteristios. — Our  knowledge  of  this  remedy  is  derived  from 
the  ill  efifects  of  eating  the  nuts ;  among  which  are  dread  of  liquids 
and  salivation.  It  is  ttiis  which  has  suggested  its  use  in  hydrophobia. 
In  addition,  trembling,  convulsions  with  periodic  spasms,  stiffness  and 
coldness  have  been  observed,  pointing  to  the  same  kind  of  nerve 
irritation  as  is  caused  by  the  poison  of  rabies.  Swelling  of  the  mouth 
and  headache  were  noted  in  one  case.  In  some  instances  death  has 
resulted  from  the  effects  of  the  nuts. 


752  FEL  TAURI 

Balfttkms. — Compare :  Epiphegas  (which  grows  on  the  beech  and 
partakes  of  its  properties)  in  headache  and  salivation. 

STHPTOHB. 

I.  Mind. — Intoxication. — Dread  of  water. — ^Terrified ;  apprdiensive  of 
death. — Gloomy  and  torpid. 

a.  Head.-^Dizziness  and  stup^action  lasting  all  night;  reeling.— 
Intoxication. — Headache ;  lasting  several  hours ;  dull ;  frontal. — Swelling  of 
mouth,  and  headache. 

8.  Mouth. — Salivation ;  mouth  flowing  with  froth  and  saliva.— Swelling 
of  mouth,  and  headache. 

II.  Stomach. — Mouth  flowing  with  froth  and  saliva ;  intolerahle  thirst ; 
entreating  for  drink,  but  as  soon  as  any  liquid  was  brou^t  he  seemed  to 
shudder  as  after  eating  unripe  grapes ;  soon  after  eating  the  nuts  had  been  seized 
with  gloominess,  torpor,  and  dread  of  liquids ;  urine  fiery  red,  depositing 
copious  turbid  white  sediment. — ^A  few  hours  before  death  vomited  a  porra- 
cious  bile.  (This  patient,  a  boy,  had  not  been  bitten  by  a  rabid  animaL}— 
Nausea. 

i8.  Chest. — Seized  with  pleurisy,  soon  became  delirious,  and  died  in 
convulsions  on  eleventh  day. 

87.    Fever. — ^Ardent  fever. — Skin  burning  violently. 


Fel  Tanri. 

Ox  Gaul.  Bilis  Bovina.  A^.  0.  Ruminantia.  Impissated  gall  triturated 
with  sugar  of  milk ;  or  lower  dilutions  may  be  made  with  water. 

GlinioaL — ^Asthma.    Constipation.    Diarrhoea.    Gall-stones.    Headache.    Indi- 
gestion.   Rheumatism. 

ChaFaoterlsticB. — Ox  gall  is  a  remedy  of  very  ancient  use.  It  is 
used  in  the  old-school  mostly  as  a  purgative ;  for  preventing  putrefac- 
tive changes  in  the  intestines,  and  for  increasing  peristalsis.  It  is 
sometimes  given  along  with  Opium  to  prevent  the  constipating  e£fect 
of  that  drug.  In  the  stomach  bile  is  a  foreign  body,  precipitating 
pepsin  and  causing  irritation  of  the  stomach.  It  does  not  aid  the 
digestion  either  of  albumen  or  of  farinaceous  substances.  Fel.  L  has 
been  proved  homoeopathically  by  Buchner,  and  has  produced  a  few 
characteristic  symptoms :  disordered  digestion,  diarrhcea,  headache, 
pains  in  joints,  and  cramps.  It  removed  a  tendency  to  sleep  after 
eating.    Several  symptoms  were  noticed  in  nape  of  neck. 

Relations. — Compare :  Cholesterinum,  Merc.  dulc. 

BTMPT0H8. 

I.    Mind. — Peevish,  irritable  mood.— Greatly  inclined  to  all  kinds  of 
business ;  unpleasant  impressions  did  not  affect  him. 


FERRUM  753 

a.    Head.— Confusion. — ^Violent  headache  in  morning,  on  pressure  upon 
r.  temple,  extending  on  to  occiput  and  nape  of  neck. 
8.    Mouth.— Tongue  white. 

II,  12.  Stomach  and  Abdomen.— Increased  thirst.— -Odourless  and 
tasteless  eructations. — Gurgling  in  stomach  and  epigastric  region. — Rumblings 
and  motions  in  abdomen. — Violent  peristaltic  movements. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Stool  thin  with  urging  and  sensation  of  warmth 
in  anus. — Stool  thin,  pasty,  followed  by  pressing  although  with  crumbling 
faeces. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — ^Urging. — Urine  offensive. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Scrotum  itching  and  afterwards  becomes 
moist. 

18.  Chest.— Anxiety  in  chest.— Constriction ;  on  waking  at  3  a.m.  cannot 
sleep  again  for  tightness  of  breath  and  cannot  remain  lying;  it  seems  as 
though  something  in  throat  prevented  free  passage  of  the  air ;  >  by  deep 
inspiration  and  sitting  upright. 

90.    Neck. — ^Tension  in  nape. 

sz.  Limbs. — Some  tearings  in  1.  shoulder-joint,  extending  up  to  nape  of 
neck. — Cramp  in  r.  toe. 

86.  Sleep. — Sound  sleep  in  morning  with  some  perspiration. — No  incli* 
nation  to  sleep  after  eating,  as  he  was  accustomed  to  do. 


Ferrmn. 

Iron.  Fe.  (A.  W.  56).  Including  also  symptoms  of  the  acetate  and 
the  carbonate.  Triturations  of  the  pure  metal  and  of  the 
carbonate ;  solution  of  the  acetate.  The  Protozalate  is  also  a 
useful  preparation  in  the  crude  and  in  trituration.  ''  HensePs 
Tonicum,"  a  liquid,  is  another  serviceable  form. 

OliaieaL— Anaemia.  Aphonia.  Asthma.  Biliousness.  Catalepsy.  Chlorosis. 
Chorea.  Consumption  (Fc.  acct.).  Coufh.  Cramps.  Debility.  Diarrhoea,  Enu- 
resis diuma.  Fever,  intermittent.  Goitre^  exophthalmic.  Gonorrhoea.  Haemor- 
rhages. Heart,  affections  of ;  palpitation  of.  Hectic.  Hydrocephalus.  Kidneys^ 
affections  of,  Lienteria.  Menstruation^  disorders  of.  Neuralgia.  Paralvsis  of  viscera. 
Pregnancy,  disorders  of.  Rectum,  prolapsus  of.  Rheumatism.  Shoulder,  affections 
of.    Spasms.    Syphilis.    Toothache.    Urine,  incontinence  of.    Vertigo. 

Charaoteristios. — Fcrrum^  the  Mars  of  the  alchemists,  is  one  of 
the  prominent  constituents  of  the  animal  body,  being  present  in 
considerable  quantity  in  the  blood.  It  is  present  in  many  articles  of 
daily  food,  and  when  given  in  excess  to  men  or  animals  its  first  efiFect 
is  to  increase  the  amount  of  iron  in  the  blood,  stimulate  the  appetite, 
augment  the  heart's  beats  and  the  bodily  vigour.  The  secondary 
e£Eects,  which  ensue  sooner  or  later  if  the  administration  of  iron  is 
continued,  are  those  which  give  the  indications  for  homoeopathic 
prescribing.  Hahnemann  (Mat,  Med.  Pur,)  describes  the  effects  of  iron 
on  persons  who  habitually  drink  chalybeate  waters :  ''  In  such  locali- 

VOL.  I.  49 


754  FERRUM 

ties  there  are  few  persons  who  can  resist  the  noxious  influence  of  the 
continued  use  of  such  waters  and  remain  quite  well,  each  being  affected 
according  to  his  peculiar  nature.  There  we  find  more  than  anywhere 
else  chronic  affections  of  great  gravity  and  peculiar  character,  even 
when  the  regimen  is  otherwise  faultless.  Weakness,  almost  amounting 
to  paralysis  of  the  whole  body  and  of  single  parts,  some  kinds  of 
violent  Umb  pains,  abdominal  affections  of  various  sorts,  vomiting  of 
food  by  day  or  by  night,  phthisical  pulmonary  ailments,  often  with 
blood  spitting,  deficient  vital  warmth,  suppression  of  the  menses, 
miscarriages,  impotence  in  both  sexes,  sterility,  jaundice,  and  many 
other  rare  cachexias  are  common  occurrences." 

The  digestive  disorders  set  up  by  Iron  are  marked  and  peculiar, 
and  among  them  is  intolerance  of  eggs.  The  occurrence  of  this 
symptom  in  a  patient  about  forty-five,  who  had  had  repeated  attacks 
of  articular  rheumatism,  led  Kunkel  to  cure  his  case  after  he  had  been 
dosed  for  three  weeks  with  salicylate  of  soda  by  the  allopaths.  The 
only  other  distinctive  feature  was  constant  <  of  pain  after  midnight. 
The  obvious  advantages  derived  in  many  cases  of  anaemia  from  the 
use  of  Iron  in  its  crude  forms  has  led  to  very  grave  abuses  in  old- 
school  practice.  That  Iron  is  what  may  be  called  a  "nutritive" 
remedy  in  certain  defective  blood  conditions,  having  an  organopathic 
relation  to  the  blood,  I  have  no  doubt.  In  the  anaemia  of  cancer  and 
syphilis  it  is  often  of  great  service  as  an  accessory,  and  need  not 
interfere  with  more  specific  remedies.  But  it  is  not  suited  to  all  cases 
of  anaemia  and  chlorosis,  or  even  to  a  majority  of  them,  and  should 
never  be  given  without  discrimination  and  careful  watching.  But 
apart  from  its  organopathic  sphere,  Ferrum  has  a  strictly  homoeopathic 
use  in  anaemia  in  which  the  highest  potencies  are  curative.  For 
excess  of  Iron  will  cause  anaemia,  and  at  times  will  aggravate  it  when 
present.  The  type  of  anaemia  caused  by  Iron  and  suited  for  its 
homoeopathic  use  is  commonly  seen  in  young  persons  subject  to 
irregular  distributions  of  blood.  The  cheeks  are  flushed  as  if  in 
blooming  health  ;  but  in  spite  of  bloom  in  appearances  there  is  pallor 
of  lips  and  mucous  membranes,  great  fatigue  and  breathlessness,  and 
any  motion  will  set  up  the  symptoms.  Delicate  girls,  fearfully  con- 
stipated, with  low  spirits.  Chlorosis  with  erethism.  Mucous  mem- 
branes abnormally  pale.  Feet  swell.  The  irregular  distribution  of 
blood  in  chlorotics  recalls  another  set  of  symptoms  which  indicate 
Ferrum :  haemorrhages  of  many  kinds,  from  over-fulness  of  blood- 
vessels from  vaso-motor  paralysis,  or  else  from  delicacy  of  the  vessels 
themselves.  Throbbing  pains,  the  blood-vessels  all  over  the  body  throb 
violently.  Feet  swell.  Fulness  of  blood-vessels  accompanies  neuralgia, 
which  is  brought  on  by  washing  in  cold  water,  especially  after  being 
over-heated.  Hammering  headache.  The  pulse  of  Fertum  is  full  and 
yielding;  (that  of  Aeon,  is  full  and  hounding.  With  Ferrum  there  is 
excessive  irritability,  both  of  the  mind  and  of  the  tissues.  It  is  like 
Arsen.  and  Chin,  in  this,  as  in  many  other  symptoms,  and  it  is  an 
antidote  to  both.  It  is  one  of  the^best  remedies  for  over-dosing  with 
quinine,  and  hence  the  favourite  old-school  combination  of  "  Quinine 
and  Iron"  is  so  far  a  wise  one.  Cramps  are  well  marked  in  the 
pathogenesis ;  irritability  of  the  bladder  causing  incontinence  of  urine 


FERRUM  755 

when  standing;  irritability  of  the  bowels,  causing  diarrhoea  whilst 
eating.  This  symptom  is  peculiar  to  Ferrum^  the  diarrhoea  coming  on 
when  the  patient  begins  to  eat.  Many  remedies  have  it  immediately 
after  eating.  <  From  eating  eggs.  There  is  also  gastralgia,  heavy 
pressure  in  region  of  stomach ;  a  feeling  as  if  something  rolled  into 
the  throat  and  closed  it  Uke  a  valve  ;  frequent  spells  of  nausea, 
periodic  vomiting  (especially  at  twelve  midnight).  The  liver  and 
spleen  are  afifected.  Walls  of  abdomen  are  sore.  Pain  in  os  tincae 
on  lying  down  ;  feeling  of  dryness  in  vagina.  Ferrum  is  a  remedy 
that  should  be  given  carefully  in  haemorrhagic  phthisis,  as  it  may 
aggravate.  The  acetate,  iodide,  and  phosphate  are  better  than  the 
metal  in  such  cases,  unless  the  similarity  is  very  close.  Rheumatic 
symptoms,  especially  of  left  shoulder  and  deltoid.  Paralytic  weakness. 
Restlessness.  Tremor.  Most  symptoms  are  <  by  motion,  especially 
sudden  motion.  Vertigo  on  suddenly  rising ;  when  crossing  a  bridge 
over  water ;  vertigo  as  if  balancing  to  and  fro,  as  when  on  water. 
Neuralgia  is  >  moving  slowly  about.  In  fact "  >  moving  about  slowly  " 
is  a  keynote  condition  of  many  Ferrum  cases.  Rest  <  cramps.  Lying 
down  <  pain  in  face  ;  asthma  ;  =:pain  in  os  tincae  ;  >  cough  {H.  W., 
2^^^-  57)-  Descending  stairs  <  headache.  Walking  slowly  >  pal- 
pitation ;  pain  in  arms  ;  in  hip-joint.  The  chief  time  of  aggravation 
is  night,  and  especially  midnight,  and  also  in  early  morning.  The 
symptoms  generally  are  <  in  cold  weather,  and  >  in  warm  air ;  but 
there  is  a  good  deal  of  contradictoriness  in  this  respect,  showing  the 
irritability  of  Ferrum  to  all  influences :  uncovering  chest  >  asthma 
and  constriction,  but  too  light  covering  <  pain  in  shoulder.  Over- 
heating :s  neuralgia,  and  so  does  washing  in  cold  water.  There  is 
dread  of  open  air,  but  open  air  >  headache.  The  chlorosis  of  Ferrum 
is  <  in  winter. 

Relations. — Ferrum  compares  with  Graphites  (which  contains 
iron),  Manganum,  and  the  other  metals.  Teste  puts  it  at  the  head 
of  a  group  comprising  Plumb.,  Phos.,  Carb.  an..  Puis.,  Zinc,  Secal., 
Mag.  mur.,  Chi.,  Bar.  c.  It  is  antidoied  by :  Ars.,  Chi.,  Hep.,  Ip.,  Puis. 
It  antidotes :  Ars.,  Chi.,  lod.,  Merc,  Hydrocy.  ac,  tea  and  alcoholic 
drinks.  It  is  complementary  to :  Alumina,  Chi.  Compatible :  Aco., 
Am.,  Bell.,  Chi.,  Con.,  Lye,  Merc,  Phos.,  Verat.  Incompatible:  Thea, 
beer.  Compare :  Borax  (vertigo  on  descending) ;  Mang.  (cough  > 
Ijring  down) ;  Anac,  Spo.  (cough  >  after  eating),  Ars.,  Chi.  (intermit- 
tent fever) ;  Phos.  (cholerine) ;  Selen.,  Thuj.  (bad  effects  of  tea).  Graph, 
(flushes  of  heat)  ;  Rhus  (>  from  motion) ;  Oleand.  (lienteria) ;  Caust. 
(paralyses). 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — ^Anxiety,  with  throbbing  in  the  epigastrium. — ^Anxiety  as  after 
committing  a  crime. — Peevish,  passionate,  and  disputative. — Irritable  ;  little 
noises  drive  to  despair. — Gaiety,  alternating  with  sadness,  every  other  day. 

2.  Head. — Confusion  and  heaviness  in  the  head. — ^Vertigo,  which  causes 
falling  forwards,  as  from  the  motion  of  a  carriage,  esp.  on  moving,  stooping, 
&c. — Dizziness  and  turning  vertigo,  on  looking  at  running  water ;  with  sick- 
ne^  at  the  stomach  in  walking ;  with  the  sensation  as  if  the  head  would 


756  FERRUM 

constantly  incline  to  r.  side. — Pressive  pain  in  the  head,  esp.  in  the  fresh  air. 
— Painful  confusion  in  the  head,  above  the  root  of  the  nose,  esp.  in  the 
evening. — Pulling  from  the  nape  of  the  neck  to  the  head,  with  shootings  and 
buzzing. — Periodical  hammering  and  pulsative  headache,  which  oblige  the 
patient  to  lie  down,  every  two  or  three  weeks. — Congestion  in  the  head; 
enlarged  veins,  sensitiveness  of  the  head  to  the  touch ;  worse  after  midnight 
and  towards  morning ;  returning  periodically. — Pain  in  the  back  part  of  the 
head  when  coughing. — Pain  in  the  scalp,  as  if  it  were  galled. — Profuse  falling 
off  of  the  hair,  with  pain  when  it  is  touched. 

3.  Eyes.— Eyes  cloudy,  dull,  and  watery,  with  blue  rings  around  them, 
esp.  after  slight  fatigue  (in  writing). — Eyes  red,  with  burning  pain. — Swelling 
and  redness  of  the  eyelids,  with  a  sty,  suppurating  on  the  upper  lid. 

4*  Ears. — Buzzing  in  the  ears,  mitigated  by  supporting  the  head  on  a 
table. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis,  chiefly  from  one  nostril  and  in  the  evening.— 
Constant  accumulation  of  clots  of  blood  in  the  nose. 

6.  Face. — Face  earth-coloured,  or  pale  and  wan,  with  sunken  eyes.— 
Fiery  redness  of  the  face ;  the  veins  are  enlarged. — ^Yellow  or  bluish  spots 
on  the  face. — Small  red  spots  on  the  cheek,  which  is  pale. — Ptifi&ng  of  the 
face  round  the  eyes. — Lips  pale. 

9.  Throat. — Pressive  pain  in  the  throat,  on  swallowing.— Spitting  of 
blood. — Constrictive  sensation  in  the  throat ;  feeling  as  if  something  rdled 
into  throat  and  closed  it  like  a  valve. 

10.  Appetite. — Sweetish  taste,  like  that  of  blood. — Bitter  taste  of  food- 
Want  of  appetite,  esp.  in  the  morning,  alternating  with  bulimy. — Dislike  to 
food  and  acids. — Longing  for  acids.— Meat  lies  heavy  on  the  stomach.— 
Insatiable  thirst,  or  absence  of  thirst. — Solid  food  appears  too  dry.— After 
every  meal,  risings  and  regurgitation  of  food,  even  of  that  which  has  been 
eaten  with  good  appetite. — ^Vomiting  after  taking  acids. — Pressure  on  the 
stomach  and  on  the  abdomen,  always  following  eating  and  drinking. — Beer 
affects  the  head,  or  causes  vomiting.— Cannot  eat  or  drink  anything  hot 

zi.  Stomach. — Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  during  a  meaL— 
Vomiting  of  food,  esp.  at  night,  or  immediately  after  a  meal,  even  after  eating 
only  fresh  eggs.— Sour  vomiting  and  acid  rising. — Everything  vomited  tastes 
sour  and  is  acrid. — Bitter  risings  after  eating  fat  things. — Pressure  on  the 
stomach,  esp.  after  eating  meat,  or  even  after  taking  the  least  food  or  drink.— 
Cramp-like  pain  in  the  stomach. — Pressive  cramps  in  the  stomach,  on  every 
occasion  of  eating  or  drinking. 

13.  Abdomen. — Inflation  and  hardness  of  the  abdomen. — Liver  enlarged, 
sensitive. — Spleen  large,  sore. — Cramps  in  spleen  region. — Cramp-like  pains 
in  the  abdomen. — Cramps  in  the  abdominal  muscles,  as  if  the  abdomen  were 
contracted,  esp.  during  physical  exertion,  and  on  stooping,  so  that  he  can  only 
straighten  himself  slowly. — Flatulent  colic  at  night  (violent  rumbling  in  the 
abdomen). — Painful  heaviness  in  the  hypogastrium  on  walking. — Painful  weight 
of  the  abdominal  viscera  in  walking,  as  if  they  would  fall  down. — ^Thc  bowels 
feel  sore  as  if  bruised,  when  touching  them  or  when  coughing. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Watery  and  corrosive  diarrhoea,  sometimes 
accompanied  by  cramp-like  pains  in  the  abdomen,  the  back,  and  the  anas.— 
Watery  diarrhoea  with  burning  at  the  anus. — Discharge  of  blood  and  mucus 


FERRUM  757 

at  every  stool. — Painless  diarrhcea  (involuntary  during  a  meal). — Undigested 
f aoces. — Slimy  faeces. — ^Ascarides  in  the  rectum  discharged  with  the  slimy  stool. 
— Costive  :  stools  hard  and  difficult,  followed  by  backache. — Constipation  from 
intestinal  atony ;  with  hot  urine. — Contractive  spasms  in  rectum. — Itching  at 
the  anus  from  ascarides  at  night  (children). — Protrusion  of  large  varices  at 
the  anus. — Blind  and  fluent  haemorrhoids. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Pains  in  bladder. — Involuntary  urination  by 
night  ;  also  by  day. — Constant  desire  to  urinate,  with  pain  in  liver,  chest,  and 
kidneys. — Urine  blood-red,  contains  blood  corpuscles. — ^Albuminuria.— Hot 
urine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Increase  of  sexual  desire,  with  frequent 
erections  and  pollutions. — Impotence. — Nocturnal  emissions. — Flow  of  mucus 
from  the  urethra. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Metrorrhagia,  with  over-excitement  of 
the  sanguineous  system. — Face  fiery  red,  and  copious  flow  of  blood,  at  one 
time  liquid,  at  another  black  and  coagulated,  accompanied  by  pains  in  the 
sacral  region  and  abdomen,  similar  to  those  of  child-birth. — Catamenia  feeble 
and  of  a  pale  blood. — Suppression  of  the  catamenia. — During  coition,  smarting 
and  pain,  like  that  of  excoriation  in  the  vagina,  with  want  of  enjo3rment. — 
Swellings  and  indurations  of  the  vagina. — Prolapse  of  vagina ;  pain  in  os  tineas 
on  lying  down. — Before  the  catamenia,  shooting  pains  in  the  head,  with 
tingling  in  the  ears. — ^Abortion. — Milky  and  corrosive  leucorrhcea. — Sterility. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hot  breath.— Oppressed,  short  breathing. — . 
Hoarseness  and  roughness  in  the  throat. — ^Tickling  in  the  trachea,  which 
greatly  excites  coughing. — Cough,  only  on  moving  and  walking. — Cough  > 
on  lying  down. — Purulent  expectoration  from  the  cough. — Spasmodic  cough, 
esp.  in  the  morning,  with  expectoration  of  tenacious  and  transparent  mucus, 
ceasing  immediately  after  a  meal ;  or  dry,  spasmodic  cough,  commencing  after 
a  meal,  with  vomiting  of  food.^^ensation  of  dryness  in  the  chest. — Cough 
worse  in  the  evening,  till  midnight. — Fetid,  greenish  expectoration,  with 
streaks  of  blood,  esp.  at  night,  or  in  the  morning. — Cough  after  a  meal,  with 
vomiting  of  food. — On  coughing,  pains  in  the  occiput,  or  shootings,  and  pains 
as  of  a  bruise  in  the  chest. 

18.  Chest. — Difficulty  of  respiration,  with  almost  imperceptible  rising  of 
the  chest,  and  great  dilation  of  the  nostrils  during  expiration. — Difficulty  of 
respiration,  esp.  at  night,  or  in  the  evening,  as  if  commencing  in  the  epigas- 
trium, <  during  repose,  and  >  by  intellectual  or  physical  occupation. 
— Fulness  and  tightness  of  the  chest.  —  Asthma  (after  midnight)  com- 
pelling one  to  sit  up. — ^Asthma  most  violent  when  lying,  or  when  sitting 
still  without  doing  anything;  >  by  walking  and  talking. — ^When  sitting 
still,  loud  breathing  as  if  asleep. — Fits  of  suffocation,  in  bed  in  the  evening, 
with  burning  pain  in  the  throat  and  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  and  coldness 
in  the  extremities. — Constrictive  oppression  of  the  chest — Constrictive  spasms 
in  the  chest,  <  by  walking  or  movement. — Stitches  and  soreness  in  the 
chest — Tensive  lancinations  in  the  chest,  extending  to  the  shoulder-blades. 
— Congestion  in  the  chest. 

xg.  Heart. — Palpitation :  <  from  least  motion ;  >  walking  slowly ;  in 
onanists ;  after  loss  of  fluids. — ^Venous  murmurs. — Hypertrophy. 

so.    Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  with  pain 


758  FERRUM 

during  movement— Swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  neck.— Tearing  (paralytic) 
between  the  shoulder-blades  at  night/into  the  upper  arm  (1.) ;  he  cannot  raise 
the  arm ;  slow  movement  improves  it  gradually. — Shootings  in  the  shoulder- 
blades  on  moving  the  arms. 

88.  Upper  Limbs. — Shootings  and  tearings  in  the  joint  of  the  shoulder, 
and  in  the  arm,  or  pullings,  paralytic  weakness,  and  heaviness. — Cracking  in 
the  shoulder-joint. — Nightly  tearing  and  stinging  in  the  arms. — Uneasiness  in 
the  arms. — Swelling  and  desquamation  of  the  skin  of  the  hands. — Cramps  and 
numbness  in  the  fingers. 

83.  Lower  Limbs. — ^Tearings,  with  violent  lancination,  from  the  ono- 
femoral  joint  to  the  tibia,  <  in  evening  in  bed,  and  during  repose. — Paralytic 
weakness  and  numbness  in  the  thighs. — Weakness  in  the  knees,  so  that  they 
yield,  with  uneasiness  of  the  feet. — ^Varices  on  the  legs. — StifiFness,  traction  and 
heaviness  in  the  legs. — Swelling  of  the  knees  and  of  the  joints  of  the  feet— 
Swelling  of  the  feet,  with  drawing  pain,  esp.  on  beginning  to  walk. — Cramps 
in  the  calves  of  the  legs,  the  soles  of  the  feet,  and  the  toes.— The  toes  are 
contracted. 

84.  Greneralities. — Violent  pains,  tearings  and  shootings,  esp.  at  ni^t, 
which  compel  movement  of  the  parts  afFected. — ^Varices. — Contraction  of  the 
limbs. — Cramps  in  the  limbs  (during  the  day). — Dropsical  swellings,  with 
shooting  pains. — Ebullition  of  blood  and  haemorrhage. — ^The  majority  of  the 
symptoms  show  themselves  at  night,  are  aggravated  by  a  sitting  posture,  and 
mitigated  by  gentle  movement. — Great  lassitude  and  general  weakness  (almost 
paralytic),  produced  even  by  speech,  often  alternating  with  anxious  trembling 
of  the  whole  body ;  she  is  so  weak  that  she  must  lie  down. — Emaciation.— 
After  walking  in  the  open  air,  sickly  feeling  of  fatigue,  to  the  extent  of  losing 
consciousness,  with  obscuration  of  the  eyes,  and  buzzing  in  the  head.— Rest- 
lessness of  the  limbs. — Great  need  to  lie  down. — Cracking  in  the  joints. 

85.  Skin. — Burning  sensation  in  different  parts  of  the  skin,  with  pain  as 
from  excoriation  on  being  touched. — Paleness  of  the  skin  over  the  whole 
body. — Dirty,  earth-coloured  skin. — Dropsy. 

86.  Sleep. — Excessive  drowsy  fatigue,  with  agitated  sleep,  at  night, 
anxious  tossing,  numerous  dreams,  and  difficulty  in  going  to  sleep  again  after 
waking. — Vivid  dreams. — Can  only  lie  on  her  back  at  night. — ^The  child  does 
not  sleep,  disturbed  by  the  itching  caused  by  the  ascarides. — Sleep  retarded 
in  the  evening. — ^Anxious  tossing  about  in  bed  (after  midnight).~Eyes  half 
open  during  sleep. — Inability  to  sleep  when  lying  on  the  side. 

37.  Fever. — Frequent  shiverings  of  short  duration. — Shiverings  in  the 
evening  with  a  feeling  of  cold  when  in  bed,  all  night. — Shiverings  with  violent 
thirst,  preceded  or  accompanied  by  headache. — Chill  with  thirst  and  red,  hot 
face. — Dry  heat,  with  urgent  inclination  to  throw  off  all  covering.— Pulse  full 
and  hard. — Ebullition  of  blood  in  the  day,  with  heat  in  the  evening,  esp.  in 
the  hands. — Fever,  with  congestion  in  the  head,  puffing  round  the  eyes,  swell- 
ing of  the  veins,  vomiting  of  food,  short  respiration  and  paralytic  weakness. 
— Copious  perspiration,  excited  by  the  least  movement  during  sleep.— Noc- 
turnal perspiration  of  a  strong  smell. — Cold  perspiration,  with  anxiety  during 
the  spasms. — Colliquative,  clammy  sweat. — Profuse  and  long-continued  per- 
spiration, during  the  day  when  moving,  and  at  night,  and  in  the  morning 
hours  in  bed. 


FERRUM   BROMATUM  759 


Ferrnm  Arsenicicnm. 

Arseniate  of  Iron.    Triferric  diarsenate.    Fe,  2As  O4. 

CUaioaL— -Anaemia.     Bright's  disease.     Chlorosis.     Liver,  enlargement  of. 
Spleen,  enlargement  of. 

CbaraoteristioB. — Hale  was  the  first  to  use  Ft.  an.,  giving  the 
2x  with  -promptly  curative  result  to  an  anaemic  girl  who  had  been 
given  Iron  and  Arsenic  separately,  under  old-school  treatment,  in  vain. 
P.  C.  MajuQidar  {Ind.  Horn,  Rev,,  v.  104)  has  put  it  to  excellent  use  in 
cases  of  enlarged  liver  and  spleen  with  fever.  When  there  is  no 
fever  Fe.  tod.  is  better.  These  are  his  indications  for  Fe,  ars.  : 
Enlarged  spleen  with  high  fever  of  a  continued  type  ;  during  fever 
the  face  is  flushed  and  sweaty,  but  during  the  intermission  the  face  is 
pallid.  Disinclination  to  work,  even  to  leave  his  bed  ;  constipation, 
or,  sometimes,  colliquative  diarrhoea,  the  stools  consisting  of  un- 
digested matter  and  mucus,  no  thirst  during  any  stage  of  the  fever ; 
heat  intense  and  prolonged  with  slight  burning  of  the  whole  body, 
emaciation,  and  debility.  Majumdar  reports  these  two  cases  :  A 
robust,  healthy  man,  25,  went  into  a  very  malarious  district  of  Bengal 
and  had  his  first  attack  of  fever.  He  was  given  large  doses  of  Quinine 
which  suppressed  the  paroxysms  for  a  time,  but  they  continually 
recurred.  After  four  years  he  returned  home  a  changed  man  :  pale, 
jaundiced,  emaciated  ;  abdomen  filled  with  enlarged  and  indurated 
liver  and  spleen,  slightly  tender  to  pressure.  These  organs  left  no 
room  for  his  food.  He  had  obstinate  constipation  ;  high  fever 
generally  appearing  in  afternoon,  no  chill  or  thirst,  but  copious  sweat 
without  much  relief  to  fever.  Fe.  ars.  6,  twice  daily,  made  an  im- 
provement in  three  days.  It  was  continued  for  a  month  and  a  half 
with  occasional  stoppages,  and  in  six  months  he  was  completely 
restored  to  health.  (2)  A  boy,  15,  suffered  from  fever  and  enlarged 
spleen.  The  liver  was  not  enlarged.  Voracious  appetite,  but  no 
digestion,  undigested  diarrhoeic  stools.  Continued  fever,  102^  to 
104°,  burning  of  body.  Some  thirst.  Great  emaciation.  Fe.  ars.  6 
night  and  morning.  He  was  cured  perfectly  in  a  year.  Fe.  ars.  has 
been  used  with  benefit  in  cases  of  albuminuria. 

Relations.— Co^n^ar^ ;  Fe.  i.,  Fer.,  Ars.,  Calc.  ars.,  Chi. 


Ferrnm  Bromatnm. 

Bromide  of  Iron.    Fe  Br,.    Trituration.    Solution. 

CainieaL— Headache.    Leucorrhoea.    Spermatorrhoea.    Uteros,  prolapse  of. 

CSharacterirtioB. — Hale  mentions  this  remedv  as  having  been 
highly  commended  to  him  in  cases  of  spermatorrhoea  with  anaemia, 


76o  FERRUM   BROMATUM 

debility,  and  depression.  It  has  been  since  proved  by  Dr.  Sarah  N. 
Smith,  of  New  York,  who  took  the  sixth  dilution  of  Boericke  and 
Tafel's  make  (Amer.  Horn,,  xxi.  302).  It  produced  (in  this  order) : 
Very  distinct  symptoms  in  the  head  and  eyes  ;  dry  mouth  and  nose, 
relieved  by  coryza  ;  a  feeling  that  she  might  die  ;  diarrhoea  ;  burning 
in  urethra  when  urinating  ;  sticky,  excoriating  leucorrhoea ;  weight 
and  discomfort  in  uterus.  The  symptoms  which  made  the  most 
impression  on  the  proverwere  the  "dead,  numb"  feeling  of  the 
scalp ;  the  unconscious  moaning  after  stool ;  and  the  sticky,  ex- 
coriating leucorrhcea.  The  heaviness  and  discomfort  in  the  uterus 
was  so  severe  that  she  declined  to  continue  the  proving  as  it  inter- 
fered with  her  work. 

Relations. — Heavy  eyes,  Con.,  Caust.,  Gels.  Smarting  while 
urinating,  Can.  s.  (Can.  s.  has  burning  while  urinating  and  after), 

BTMPTOMB. 

z.  Mind. — ^Woke  at  2  a.m.  with  the  feeling  that  I  might  die,  which 
lasted  for  a  few  moments  and  passed  away.  Recurred  three  different 
mornings  at  the  same  hour  (9  o'clock). 

a.  Head, — Severe  internal  pressure  in  occiput,  producing  a  painful 
sensation  in  ears,  as  if  they  were  pressed  from  within  outwards ;  after  a  few 
hours  the  same  feeling  extended  to  vertex,  producing  a  dead,  numb  feeling  of 
the  scalp  extending  from  occiput  to  vertex. — Head  feels  enlarged  in  all 
directions,  the  ears  seeming  to  stand  out  from  the  head. 

3.  Eyes. — Heavy  feeling  in  the  eyes  and  drooping  of  lids,  could  not 
keep  eyes  open. — Dull  appearance  of  eyes. 

5.    Nose. — Dryness  of  nose. — Dryness  of  nose  and  mouth  >  by  coryza. 

8.    Mouth. — Mouth  very  dry. — ^Tongue  dry  and  stiffened  on  waking, 
la.    Abdomen. — Much  rumbling  in  1.  hypochondrium,  accompanied 
with  diarrhoea. 

13.  Stool. — Diarrhoea  followed  with  a  bloody  mucus  and  tenesmus,  with 
the  sensation  that  the  lower  bowel  protruded. — ^After  the  diarrhoeic  stool, 
unconscious  moaning,  heard  in  the  next  room,  accompanied  with  a  distressed 
noise  in  the  head. — Stools  excoriating  and  frequent. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Burning,  smarting  pain  in  urethra  while 
urinating  (appeared  near  end  of  week  of  proving  and  continued  after  it). 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Spermatorrhoea. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— As  the  excoriating  stools  decreased  in 
frequency,  a  sticky  mucus-like  excoriating  leucorrhoea  came  on;  with  the 
appearance  of  the  discharge  came  the  descent  of  the  uterus,  which  continued 
for  a  week  or  more,  and  the  discharge  several  days  beyond. — "  The  uterus 
seems  heavy  and  uncomfortable,  so  that  it  interferes  with  my  work.  I  can 
scarcely  get  up  and  down  stairs." 


FERRUM   lODATUM  761 


Ferrom  lodatnm. 

Iodide   of  Iron.    Fe  U-    Trituration   of  freshly  prepared  crystals. 

Solution. 

Olinioal.— Albuminuria.  Alcohol,  effects  of.  Amenorrhoea.  Breast,  tumour 
of.  Bronchorrhoea.  Cancer.  Catarrh.  Coryza.  Diabetes.  Dyspepsia.  Exo- 
phthalmic goitre.  Eyes,  scrofulous  inflammation  of.  Glands,  enlargements  of. 
Gonorrhoea.  Heartburn.  Kidneys,  affections  of.  Leucorrhoea.  Liver,  enlarged. 
Nose,  scrofulous  inflammation  of.  Ovarian  dropsy.  Periostitis.  Plethora. 
Pneumonia.  Scoliosis.  Scrofula.  Spleen,  enlarged.  Tuberculosis.  Uterus, 
prolapse  of.    Writer's  cramp. 

ChanotevistlOB.— The  Iodide  of  Iron  has  had  an  independent 
proving.  It  corresponds  more  particularly  to  scrofulous  affections, 
glandular  enlargements,  and  tumours.  A  number  of  peculiar  symp- 
toms were  felt  in  rectum  and  anus  :  As  if  anus  were  compressed  ;  as 
if  worms  were  in  anus ;  as  if  something  twisted  round  about  in  a 
circle ;  as  if  a  cord  were  drawn  connecting  navel  and  anus ;  as  if  a 
screw  were  boring  in  anus.  Fe.  i.  has  a  symptom  somewhat  like  the 
Ferrum  symptom  :  ''  as  if  something  rolled  into  throat  and  closed  it 
like  a  valve."  With  Fe.  i.  it  is, ''  food  seems  to  push  up  to  throat  as  if 
it  had  not  been  swallowed."  Lancinating  or  cutting  pains  are  noted 
in  eyes,  ears,  and  root  of  nose  to  occiput.  Sensation  as  if  lying  in  a 
cramped  position.  P.  C.  Majumdar  {Ind.  Horn.  Rev.y  v.  104)  has  used 
Fe.  i.  with  success  in  cases  of  enlarged  liver  and  spleen  when  un- 
accompanied by  fever.  (When  fever  is  present  Fe.  ars.  is  the  better 
remedy.)  The  leading  symptoms  are  :  "  Feels  as  if  she  had  eaten 
too  much,  a  sort  of  upward  pressure.  Stuffed  feeling  in  abdomen  as 
if  she  could  not  lean  forward  ;  costiveness."  These  are  very  common 
symptoms  in  cases  of  enlarged  spleen.  "Sweet-smelling  urine" 
appears  to  be  a  leading  symptom  of  Fe.  u  Berridge  removed  with  it 
this  train  of  symptoms  :  "  Morning  catarrh,  hot  and  restless  in  bed, 
sweet  smell  of  urine  "  {H.  P.,  vi.  208).  Motion  and  walking  <.  Most 
symptoms  are  <  at  night,  and  in  the  morning.  Warmth  <  ;  open 
air  >.  Touch  <.  Suited  to  scrofulous  or  mercurial  diathesis  ;  to 
subjects  of  relaxed  fibre  (phthisis  in  third  stage ;  bronchorrhoea, 
pneumonia). 

Relations. — Compare:  Alum,  (anaemia,  leucorrhoea,  prolapsus 
uteri) ;  Alumen  (swollen  vagina,  prolapsus  uteri) ;  Cauloph.  (prolapsus 
uteri  and  leucorrhoea  from  atony ;  fitful,  crampv  pains) ;  Helon. 
(pruritus,  prolapse,  leucorrhoea,  albuminuria)  ;  Hvdrast.  (debility  and 
atony  ;  tenacious,  profuse  leucorrhoea  ;  palpitation)  ;  Graph, 
(chlorosis,  leucorrhoea  profuse,  hot,  watery) ;  lod.  (red  face,  irrita- 
bility ;  corroding  leucorrhoea,  emaciation  marked)  :  Kali  bich.  (stringy, 
albuminous  leucorrhoea  ;  string  expectoration).  Thyroidin  (palpita- 
tion ;  exophthalmic  goitre).  Fe.  bro.  (leucorrhoea,  prolapsus  uteri). 
Fe.  ars.  (enlarged  liver  and  spleen). 


762  FERRUM    lODATUM 


SYMPTOMS. 

2.  Head. — Headache,  a  confused  sensation  with  heaviness,  <  in 
warm  room  ;  by  smoking ;  wearing  hat ;  reading ;  writing ;  motion ;  >  in 
open  air  ;  sitting  or  standing  in  a  draught. — Sharp  pain  from  below  eye  up 
through  head  to  vertex. — Cutting  from  bridge  of  nose  through  the  occiput 

3.  Eyes. — Purulent  inflammation  and  photophobia ;  glands  swoUexL— 
Exophthalmos  after  suppressed  menses. — Trachoma. — Painful  lancinations  in 
eyes  and  ears. 

4.  Ears.— Roaring  in  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Nose  stopped ;  freer  towards  noon. — ^Thick  nose  of  scrofula. 
— Nose  swollen  with  ulcers  and  crusts  inside. — Profuse  discharge  of  mucus 
from  nose  and  frequent  expectoration  of  mucus  from  lar3mx  and  trachea.— 
A  chronic  nasal  catarrh  becomes  worse  ;  discharge  usually  in  mornings  now 
lasts  all  day ;  blowing  gives  no  relief ;  discharge  thick,  yellow  or  green. 

8.  Mouth. — Taste  :  metallic  ;  bitter  ;  flat,  insipid  ;  inky  ;  pasty ; 
sharp,  biting ;  bad  in  morning ;  of  peppermint. — ^Tongue,  thick  yellow  coat. 
— Burning  of  tongue  and  mouth ;  mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  throat 
uniform  red,  or  dotted  with  fine  dense  bright  red  papular  eruption. — Burning 
pain  and  prickling  and  swelling  of  mucous  membrane. — Dryness  of  mouth  and 
throat. 

9.  Throat. — ^Violent  tickling  and  scraping  in  throat,  with  sensation  as 
though  he  would  suffocate;  hawking  of  mucus  and  cough. — Rattling  of 
mucus. — Pood  seems  to  push  up  to  throat  as  if  it  had  not  been  swallowed. 

11.  Stomach. — No  appetite ;  no  relish  for  smoking. — Great  thirst.— 
Sour  and  bitter  rising  from  stomach. — Rising  up  in  throat  of  greasy,  acrid, 
stinging  taste. — Eructations,  nausea,  and  vomiting. 

12.  Abdomen. — ^Tenderness  at  epigastrium ;  at  same  time  pinching  in 
back,  over  spine,  directly  behind  epigastrium. — Fulness  even  after  a  little 
food,  as  if  she  had  eaten  too  much,  a  sort  of  upward  pressure  ;  stufFed  feeling 
as  if  she  could  not  lean  forward. — Stomach  full  of  wind,  every  breath  gives 
pain  as  from  a  weight  in  epigastrium. — On  rising,  or  at  night,  when  turning 
in  bed,  heart  beats  violently;  with  pains  in  epigastrium  or  lower  end  of 
sternum. — Dull  pain  under  short  ribs. — ^Abdomen  swollen ;  bloated  after  food 
or  drink  ;  pushed  up  ;  food  soon  satisfies. — Rumbling  with  slight  colic  before 
stool. — Abdomen,  when  pressed,  feels  like  a  rubber  ball. — Feeling  as  of  a 
cord  drawn  connecting  anus  and  navel,  with  cutting  pain  on  straightening  up 
from  bent  position. — ^Abdominal  walls  numb  ;  if  pinched  feel  sore  long  after. 
— Inguinal  pain  extending  across  hypogastrium,  sides  feels  stiff  as  after  a 
strain. — Feeling  in  sides,  low  down,  as  of  needles  pricking  her ;  <  raising 
arms  and  walking ;  inguinal  region  sore  on  walking. — Stitches  in  r.  groin 
when  walking. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Bowels  not  moved  for  a  week,  then  stools 
loose ;  may  have  two  movements :  first  costive,  second  sudden  and  loose 
(thin,  light  yellow),  preceded  by  griping. — Small,  hard  stool,  with  sticking  and 
pain  as  from  constriction  in  anus  on  passage  of  faeces  through  it ;  stool  hard. 
— Feeling  in  rectum  and  esp.  in  anus  as  if  compressed ;  constriction,  as  if 
worms  were  in  it ;  stool  easy  and  painless. — Peculiar  feeling  in  rectum  and 


FERRUM   lODATUM  763 

anus  as  if  something  twisted  and  turned  about  in  a  circle,  and  something  like 
drops  of  water  flowed  down,  and  as  if  a  screw  were  boring  upward  and 
downward. — Urging  to  stool  with  much  pain  in  abdomen  (drawings  from 
above  navel  down  r.  side),  followed  by  small,  yellowish-brown,  somewhat 
hard  stool,  in  the  morning. — Frequent  ineffectual  urging. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Pain  in  both  kidneys,  esp.  1.— A  feeling  in 
fossa  navicularis  as  if  water  remained  in  it  and  could  not  be  forced  out  any 
farther,  in  the  morning. — Urine  dark-coloured,  depositing  thick  white  sedi- 
ment ;  urine  scalds. — Frequent  and  profuse  emission  of  light-coloured  urine, 
having  a  sweetish  smell,  and  slight  milky  sediment. — ^Albuminuria  with 
oedema;  in  hard  drinkers. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Erections  at  night,  with  violent  pain  and 
burning  in  urethra ;  unable  to  urinate ;  tenesmus  in  neck  of  bladder. — 
Prickling  itching  in  urethra,  esp.  fore  part,  with  frequent  urging  to  urinate^ 
but  very  little  flow. — Crawling  tickling  in  urethra  and  rectum. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Hysterical  attacks;  great  debility; 
leucorrhcea,  anorexia ;  finally  dropsy  of  r.  ovary ;  menses  scanty,  preceded 
by  pain  in  r.  breast  and  followed  by  profuse  leucorrhoea  ;  three  weeks  after 
beginning  treatment,  sudden  loss  of  consciousness  and  discharge  of  two 
quarts  of  yellowish  fluid  from  vagina,  after  which  swelling  subsided  and 
health  was  entirely  restored. — Constant  bearing-down  as  if  something  was 
coming  away ;  when  sitting  feels  as  if  pushing  something  up. — Retroversio 
uteri;  sensation  of  pressure  and  protrusion  of  rectum  on  standing. — Pro- 
lapse ;  inversion ;  antiversion. — Amenorrhoea. — Itching,  soreness,  and  swelling 
of  vulva  and  vagina. — Leucorrhoea  like  boiled  starch ;  when  bowels  move 
the  discharge  is  stringy. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Shortness  of  breath ;  obliged  to  take  a 
deep  breath,  with  sensation  of  oppression  of  chest,  and  a  pressure  beneath 
sternum. — Short,  hacking  cough,  with  yellowish-white,  rather  thick  expecto- 
ration and  at  times  pain  in  chest. — Expectoration  of  greyish-white,  rather 
tenacious  mucus  drawn  out  in  threads. — Haemoptysis. 

18.  Chest. — Sudden  sharp  sticking  pain  extending  from  1.  nipple  out- 
ward to  arm ;  <  by  pressure ;  frequently  returned  during  afternoon  and 
evening. — Scirrhous  tumour  near  r.  nipple,  small  and  painless  at  first,  in- 
creasing with  sharp,  lancinating  pains  from  breast  to  axilla,  sensitive  to  touch 
(cured). 

ig.  Heart. — Running  up  istairs  causes  violent  palpitation  and  pain  on 
top  of  head. — Heart-beat  so  violent,  it  awoke  her  from  sleep,  throbbing  all 
over. — Heart  beats  quickly  and  seems  to  force  the  blood  violently  through 
whole  body.— Blood-vessels  throb  all  over,  even  when  quiet. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Sides  of  neck  sore  when  touched  or  on  moving. 
— Small  of  back  as  if  broken  ;  felt  only  at  night ;  as  if  lying  in  a  cramped 
position. — Dull  pain  in  back  on  each  side  about  six  inches  above  kidneys, 
extending  through  chest. — Painful  sensation  in  back  and  kidneys  and  lower 
portion  of  spine,  starting  from  lumbar  vertebrae. 

21.  Limbs. — Weakness  and  bruised  sensation  in  all  the  limbs,  with 
aversion  to  moving  about. — Periostitis  of  fingers  and  toes. — Painful  drawing 
in  tendons  and  back  of  r.  hand  and  1.  foot. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Rheumatic,  bruised,  paralysed  feeling  in  r.  upper 


764  FERRUM  MAGNETICUM 

aim  and  shoulder. — R.  arm  weary  and  as  if  paralysed,  has  to  stop  writing  in 
evening. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pain  extending  upward  from  back  of 
L  foot  to  pelvis  in  evening. — R  tibia  painful. 

25.    Skin. — Short-lasting  eruptions  like  urticaria,  eczema,  and  lichen. 

96.  Sleep. — Sleep  restless ;  frequent  waking ;  many  dreams  of  long  past 
events  ;  easy  erections. — Frequent  waking  with  excessive  urging  to  stool  and 
pain  on  micturition. — Dreams  of  thieves  and  fighting  with  them.— Dreams 
that  he  has  grown  very  large,  thirty  feet  high,  and  everything  about  is  small 
and  insignificant ;  the  bedstead  was  too  small  and  short ;  frequent  starting  in 
sleep,  and  waking  with  a  feeling  as  though  paralysed. 

27.    Fever. — Coldness  in  a  warm  room  about  noon ;  heat  3  to  4  p.m. 


Ferrum  Magneticom. 

Sesquioxide  of  Iron.    Loadstone.  A  black  oxide  of  iron.   FcO  Fc,  0,. 

OliliieaL— Amaurosis.     Diarrhoea.      Platolence.      Ganglion.       Rheumatism. 
Vision,  disorders  of.     Warts.     Whitlow. 

Gharaoteristiofl.— Caspari  is  the  authority  for  Fer.  tnagneL  It 
produces  paralytic  weaknesses  like  the  other  Iron  preparations,  of 
which  this  is  the  most  peculiar :  "  After  perspiring  during  a  moderate 
walk)  weakness  and  lassitude,  which  seem  to  proceed  from  the 
abdomen."  As  with  Ferrum^  there  is  <  during  a  meal ;  flatulency, 
grumblings,  movements  in  abdomen ;  with  urgent  diarrhoea  after  a 
meal.  The  abdominal  sufferings  are  felt  more  on  the  left  side.  Very 
abundant  and  frequent  emission  of  fetid  wind.  Many  rectal  and 
urinary  sjrmptoms  are  recorded.  The  appearance  of  warts  may 
indicate  that  Fer,  magn.  is  related  to  the  sycotic  constitution. 

Teste,  who  puts  Fer,  fnagn.  in  the  Arnica  group  along  with  Ledum^ 
Crotorif  Rhus  and  Spig.^  has  had  some  experience  with  it  It  relieved 
(after  Spig.)  an  old  man  suffering  from  chronic  rheumatism  of  the 
nape  of  the  neck,  with  irritable  disposition.  Also  a  case  of  compound 
capsular  cataract  in  a  gouty  patient.  A  third  patient  had  rheumatism 
of  both  thighs,  coming  on  after  violent  exercise.  This  patient  was 
treated  in  two  attacks.  In  the  first  attack  he  received  Am,  first,  and 
then  Fe,  mag.  In  the  second,  Fe.  mag.  was  given  at  once  and  the 
effect  was  speedy  and  marked.  The  fourSi  patient  had  a  very 
unpleasant  experience  with  the  medicine.  He  suffered  from  a 
mercurial  neurosis,  and  was  very  sensitive  to  medicines.  One  of  the 
symptoms  which  led  to  its  being  given  was  a  painful  contraction  of  the 
posterior  cervical  muscles,  against  which  no  remedy  Teste  had  tried 
had  produced  any  effect.  Fe,  mag.y  four  globules  in  a  tumbler  of  water, 
two  tablespoonfiils  every  day,  was  the  prescription.  The  first  table- 
spoonful,  which  was  taken  in  the  morning,  seemed  to  produce  a 
sensible  improvement ;  but  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  second  dose. 


FERRUM   MAGNETICUM  765 

which  was  taken  at  4  p.m.,  the  sight  became  dim  ;  a  halo  of  fire,  red 
and  violet,  was  seen  first  in  front  of  the  right,  and  afterwards  in  front 
of  the  left  eye  ;  soon  after,  this  halo,  which  formed  a  circular  zigzag- 
shaped  line,  became  narrower  and  narrower  and  finally  produced  such 
a  complete  blindness,  that  the  patient  assured  Teste  he  was  unable  to 
distinguish  night  from  dayUght.  This  lasted  one  hour  and  did  not 
pass  off  entirely  till  after  a  meal.  Much  more  distressing  phenomena 
iollowed  :  Towards  8  p.m.  the  pain  in  the  nape,  which  first  was 
seated  on  the  left  side,  passed  to  the  right,  invading  the  whole  extent 
of  the  trapezoid  muscle,  where  it  became  literally  frightful.  "  For 
two  days  and  nights  the  patient,  who  was  a  brave  and  strong  man, 
and  whom  I  had  seen  bear  the  most  painful  surgical  operations  without 
uttering  a  sound,  suffered  to  such  an  extent  that  he  uttered  heart- 
rending cries."  Catnph.,  Puis.,  and  Bty.  failed  to  reUeve,  the  first 
rather  aggravated.  Rhus  U  effected  some  relief.  But  it  did  not 
prevent  the  recurrence,  for  eight  days  in  succession,  of  the  visual 
phenomena,  though  with  less  intensity  than  the  first  time,  at  irregular 
intervals,  generally  6  or  7  a.m.,  and  sometimes  even  at  night  in 
perfect  darkness. 

Relations.— Com^ar^ ;  Per.,  Elect,  Galv.,  Magn.  arct.,  Magn.  aust. 

8THPT0H8. 

I.  Mind. — Indecision,  and  long  reflection  before  undertaking  an3rthing. 
— Indolence,  slowness  of  movement. — ^Air  of  importance,  and  self-sufficiency. 
— Irascibility. 

8.  Head. — Pulsative  headache,  by  fits. — Circumscribed  headache,  esp. 
in  the  morning,  generally  on  r.  side. — Headache  on  stooping,  on  moving  the 
arms,  and  on  going  up  stairs. — Headache,  suddenly  attacking  the  eyes  and 
the  nose,  as  if  the  patient  were  going  to  weep,  or  to  sneeze. — Itching  in  the 
scalp. — Eruption  of  small  painful  pimples  on  the  scalp. — Small  scabs  on  the 
head« — Falling  off  of  the  hair. 

3.  Eyes. — Darkness  before  the  r.  eye,  which  causes  it  to  wink. — ^Varie- 
gated areola  round  a  light. — Halo  of  fine,  red  or  violet,  contracts  till  vision 
entirely  disappears,  cannot  tell  day  from  night ;  lasts  an  hour ;  vision  fully 
restored  only  after  a  meal;  repeated  at  irregular  intervals  eight  days  in 
succession. — PresSive  pain  on  the  eyelid,  which  impedes  the  sight. — Swelling 
of  the  lower  lid,  which  makes  the  eye  appear  smaller. — Pricking  itching  in 
the  canthi. — Painful  sensibility  of  the  lachrymal  caruncula,  with  profuse 
lachrymation. 

4.  Ears. — Pullings  in  the  ears  and  the  pharynx,  during  deglutition. — 
Itching,  wringing,  and  cold  lancinations,  in  the  auditory  duct. — ^Tingling  in 
the  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Sneezing,  with  stoppage  of  one  nostril,  and  catarrh. 

0.  Face. — Face  dejected,  with  general  heat,  followed  by  redness  of  the 
face. — Heat  of  the  face. — Itching  and  tingling  in  the  face  and  on  the  lips. — 
Eruptions  on  the  forehead,  in  the  eyebrows,  at  the  root  of  the  nose,  on  the 
cheeks,  the  lips,  and  the  chin. 

7.  Teeth. — Bleeding  of  the  gums,  when  slightly  pressed  upon. — ^Teeth 
easily  set  on  edge. — Painful  sensibility  of  the  teeth  during  mastication. 


766  FERRUM   MAGNETICUM 

8.  Mouth. — ^Accumulation  of  water  and  saliva  in  the  mouth. — Itching 
sensation  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  palate. 

Q.  Throat. — Bitter  and  rancid  taste  in  the  pharynx,  on  hawking.— 
Sensation  as  if  mucus  were  adhering  to  the  uvula.  —  Lancinations  in  the 
throat. — Pressure  in  the  oesophagus,  as  if  too  much  had  been  swallowed  at 
one  time. 

11.  Stomach. — During  a  meal,  flatulency,  movements,  and  grumbling 
in  the  abdomen. — ^Af ter  a  meal,  taciturnity,  lassitude,  heat,  expulsion  of  flatns, 
pains  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  with  anguish,  pains  in  the  epigastrium, 
esp.  on  breathing,  urgent  want  to  evacuate,  and  diarrhoea. — ^Abortive  risings. 
— Nausea. 

12.  Abdomen. — Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen. — ^The  abdominal  sufferings 
are  felt  more  particularly  on  1.  side. — Rolling,  grumbling,  borborygmi,  and 
whistling  in  the  abdomen,  with  expulsion  of  flatulency,  and  urgent  want  to 
evacuate,  and  to  make  water ;  the  movements  in  the  abdomen  are  accompanied 
by  pullings  along  the  legs,  as  far  as  the  toes. — ^The  flatulency  seems  all  to 
proceed  from  one  place,  in  1.  side  of  alnlomen. — ^Very  abundant,  and  frequent 
emission  of  fetid  wind. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Urgent  want  to  evacuate,  with  expulsion  of  flatus 
only. — Loose  evacuations,  with  much  flatulency,  and  sometimes  with  excre- 
ments of  a  fetid  smell,  physical  depression,  and  paleness  of  face. — On  expelling 
the  flatus  there  escapes  a  small  liquid  evacuation. — Itching  and  shooting  in 
the  anus. — Tingling  and  itching  in  the  rectum. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  red  and  copious,  which  becomes  the 
colour  of  clay  after  having  stood  some  time. — Itching  and  lancination  in  the 
scrotum,  and  in  the  extremity  of  the  glans. — Increase  of  sexual  desire, 
with  and  without  erection;  or  absence  of  all  sexual  desire,  yet  without 
impotence. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Frequent  hawking  of  mucus. — Dry  cough 
after  dinner,  proceeding  from  an  irritation  in  the  trachea,  as  if  one  had 
swallowed  dust. 

i8y  19.  Chest  and  Heart. — Tearing  and  lancination  in  the  L  side  of 
the  chest,  when  breathing.  —  Sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  chest— On 
drawing  up  the  chest,  and  throwing  back  the  r.  arm,  the  heart  beats 
violently  and  with  repeated  throbs. 

30.  Neck. — In  the  morning,  pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  as  if  from 
having  lain  in  an  inconvenient  position. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Cramp-like  or  paralytic  pullings,  or  jerking  pullings 
in  the  forearms,  and  in  the  hands. — Pain,  as  from  dislocation  in  the  wrist- 
Paralytic  pulling  in  the  r.  arm. — Prickings,  esp.  in  the  phalanges,  and  in  the 
ends  of  the  Angers. — Spots,  like  ephelides,  in  the  arms,  and  in  the  fingers.— 
Small  warts  on  the  back  of  the  hands,  and  on  the  wrist — Pulsation  at  the  end 
of  the  thumb. — ^Whitlow. — Dryness  and  tension  in  the  hands. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Tensive  pressure  in  the  hip-joint,  on  drawing  back 
the  leg,  at  night  and  in  the  morning ;  the  pain  is  dispersed  by  lying  on  that 
part,  but  returns  when  the  position  is  changed. — ^Acute  lancinations  in  the 
knee. — In  the  morning,  spasms,  and  contraction  in  the  calf  of  the  leg. — Painful 
stiffness  on  the  internal  surface  of  the  knee,  esp.  on  bending  it,  after  extending 
the  leg,  and  only  while  walking  in  the  open  air. — In  the  evening,  in  bed,  sharp 


FERRUM   MURIATICUM  767 

pains  in  a  small  place  on  the  foot,  with  great  sensitiveness  to  the  touch,  or  to 
the  bending  of  the  foot  upwards.— Ganglion  of  the  foot. — ^Tingling  and  pricking 
in  the  heels. — Starting  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.^The  little  toe  is  painful,  as  if 
it  were  violently  compressed. 

24.  Generalities. — Pains  and  itchings,  some  of  which  reappear  at 
intervals  of  four  weeks. — ^After  a  walk,  thirst,  perspiration,  lassitude,  pale- 
ness.— Prickings,  lancinations,  tingling,  and  itching  in  different  parts. — 
Paralytic  weakness,  difficulty  of  movement,  and  relaxation  of  the  muscles. 
— Excessive  lassitude. — ^Trembling  in  the  legs  and  arms. — After  perspiring, 
during  a  moderate  walk,  weakness  and  lassitude,  which  seem  to  proceed  from 
the  abdomen,  with  a  trembling  in  the  knees  and  hands.— Fatigue  on  taking 
the  slightest  exercise. 

25.  Skin. — Itching  and  tingling  in  different  parts,  esp.  in  the  evening, 
mitigated  by  scratching,  but  appearing  in  other  parts. — Red  spots,  sometimes 
of  a  bright  red,  or  bluish  red  ;  some  disappear  on  being  pressed. — Small  warts 
(on  the  hands). 

26.  Sleep. — ^Violent  and  noisy  yawnings,  with  accumulation  of  water  in 
the  mouth. — Drowsiness,  with  prompt  sleep  on  lying  down,  or  even  when 
seated. — ^Absurd  dreams  at  night,  and  awaking  towards  three  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  with  perspiration  and  heat. — Dreams  immediately  after  lying  down, 
waking  with  a  start ;  coldness  which  causes  trembling. — Inclination  to  remain 
in  bed  in  the  morning. — ^After  rising,  weakness  in  the  knees. — Sleep,  not 
refreshing,  with  pressure  on  the  eyes,  confusion  in  the  head,  flaccidity  in  the 
skin  and  face,  and  lassitude  in  the  arms. 

27.  Fever. — Shivering  and  cold,  in  the  side  opposite  to  that  on  which 
the  patient  has  lain. — ^After  a  walk,  heat  with  weakness,  proceeding  from  the 
stomach,  trembling,  vertigo,  paleness,  want  to  lie  down. — Heat,  as  if  a  catarrh 
were  developing  itself,  with  lassitude  and  down- cast  eyes. — Internal  heat,  with 
petspiration  and  slow  pulse,  after  washing  the  body. — Pulse  slow  and  small. — 
Perspiration  on  the  slightest  exercise. — Sweat  in  the  morning,  esp.  on  the 
body,  and  on  the  occiput. — Sweat  of  an  acid  smell,  as  in  measles. 


Ferrmn  Muriaticum. 

Ferrum  Chloratum.  Ferrous  Chloride  or  Dichloride.  Fe  CU,  4H9O. 
(Crystals.)  Tincture,  consisting  of  25  parts  of  crystals  to  225 
parts  of  alcohol. 

Clinical. — Anccmia,  Angina  tonsillaris.  Constipation.  Cramps.  Diabetes. 
Diarrhcea.  Disparunia.  Dyspepsia.  Dysentery.  Haemorrhages.  Headache. 
Marasmus.  Neuralgia.  Pleurisy.  Rickets.  Rheumatism.  Scrofula.  Spleen,  en- 
largement of.    Typhoid  fever.    Vomiting,    Worms. 

Charaoteristios. — Fer.  mur,  is  the  liquid  preparation  of  Iron 
whicli,  under  the  name  of  "Steel  Drops,"  has  been  most  used  in 
old-school  practice  in  the  treatment  of  anaemia.  Our  knowledge 
of  its  properties  is  derived  mainly  from  over-dosings,  with  a  few 
provings,  and  clinical  observations.    Fer,  mur.  is  mainly  a  right-side 


768  FERRUM   MURIATICUM 

medicine,  causing  neuralgia  and  headache  of  the  ri^t  side  of  face 
and  head,  and  rheumatism  of  right  shoulder.  On  the  other  hand  it 
affects  the  spleen,  causing  pain  in  the  left  h3rpochondrimn.  Like  other 
Iron  preparations,  it  affects  the  blood,  causing  haemorrhages  erf  all 
kinds.  On  venesection  the  blood  is  remarkably  black  and  thick, 
so  that  it  can  with  difficult  be  made  to  flow.  Weakness,  restless^ 
ness,  and  nervousness.  Poisonous  doses  have  caused  convulsions. 
Vascular  and  nervous  irritabiUty  after  haemorrhages  ;  <from  eating, 
and  especially  from  eggs.  Spasmodic  cough,  >  l^  eating.  Most 
symptoms  are  <  by  motion ;  <  during  the  night  and  in  the  morning. 
Pressure  <.  Effects  of  mechanical  injury.  Cold  and  heat  alternate ; 
cold,  anxious  sweat,  with  muscular  cramp ;  strong-smelling  night- 
sweat 

Relationi.— Com^r^ ;   Chi. ;  Nat.  m. ;  Sang,  (shoulders)  ;   Fe. 
picric,  (prostate  gland) ;  other  preparations  of  Iron. 


STHPTOMB. 

1.  Mind. — Loquacity. — Depression. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  with  enlargement  of  spleen. — Severe  neuralgic  pains 
in  r.  temple  and  r.  side  of  face. — Headache,  with  ascarides. — Pain  in  back  of 
head  on  coughing. 

3.  Eyes.— Eyes  injected.— Bright  redness  of  margins  of  lids. 

6.  Face.— Paleness  of  face,  red  spots  on  pale  cheeks.— Flushes.— 
Face  swollen  and  livid. 

8.  Mouth. — Insipid  flat  taste. — Dry  mouth. — Solid  food  tastes  dry  and 
insipid. — ^Tongue  very  much  coated. — Tongue  swollen  and  protruded,  with 
ropy  mucus  from  mouth. — Palate  and  interior  of  mouth  burnt  and  parboOed- 
looking. 

g.  Throat. — Extremely  severe  sense  of  burning  and  constriction  in  the 
throat. — ^Angina  tonsillaris. 

IX.  Stomach. — ^Anorexia;  in  morning. — Unquenchable  thirst  or  thirstlcss- 
ness. — Longing  for  acids. — Aversion  to  meat  or  anything  sour. — Sour  bdching, 
esp.  after  solid  food.— Bilious  eructations  after  fat  food. — ^Vomiting  after 
eating ;  after  eating  eggs. — Stomach  somewhat  distended. — Hand  riveted  to 
region  of  stomach,  as  the  principal  seat  of  the  pain. 

12.  Abdomen. — Severe  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium ;  at  times  at  ni^L— 
Spleen  enlarged  and  sensitive  to  pressure. — Spasmodic  constriction  of  abdo- 
minal muscles,  as  if  abdomen  were  constricted,  esp.  when  stooping,  so  that 
he  can  only  straighten  himself  slowly. — Great  pain  along  whole  length  of  colon, 
<  by  pressure  and  any  movement  of  body. — Hypogastrium  swollen  and  very 
sensitive,  esp.  above  pubes. — Piercing  pains  in  hypogastrium. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoea,  with  pains  in  limbs. — Chronic  diar- 
rhoea, with  loss  of  appetite  and  rapid  emaciation. — Diarrhoea,  with  intestinal 
catarrh  in  typhoid  fevers,  also  fetid,  debilitating  discharges.— E)ysenteric 
diarrhoea,  with  considerable  pain,  tenesmus,  stools  of  blood  and  membraneous 
shreds. — Stools  dark,  inky,  copious. — Obstinate  constipation.— Dry  cough, 
ending  in  retching ;  itching  of  nose  and  anus,  enuresis,  headache,  neuralgia, 
nervousness;  ascarides.— Ascarides,  coincident  with  bleeding  piles. 


FERRUM   PERNITRICUM  769 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Diabetes  mellitus.— Chronic  affections  of  blad- 
der.— Haematuria,  haemorrhage  from  urethra  or  kidneys. — Habitual  discharge 
of  phosphates  in  urine.  —  Enuresis.  —  Almost  complete  retention. —  Scanty 
urine. — Deposit  of  bright  red  crystals. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Enlarged  prostate  gland. 

z6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — During  coition,  soreness  and  cutting 
pain  in  vagina ;  want  of  pleasurable  sensation. — Metrorrhagia ;  dysmenia  ; 
leucorrhcea. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Breathing  stertorous ;  suffocation  impend- 
ing ;  inspiration  esp.  difficult — In  morning,  spasmodic  cough  with  expectora- 
tion of  transparent  tough  mucus,  at  once  >  by  eating  small  quantities  of  food. 
— Dry  cough,  ending  in  retching. — ^When  coughing  :  pain  in  occiput ;  bruised 
pain  in  chest ;  stitches  in  chest — Pleuritic,  stitching  pains  in  chest,  fever, 
severe  cough  with  scanty  expectoration,  exudation  within  pleura ;  great  weak- 
ness and  emaciation. 

19.  Heart. — Heart  affections  with  hectic  ;  quick,  superficial  breathing ; 
coDgh  ;  involuntary  sighing ;  dyspnoea  from  slight  exertion ;  painful  drawing 
and  expansion  about  apex ;  tumultuous  fluttering  heart-beat ;  small,  thread- 
like pulse ;  at  times  double  or  intermitting. — Chlorosis ;  muscular  debility ; 
weak  circulation. 

21.  Limbs. — ^Weakness,  compelling  to  lie  down. — Sudden  cramps  and 
distortion  of  hmbs. 

88  Upper  Limbs. — Paialjrtic  tearing  in  shoulder-joint,  arm,  clavicle, 
and  muscles,  making  it  impossible  to  lift  arm  ;  >  by  gentle  motion. — Slight 
drawing  pain  in  shoulder,  followed  by  tearing,  stitching  pains  extending  to 
elbows ;  paralytic  lameness  of  upper  arm  ;  pain  <  from  least  motion  ;  <  at 
night,  driving  him  out  of  bed ;  slightly  >  by  walking  about ;  no  swelling. — 
Acute  inflammatory  rheumatism  of  r.  shoulder-joint,  pain  deep  in  socket, 
preventing  motion. — Mechanical  injury  to  shoulder-joint,  vnih  rheumatic 
lameness. 

83.    Lower  Limbs.— Cramp  in  calves,  esp.  at  night  in  bed. — Large,  deep 
ulcer  in  1.  calf,  centre  black  and  hard.— ^Edematous  feet,  drawing,  tearing 
pains,  esp.  on  beginning  to  walk ;  after  metrorrhagia. 
95.    Skin. — Phagedenic  ulcers. 

Ferrnm  Pernitricnm* 

Pemitrate  of  Iron.    Fe,  6NO3.    Dilutions  of  the  Ferri  Pemitratis 

Liquor  of  B.P. 

GUnleslT-Diarrhoea.    Eyes,  affections  of .    Glands,  affections  of .    Lienteria. 

Charaoteriflttos. — Fer.  pemit.  has  been  used  by  old-school  prac- 
titioners with  good  effect  in  the  diarrhoeas  of  India  ;  in  lienteria ; 
the  diarrhoea  of  phthisis;  diarrhoea  in  feeble  and  nervous  females; 
also  in  scrofulous  children  with  enlarged  glands  and  obstinate 
ophthalmia.  Though  there  are  no  provings  of  the  remedy  it  is 
plain  that  these  are  specific  effects.  Cooper,  who  has  given  much 
VOL.  I.  5^ 


770  FERRUM   PHOSPHORICUM 

attention  to  the  Iron  preparations,  give  as  a  characteriBtic,  ^  Cough, 
with  florid  complexion."  In  cases  presenting  marked  features  of 
Ferrum  and  Nit.  ac.,  Fe.  pemit.  should  render  good  service. 


Ferrum  Phosphoricnm. 

Ferrum  Phosphoricnm  Album.  Ferric  Phosphate.  Fcrroso  -  ferric 
Phosphate.  White  Phosphate  of  Iron  (Schussler's).  This  is 
said  to  be  a  true  ferric  phosphate,  Fe,  (POJ.  as  contrasted 
with  the  ordinary  jphosphate  of  iron,  which  is  a  ferrous-hydric 
phosphate,  Fe  HPO. 

OUaloal*— ilmu,  Aro/a/se  of.  Bladder^  paralysis  of ,  Bronchitis.  Colic  Googh. 
Croup.  Cystitis.  Debilify,  Delirium  tremens.  Diabetes.  Diarrhcea.  Dyspepsia. 
Dysentery.  Ear,  ajfecHons  of.  Erysipelas.  Fever.  Frost-bite.  Gastritis.  Gonor- 
rhcea.  Haematemesis.  Haemoptysis.  Haemorrhages.  Hands,  swelling  of.  Heart, 
palpitation  of.  Inflammation.  Injuries.  Intermittent  fever.  Kidnevs,  Brights 
disease  of.  Measles.  Mumps.  Naevus.  Neuralgia.  Nose,  Heeding  of.  Pbl^bisii 
haemorrtiagica.  Pleurisy.  Pneumonia.  Raynaud's  disease.  Rheumatism.  Sprains. 
Styes.  Tarsal  cysts.  Urine,  incontinence  of.  Veins,  varicose.  Vomiting.  Whooping- 
cough. 

CharaoteristiOB. — The  preparation  of  Ferrum  pkos.f  whidi  plays 
such  an  important  part  in  the  therapy  of  Schussler,  has  so  far  over- 
shadowed the  ordinary  "Phosphate  of  Iron"  in  homoeopathic 
fractice,  that  I  have  retained  the  simple  designation,  "  Femun 
hosphoricum/'  for  this  preparation  as  less  likely  to  create  confusion. 
The  ordinary  phosphate,  which  has  been  proved  separately,  I  shall 
describe  next  as  Ferrum  Phosphoricum  Hydricum.  Our  chief  know« 
ledge  of  Fer.  phos.  is  from  Schiissler's  work  and  the  clinical  experience 
of  uose  who  have  used  it  on  his  indications.  But  it  has  also  been 
proved  under  Dr.  John  L.  Moffat  (C.  D.  P.). 

In  Schiissler's  therapy  Fer.  phos.  takes  the  place  filled  by  Acon.^  Bell^ 
Gek.,  Verat.  viride,  Amicaj  and  other  remedies  which  correspond  to 
disturbed  states  of  circulation,  irritation,  and  relaxation  of  tissue. 
"  Painless  irritability  of  fibre "  is  Cooper's  keynote  as  exemplified 
in  diurnal  eniuresis.  It  also  retains  the  leading  features  of  the  other 
Iron  preparations  :  anaemia,  haemorrhages,  and  disorders  of  the  veins. 
Inflammation,  induration  and  enlargement  of  blood-vessels  ;  great 
physical  and  mental  lassitude  ;  indisposed  to  physical  exertion  ; 
nervousness,  prostration,  rheumatic  paralysis.  Acute  infianmiatory 
rheumatism.  The  right  shoulder  is  affected  as  in  Fer.  mur.  The  right- 
sideness  of  Fe.  p.  is  as  marked  as  that  of  the  other  Ferrum  prepara- 
tions. Nimier  and  Parenteau  have  cured  several  cases  of  right-supra- 
orbital  neuralgia  with  morning  aggravation  with  Fe.  p.  6x.  The 
morning  aggravation  appears  to  be  the  distinctive  indic^on.  Nash 
savs  the  haemorrhages  are  bright  red,  but  occur,  not  in  the  plethoric 
suDjects  of  Acon.^  but  rather  in  pale,  ansmic  subjects  liable  to  sudden 
locsd  congestions.    Cooper  cured  with  Fe.  p.  a  case  of  phthisis  in  a 


FERRUM   PHOSPHORICUM  771 

piatient  "of  the  transparent-skin  type,  the  haemoglobin  shining 
through.''  Schussier's  own  account  of  Fer.  phos.^  taken  from  the 
final  edition  of  his  work,  translated  by  L.  H.  Tafel,  is  as  follows : 
''  Iron  and  its  salts  possess  the  property  of  attracting  oxygen. 
The  iron  contained  in  the  blood  corpuscles  takes  up  the  inhaled 
oxygen,  thereby  supplying  with  it  all  the  tissues  of  the  organism. 
The  sulphur  contained  in  the  blood  corpuscles  and  in  other  cells, 
in  the  form  of  sulphate  of  potassa,  assists  in  transferring  oxygen  to 
all  the  cells  containing  iron  and  the  sulphate  of  potassa.  [i]  when 
the  molecules  of  iron  contained  in  the  muscle-cells  have  suffered  a 
disturbance  in  their  motion  through  some  foreign  irritation,  then 
the  cells  affected  grow  flaccid.  If  this  affection  takes  place  in  the 
annular  fibres  of  the  blood-vessels,  these  are  dilated;  and  as  a 
consequence  the  blood  contained  in  them  is  augmented.  Such  a 
state  is  called  hyperaemia  from  irritation  ;  such  a  hyperaemia  forms 
the  first  stage  of  inflammation.  But  when  the  cells  sheeted  have 
been  brought  back  to  the  normal  state  by  the  therapeutic  effect  of 
iron  {Phosphate  of  Iron)  then  the  cells  are  enabled  to  cast  off  the 
causative  agents  of  this  hyperaemia,  which  are  then  received  by 
the  lymphatics  in  order  that  they  may  be  eliminated  from  the 
organism.  [2]  When  the  muscular  cells  of  the  intestinal  villi  have 
lost  molecules  of  iron,  then  these  villi  become  unable  to  perform 
their  functions :  diarrhoea  ensues.  [3]  When  the  muscular  cells  of 
the  intestinal  walls  have  lost  molecules  of  iron,  then  the  peristaltic 
motion  of  the  intestinal  canal  is  retarded,  resulting  in  an  inertia  with 
respect  to  the  evacuation  of  the  faeces." 

From  the  above  Schiissler  deduces  the  following  indications  for 
Iron  :  "  When  the  muscular  cells  which  have  g^wn  flaccid  through 
loss  of  iron  receive  a  compensation  for  their  loss,  the  normal  tensional 
relation  is  restored  ;  the  annular  fibres  of  the  blood-vessels  are 
shortened  to  their  proper  measure,  the  capacity  of  these  vessels 
again  becomes  normal,  and  the  hyperaemia  disappears,  and  in  conse- 
quence the  inflammatory  fever  ceases.  Iron  will  cure  : 
"  I.  The  first  stage  of  all  inflammations. 

"3:  Korrhages}  caused  by  hyperaemia 
''  4.  Fresh  wounds,  contusions,  sprains,  &c.,  as  it  removes  the 
hyperaemia. 
"  The  pains  which  correspond  to  iron  are  increased  by  motion, 
but  relieved  by  cold.  In  the  muscle-cells  iron  is  found  in  the  form 
of  a  phosphate ;  we  should  therefore  in  therapeutics  use  Fcrrum 
phosphoricumy  Schussler  generaUy  used  the  I2X  trituration.  As  an 
instance  of  hyperaemia  of  a  low  order  may  be  mentioned  a  case 
of  Raynaud's  disease  of  the  fingers  and  toes,  in  which  amputation 
seemed  inevitable.  Halbert  effected  a  complete  cure  with  Fe.  p.  6x 
trit.  Fe,  p,  is  suited  to  the  leuco-phlegmatic  temperament ;  to  young 
persons  with  varicose  veins.  Pains  go  from  below  upward.  Great 
emaciation.  Takes  cold  easily.  Results  of  checked  perspiration  on 
a  warm  summer  day  (peritonitis)  :  Open  air  <  cough  ;  and  there  is 
sensitiveness  to  cold  air.  Warm  drinks  <,cold  and  cold  drinks  > 
toothache.    Aversion  to  meat  and  milk.    While  eating  at  table,  chill. 


in  FERRUM   PHOSPHORICUM 

<  By  eating.   <  From  meat,  herring,  coffee,  cake-   <  From  tea. 
Rest  >,  motion  <  ;  gentle  motion  >  pain  in  upper  arms  and  shoulders. 

<  At  night,  and  4  to  6  a.m.    Sensitive  to  touch  and  every  jar. 

BttlmtloilB. — Compare :  Aeon,  (more  bounding  pulse  than  Fe.  p.)  ; 
Gels,  (more  flowing  pulse)  ;  Caustictand  Puis,  (cough  with  spurting  of 
urine).  CompaUbU :  Kali  mur.  (croup,  pneumonia,  palpitation, 
typhus)  ;  KaU  p.  fcolic,  threatened  gangrene) ;  Calc  suL  (hip-joint 
cUsease) ;  Calc.  p.  (chlorosis,  haemorrhoidb) ;  Calc.  fl.  (haemorrhcnds) ; 
Nat.  sul.  (diabetes);  Ant  t  (capillary  brondiitis).  According  to 
Cooper  Fe.  phos.  anUdoied  "  violent  disnria,  night  and  day,"  cansed 
by  Stront.  bro. 

OaBMitioni — Checked  perspiration  on  a  warm  summer's  day. 
Mechanical  injuries. 

BTHPTOMS. 

I.  Mind.— Very  talkative  and  hilarious;  unnatural  excitement- 
Delirium  tremens. — Physical  and  mental  depression. — Unable  to  concentrate 
thoughts. — Memory  impaired  :  for  names,  facts,  &c ;  irritated  at  his  own 
mental  sluggishness. — Drowsiness ;  with  rush  of  thoughts,  suddenly  changii^ 
from  pleasant  to  unpleasant. — (Sows  eat  up  their  young ;  a  transient  mania 
depending  on  h3rperaemia  of  the  brain.) 

8.  Head. — Dizziness;  feeling  as  if  head  was  being  suddenly  pushed 
forward. — Everything  swims  around  him  ;  his  muscles  seemed  so  weak  he  conid 
hardly  move  about — General  dull  headache  <  5  p.m. — Hammering  pain  in 
forehead  and  temples,  fears  apoplexy ;  <  r.,  formerly  <  L — Supra-orbital 
neuralgia  of  r.  side,  with  a  morning  aggravation. — Frontal  headache,  followed 
and  relieved  by  nose-bleed. — Scarcely  endurable,  dull,  heavy  pain  at  vertex 
during  menses,  which  are  profuse. — ^Top  of  head  sensitive  to  cold  air,  noise, 
and  any  jar ;  on  stooping  sharp  pain  through  head,  from  back  to  front ;  at 
times  a  feeling  as  if  head  were  being  pushed  forward,  with  danger  of  falling. 
Pinching  in  1.  temporal  region  from  within  outwards. — Blind  headache,  with 
bearing-down  in  uterus,  and  ovarian  pains. — Headache :  with  hot,  red  face  and 
vomiting  of  food ;  with  nervousness  at  night ;  with  general  soreness  of  scalp, 
cannot  bear  to  have  hair  touched. — Rush  of  blood  to  head,  with  vertiga— 
Violent  throbbing  up  to  occiput 

3.  Eyes. — On  stooping  cannot  see  ;  seems  as  if  all  blood  ran  into  ^es. 
— Blinding  headache. — Hemianopsia  (r.) — Conjunctivitis  and  photophobia. — 
Heaviness  of  lids,  esp.  r. — ^Traumatic  conjunctivitis. — Dry  and  rough  feeling 
of  lining  of  lids,  congestion  of  eye  {Alumina  relieved).--Stycs  on  lower  lids 
(1.),  then  upper. — Tarsal  cysts. 

4.  Ears. — Hard  of  hearing ;  ringing  and  buzzing. — Painful  red  swelling 
of  parotids. 

5.  Nose. — Nose-bleed  of  bright  blood,  in  children. — Nose-bleed  re- 
lieving headache.— Erysipelas,  with  ulceration  just  inside  tip  (L). 

6.  Face. — Face  earthy,  pale,  sallow. — Heat,  with  redness. — Hot  cheeks, 
with  toothache. — Neuralgia  in  face  (r.). — ^Acne  in  chin  and  forehead. 

8.  Mouth.— Toothache  always  appearing  after  eating  food;  <  by 
warm  drinks,  >  by  cold. — Complaints  during  dentition,  with  fever. 


FERRUM   PHOSPHORICUM  773 

g.    Throat.--On  waking,  throat  feels  swollen  and  sti£F,  swelling  painful, 

<  empty  swallowing. — Feeling  of  lump  (r.)  on  swallowing. — Inflammation  of 
palate,  tonsils,  and  pharynx,  with  dryness,  redness,  and  pain. — Membrane  on 
r.  tonsil,  spreading  to  1. 

11.  Stomach. — Poor  appetite,  with  attacks  of  sickness.--Great  thirst  for 
much  water.— Vomiting  at  irregular  times,  sometimes  awaking  her  out  of 
sleep.— Green  vomit. — Haematemesis.— Vomiting  with  the  pains. — Weight  and 
fulness  in  stomach ;  with  fulness  in  forehead. — Pain  in  stomach  <  after 
eating,  and  by  pressure. 

12.  Abdomen. — Distension  in  hypochondria  and  region  of  stomach. — 
Feeling  of  a  layer  of  hard  substance  in  abdomen  ;  later  Of  hardness  in  spots. 
— Intolerance  of  clothes  touching  abdomen  and  chest ;  throws  them  o&  at 
night. — Colic  before  stool. — Hernia  :  inflamed  and  incarcerated. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.  — Chronic  diarrhoea;  yellow,  watery  (with 
pneumonia). — Lienteria  from  relaxation  of  intestinal  muscles. — Dark  green 
stools,  odourless. — Hot  flatus. — Dysentery  with  violent  fever  ;  fever  continues 

<  from  pressure  on  stomach ;  no  tenesmus. — Summer  diarrhoea,  stools  green, 
watery,  or  hashed,  mixed  with  mucus,  scanty,  straining  at  stool ;  also  retching, 
child  rolls  its  head  and  moans,  eyes  half  open. — Stools  pure  blood ;  bloody 
mucus  or  slime ;  <  midnight  to  morning. — Green  and  hard  stools  expelled 
with  much  effort. — Habitual  constipation  ;  piles  ;  disposition  to  prolapse. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  urgent,  with  pain  in 
neck  of  bladder  and  end  of  penis ;  must  urinate  immediately,  which  >  the 
pain  ;  <  during  the  day  ;  <  standing. — Enuresis  nocturna  from  weakness  of 
sphincter. — Enuresis  diurna  from  irritability  of  trigone,  >  lying  down. — 
Urine  spurts  out  with  every  cough. — Complaints  before  urinating — Urine 
smells  like  cafi  au  lait — Haemorrhage  from  bladder  or  urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Seminal  emissions. — Sexual  instinct  com- 
pletely in  abe3rance. — Dull  aching  in  r.  testicle. — Gonorrhoea,  inflammatory 
stage. 

iG.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Bearing-down  in  uterus,  with  constant 
dull  pain  in  either  ovarian  region. — Vaginismus. — Pain  in  vagina  during 
coition;  cannot  bear  examination. — Dryness  of  vagina. — Dysmenia,  with 
accelerated  pulse  and  red  face. — Menses  pale  first  half  of  period. — Menses 
every  three  weeks,  profuse,  with  pressure  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back, — 
During  profuse  menses,  pain  on  top  of  head. — During  pregnancy  ;  cough  with 
ejection  of  urine ;  headache  during  third  month. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Laryngitis,  with  hoarseness  from  over- 
straining voice.— Hoarse  ;  raises  greenish  mucus  in  biggish  lumps. — Much 
mucus  in  throat  and  rattling  in  chest.— Pleuritic  stitch  with  a  deep  inspiration, 
or  cough. — ^Acute,  short,  spasmodic,  and  very  painful  cough.— Suddenly  a 
loose  cough,  painless  indoors,  but  painful  in  open  air. — ^Tormenting  cough 
when  bending  over  or  touching  larynx. — Cough  :  causes  spurting  of  urine ; 

<  in  open  air;  <  touching  larynx;  <  at  night— Whooping-cough,  with 
retching  and  vomiting. — Haemoptysis ;  after  concussion  or  fall. 

19.  Heart. — Dull,  aching  pain  at  heart ;  sometimes  extending  to  back,  1. 
of  spine. — Palpitation  with  full  pulse  (less  bounding  than  Aeon.,  less  flowing 
than  Gels,). 

20.  Neck  and  Back.— Crick  in  neck  or  back. 


774  FERRUM   PHOSPHORICUM   HYDRICUM 

9Z.  Limbs. — Rheumatism  attacking  one  joint  after  another;  joints 
puffy,  but  little  red ;  high  fever ;  <  slightest  motion. — Rheumatism  of  wrist 
and  knee. 

82.  Upper  Limbs.— Violent  drawing,  tearing  pain  r.  shoulder  and  upper 
arm,  <  violent  motion  of  arm,  >  gentle  motion,  so  that  patient  hardly  kept  it 
still  at  all ;  somewhat  sensitive ;  deadness  in  r.  hand. — ^Acute  rheumatism  of  r. 
deltoid ;  unable  to  wear  cloak. — In  r.  shoulder- joint  acute  rheumatism ;  red, 
swollen ;  very  sensitive. — Swelling  of  elbow  from  sprain. — Rhetunatism  in  wrist. 
— Wrists  ache  with  loss  of  power  to  grasp.— Pahns  of  hands  hot,  with  chikiren. 
— ^Nodule  on  dorsum  of  1.  little  finger. — Contracted  fingers  frcHn  acute 
rheumatism. 

83.  Lower  Limbs. — Pain  and  soreness  in  hip. — ^Pains  in  knees  spread- 
ing to  other  joints,  finally  to  shoulders  and  upper  thorax  (after  Fen.  fhos. 
it  went  downwards  from  joint  to  joint,  to  knees,  and  then  pa^ed  off).— While 
walking  constrictive  pain  in  anterior  aspect  of  shins,  lower  third,  as  if  he  had 
been  walking  very  hard  and  fast  (which  was  not  so),  <  L — Ankle,  outer  side, 
pale  red  ;  foot  greatly  swollen  and  sensitive ;  toe  feels  as  if  borning.--Steady, 
terrible  pain  all  over  foot  and  ankle,  extorting  cries,  shooting  pains  around 
ankle  and  up  inside  of  leg. — ^An  acute,  very  painful  sugillation  on  dorsum  of 
foot. 

85.  Skin.-^Capillary  congestion,  with  burning  of  skin,  <  from  severe 
exercise  or  in  a  warm  room. — Measles.— Erysipelas. — ^Acne. 

86.  Sleep. — Drowsiness,  with  rush  of  thoughts.— Eyes  half  open  in  sleep. 
— Restless  at  night. — Restless  sleep  with  anxious  dreams ;  great  depressu)n  in 
morning. — Sleepless  from  severity  of  pains. — Dreams  of  quarelling ;  suddenly 
changes  to  happy  conversation  with  another  person. 


Ferrum  Phosphoricum  Hydricom. 

Ferrous  hydropliosphate.    FeH  PO4,  mixed  with  an  uncertain  amount 
of  Ferric  phosphate.    Trituration. 

CUnioaL— Conjunctivitis.    Writer's  cramp. 

OharaoteFiBtlcB.— This  salt  has  been  proved  by  Dr.  J.  C.  Moigan. 
The  symptoms  resemble  those  of  Ferr.phos,  alb.  and  the  other  Fenum 
preparations.  Malaise  ;  feeling  as  if  he  had  not  had  sufficient  sleep; 
aching  in  occipito-cervical  region ;  sensitiveness  to  cool  air  and 
desire  for  warmth.  Right  side  most  affected.  Symptoms  <  bending 
forward. 

BTHPTOMB. 

X.    Mind. — Intolerance  ;  annoyed  by  obstacles. 

2.  Head. — Dull  r.-sided  headache. — Every  concussion  (as  coughing  or 
hard  smacking  of  lips)  is  felt  as  a  dull,  painful  sensation  at  base  of  skuIL 

3.  Eyes. — Painful  smarting  in  edges  of  r.  eyelids. 

4*    Ears. — Sticking  in  r.  ear  as  from  large-pointed  stick  on  going  to  bed. 


FERRUM  PICRICUM  775 

zi«  Stomach.— Irritating  rising,  greasy  flavour.— At  9.30  p.m.,  sitting  at 
table,  bent  forward  reading,  most  intense  heartburn,  with  rising  so  irritating 
as  to  cause  cough. 

».  Meek  and  Back.— Aching  in  sacro-iliac  symphysis  when  walking, 
>  by  pressure. 

a6.  Sleep.— Drowsy,  eyes  feel  it  much,  feeling  extends  upward  into  head ; 
soon  after,  he  was  compelled  to  lie  down  and  take  a  nap. 

97.    Fever. — Heat  and  dryness  of  face  and  palms  while  sitting. 


Ferrum  Piorioum. 

Kcrate  of  iron.    Ce  H^  (tiO^%  OFe.    Trituration.    Tincture. 

QUnleaL— Albuminuria.     Corns.     Deafness.     Ears,    diseases    of.      Fatigue. 

][aandioe.     Liver,   disorders  of.     Lupoid  warts.     Lupus.     Nose-bleed.    Prostate, 

I  of.    Rheumatic  arthritis.    Rodent  uloer.    Tinnitus.   Voice,  loss  of.    Warts. 


duunuitoKlBtiet.— This  is  an  unproved  medicine,  but  Dr.  Cooper, 
who  introduced  it,  has  given  the  leading  indications  for  its  use,  and 
these  are  so  dear  that  it  has  taken  a  definite  position  in  the  materia 
medica.  It  is  a  liver  medicine,  and  is  particularly  suited  to  persons 
with  dark  hair  and  eyes,  and  bilious-looking  patients.  A  dirty  appear- 
ance about  the  joints  indicates  it ;  the  stain  being  due  to  bile  pigments. 
It  has  cured  many  cases  of  warts  and  corns,  as  I  have  repeatedly 
verified.  Dr.  Cooper  has  reported  a  case  of  lupoid  wart  cured  by  it 
Dr.  Cooper  was  led  to  give  Fe.  pic.  in  cases  of  warts  by  a  symptom 
produced  in  a  patient  (to  whom  he  was  giving  it  for  deafness), 
*'  sensation  as  if  a  wart  were  growing  on  the  ttiumb."  He  considers 
it  specially  indicated  for  warts  on  the  hand,  when  they  are  multiple. 
Cooper  has  observed  that  warts,  especially  old  pedunculated  warts, 
frequentiy  accompany  chronic  deafness.  Keferring  to  the  e£Fects  of 
fatigue,  Cooper  describes  it  as  the  failure  of  an  organ  under  exertion 
which  would  not  ordinarily  strain  it — c^.y  failure  of  the  voice  in  public 
speakers.  The  condition  of  the  ear  in  the  deafness  which  calls  for 
Fc,  pic.  is  one  of  "  diffused  vasculitis.''  Pic.  ac.  is  also  of  use  in  the 
effects  of  fatigue,  but  in  this  case  it  is  unusual  fatigue  that  sets  up  the 
noises,  &c.,  and  the  deafness  is  nervous  deafness  and  unconnected 
with  changes  in  the  blood-vessels  to  which  Fe.  pic.  is  homceopathic. 
Pic.  ac.,  again,  suits  blondes,  Fc.  pic.  dark-haired,  plethoric  people. 
Burnett  has  cured  with  it  rheumatic  arthritis  in  a  dsrk-haired  subject. 
P.  C.  Majumdar  {Ind.  Horn,  Rev,,  October,  1899)  cured  a  student, 
su£Eering  from  anaemia  and  malarious  fever  off  and  on  for  a  year,  who 
had  these  symptoms  among  others  :  Impaired  hearing  of  both  ears, 
buzzing,  hissing,  vertigo,  indigestion,  headache,  and  tired  feeling  after 
bodily  or  mental  exertion.  He  considers  Fe.  pic.  suited  to  the  results 
of  malarious  fever^  sexual  excesses,  and  loss  of  blood.  Pullar  has 
cured  with  it  a  case  of  albuminuria.  Fe.  pic.  is  apt  to  aggravate  if 
given  too  low.    The  symptoms  it  causes,  or  cures,  I  have  arranged 


776  FERRUM  SULPHURICUM 

below  in  schema  form.  Dr.  Mende  considers  Fe.  pic.  almost  specific 
in  nose-bleed.  It  has  a  specific  action  on  the  prostate  gland.  Dadley 
Wright  has  confirmed  Cooper's  observation  here ;  it  will  frequently 
control  senile  hypertrophy.  <  From  fatigue  is  a  leading  indication: 
overpowering  effects  of  fatigue, 

xMBAowk— Compare :  Pic.  ac,  Nit.  ac,  Thuja.,  Amm.  pic,  Calc. 
pic,  and  the  Femim  preparations. 

Camatloii.— Fatigue. 

BTHPTOMB. 

9.  Head. — Giddiness  with  disturbance  of  cerebral  circulation,  pain  in 
occiput,  inability  to  walk. 

4.  Ears. — Diffused  vasculitis;  with  liver  symptoms.-— (Deafness  in 
young  people  cutting  wisdom  teeth.) 

G.    Face. — Lupoid  wart  on  face. 

12.  Abdomen. — Liver  sensitive,  some  icterus. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Constipation. 

15.    Male  Sexual  Organs.— Prostate  gland  enlarged. 
90.    Neck  and  Back. — Pain  in  r.  side  of  neck  and  down  r.  ann. 
85.    Skin.— Warts:  multiple;  pedunculated.— Corns.— Jaundice.— Dirty- 
looking  skin  about  joints. — Sensation  as  if  a  wart  were  growing  on  thumb. 
flO.    Sleep. — Restless  sleep  with  unpleasant  (often  erotic)  dreams. 

Ferrum  Pyrophosphoricum. 

Ferri  pyrophosphas.  Pyrophosphate  of  Iron.  A  scale  preparation 
containing  55  per  cent,  of  Pyrophosphate  of  Iron  (Fe.  P,  0,) 
combined  with  Citrate  of  Soda.    Solutions  and  triturations. 

Cninloal.— Braf n,  congestion  of.    Headache,    Tarsal  cysts. 

CharaoteristloB. — ^This  preparation  has  not  been  proved,  but  it 
has  been  used  cUnically  in  low  attenuations  in  cases  of  brain  congestion 
and  congestive  headache,  following  great  losses  of  blood.  If  Fe.  fh, 
fails  to  remove  tarsal  cysts,  Cooper  says  give  Fe.  pyropk. 

Ferrum  Snlphoricom. 

Sulphate  of  Iron.  Ferrous  Sulphate.  Iron  or  Green  VitrioL  Copperas. 
Fe  SO4,  7H.O.    Trituration  of  the  pure  crystals. 

OUniesL—Aphthae.  BulioEiy.  Cardialgia.  Chorea.  Constipation.  Diarrhoea. 
Eczema.  Gall-bladder,  pain  in.  Gastritis.  Gonorrhcea.  Haemorrhages.  Head- 
ache. Helminthiasis.  Menorrhagia.  Nettlerash.  Scrofula.  Spasms.  Toothache. 
Worms. 

Ohanoteristiot.— F^fT.  suL  has  the  leading  features  of  the  other 
Ferrums,  but  many  of  the  Sulphur  characters  appear,  in  the  modalities 


I 


FERRUM   SULPHURICUM  ^^^ 

especially.  There  is  <  from  warmth  or  warm  room  (toothache) ;  > 
from  cold  air  or  from  ice  (toothache)  or  from  fresh  air.  It  is  like 
Sulph.  also  in  acidity  and  eructations  of  food  in  particles.  Other 
noteworthy  symptoms  are:  Passive  haemorrhages.  Pain  in  gall- 
bladder. Pallor  or  flushing.  Sensation  as  if  all  the  blood  were 
rushing  into  head  and  face.  Sensation  of  fermentation  or  purring  in 
stomach.  FeeUng  of  general  heat  and  disposition  to  sweat,  with 
sensation  in  sldn  of  back  as  if  he  wore  a  stout  woollen  shirt  Mus- 
cular pains  or  contractions.  Local  atony ;  disposition  to  conges- 
tions ;  nettlerash  ;  aphthas ;  eczema,  with  sluggish  liver. 

Belattons. — Compare :  Phos.  (regurgitation  of  food  in  particles)  ; 
Cina  (worms).    Bapt.  (pain  in  region  of  gall  bladder). 

STHPTOMS. 

8.  Head. — ^Severe  vertigo ;  with  diarrhoea. — Pressing  throbbing  head- 
ache, <  in  forehead,  with  ringing  in  ears,  sensation  of  blood  rushing  into 
head  and  face ;  face  scarlet,  glowing ;  >  in  fresh  open  air ;  <  warm 
room. 

4.    Ears. — Pain  apparently  in  walls  of  meatus  auditorias  externus. 

%  8.  Teeth  and  Mouth. — ^Violent  tearing  toothache ;  teeth  all  sound ; 
>  from  cold  air  or  application  of  ice  on  cheek ;  headache.—- Very  trouble- 
some soreness  of  soft  palate. 

g.  Throat. — ^Taste  of  salt,  with  smarting  in  throat. 
zi.  Stomach. — Bulimia,  cannot  be  satisfied,  thirst  not  marked. — Loss  of 
appetite ;  aversion  to  meat. — Eructation  of  flatus  and  food  with  acidity.— 
Sickness,  with  vomiting. — Sensation  of  fermentation,  or  of  a  noise  or  move- 
ment like  purring  of  a  cat  in  region  of  stomach. — Cardialgia. — Gastritis,  with 
pain  after  eating,  and  regurgitation  of  food  by  mouthf uls. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  region  of  gall-bladder. — Colicky  pains,  with 
flatulence  and  diarrhoea. 

13.  Stool  and  Rectum.— Watery,  reddish-brown,  odourless,  painless 
diarrhcea,  with  great  paleness  of  skin,  emaciation,  vertigo,  cedema  of  scrotum 
and  lower  limbs,  bulimy  without  thirst,  venous  murmurs. — Constipation. — 
Helminthiasis ;  tape  worms ;  ascarides. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Great  weakness  accompanying  Brighf  s  disease. 
— Bloody  urine,  with  albuminuria. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — G^dema  of  scrotum  and  lower  limbs. — 
Secondary  gonorrhoea. 

Id.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Menstruation  copious,  five  to  six  days' 
duration,  with  colic  before  and  during  the  time ;  headache  frequently  between 
periods ;  pressing  throbbing,  esp,  in  forehead,  with  ringing  in  ear,  rUsh  of 
blood,  scarlet  glowing  face  >  in  fresh  air,  <  in  warm  room ;  often  accom- 
panied by  toothache. — Metrorrhagia ;  leucorrhoea. 

90.    Back, — Pain  shooting  down  r.  side  of  back. 

ai.  Limbs. — Limbs  very  painful,  esp.  feet  and  calves,  where  the  pain  is 
distracting. — Contractions  in  arms,  hands,  and  feet 

82.  Upper  Limbs. — Rheumatism  and  semi-paralysed  condition  of  r. 
arm  and  shoulder.^Arms  bent  at  elbows,  and  fingers  drawn  towards  forearm 


778  FERULA  GLAUCA 

by  flexure  of  wrist. — Hands  yield  to  forcible  extension,  but  immediately  return 
to  same  condition. 

93.  Lower  Limbs.— Paralysis  of  lower  limbs. — Knees  slightly  flexed, 
toes  drawn  upwards  rigidly. — Pain  in  sole  of  left  foot  in  middle  of  thick 
fleshy  anterior  part,  and  at  same  time  an  aching  pain  through  lower  part  of 
leg. 


FerFnm  TartaFicnm. 

Tartrate  of  Iron. 
CHwIcal.— Cardialgia.    Headache. 

OharaoteristtoB. — Berridge  has  recorded  these  two  symptoms 
caused  by  a  is-grain  dose :  (i)  Uninterrupted  sensation  as  if  an  im- 
mense load  were  on  entire  upper  portion  of  head,  causing  a  gloomy 
apprehensiveness  of  congestive  apoplexy  (lasted  three  days,  removed 
by  a  dose  of  Nux  i).  (2)  Heat  from  or  heat  at  cardiac  orifice  of 
stomach  lasting  12  hours  ;  unaffected  by  food  or  drink. 


Ferula  Glauca. 

Ferula  Neapolitana.    Bounafa.    N.  O.  Umbelliferae.    Tincture  of 

plant 

CninioaL— 'Aphthae.     Diarrhoea.    Digestion,  slow.     Haemorrhoids.    Nympho- 
mania.   Pruritus  vulvae. 

OharaoteristloB. — Ferula  has  been  proved,  but  I  am  not  aware 
of  any  cliniod  experience  with  it  Heat  and  burning  are  produced 
in  most  parts,  and  sensations  of  coldness  in  others.  Stiffness  and 
constriction  were  also  prominent  Violent  sexual  excitement  in 
women.    A  cough  was  complained  of,  <  in  damp  or  cold  weather. 

Relations.— Cofif^ar^ :  dther  UmbelUferae;  tongue  as  if  burnt, 
Sang.  c. 

STHPTOMS. 

z.  Mind.-*ATersion  to  society;  to  work. — Sadness;  indinatiOD  to 
weep. — ^Impatience;  anger. 

2.  Head. — ^Burning  in  head.— Icy  coldness  in  occipnt  during  day.— 
Lancinations,  pricking,  pulling  pains  in  occiput. 

3.  Eyes. — Burning,  pricking,  itching  of  eyelids. 

5.  Nose. — Redness  of  nose ;  sensitive  to  touch. — Scabs  in  nose,  with 
smarting  and  itching. 

S.    Mouth.— Aphthae ;  heat  in  mouth ;  sensation  in  tongue  as  if  bomt 
9.    Throat-^Scratching, burning, lancinations;  difficuifyofswallowiQg. 


FICUS   RELIGIOSA  779 

u.  stomach.— Decreased  appetite;  nrgent  thlrsL— Bitter  eructations. — 
fitting  up  of  bile. — Slow  digestion,  with  bitter  eructations. — Heat  and  cutting 
pains  in  stomach ;  <  after  eating. 

12.  Atxtomen. — Lancinating,  pulling  in  r.  hypochondrium. — Inflation 
and  tension  of  abdomen. — Colic  before  and  during  stool— Constant  burning 
in  abdomen. — Heat  and  weight  in  hypogastrium. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Haemorrhoids,  with  itching,  burning,  lancinating, 
and  prickings  at  anus. — Diarrhoea  day  and  night,  but  worse  by  day ;  stools 
light-yellow  and  watery,  with  smarting  and  burning  at  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Diminished  urine. 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menses  several  days  early,  more  .pro- 
fuse, thin  or  thick,  with  heat  and  itching  of  vulva.— Violent  sexual  excitement 
(in  females  only). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Difficult  breathing.— Fetid  breath.— Cough 
dry  or  loose,  <  in  damp  or  cold  weather,  with  thick  yellow  expectoration. 

iQb    Heart. — Constriction  and  heat  at  heart ;  beats  stronger. 

90.    Neck. — StifiE-neck. — Pricking  and  lancinating  at  nape. 

82.    Upper  Limbs. — StifFness  of  arms  ;  difficulty  in  bending  them. 

S3.  Lower  Limbs.— Numbness  of  thighs.— Cold  feeling  along  sciatic 
nerves ;  felt  soon  after  rising  up. — Lancination  along  nerves  of  thighs  and 


95.  Skin. — Redness  and  subcutaneous  swelling.:— Small  red  pimples  and 
incessant  itching. — Red  pimples  with  white  tips  in  beard  and  whiskers. — 
Pricking  and  violent  itching  in  many  parts,  <  at  night. 

s6.  Sleep. — Sleepy  in  day ;  sleepless ;  restless ;  starting  from  sleep  at 
night 


Ficus  Religiosa. 


P^Jnir.    (India.)    N.  0.  Moraceae.    Tincture  (juice  of  fresh  leaves 
mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol). 

GtadesL^Hsemorrhages.    Menorrhagia.    Metrorrhagia. 

Charaoteristios. — ^We  owe  this  remedy  to  Dr.  Sarat  Chandra 
Ghose,  of  Midnapore,  who  made  the  first  proving  and  thereby  dis- 
covered its  power  to  cause  and  cure  haemorrhages  of  many  kinds. 
Dr.  Ghose  kmdly  sent  me  a  supply  of  the  remedy,  and  I  have  had  very 
satisfactory  results  with  the  ix  potency  in  controlling  menorrhagia. 
The  provers  were  Dr.  Ghose  himself,  his  wife,  and  a  dog.  As  the 
experiments  are  quite  remarkable  I  will  give  them  in  detail,  i.  The 
dog,  which  was  perfectly  strong  and  h^thy,  received  40  drops  of 
the  tincture  one  morning.  No  result  followed  that  day,  and  the  dose 
was  repeated  next  morning,  and  the  animal  commenced  and  con- 
tinued to  vomit  blood  of  a  bright  red  colour.  It  kept  very  quiet  and 
was  unwilling  to  move.  After  three  doses  of  five  drops  of  the  tincture 
given  in  quick  succession,  the  vomiting  ceased.  It  is  remarkable  that 
the  same  treatment  (minute  doses  of  the  same  remedy)  was  e£Eectual 


78o  FILIX   MAS 

in  arresting  the  effects  of  the  drag  in  the  other  two  provings.  Mrs.  G. 
took  the  tincture  in  20-drop  doses  repeatedly  throughout  two  days. 
On  the  third  day  dysentery  and  menorrhagia  set  in  simultaneously. 
The  blood  was  bright  red.  Other  symptoms  were :  Headache ;  very 
weak  and  restless  ;  sight  dim  ;  burning  at  the  top  of  the  head.  The 
face  became  yellowish  ;  breathing  dUfficult  She  became  sad  and 
melancholy.  With  the  profuse  discharge  of  bright  red  blood  there 
were  bearing-down  pains  in  lower  abdomen.  Dr.  G.  took  40  drops 
in  one  dose.  The  result  was  :  Frequent  desire  to  pass  water,  which 
gradually  became  bloody,  and  contained  much  blood.  Then  inclina- 
tion to  cough,  causing  him  to  spit  blood.  Slight  headache  ;  giddiness 
and  nausea.  Sight  dim.  Very  weak  and  restless.  The  tincture  was 
taken  three  drops  every  two  hours,  and  after  the  third  dose  the 
symptoms  vanished.  Dr.  Ghose  relates  some  striking  cases  cured 
with  the  remedy— dysentery,  hsematemesis,  haemorrhage  of  typhoid, 
bleeding  piles,  and  epistaxis. 

Relations. — Compare:  Acalypha,  Ipec,  Am.,  Phos.,  Sanguisuga, 
Cactus,  Ferram,  &c. 

BTHPTOMS. 

z.    Mind. — Qoiet  and  disinclined  to  move. — Sad  and  melancholy, 
a.    Head. — Nausea,  vertigo,   and   slight   headache.— Headache   (with 
hamorrhages).— Burning  at  vertex. 
3.    Eyes.— Sight  dim. 
5.    Nose.— Epistaxis. 
©.    Face.-— Face  became  yellow. 
zi.    Stomach.-— Vomiting  of  bright  red  blood. 
Z9.    Abdomen. — Bearing-down  pains  in  lower  part  of  abdomen. 
Z3.    Stool  and  Anus.— Dysentery,  with  menorrhagia.— Dysentery,  blood 
bright  red. 

Z4.    Urinary  Organs.— Frequent  desire  to  micturate.— Urine  contains 
much  blood. 

zO.    Female  Sexual  Organs.— Menorrhagia,  bright  red  blood,  bearing- 
down  pains  in  lower  abdomen. 

Z9.    Respiratory  Organs.— Difficulty  of  breathing.— Inclination   to 
cough,  causing  him  to  spit  blood. 

S4.    Generalities.— Very  weak  and  restless. 


Filix  Mas. 

Male  Fern.  AT.O.  FiUces.  Tincture  of  fresh  root,  or  fresh  root  grated. 

OUniosL— Abdomen,  bloated.     Abortion.     Blindness.     SteriUty.    Tapeworm. 

Charaoteristios.— Male  fern  has  been  recognised  as  a  vermifuge 
from  the  time  of  Galen,  and  Dioscorides  credits  it  with  the  power  of 
causing  sterility  and  abortion.     A  fragmentary  proving  in  Allen's 


FILIX  MAS  781 

Appendix  records  a  case  in  which  15  to  20  drops  of  the  tincture 
given  three  times  a  day  to  a  woman  suffering  from  bloated  abdomen 
with  more  or  less  pain  caused  diminution  of  the  bloating,  but  also  : 
Severe  prolapse  of  vagina,  pain  and  tenesmus  of  bladder  with  copious 
and  frequent  emission  of  urine  with  intense  pain.  Filix  was  dis- 
continued and  then  Chimaphila  relieved.  The  symptoms  did  not 
return  afterwards,  except  after  much  walking  and  standing.  Bering 
says  the  best  time  to  give  the  drug  for  expulsion  of  tapeworm  is  in 
the  summer  when  the  fresh  root  can  be  obtained.  If  an  ounce  of  the 
grated  root  is  given  in  the  forenoon,  usually  the  tapeworm  comes 
away  in  the  afternoon.  Among  the  leading  symptoms  are :  Pale  face 
with  blue  rings  round  eyes ;  gnawing,  boring  pains  in  abdomen,  < 
after  sweet  things.  Blindness  has  t>een  caused  in  a  numt>er  of  cases 
from  atrophy  of  the  optic  nerve.  C.  S.  Spencer  records  this  effect 
from  taking  capsules  each  containing  ten  minims  of  the  oil  of  male 
fern  for  tapeworm  :  "A feeling  of  nausea;  abdomen  became  painfully 
distended  with  colicky  pains.  Menses  returned  after  only  one  week's 
absence,  and  continued  profusely  for  three  weeks.  Very  sick  after 
taking  her  food.  The  worm  was  got  rid  of  and  the  capsules  stopped 
when  these  symptoms  passed  away. 

Teste  has  used  it  successfully  in  a  case  of  violent  dyspnoea  without 
cough,  with  stitches  in  region  of  heart  and  obscure  symptoms  of 
pericarditis.  The  patient  was  a  young  lady  of  lymphatLco-nervous* 
temperament,  and  was  much  weakened  by  long  sickness. 

Relationt. — Compare :  Areca,  Granat,  Kousso  and  Cue.  pep. 
sem.  (tape-worm)  ;  Gels.,  Carb.  s.,  Ben.  din.  (vision).  Teste  places 
Filix  mas  in  his  Ipecac,  group  along  with  Nux  vom..  Ant.  crud.,  Ant. 
tart.,  &c. 

BTHPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — Irritable  and  cross. — Confusion,  stupor,  coma. 

2.  Head.— Vertigo. 

3.  Eyes. — Blindness ;  first  mydriasis  and  amaurosis  with  normal 
fundus ;  eight  days  later,  atrophy  of  optic  nerve.— Immobility  of  pupil.— 
After  violent  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  soporific  condition  lasting  thirty  hours ; 
awakening,  her  1.  eye  was  blind,  and  r.  eye  had  lost  some  of  its  acuteness  of 
vision.  Being  kept  in  the  dark,  perception  of  light  by  1.  eye  returned  after 
forty-eight  hours  and  recovery  took  place. 

5.  Nose.— Itching  of  nose. 

6.  Face. — Pale  face  ;  blue  rings  round  eyes. 

11.  Stomach. — Nausea — Sick  after  taking  food. 

12.  Abdomen.— Bloating  of  abdomen.— Gnawing  and  boring  in  bowels, 
<  eating  sweet  things. — Great  pain  in  abdomen,  with  diarrhcea  and  constant 
vomiting. 

13.  Stool  and  Rectum.— Ineffectual  urging  to  stool.— Pappy  stools.— 
Violent  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.— Worm  sjmiptoms,  esp.  with  constipation. 
— ^Worm  colic. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Menstruation  stimulated.— Menses  re- 
turned after  nearly  one  week's  absence,  continued  profusely  for  three  weeks. 


782  FLUORICUM  ACIDUM 

—Prolapse  of  vagina;  with  pains  and  tenesmus  of  bladder  and  copious 
frequent  emission  of  urine  with  internal  pains  (relieved  by  Ckima^,).'- 
Abortion.— Sterility. 

24.  Generalitie8.--Great  feeling  of  weakness,  trembling,  cramp-like 
feelings  in  hands  and  feet. — Somnolent,  with  spasmodic  symptoms,  ending  in 
death. 

flO.    Sleep.— Soporific  condition. 

97.  Fever.— Violent  rigor,  fever,  great  pain  in  abdomen  with  dianhoa 
and  constant  vomiting. 


Flaoricmn  Acidiim. 

Hydrofluoric  add.  H  F.  Made  by  distilling  pure  fluorspar  (Calcium 
fluoride)  in  a  state  of  fine  powder  with  sulphuric  add. 
Solution. 

Gllldoal*— il65Ctfss.  Alcoholism.  Alopecia.  Apoplexy.  Bone,  affecHons  0/. 
Brain,  atrophy  of.  Cicatrix.  Coccygodynia.  Decubitus.  Dropsies.  Eyes,  affec- 
Uons  of.  Fistula.  Gleet  Goitre.  Gonorrhoea.  Hctmorrhoids.  Hair,/aUing 
out.  Hands,  perspiring.  Headache.  Hydrocele.  Liver,  induration  oC  Loco- 
motor ataxy.  Naevus.  Nose,  inflammation  of.  Nymphomania.  Otorrtoa. 
Peritonitis.  Perspiration.  Pityriasis.  Satyriasis.  Splenalgia.  Saturation. 
Syphilis.  Teeth,  defective.  Toothache.  Tongu&,  ulceration  of  Varioosts.  Vans, 
cUseased.    Whitlow. 

OharaoteFisttot. — Fluoric  acid  acts  on  the  lower  tissues  of  the 
body  much  like  Silica^  which  it  follows  and  precedes  well.  It  is  useful 
after  the  abuse  of  Silica.  The  modalities  of  the  two  are  different  ; 
Fluor,  ac.  having  >  from  cold  applications.  It  acts  on  the  bones, 
especially  the  long  bones,  causing  caries  and  necrosis,  and  favours  the 
expulsion  of  the  necrosed  part.  Fistulas,  rectal,  dental,  and  lachrymal 
come  within  its  sphere.  Old  cicatrices  become  redder  and  itch. 
Small  red  spots  here  and  there,  <  by  warmth,  >  in  cool  place.  Red 
blotches  on  body  which  tend  to  desquamate.  Nails  grow  rapidly. 
Teeth  are  deficient  in  enamel ;  black,  rough,  unsightly-looking. 
Increased  sensitiveness  of  vision  and  hearing.  According  to  Guernsey 
Fluor,  ac.  affects  the  right  ear  ;  left  teeth  ;  left  hypochondrium ;  lett 
side  of  abdomen  ;  right  side  and  nape  of  neck ;  right  side  of  back. 
T.  F.  Allen  has  recorded  an  experience  {N.  A.  J.  /f.,  1886,  p.  288) 
showing  the  applicability  of  Fl.  ac.  in  whitlow.  A  lady  spilled  some 
of  the  add  on  her  hand  and  though  treated  at  once  with  turpentine  a 
few  spots  escaped  on  one  hand,  and  these  soon  gave  her  great  pain, 
intensely  pulsating.  The  pulsations  involved  the  tip  of  the  thumb 
espedally,  though  this  had  not  been  touched  by  the  add.  It  vras  not 
red  Uke  the  spots  touched  by  the  add  but  was  sore  to  touch,  and 
when  pressed  there  was  a  sensation  as  of  a  splinter  under  the  nail 
and  in  the  cellular  tissue.  This  lasted  some  days.  The  whole  hand 
was  swollen  and  hot,  >  in  cool,  open  air.  In  a  workman  whose  hand 
was  exposed  to  the  fumes  of  the  acid  there  was  intense  throbbing  pains 


FLUORICUM   ACIDUM  783 

especially  in  the  thumb ;  suppuration  occurred  later  and  was  very 
slow  to  heal.  According  to  McLachlan,  the  left  hand  is  affected  rather 
than  the  ri^t  and  the  pus  tends  to  point  on  the  dorsum  of  the 
finger.  >  From  cold  washing  distinguishes  it  from  Silic.  Fl.  ac.  is 
also  distinguished  from  Sil.  by  the  general  >  from  walking  in  the 
open  air.  ''  A  constant,  irresistible  desire  to  walk  in  the  open  air  ;  it 
does  not  fatigue,"  is  characteristics  of  Fl.  ac.  Hunger  predominates. 
There  is  <  from  wine  like  Zinc. ;  but  also  <  from  red  wine,  which  is 
peculiar  to  Fluor,  ac.  Abdominal  symptoms  >  by  tightening  clothes 
{NaL  mur.—opp.  Lack,,  Hep.),  Peculiar  symptoms  are  :  Increased 
ability  to  exercise  his  muscles  without  fatigue.  Is  less  affected  by 
excessive  heat  in  summer  or  cold  in  winter.  Sensation  as  of  a  cold 
wind  blowing  under  Uds,  even  in  warm  room ;  as  of  3ir  passing 
down  from  shoulder- joint  to  fingers.  Numbness  of  limbs  even  when 
not  lain  on.  Motion  <.  Bending  backward,  and  bending  head 
back  >.  Cold  drinks  <  toothache  ;  washing  with  cold  water  >. 
Warm  drink  <  diarrhcea.  Symptoms  seem  to  go  from  below  upward. 
Suited  to  complaints  of  old  age,  and  premature  old  age ;  weakly 
constitutions,  sallow  skin,  emaciation. 

RelationB. — Compatible :  after  Arsen.  in  ascites  from  gin-drinker's 
liver  ;  after  Kali  c.  in  hip  disease  ;  after  Phos.  ac.  in  diabetes.  Com- 
pare :  Coca  (fatigue) ;  Coffea  (toothache) ;  Citr.  ac.  and  Sep.  (aversion 
to  one's  family^  ;  Oxal.  ac.  Miarrhcea  <  from  coffee)  ;  Rhus  t.  and 
Ruta  (coccygoaynia) ;  SiUc.  (fistula,  onychia,  bone  diseases,  coccygo- 
d3rnia) ;  Brom.,  lod.,  Spongia  and  Kali  c.  (goitre) ;  Staph,  (teeth). 
Followed  well  by  :  Sulph.,  Nit  ac. 

BTHPTOHS. 

I.  Mind. — Uncommon  baoyancy  of  mind ;  fears  nothing  and  is  self- 
satisfied. — Disposition  to  be  exceedingly  anxious,  causing  perspiration. — 
Aversion  to  his  own  family. — Sensation  as  if  danger  menaced  him. — For- 
getfulness  of  dates  and  of  his  common  employment. 

a.  Head. — ^Vertigo  with  sickness  of  the  stomach. — Congestion  of  blood 
to  the  head  (forehead). — Dulness  (towards  night)  in  the  occiput — Dulness  and 
pressure  in  occiput — Sensation  of  numbness  in  the  forehead. — Heaviness 
above  the  eye%,  with  nausea,  <  on  motion. — Compressing  pain  in  the  temples. 
— Headache  >  by  profuse  flow  of  urine. — Severe  pressing  pain  in  temples, 
from  within  outward. — Pain  along  the  sutures. — Caries  of  the  temporal  bones. 
— Sensation  of  weakness,  like  numbness  in  the  head  (and  hands). — Itching  of 
the  head. — Falling  off  of  the  hair ;  the  new  hair  is  dry  and  breaks  off. — 
Baldness. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Violent  itching  in  the  canthi. — Burning  in  the  eyes. — Pressure, 
as  if  it  were  behind  r.  eyeball. — Fistula  lachrymalis. — Sensation  of  sand  in  the 
eyes,  or  as  if  a  fresh  wind  was  blowing  on  them. 

4.  Ears. — Intolerable  itching  in  both  ears. — Singing  in  ears. — Hardness 
of  hearing  >  bending  head  back. 

5.  Nose. — Red,  swollen,  inflamed  nose. — Obstruction  of  the  nose. — 
Fluent  coryza. 

6.  Face.— Heat  in  the  face ;  desire  to  wash  it  with  cold  water.— 


784  FLUORICUM  ACIDUM 

Perspiration,  esp.  in  the  face. — Cnista  lactea,  dry,  scaly,  itches  very  much.— 
Tubercles  in  skin  of  forehead  and  face,  suppurating ;  syphilis  infantum. 

8.  Mouth.— The  teeth  feel  warm  (L  upper  jaw). — Fistula  (near  the 
r.  eye-tooth)  with  great  sensitiveness  of  the  uppef  jaw  to  the  touch.— Sensa- 
tion of  roughness  (lower  incisor  teeth). — ^Toothache  <  from  cold  drink;  or 
>  until  water  becomes  warm  in  mouth. — Rapid  caries  of  teeth. — Acrid,  foul 
taste  from  the  roots  of  the  teeth. — Increased  flow  of  saliva. — Increased  flow 
of  saliva  (with  sneezing ;  with  pricking  of  the  tongue.) — In  the  morning  the 
mouth  and  teeth  are  full  of  mucus. — The  posterior  nares  feel  expanded  daring 
a  walk. — ^Tongue  deeply  and  widely  fissured  in  all  directions,  with  a  large, 
deep  phagedenic-looking  ulcer  in  the  centre. 

9.  Throat. — ^Throat  peculiarly  sensitive  to  cold,  slightest  ezposare 
resulting  in  inflanmiation,  with  increase  of  pain  and  impeded  deglutition.— Con- 
striction in  the  throat  with  difficult  deglutition ;  in  the  morning  hawking  up 
of  much  phlegm  which  is  mixed  with  blood. 

II.  Stomach. — Hunger  predominates. — ^Thirst,  craves  refreshing  drinks. 
— ^Aversion  to  co£Fee. — Eructation  and  discharge  of  flatulency. — ^Frcqucnt 
eructations. — Nausea,  eructations,  and  lassitude. — Sickness  of  the  stomach, 
with  general  heat — Fulness  and  pressure  in  epigastrium. — Pressure  from 
weight  ill  the  stomach,  between  meals. — Heat  in  the  stomach  before  the  meal 
— Bilious  vomiting  after  slight  errors  in  diet,  with  increased  alvine  discharges, 
preceded  by  tormina. 

18.  Abdomen.— Frequent  passages  of  flatus  and  belchings,  which  refiere. 
— Great  tension  and  dropsical  swelling  of  the  abdomen. — Pinching  in  the 
region  of  the  spleen  (extending  to  the  hips),  11  a.m. — Pressing  pain  in  the 
region  of  the  spleen  and  1.  arm. — Sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  region  of  the 
navel,  with  desire  to  draw  a  deep  breath ;  >  by  bandaging  and  eating. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Soft  small  stools  in  the  morning  after  drinking 
coffee,  and  again  in  the  evening,  with  protrusion  of  the  haemorrhoids.--Water7 
stools  in  the  morning  after  rising. — Frequent  passages  of  flatus  and  eructations 
(with  constriction  of  the  anus). — Stool  pappy,  yellowish-brown,  fetid,  with 
tenesmus  and  prolapsus  ani. — Protrusion  of  the  anus  during  an  evacuation.— 
Constipation ;  stools  infrequent  and  hard. — Itching  within  and  around  the 
anus,  in  the  perineum  (evening). 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Free  discharge  of  light-coloured  urine,  affording 
relief. — ^Very  frequent  discharge  of  light-coloured  urine  (thirst  increased).-- 
Whitish  purple-coloured  sediment  in  the  urine. — Intolerable  burning  in  the 
urethra  during  and  after  urination. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Increased  sexual  desire  (in  old  men)  with 
violent  erections  all  night — Sensation  of  fulness  in  both  spermatic  cords.— 
Highly  excessive  enjoyment  and  pleasure  during  coition. — Seminal  discharge 
tardy  but  free,  and  without  bad  aiter-f eeling. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menstruation  too  early  and  too  copious ; 
the  discharge  is  thick  and  coagulated. — ^Acrid  leucorrhoea ;  itching. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Itching  in  the  larynx,  which  causes  him  to 
hawk  and  to  swallow. — Short  frequent  cough,  mostly  dry,  white,  frothy  sputa. 
— Itching  under  the  ribs  (1.). — Difficult  respiration  (afternoon  and  evening).— 
During  respiration  wheezing  (hydrothorax). 

18.  Chest.^-Oppression   of  chest,  >  bending  backwards.  —  Nipples 


FLUORICUM  ACIDUM  785 

itching,  sore,  cracked. — Itching,  redness,  swelling  of  (r.)  nipple. — Itching 
on  1.  breast  and  r.  side  of  nose. 

xg.    Heart.r— In  the  heart  sensation  of  soreness,  jerking. 

90.  Neck  and  Back.— Rigidity  in  the  nape  of  the  neck.— <Pain  (head- 
ache) from  the  nape  of  the  neck  extending  through  the  centre  of  the  head  to 
the  forehead. — Bruised  pain  in  the  os  sacruiQ  and  loins,  >  by  stretching, 
bending  backwards,  and  by  pressure. 

98.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  in  r.  shouIder«joint. — Pain  in  r.  shoulder-joint, 
extending  toward  fingers,  with  sensation  as  if  air  were  passing  down. — ^Tremb- 
ling in  the  biceps  and  triceps  of  r.  arm. — Slight  lameness  in  r.  arm  (has  some 
difficulty  in  writing). — Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  arm  from  shoulder  to  elbow, 
with  lameness. — The  1.  forearm  and  hand  asleep  (in  the  morning). — Numbness 
and  lameness  in  L  forearm  and  hand  (morning). — Pain  in  1.  index  finger  ;  the 
whole  finger  is  painful  internally. — ^Weakness  and  numbness  of  the  hands  and 
head. — Constant  redness  of  the  hands,  esp.  the  palms  of  the  hands. — ^Acute 
prickings,  as  with  needles,  in  the  fingers. — ^Thumbs  and  fingers  inflamed, 
with  acute  throbbing  pains. — Sensation  of  a  splinter  under  nail. — ^The  nails 
grow  more  rapidly. — Brittleness  of  the  nails. — Panaritium ;  also  simple 
onychia, 

Q.  Lower  Limbs.— ^Edematous  swelling  up  to  the  abdomen.— Varicose 
veins. — ^Acute  stitches  in  r.  hip-bone. — Lameness  in  1.  hip. — Pain  in  r.  knee- 
joint — The  1.  leg  falls  easily  asleep. — Burning  stitches  under  the  soles  of  the 
feet  (in  the  morning). — Feet  hot  and  burn. — Soreness  between  the  toes. — 
Soreness  of  all  his  corns. 

94.  Generalities. — Lassitude. — Loss  of  strength. — Limbs  go  to  sleep, 
although  he  does  not  lie  on  them.— Increased  ability  to  exercise  his  muscles 
without  fatigue,  regardless  of  the  most  excessive  heat  in  summer  or  cold  in 
winter. — ^Violent  jerking,  burning  pains,  confined  to  a  small  spot. 

95.  Skin. — Old  cicatrices  become  red  around  the  edges,  covered  or 
surrounded  by  itching  vesicles,  or  they  itch  violently. — Burning  pains  on 
small  spots  of  the  skin. — Itching  of  the  skin  (in  the  month  of  March). — 
Elevated  red  blotches. — Red,  round,  elevated  blood  vesicles,  resembling  little 
flesh- warts. — ^Varicose  veins  on  the(l.)  leg. — Caries  and  necrosis. — Ulcerations, 
esp.  after  the  abuse  of  Silica. 

96.  Sleep — Sleeplessness  without  inclination  to  sleep ;  a  short  sleep 
suffices  and  refreshes  him. — Drowsy  and  sleepy  in  the  early  evening. — Dreams 
toward  morning. 

97.  Fever. — General  heat  with  nausea. — General  heat  with  nausea  from 
the  least  movement,  with  inclination  to  uncover  oneself  and  to  wash  oneself 
virith  cold  water. — Perspiration,  clammy,  acid,  disagreeably  smelling,  princi- 
pally on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  esp.  on  moving  in  the  afternoon  and 
evening,  with  itching. — ^The  perspiration  favours  soreness  of  the  skin  and 
decubitus. — Less  susceptible  to  the  summer  heat 


VOL.  I.  51 


786  FORMICA 


Fomiica. 

Formica   rufa.     The  Ant.     N.   0.   Hymenoptera.    Tincture  from 
crushed  live  ants.    Contains  formic  acid  (HCO,  OH). 

CniBloaL— 'Apoplejr^.  Brain,  afifections  of .  Bruises.  Chorea.  Coo^  I>iar- 
rhcea.  Dislocations.  Dropsies.  Byes,  affections  of.  Facial  paralysis.  Foot-sweat, 
checked,  consequence  of.  Gout  Hair,  falling  out.  Headaches.  Nodes.  Orer- 
lifting,  complaints  from.  Paralysis.  Rheumatism.  Sight,  affections  of.  Spine, 
affections  of.    Spleen,  pain  in.    Throat,  sore. 

Charaoteriatiot. — Formica  causes  many  rheumatic  and  gouty 
pains ;  the  pains  appear  suddenly,  and  dart  from  place  to  place : 
left,  then  right  ;  right,  then  left.  The  spinal  cord  is  affected, 
paralyses  and  spasms  occurring.  Sensation  as  if  brain  too  heavy 
and  large.  Sensation  as  if  a  bubble  burst  in  forehead.  It  is  of  use 
"in  all  kinds  of  apoplectic  diseases.  It  strengthens  the  brain'' 
(Hering).  Cooper  has  given  the  3X  with  success  in  cases  of  weakness 
of  lower  extremities.  J.  W.  Thomson  {H.  P.,  xvi.  32)  reports  the  case 
of  a  gentleman,  aged  84,  who  had  severe  neuralgic  pains  between 
posterior  of  right  ear  and  centre  of  occiput.  From  this  he  apparently 
recovered.  Eighteen  months  later  he  returned  with  a  steady,  sore, 
and  burning  pain  in  same  region  ;  swollen  and  tender  around,  but 
especially  behind,  right  ear.  He  could  only  sleep  in  one  comfortable 
position,  which  he  could  not  describe,  but  only  knew  when  he  found 
it ;  and  he  must  be  covered  up  warmly  behind  right  ear  and  between 
that  and  occiput  and  neck — all  right  side.  Better  from  taking  right 
hand  and  rubbing  gently  behind  right  ear.  Sweat  afforded  no  reUef; 
the  whole  head  seemed  to  sympathise  with  the  distress;  he  had 
dribbling  of  urine.  Formica  rufa  was  given,  six  doses,  one  before 
each  meal.  On  the  second  day,  towards  evening,  he  felt  worse, 
and  on  the  third  day  there  were  twinges  and  spasms  of  severe  pain 
in  addition  to  the  sore  pain  which  he  had  before  experienced.  These 
gradually  got  better,  and  on  the  fourth  day  even  the  soreness  was 
much  better.  The  main  thing,  however,  was  that  he  felt  mentally 
better ;  said  his  mind  and  head  felt  stronger,  and  from  feeling 
depressed  he  had  become  cheerful,  and  life  did  not  seem  the  burden 
it  had  for  some  time  past  Hering  gives  as  an  indication  for  Formic 
acid  :  "  Burning  pain,  binning  from  washing  ;  renewed  burning  from 
cold  washing."  Symptoms  are  >  after  midnight  Motion  <  ;  also 
sitting.  Hot  irons  >  pain  in  neck.  >  By  rubbing  ;  by  combing  hair. 
Cold  water  application  <  (headache ;  burning  pains).  Great  liability 
to  take  cold  ;  consequences  of  cold  and  wet ;  cold  bathing ;  damp 
weather.  Clammy  skin ;  disagreeable  sweat  during  night ;  sweat 
without  relief. 

RelatioiiB. — Compatible :  After  Cham.  Compare :  Ars..  Bry.,  Dulc. 
(rheumatism) ;  Urt.  u.  (nettle-rash  ;  gout ;  rheumatism.  Nettles  con- 
tain Formic  acid) ;  Frag.  v.  (lack  of  mammary  secretion) ;  Tromb. 
(diarrhcea) ;  Caps,  (burning  pains  <  by  cold  water). 

Canaaiioii.— Checked  foot-sweat 


FORMICA  787 


8TMPT0H8. 

I.  Mind.— Want  of  memory ;  in  evening. — Indisposed,  morose,  fearful, 
apprehensive. — Exhilarated  after  pain  in  vertex  abated. — Mind  unusually 
excited. — Remarkable  and  unexpected  activity  of  mind  during  the  day,  with 
absence  of  usual  dulness  and  sleepiness. 

8.  Head.— Vertigo ;  all  things  seem  to  move  to  and  fro,  and  reeling  of 
body;  pain  in  U  supra»orbital  region  when  going  to  bed,  with  dixziness; 
blackness  before  eyes,  >  by  sitting  down. — Fulness ;  stupid  feeling,  with 
sensation  of  stiffness  in  neck. — Dulness ;  pressure  on  both  sides  between 
temples  and  ears. — Fore  part  of  head  aches  with  the  cough.-— Sensation  like  a 
babble  bursting  in  forehead,  running  around  1.  side  of  head. — Headache  in  1. 
forehead  and  temple  back  to  occiput,  with  cutting  extending  into  ear. — Head- 
ache with  cracking  in  1.  ear,  followed  by  pain  in  1.  temple,  then  in  vertex  with 
nausea  and  abatement  of  pain  in  foreh€»Eui. — Pain  on  top  of  head,  shifting  from 
epigastrium. — In  morning,  headache  in  posterior,  upper  and  inner  part  of 
head ;  <  drinking  co£Fee ;  each  time  during  and  after  washing  witti  cold 
water. — Pain  from  neck  up  to  back  of  head. — Sensation  running  up  into  head 
from  body  like  lightning. — Headache,  <  sitting  up  in  bed ;  >  after  combing 
hair. — ^Itching  of  scalp. — Hair  ceases  falling  out. — Contusions  of  head. 

3.  Byes. — Pain  in  1.  supra-CM-bital  and  1.  temporal  region,  the  seat  of 
pain  being  tender  to  touch  ;  pain  and  aching  over  1.  eye  ;  objects  appear  as  if 
seen  through  a  mist ;  blackness  before  eyes,  must  sit  down  for  a  few  moments. 
— Pain  in  eye  when  awakes,  >  by  washing. — Dim  sight. — Flickering  before 
eyes. — Nebula  ,*  leucoma ;  pterygium. — ^Maculae  and  ulcers  on  cornea. — Rheu- 
matic ophthalmia. — Spasmodic  twitching  of  upper  eyelid  (r.). 

4«  Ears. — Ringing  buzzing  in  ears.-^Cracking  in  1.  ear  with  headache. 
— Deafness. — ^External  sensitiveness  of  r.  ear  and  temple. 

6.    Face. — Entire  1.  side  of  face  and  cheek  feel  as  if  paraljrsed. 

9^  Throat. — Sore  throat  in  mcMning,  with  much  mucus. — Sore  throat 
<Lside. 

XX.  Stomach. — Pain  in  neck  when  hawking  and  gargling ;  when  eating 
and  drinking,  esp.  when  closing  jaws. — ^Af  ter  drinking  tea  copious  sweat. — 
Nausea  and  vomiting  ;  with  diarrhoea ;  in  evening ;  with  cough. — Burning 
pain  in  stomach,  with  oppression  and  weight. — Constant  pressure  at  cardiac 
end  of  stomach,  and  a  burning  pain  there. 

X8.  At>domen. — Dull  pain  in  region  of  spleen. — Sensation  across  abdo- 
men as  if  bruised  below  navel,  also  tired  feeling  in  back. — Flatulence. — 
Hardening  of  mesenteric  glands. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhcea  after  meals,  or  only  during  day,  not 
at  night ;  or  day  and  night,  or  before  midnight. — Diarrhoea  with  tenesmus ; 
pain  in  bowels  before  stool. — Loose  diarrhoeic  stool,  with  feeling  as  if  more 
was  to  pass. — White  stools. — Constipation  and  sensation  of  constriction  in 
sphincter. — Pressure  in  rectum,  <  evening  and  in  bed. — Painful  desire  in 
anus  and  rectum  for  stool,  which,  however,  will  not  pass. — ^Tape-worm. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.-— Paralysis  of  bladder.— Double  the  quantity  of 
urine,  even  at  night;  increased  for  two  or  three  days. — Urine  like  saffron  ; 
bright  yellow ;  no  sediment ;  passed  frequently. 


788  FRAGARIA  VESCA 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Long-lasting  erections  after  urinating  in 
morning. — Seminal  emissions. — Scanty  ejaculation  with  incomplete  erection. 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — ^Menses  scanty  and  pale,  with  bearing- 
down  pains  in  back  third  day ;  fourth  day  darker ;  crampy  pain  tfaroogh 
hip-joint  and  pelvis. — Menses  appear  eight  days  too  soon. — La^ck  of  milk  with 
nnrsing  women. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness  with  sore  throat — Small  piece 
of  phlegm  in  throat,  which  cannot  be  brought  up  by  coughing. — Cou^  tedious 
and  long  lasting ;  <  at  night  and  from  motion ;  with  an  aching  in  forehead 
and  a  constrictive  pain  in  chest — Violent  attacks  of  cou^,  with  vomiting, 
day  and  night. 

z8,  IQ.  Chest  and  Heart. — Pleuritic  pains. — Uneasy  pain  in  re^oa 
of  heart. — Fluttering  palpitation. — ^Violent  penetrating  pain  in  region  of  r. 
nipple. — ^Violent  prickling  pressing  stitches  in  region  of  1.  nipple,  later  on  L 
side  of  back,  but  more  violent ;  still  later  the  same  sensation  on  other  parts 
of  the  body. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Soreness  in  neck  and  up  into  head. — Severe  pain 
1.  side  of  neck  while  chewing. — StifFness  1.  side  of  neck  extending  down  L  arm ; 
<  by  least  motion ;  turn,  or  twist ;  >  by  application  <^  a  hot  iron.— Severe 
pain  across  sacrum  and  dorsum  of  each  hand. — ^Affection  of  spinal  cord. 

21.  Limbs. — Sensation  as  if  muscles  were  strained  and  being  torn  from 
attachment. — Rheumatism  appearing  suddenly,  mostiy  in  joints,  with  restless- 
ness ;  patients  desire  motion,  although  it  <  pains ;  >  by  pressure ;  sweat 
without  relief  ;  <  r.  side. — Stiffness  and  contraction  oi  joints. 

as.  Upper  Limbs. — Itching  in  armpits  in  morning. — Pain  from  neck 
down  1.  arm ;  in  evening  to  r. ;  could  scarcely  move  her  arm.— Severe  pain 
above  r.  elbow. 

IQ.  Lower  Limbs. — Severe  pain  throu^  pelvis  as  if  from  one  aceta- 
bulum to  the  other. — Bruised  pain  in  hips  at  night,  causing  him  to  change 
from  side  to  side. — Chronic  gout.— Checked  foot-sweat  (chorea  from). 

96.  Sleep.— All  night  dry  throat,  woke  her  out  of  sleep.— Disagreeable 
sweat  during  night,  awoke  with  clammy  skin. — Could  get  to  sleep  if  she  conld 
get  the  right  position. — ^Wakes  early,  and  feels  she  has  had  sufficient  sleep.— 
On  awaking :  headache ;  vomiting  with  headache ;  pain  in  eyes ;  stitches  in 
ears. 


Fragaria  Yesca. 


Strawberry.    N.  0.  Rosaceae.    Tincture  of  the  ripe  fruit    Infusion  of 

the  root. 

OUnieaL- Anasarca.  Biliousness.  Chilblains.  Convulsions.  Erysipdas. 
Gonorrhoea.  Psilosis  (or  Sprue).  Tapeworm.  Ton^i^,  strawberry ;  swollen.  Urti- 
caria.   Weaning. 

CharaoteristiCB. — It  is  well  known  that  many  persons  are  unable 
to  eat  strawberries,  and  the  poisonous  effects  resulting  from  them  on 
those  who  are  sensitive  to  their  action  have  been  utilised  in  homceo- 


FRANCISCEA   UNIFLORA  789 

pathy.  Faintness  ;  suffocation  like  apoplexy ;  convulsions  and  death 
have  resulted ;  general  anasarca,  and  especially  swollen  tongue.  The 
well-known  "  strawberry  tongue  "  is  an  indication  for  its  use.  Dr. 
Burnett  gives  it  as  "  pippy  tongue."  An  infusion  of  the  root  is  used 
for  drying  up  the  breasts  in  women  who  wish  to  wean  their  children  ; 
it  diminishes  the  size  of  the  breasts  and  dries  up  the  milk.  Profuse 
viscid  sweat  has  been  observed.  Lippe  mentions:  "Tapeworm. 
P^n  in  chilblains  in  hot  weather."  In  old  physic  Fragaria  vesca  (in 
decoctions  of  leaves,  root,  or  fruit  ripe  or  unripe,  or  combinations  of 
these)  had  a  very  large  place  assigned  to  it.  It  is  commended  by  W. 
Salmon  as  a  wash  for  sore-mouth ;  as  a  haemostatic  arresting  the 
menses  and  stopping  "  bloody-flux  ;  "  swelling  of  the  spleen  ;  many 
forms  of  skin  eruption  and  for  "  clearing  the  complexion."  In  two 
instances  I  have  known  indulgence  in  strawberries  to  revive  symptoms 
of  gonorrhoea  in  men  who  thought  themselves  cured.  A  number 
of  cases  of  sprue  or  psilosis  have  been  cured  by  a  diet  of  strawberries 
ad  libitum  (H.  W.,  xxxiv.  440). 

BelatioiiB.— Com^ar(0 ;  Hydrocy.  ac,  Apis,  Arsen.,  Cratseg. 

8THPT0HS. 

6.    Face.— *Face  reddish  blue. — Livid  countenance. 

8.  Mottth.-~Tongue  swollen  so  that  it  hung  from  the  mouth. — Pippy  or 
strawberry  tongue. 

II,  18.  Stomach  and  Abdomen.— Vomiting  followed  by  relief.— 
Stomach  and  abdomen  distended. — ^Violent  colic. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.-— Gonorrhceal  discharge  lighted  up  after 
long  cessation. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Breasts  diminished  in  size  and  milk 
dried  up  (root). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— attacks  of  sufiFocation  like  apoplexy. 

19.  Heart. — Small  intermittent  pulse. — Failure  of  the  heart's  action  and 
prolonged,  leaving  the  patient  weak  and  languid.    (Death  occurred  later.) 

80.    Neck. — Neck  very  much  distended  with  fine  veins. 

24.  Generalities. — Swelling  of  the  whole  body. — Swelling  of  the  whole 
body  with  faintness. — Complete  prostration. — Convulsions. 

85.  Skin. — Petechial  eruption. — Erysipelatous  eruption. — Urticaria-like 
eruption. 

17.    Fever. — Profuse  viscous  sweat. 

Francisoea  Uniflora. 

Brazilian  Manaca-root.  N.  0,  Scrophulariaceae.  Closely  allied  to 
Brunfelsia.  Tincture  of  fresh  root.  An  alkaloid,  Franciscein, 
is  also  used. 

GUaieal*— Headache.    Pericarditis.    Rheumatism.    Syphilis. 

Charaoteristios. — Frandscea  u.  is  a  Brazilian  remedy  of  great 
local  repute  as  an  anti-syphilitic  and  anti-rheumatic.    It  is  oilled 


790  FRANZENSBAD 

"  vegetable  mercury."  In  large  doses  it  is  a  poison,  causing  "riokot 
purgation  and  emesis.  Many  cases  of  acute,  sub-acute,  and  dironic 
cases  of  rheumatism  have  been  reported  cured  with  the  tincture  by 
homoeopaths ;  also  pericarditis  compUcating  rheumatism.  Hauaea 
gives  these  symptoms  as  characteristic,  though  I  do  not  know  of  any 
proving :  ^'  Intense  headache  like  a  band  around  the  head,  pain  in 
occiput,  neck  and  spine,  lancinating,  sticking ;  terrible  aching  aU 
over,  with  great  heat,  followed  by  profuse  sweat,  which  >  all 
symptoms." 


Franzensbad. 

The  alkaline-saline  springs  of  Franzensbad,  near  Eger,  in  Bohemia, 
(Franzens-quelle,  Salz-quelle,  Wiesen-queUe.) 

OUnieaL— Chlorosis.  Constipation.  Debility.  Diarrhoea.  Dyspepsia.  Nervons 
derangement 

Chanuiteriitios.— The  Franzensbad  waters  are  resorted  to  for 
their  tonic  effect,  especially  in  chronic  derangement  of  the  digestion, 
obstinate  constipation  and  inertia  of  the  lower  bowel,  ana&mia  follow- 
ing passive  haemorrhages,  chlorosis,  and  nervous  disturbances  caused 
by  debility.  The  waters  of  each  of  the  three  principal  springs— 
Franzens-quelle  (F.),  Salz-quelle  <S.),  and  Wiesen-queUe  (W.)— ha?e 
been  proved  by  Dr.  Watzke.  Sodium  sulphate  is  by  far  the  most 
predominant  ingredient  in  each,  the  chloride  and  caimnate  of  soda 
coming  next.  The  waters  are  also  highly  charged  with  carbonic 
acid  gas.  Great  sense  of  weakness,  physical  and  mental,  was  pro- 
duced by  all.  Under  F.  there  was  increased  sensitiveness  to  cold. 
Contractive  sensations  were  noticed,  as :  Contractive  pain  in  whde 
forehead;  sensation  of  contraction  of  skin  of  forehead  between 
eyebrows.  Many  symptoms  of  disordered  stomach  and  bowels 
occurred,  and  some  peculiar  symptoms  in  the  penis  and  generative 
organs.    Sensitiveness  of  the  surface  generally. 

Relations* — Compare:  Nat.  sul. ;  Kali  iod.  (diffused  sensitiveness). 

8TMPT0HS. 

z.    Mind. — Great  ill-humoor. 

s.  Head.— Contractive  pain  in  whole  of  forehead.— Occiput  near  vertex 
warm  to  touch. — Sensitiveness  of  whole  head  and  eyeball,  <  by  reflecting  long 
on  a  subject,  not  <  by  stooping,  shaking  head,  or  walking. 

3«    Eyes. — Sensation  of  great  dryness  and  hardness  of  lids. 

5.  Nose.— Fluent  coryza  in  moving  after  rising,  with  constant  tickling 
in  1.  nostril,  lachrymation  of  1.  eye  and  frequent  sneezing. 

8.  Mouth.— Tongue  coated  white.— Dryness  of  palate  and  throat- 
Earthy  or  burnt  taste  in  mouth. 

g.    Throat.— Constriction  in  throat ;  >  after  supper ;  with  nausea. 


FRAXINUS  AMERICANA  791 

IX.  Stomach.— Appetite  diminished.— Repeated,  empty  violent  eruc- 
tations. 

18.  Abdomen.-— Aching,  distension,  and  marked  sensitiveness  of  the 
whole  abdomen. — Stitches  in  region  of  gall-bladder.— Gurgling ;  painless 
rambling ;  colic ;  slight  griping,  followed  by  diarrhcea. — Painful  drawing  in 
groin  on  micturition. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Contractive,  at  times  jerking  pain  in  anus  nearly 
whole  forenoon. — Constant  empty  urging  to  stod. — Semi-fluid  evacuations  ; 
after  eating ;  preceded  and  followed  or  not  by  pain. — Constipation. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Distressing  (slow)  drawing  through  the  whole 
nrethra.-^titches  in  orifice  of  urethra ;  followed  by  unpleasant  itching. — 
Frequent  micturition. 

15.  Male  Sezttal  Organs. — Erection  without  sexual  desire;  desire 
diminished. — Sensitiveness,  at  times  painful  drawing  in  penis ;  frequently 
returns,  is  apparently  seated  in  mucous  membrane  of  urethra  (S.)— ^Violent 
tickling  in  prepuce  and  glans. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Voice  rough  and  deep ;  hoarseness. — Dry, 
tickling  cough,  frequently  repeated,  caused  by  tickling  in  soft  palate  (S.). 

18.  Chest. — Sensitiveness,  external  painf ulness ;  constriction  in  chest. 
90.    Back. — Severe  long-lasting  pain  in  back  and  loins  ;  a  disagreeable 

sensation  of  heaviness  and  pressure,  towards  morning,  while  lying  in  bed,  only 
>  after  rising ;  <  by  motion ;  by  turning  to  one  side.— Pinching  beneath  r. 
scapula. 

85*    Skin. — Sticking  itching  in  various  places. 

S6.  Sleep. — Frequent  waking  with  unusually  vivid  and  remembered 
dreams. 


Fraxinus  Americana. 

White  Ash.    AT.  0.  Oleaceas.    Tincture  of  the  bark. 
Olfaitealt— Ufentf,  affiecUons  of;  prolapse  of.    Utems,  tmnoars  of. 

CDiaraeteristioB. — Fraxinus  has  had  a  fragmentary  proving,  but 
the  chief  clinical  authority  for  its  use  is  Dr.  Burnett,  who  regards  it 
as  a  uterine  tonic  in  all  heavy  states  of  the  uterus  with  prolapse, 
bearing-down,  and  relaxed  ligaments.  He  calls  it  "  the  medicinal 
pessary."  I  have  repeatedly  verified  his  indications.  It  is  an  organ- 
remedy  of  the  first  rank.  It  is  also  indicated  in  uterine  tumours, 
especially  fibroids,  with  bearing-down  sensations. 

RaluioilB*— Com^ari^ ;  Sepia,  Lil.  t,  Nat  hyperchlor.,  Secale, 
Hydrast 

8THPT0H8. 

8.  Head.— Headache  with  vertigo  followed  by  fever.— Throbbing  pain 
in  back  of  head  and  neck. 

(L    Face— Fever  sores  on  lips. 


792  FUCUS  VESICULOSUS 

13.  Stool. — Bowels  constipated. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  scanty  and  brown. 

Id  Female  Sexual  Organs.—- Uterine  prolapse.--(Bearing«down  pains. 
— Painf ulness  and  heaviness  of  uterus. — Fibroid  tumours.) 

21.  Limbs.— Cramp  in  feet  after  midnight,  lasting  three  nights  after  the 
fever. 

96.  Sleep.— Wakefukiess  first  part  of  night ;  last  part  dreamed  that  two 
rough  men  came  into  the  house ;  in  putting  them  out  I  was  cut  with  a  knife ; 
I  called  for  police,  and  that  awoke  me ;  I  was  breathing  quick,  with  a  fearfnl 
feeling. 

27.  Fever.— Cold  creeping  and  hot  flushes.— Fever  two  days  after  the 
medicine  was  stopped. 


Fuous  Yesionlosus. 

Sea  Kelp.    N,  O.  Algae.    Tincture  and  trituration  of  the  dried  plant 
GUnieaL— Corpulence.    Dyspepsia.    Goitre. 

Charaoteristtos. — Fucus  is  a  tissue-remedy  of  great  power  and 
must  be  compared  with  Iodine,  of  which  it  contains  a  large  propor- 
tion. The  symptoms  have  been  obtained  from  patients  taking  the 
medicine  for  the  reduction  of  obesity.  The  rapidity  of  digestion  is 
increased  and  flatulency  diminished.  Goitre  has  been  curra  with  it 
in  teaspoonf ul  doses  of  the  tincture  given  two  or  three  times  a  day. 

SYMPTOMS. 

a.  Head. — ^Intolerable  headache ;  forehead  felt  as  if  compressed  by  an 
iron  ring. 

II.  Stoinach.--^tomach  acts  with  more  rapidity,  and  the  hour  of  repast 
is  more  impatiently  looked  for. — ^The  act  of  digestion  is  no  longer  accom- 
panied by  flushings  of  the  face,  fulness,  weight  in  epigastric  region  and  fits  of 
heat  towards  head. 

13.    Abdomen. — Flatulency  diminished  and  then  disappears. 

13.    Stool. — Obstinate  constipation. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs.— Sense  of  suffocation,  esp.  during  menses. 


f 


LOSTON  l;NlYl:-:x=  li 


Cvi'ioci  cf  lj;t;<-i^i"  ■-. 


Gadus  Morrhua. 

Cod    AT.  0.  Gadidae.    Trituration  of  first  cervical  vertebra  of 

the  fish. 

COIiiioaL— Asthma.  Bladder,  a£fectioti8  of.  Bone  affections.  Cough.  Hands 
hot    Phthisis. 

OhanuiteriskiOB. — Petroz  is  our  authority  for  this  medicine.  Like 
OL  jec.  oseLf  Gadus  has  a  powerful  action  on  the  respiratory  apparatus. 
It  is  like  Lycopod.  in  producing  flapping  of  the  alae  nasi.  It  also  affects 
the  bones  and  causes  troublesome  beat  of  the  hands.  Hopelessness  and 
desire  for  death  are  prominent. 

Relfttions*— Corn^ar^ ;  OL  jec.  asel.,  Calc.  c,  Calc.  phos.,  Con- 
chiol. 

8TMPT0HS. 

z.  Mind. — Deep  melancholy,  paroxysms  of  helplessness,  for  forty- 
eight  hours,  during  which  the  desire  for  death  is  hardly  controlled. — 
Intellectual  faculties  torpid;  absence  of  ideas. 

2.  Head. — Headache  in  the  night  accompanied  by  fever. 

3,  4.  Eye  and  Ear.— Marked  diminution  of  strength  of  hearing  and 
sight — ^A  noise  (tic-tac)  is  felt  in  r.  ear,  and  pain  if  a  noise  from  exterior 
becomes  predominant. 

5.  Nose. — Oscillation  of  wings  of  nose,  accompanying  very  frequent 
breathing  as  after  exercise,  at  the  time  of  waking  and  during  the  whole 
day. 

6.  Face.— Altered  countenance. 

8.    Mouth. — ^Teeth  sensitive  and  set  on  edge. — Dry  mouth. 
9*    Throat.— Waking  in  night  on  account  of  severe  contraction  in  the 
throat— Constriction  of  fauces,  wheezing  cough,  with  white  frothy  expectora- 
tion. 

zx.    Stomach. — Loss  of  appetite. 

tt.    Abdomen.— Atxiomen  much  distended.— Sensation  of  burning  heat 
in  whole  hypogastrium. — ^While  pains  are  felt  in  the  chest,  sharp  pains  in 
r.  side  of  atxiomen,  in  the  groin,  and  in  the  kidneys. 
i^    Stools.— Soft  stools,  diarrhoea. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.  — Sensation  of  swelling  and  fulness  in  bladder ; 
stitches  in  bladder ;  almost  impossible  to  urinate. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs.— Voice  weak,  exertion  required  to  articulate 

799 


794  GALEGA 

dictinctly ;  words  do  not  come  when  wanted. — Light  congh  with  expecton^ 
tion  of  foamy  sputa. — Fits  of  wheezing  cough  with  pain  deep  in  chest— Very 
frequent  breathing,  with  oscillation  of  wings  of  nose^  as  after  exercise,  at  time  of 
waking  and  during  the  whole  day. — Breath  short,  laborious ;  as  if  air  passages 
were  closed. — Rush  of  blood  to  chest,  without  palpitation. — ^Violent  pains  in 
chest  with  orgasm. — Lumps  seem  adherent  to  parietes. — Sharp  pains,  burning 
shootings,  2  p.m. — Sharp  pains  running  through  chest ;  not  <  by  walking, 
though  renewed  on  first  movement — ^Very  sharp  pains  in  both  lung^  esp.  L, 
evening.— Contused  pain  in  chest  walls ;  brought  on  by  coughing,  deep 
inspiration,  or  motion.— A  few  fits  of  coughing  caused  a  sensation  of  painful 
ruffling  of  the  lungs,  which  seemed  to  change  place  and  be  contused. 

80.  Back.-^harp,  lancinating  pain  in  dorsal  vertebrae.— €k>nstrictive 
pains  in  sides  of  trunk. — Pains  in  lower  back  and  sacrum. 

93.    Upper  Limbs. — Nails  become  soft 

33.  Lower  Limbs.- Pain  above  1.  hip.-^light  lancinating  pain  in  L 
knee,  which  bends  involuntarily  when  standing. — ^Tearing  pain  in  r.  buttock 
and  thigh. — Bruised  sensation  in  femur  from  head  of  bone  to  patella. 

87.  Fever.— ^Very  severe  coldness  from  hip  down  to  feet— Hands 
excessively  hot  and  dry. — Dry  heat  in  palms ;  intolerable  in  evening.— Fever 
without  chill. 


Galega. 

Galega  officinalis.   Goafs  Rue.  AT.  0.  Leguminosae.    Aqueous  extract, 
Infusion,  or  Tincture  of  whole  fresh  plant 

OlliileaL— Backache.    Debility.    Kidney  ache.    Lactation. 

Charaoteristics. — Galega^  as  its  name  implies,  has  an  ancient 
reputation  as  a  milk-gland  stimulant  The  Galegct  are  nearly  related 
to  Glycyrrhiza,  the  well-known  source  of  liquorice.  Carron  de  la 
Carriere  {H,  W.j  xxvii.  79)  tested  its  action  on  Ae  milk  glands  of 
nursing  women  and  f  omid  it  rapidly  increased  the  quantity  and  0^% 
of  the  milk  and  increased  the  woman's  appetite.  Dorretta  {U,  W,^ 
xxix.  177)  gave  Galega  (he  calls  it  ''  GaUga  vera^^  but  doubtless  it  is 
Goat's-rue),  in  liquid  extract  of  the  leaves,  for  a  conmion  form  of 
backache,  which  he  located  in  the  kidneys,  though  it  is  unaccom- 
panied by  any  sign  of  kidney  disease.  The  medicine  he  says  is  also  a 
most  excellent  reconstructive  in  cases  of  ansemia  and  impaired 
nutrition. 

Bdatloilg,— Coiiffcir^ ;  Agnus,  c,  Calc.  c;  in  kidney-ache, 
Santal. 


GALLICUM   ACIDUM  795 

Galium. 

Galium  aparine.  Cleavers.  Goose-grass.  N,  O,  Galiaceas  (con- 
sidered by  some  a  sub-order  of  Rubiaceae).  Tincture  and 
infusion  of  fresh  plant    Extract.    Poultices. 

CllaieaL— Bladder,    irritability   of.      Calculos.    Cancer.     Gravel.     Psoriasis. 
Xncers. 

CSutfaeteristieB* — Galium  has  had  no  proving,  but  it  is  a  popular 
remedy  for  cancer  given  internally  and  used  externally;  and  also 
tor  scrofulous  swellings  and  ulcers.  It  is  further  used  as  a  diuretic  and 
as  a  solvent  for  gravel  and  stone.  It  has  cured  a  case  of  nodulated 
tumour  of  the  tongue  diagnosed  to  be  cancer  {see  Hale) ;  and  a  case 
of  psoriasis  of  the  hand  (left)  has  been  reported  cured.  Substantial 
doses  were  given  in  each  case,  and  in  the  latter  poultices  of  the  herb 
were  used  as  well. 


GaUioom  Aoidom. 

Gallic  Acid.    C,  He  O,.    Trituration. 

CQinieal*  —  Asthma.      Constipation.       Debility.      Delirium.      Haemorrhages. 
Phthisis.    Urticaria. 

Cluunuitori8tio8.~Gai/u:  add  is  the  well-known  astringent, 
derivative  of  Tannic  acid,  obtained  from  galls  or  oak-apples.  It  is 
used  in  old-school  practice  as  a  local  application  to  arrest  haemor- 
rhages. A  case  is  recorded  {H,  W.,  xxviii.  502)  in  which  the  applica- 
tion of  an  ointment  containing  Gallic  acid,  or  the  insertion  of  a 
tannin  suppository  for  piles,  caused  an  attack  resembling  hay- 
asthma,  with  an  eruption  of  urticaria.  The  experience  was  repeated 
several  times  before  the  cause  was  found  out.  This  is  sufficient  to  show 
that  GalL  ac,  is  truly  homoeopathic  to  pulmonary  cases,  in  which  it  has 
been  largely  used  by  the  old  school  as  well  as  the  new.  In  pulmonary 
haemorrhage,  and  in  the  excessive  expectoration  and  the  night-sweats 
of  phthisis  it  has  been  found  of  especial  service.  Marcy,  of  New  York, 
has  recorded  the  case  of  a  young  lady  who  had  a  cavity  in  the  left 
lung,  with  copious  purulent  expectoration,  ni^t-sweats,  evening  fever, 
pulse  130.  Under  the  prolonged  use  of  GalL  ac.  ix  she  recovered  her 
normal  health  except  that  the  left  lung  remained  dull  and  she  had 
great  shortness  of  breath  on  the  slightest  exertion.  Her  flesh, 
strength,  and  general  appearance  were  as  when  she  was  in  perfect 
health.  Bayles  says  it  rapidly  checks  secretions,  gives  general  tone 
to  the  stomach,  increases  appetite  and  removes  constipation.  This 
last  must  be  a  homceopathic  efiEect  Gall.  ac.  is  used  in  popular  prac- 
tice to  check  excessive  menstruation.  Prominent  svmptoms  in  the 
proving  are  :  Weakness  with  irritability.    Excessive  dryness  of  mouth 


796  GALVANISMUS 

and  throat.    Sense  of  contraction  of  anus.    Jerking  of  limbs.    Itching 
of  skin. 

Relations*-- Com^ar^ ;  Quercus,  Tannin.,  Badl.,  Ars.  iod.,  Phos., 
&c.    Pbos.  relieved  pain  in  right  lung. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind.^Wild  delirium  at  night ;  very  restless ;  jumps  out  of  bed ; 
sweats  profusely  ;  afraid  to  be  alone ;  insists  on  constantly  being  watched ;  is 
exceedingly  rude  and  abuses  every  one,  even  his  best  friends ;  jealous  of  his 
nurse  and  curses  every  one  who  speaks  to  her  (a  patient  taking  massive  doses 
for  aneurism). 

3.    Eyes. — Photophobia  and  burning  itching  of  lids. 

5.    Nose. — Discharge  thick  and  stringy. — Nose-bleed. 

8,  Q.  Mouth  and  Throat.--Gums  sore  L  side  around  decayed 
tooth. — Dryness  of  mouth,  fauces,  and  throat ;  with  bad  taste  in  deep  sleep 
and  dreams  at  night. — Increased  roughness  and  secretion  of  phlegm  in 
throat 

iz,  IS. — Stomach  and  Abdomen. — Appetite  lessened  ;  with  astringent 
taste  in  mouth  at  noon. — Slight  nausea.--^tool  later  than  usual  leaving 
smarting,  aching,  faint,  sick,  hungry,  and  gnawing  sensation  in  bowels, 
extending  to  stomach,  with  nausea  lasting  most  of  afternoon. — Gnawing,  faint 
sick  sensation  in  bowels  and  extending  upward  to  stomach,  with  an  astringent 
sensation  in  same. 

13.  Stool  and  AnttS. — Sensation  of  contraction  of  anus,  requiring  a 
greater  eCFort  for  expulsion  at  stool,  which  comes  at  length  in  bulk  as  if 
accumulated  there. — Stool  delayed.— Smarting,  esp.  in  rectum. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Urine  increased.— Some  red  sediment  (Hay- 
asthma.) 

Z7»  iS.  Respiratory  Organs  and  Chest.— -Pain  in  r.  lung,  lessened  on 
lying  down  9  p.m.,  not  so  severe  in  morning ;  <  by  coughing,  yawning  and 
full  inspiration. — (Cavity  in  1.  apex  ;  purulent  expectoration.)— Some  aching 
middle  and  upper  part  of  lungs,  more  in  1.,  extending  throu^  muscles  of  neck 
and  r.  shoulder  and  down  upper  part  of  spine,  <  moving  and  turning  bead, 
morning. 

21.    Limbs.— Jerking  of  limbs. 

85.    Skin. — Itching  in  various  parts. — ^Urticaria. 


Galvanismus. 

Galvanism.  ("Z"  signifies  zinc,  " s "  silver,  and  "c"  the  copper  pdc.) 
Attenuations  are  made  by  triturating  sugar  of  milk  which  has 
been  subjected  to  the  influence  of  either  pole. 

GiisiosL— Asthma.  Brain-fag.  Diarrhoea.  Epilepsy.  Fever.  Haemor- 
rhoids. Hydrocephahis.  Paralysis.  Rheumatism.  Salivation.  Tetanus.  Tongue, 
affections  of.    Toothache.    Vision,  illusions  of. 

Characteristics. — Caspari  is  the  authority  for  this  medicine. 
The  most  prominent  symptoms  are  muscular  contractions  ;  shudder- 


GALVANISMUS  797 

ing,  shivering,  cold-water  sensations  on  skin  or  else  burning.  Disorders 
of  sight  and  hearing  with  confusion  of  the  head  and  headache. 
There  is  also  putrid  smell  before  nose.  Many  sensations  appear  in 
the  tongue,  and  there  is  salivation.  Catamenia  copious.  Farrington 
gives  **  benumbed  feeling  at  the  back  of  the  head  in  brain-fag,  the 
positive  pole  being  applied  to  the  cervical  region,  the  negative  to  the 
vertex." 

Relations* — Compare  :  Kali  bro..  Gels.,  Electricitas,  Magnet 
p.  arct.,  Magnet,  p.  aust. 

STMPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — Sobbing;  peevishness. — Inquietude;  oppression. — ^Anxiety. 
— ^Anguish,  with  oppression  of  the  chest,  and  rattling  respiration. — 111- 
homour  ;  vexation  ;  obstinacy. — Dulness  of  mind ;  incapacity  for  labour. — 
Rambling  thoughts. — ^Zoomagnetic  symptoms. — Unusual  vivacity  and  activity 
of  mind,  without  force  of  will,  with  loss  of  command,  almost  entire,  over  the 
motions  of  the  limbs. 

2.  Head. — Head  confused  to  an  excessive  and  painful  degree ;  per- 
plexity and  giddiness  in  the  head. — ^Vertigo  :  with  confusion  of  the  head,  and 
lights  before  the  eyes ;  with  deafness  ;  with  alternation  of  heat  and  cold. — 
Cephalalgia;  violent  pains  in  the  direction  of  the  ears. — Sensation  as  in 
coryza,  in  the  head  and  nose. — Pressive  headache. — Congestion  in  the  head. 
— ^Noise  in  the  head,  like  bellowing,  or  boiling. — Chronic  hydrocephalus. 

3.  Eyes. — Sharp  pains  in  the  eyes.--Aching  of  the  eyes. — Pulsation  in 
the  eyes. — ^Jerking  of  the  eyelids. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes. — Redness  of  the 
eyes,  esp.  of  the  conjunctiva. — Swelling  of  the  eyes. — Stye. — Lachrymation. — 
Difficulty  in  moving  the  eyelids  (ameliorated). — Convulsions  of  the  eyes. 
— Pupils  contracted. — ^Weakness  of  sight. — ^Amaurosis. — Objects  appear  to  be 
twisted. — Objects  seem  enlarged. — Objects  appear  :  to  quiver  ;  more  clear  ; 
brighter ;  bluish,  or  of  a  deep  blue  (z). — Blue  colour  seems  to  be  greenish, 
yellow,  or  red. — Red,  to  be  green,  blue,  or  slightly  reddish,  according  to  the 
pole  which  is  used. — ^The  earth  and  air  appear  to  be  white  as  snow. — Before 
the  eyes,  lightnings ;  a  globe  of  light ;  scintillations ;  reddish  light. 

4.  Ears.--Violent  pains  in  the  ears. — Pulsations. — Sensation  as  if  little 
balls  circulated  in  them.— Incisive  pains,  as  if  galvanic  rays  were  passing 
through  them  (s). — Redness  of  the  galvanised  ear. — Inflammation  and  sup- 
puration of  the  exterior  of  the  ear. — Absence  of  ear  wax ;  discharge,  at  first 
serous,  afterwards  like  pus,  by  the  ear  which  is  deaf  (s.)— Ulcers  in  the  ears, 
sometimes  with  sanious  discharge. — ^Discharge  of  blood. — Deafness ;  whist- 
ling in  the  ears,  sometimes  with  tinkling ;  noise  as  in  swallowing  (s). — Sound 
of  bells ;  sound  of  wind  instruments ;  murmuring ;  uproar ;  detonation,  like 
the  report  of  a  pistoL 

5.  Nose.— ^vere  aching  in  the  nose  (s). — Incisive  and  darting  pains. 
— ^Tickling  (s). — Sensation  of  coldness. — Excoriation  of  the  mucous  mem- 
brane.— Epistaxis. — Putrid  smell  before  the  nose  (s). — Great  inclination  to 
sneeze  (s). — Coryza. 

0,  7.  Face  and  Teeth. — Redness  of  the  face,  as  in  erysipelas. — Swell- 
ing of  the  face. — Swelled  cheek,  with  toothache. — Convulsions  of  the  lips  and 
of  the  muscles  of  the  face. — Burning  on  the  skin,  under  the  eyes. — Lancina- 


798  GALVANISMUS 

tion  in  a  rhenauitic  swelling  of  the  cheek,  as  in  a  woim<L-*-Toofliacfae» 
sometimes  with  swelling  of  the  cheek. — Pain  in  a  hollow  tooth,  with 
salivation. 

8.  Mouth.— Augmented  secretion  of  saliva;  salivation  during  the 
toothache ;  the  saliva  has  an  alkaline  taste  (c) ;  abundant  secretion  of  dear 
saliva,  which  leaves  an  acid  taste  in  the  mouth ;  saliva  flovrs  from  the  throat 
in  a  stream. — Caustic  sensation  on  the  tongue  (c) ;  coldness  (s) ;  heat  (z) ; 
painful  lancinations ;  pulsation ;  sensation  as  if  coal  were  on  the  tongue,  a 
tumour,  or  a  t)oil,  or  else  as  though  a  hole  had  been  pierced  in  it ;  blunted 
sensitiveness  of  the  tongue;  heaviness,  with  difficult  speech;  convulsive 
contractions. 

Q.  Throat. — Pains  in  the  throat ;  heat ;  swelling  of  the  amygdalae.— 
Painful  sensation  in  swallowing. — Abundant  expectoration  of  mucus.— Oamp 
of  the  gullet. 

iz.  Stomach.— Acidulated  taste  in  the  mouth ;  add  (z) ;  metallic  (z).— 
Frequently,  diminution  of  appetite,  much  thirst;  sometimes  with  burning 
heat  of  the  body. — Risings,  with  cutting  and  pinching  pains  in  the  abdomen ; 
nausea ;  vomiting,  sometimes  of  a  grass-green  liquid  (c) ;  violent  vomiting. 

la.  Abdomen.— Tension  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Colic  (bellyache). 
— Dull  colic. — Pinching  and  cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  flatus, 
with  risings,  emission  of  wind,  and  diarrhoea. — Borborygmi  in  the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Urgent  inclination  to  evacuate,  with  sensation 
of  increased  peristaltic  movement,  and  evacuation  of  abnormal  stools  (z,  on 
the  tongue ;  s,  in  the  anus). — Stool  promoted,  in  constipation.— Copious 
evacuation,  at  an  unusual  time. — ^Two  evacuations  during  the  night ;  diar- 
rhoea, sometimes  with  violent  vomiting. — ^After  the  diarrhoea,  lassitude  like 
that  caused  by  bodily  fatigue,  and  profound  sleep. — In  the  rectuih,  pulsation 
and  movement  (z). — In  the  anus,  contractions. — Haemorrhoidal  symptoms; 
increase  of  haemorrhoidal  flux. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Great  heat  in  the  bladder  (z). — ^Violent  pains  in 
the  neck  of  the  bladder. — Augmented  secretion  of  urine. — ^Turbid  urine,  with 
thick  and  reddish  sediment ;  increased  emission  in  gonorrhoea. 

15.  Male  Sezttal  Organs. — ^Erections,  sometimes  very  strong,  and 
without  lascivious  ideas. 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Catamenia  copious;  the  menses 
appear  each  time  the  patient  is  galvanised. — Suppressed  catamenia  quickly 
reappear,  but  nevertheless  fail  to  appear  at  the  following  period. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Spasmodic  movements  in  the  larynx,  which 
ascend  and  descend. — Painful  irritation  in  the  throat — Cough, dry;  humid; 
with  patients  who  have  tubercles  the  nodosites  speedily  soften  and  break, 
and  the  fatiguing  cough  disappears. — Difficult  respiration;  asthma  (c) 
respiration  deep,  slow,  rattling. — Respiration  impeded  by  each  shock. 

18.  Chest.— Great  oppression  of  the  chest,  with  great  anguish,  and 
palpitation  of  the  heart — Pulse  accelerated,  intermittent,  or  rather  full.— 
Accumulation  of  saliva. — ^Tightness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  abundant 
secretion  of  a  red  and  hot  urine. — ^Violent  pains  in  the  chest— Pressure 
in  the  chest — Palpitations  of  the  heart 

90,  21.  Necky  Back,  and  Limbs.— Nape  and  neck  stiff,  as  from 
rheumatism. — ^In  the  shoulder,  stiffness  and  difficulty  of  movement— Burning 


GALVANISMUS  799 

and  pulsation,  with  drag^g  pains  extending  to  the  fingers. — In  the  arm, 
draggings  and  tension  (c);  heat  (z);  coldness  (c);  tetanic  stiffness,  with 
difficulty  of  movement  and  lassitude. — In  the  hand,  itching,  sometimes  in  a 
swelling  on  the  hand,  which  soon  becomes  painful  and  suppurates. — Burning, 
as  from  hot  coals. — Fingers,  almost  always  t>ennmbed.— Heat  in  the  fingers 
(z) ;  coldness  (s) ;  incisive  and  piercing  pains  (s).-*Sensation  as  though  the 
finger  were  wrapped  up,  as  when  inflamed  and  swollen ;  itching  eruption  in 
the  articulations. — On  the  legs,  re-appearance  of  an  itch-like  re-percussed 
eruption.— Trembling  of  the  muscles  in  the  thighs,  and  the  calves  of  the  legs, 
during  sleep  (c).— Painful  sensation  commencing  in  the  toes,  and  extending 
into  the  atxlomen. 

£4.  Generalities. — Painful  tension  throughout  the  body ;  many  electric 
shocks  in  the  body  during  the  night ;  slight  shocks  like  shivering.— Tetanus ; 
recurrence  of  epilepsy  cured  a  long  time  previously. — The  epileptic  attacks, 
which  occurred  at  night,  now  take  place  in  the  daytime. — Contraction  of  the 
flexor  muscles  (z),  of  the  extensor  muscles  (c),  starting  of  the  tendons. — 
Disposition  to  tremble. — ^Valetudinary  condition ;  lassitude,  sometimes  with 
drowsiness,  or  else  following  diarrhoea;  fainting;  asphyxia.— Great  sensi- 
bility of  the  galvanised  part — Congestion  of  the  parts  touched. 

85.  Skin. — Scarlet  redness  of  the  legs,  of  the  arms,  of  the  chest,  and  of 
the  neck,  with  miliary  eruption  (c). — Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the 
galvanised  part — Miliary  scarlatina,  over  the  whole  body,  except  the  face ; 
the  margins  of  the  ulcers  become  more  inflamed;  the  parts  (galvanised) 
where  have  been  blisters,  become  painful,  brown,  swelled,  or  else  discharge 
much  corrosive  serum. 

96.  Sleep . — Drowsiness. — Sleeplessness,  sometimes  complete ;  disturbed 
sleep. — ^During  sleep  frequent  smiling. — Uneasy  awakening. — Dreams  of 
chewing  something  which  seems  to  have  an  agreeable  flavour ;  vivid  dreams ; 
dreams  in  which  the  sleeper  appears  to  fly. 

07.  Fever. — Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  body  (c) ;  coldness  of  the  arm 
(c) ;  sudden  sensation  as  of  being  sprinkled  with  cold  water. — Shuddering, 
with  febrile  shivering,  in  hysterical  patients ;  quaking  shivering. — Febrile 
movements;  alternation  of  heat  and  shivering;  sometimes  with  shivering, 
headache,  burning  in  the  throat,  and  difficult  respiration  (c). — Heat 
augmented :  in  the  arm ;  along  the  nerve  of  a  paral3rsed  part;  throughout 
the  body ;  flying  heat,  or  else  as  intense  and  burning  throughout  the  body 
(c). — Burning  on  the  skin  (under  the  eyes,  or  else  in  the  shoulder  and  the 
hand)  as  if  from  contact  with  live  coals  (c). — Pulse :  full,  hard,  and  strong 
(z);  rapid,  and  full;  rapid,  small,  contracted  (c);  irregular  (c).--General 
perspiration.— Copious  sweat,  which  is  acidulated  (c). 


8oo  GAMBOGIA 


Gambogia. 


Gamboge.  Gummi  Gutti.  AT.  O.  Guttiferae.  Tincture  of  the 
resinous  gum  obtained  from  a  tree  {Garcinia  morella)  native  to 
China. 

Gliaioal.— ilnus,  affecUons  of.  Backache.  Blow,  effects  of.  Coccygodyiua. 
Colic.    Diarrhoea.    Eyes,  inflammation  of.    Lienteria.    Throat,  sore.    Typhlitis. 

CharaoterirtiOB. — The  chief  reputation  of  Gamboge  among 
homoeopaths  is  as  a  remedy  for  diarrhoea.  "  Profuse  watery  diarrhoea, 
particularly  with  old  people,"  is  characteristic.  Stool  preceded  by 
excessive  cutting  about  navel ;  stool  expelled  all  at  once  after  con- 
siderable urging  ;  and  is  followed  by  a  feeling  of  great  relief.  Stools  : 
yellow  (the  colour  of  the  drug) ;  green  ;  bloody  ;  lienteric.  Burning 
in  anus  after  stool ;  anus  sore  and  excoriated.  Frightful  vomiting 
and  purging,  with  fainting.  But  this  action  by  no  means  exhausts 
the  range  of  Gamb, ;  it  has  a  number  of  symptoms  in  the  eyes  and 
throat ;  and  aJso  rheumatic  symptoms.  Fain  in  small  of  back,  as 
if  bruised  or  sprained.  Pain  in  sacrum,  resulting  from  a  blow,  was 
cured  in  one  case  of  mine.  Gnawing  in  coccyx.  Burning  pains  are 
prominent.  Burning  in  the  liver.  (Like  many  other  yellow,  bile-like 
drugs,  Gamb,  acts  markedly  on  the  liver.)  Most  symptoms  are 
>  by  motion ;  cough  >  sitting  up  ;  >  in  open  air ;  <  towards 
evemng  or  at  night.  There  is  periodicity  in  the  symptoms.  General 
soreness  over  the  body. 

Relations. — Aniidoted  by :  Camph.,  Coff.,  Coloc,  Kali  c,  Op. 
Compare :  Aloe,  Podo.,  Puis,  (cough  >  sitting  up  ;  >  open  air)  j 
Apocy.  c.  (stool  expelled  all  once  ;  but  Gamb.  has  cutting  before 
and  >  after  stool) ;  Crot.  t.  (Crot.  has  stool  in  one  gush,  but  Gamb.  is 
not  <  from  least  food  or  drink  like  Crot.). 

STHPTOMS. 

X.  Mind.— Cheerful,  talkative,  feeling  of  ease,  great  lightness  of  all  his 
motions. 

2.  Head.-— Vertigo  during  rest  or  motion,  in  morning  on  rising.— Pain 
in  the  vertex,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  forenoon ;  >  in  open  air. — Heaviness  in  the 
head,  with  drowsiness  and  pain  in  the  back. — Heat  rises  to  the  head,  with 
perspiration. 

3.  Eyes. — Itching  of  the  inner  canthi,  with  discharge  of  acrid,  corro- 
sive tears  after  rubbing;  >  in  open  air. — Nightly  agglutination  of  the  lids; 
burning  in  the  morning.— Violent  itching  of  the  eyes  in  the  evening.— 
Burning  of  the  eyes,  >  by  walking  in  the  open  air.— Violent  burning  of  the 
eyes  and  photophobia,  in  evening  or  afternoon,  >  from  walking  in  the  open 
air,  but  returning  in  the  morning. 

4.  Ears. — Lancination  in  the  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Sneezing  (in  daytime). — ^Violent  chronic  sneezing.— Ulcera- 


GAMBOGIA  801 

tion  oi  r.  nostril,  with  burning  pain. — Dryness  of  r.  nostril. — Much  mucus 
in  the  nose,  smelling  like  pus. 

8.  Mouth. — Feeling  of  coldness  in  the  points  of  the  incisors. — Dry 
mouth. — Burning  of  the  anterior  half,  or  only  of  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  which 
feels  hard. 

Q.  Throat.— Violent  stinging  in  r.  side  of  throat. — Stinging  in  the 
r.  side  of  the  throat  during  and  between  the  acts  of  deglutition. — Sore  pain 
in  the  throat,  which  is  felt  when  even  touching  the  outer  side  of  the  neck. — 
Roughness  and  burning  in  throat,  causing  constant  hawking. — ^The  throat 
feels  swollen. 

II.  Stomach. — Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth. — Nausea,  with  accumulation 
of  water  in  the  mouth  and  gulping  up  of  sour  water. — Nausea  proceeding 
from  the  stomach. — ^Violent  empty  eructations. — Frightful  vomiting  and 
purging,  with  fainting. — Dartings  in  the  stomach,  causing  one  to  start. — 
Acute  darting,  stitching  pains  in  the  stomach. — Gnawing  in  the  stomach. — 
Aversion  to  food. — ^Violent  thirst  in  the  evening. — Ulcerative  pain  in  the 
stomach,  passing  o£E  after  eating. 

18.  Abdomen. — Empty  feeling  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen. — Inflation 
and  tension  in  the  abdomen. — Inflation  and  tension  of  the  abdomen,  with 
pinching  in  the  umbilical  region. — Gnawing  in  a  small  spot  below  the 
umbilicus. — Pinching  in  the  abdomen  and  groins. — In  the  groins  sticking, 
tension. — Burning  in  the  region  of  the  liver. — Rumbling  in  the  bowels. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Frequent  emission  of  flatulence ;  esp.  evening 
and  night. — Diarrhoea,  with  burning  pain  and  tenesmus  of  the  rectum, 
prolapsus  ani,  and  constant  pinching  around  the  umbilicus,  sometimes 
attended  with  discharge  of  mucus. — Watery  diarrhoea,  with  colic  and 
tenesmus. — Faecal  diarrhoea,  stools  evacuated  with  great  force. — ^Yellow  and 
green  diarrhoeic  stool,  mixed  with  mucus,  preceded  by  excessive  cutting 
around  the  umbilicus. — Hard,  insufficient  stool,  with  violent  urging,  pressing, 
and  protrusion  of  the  rectum. — Hard  stool,  succeeded  by  burning  at  the 
anns. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Infrequent  urination.— Emission  of  a  few  drops 
at  a  time,  then  intermitting,  and  finally  returning,  with  burning  at  the  orifice. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Leucorrhoea. — Menses  too  early  and 
too  profuse. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Sensation  of  soreness  in  every  part  of  the 
chest. — Pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  chest. — Stitches  going  from  both  sides 
of  the  chest  towards  each  other. — Repeated  extremely  painful  stitches  in 
the  sternum. 

ao.  Back. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  bruised  or  as  if  sprained. — 
Gnawing  in  the  os  coccygis. 

82.  Upper  Limbs. — Stitch  on  the  top  of  r.  shoulder. — Stinging  and 
numb  feeling  in  the  ball  of  r.  thumb. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Cramp  in  the  calf,  with  contraction  of  the  toes. — 
Heaviness  and  languor  of  the  feet. 

24.  Generalities. — Itching  and  formication  in  various  parts. — Pains,  as 
if  bruised. — ^Tearing  in  the  shoulders. — Burning  sensation  in  various  parts. — 
Burning-stinging  pain. — Increased  heat,  with  anxiety. — Gnawing. 

25.  Skin. — Intolerable  itching  and  formication  in  various  parts. — ^After 
VOL.  I.  52 


8o2  GASTEIN 

scratching,  burning  and  ulcerative  pain.^Itching  blisters  on  both  hands,  6rst 
pale>  then  red. 

flO.  Sleep.— Drowsiness  the  whole  day.— Sleepiness,  great  indination  to 
sleep. — ^Anxious,  vexatious  dreams. 

87.  Fever.— Chill,  proceeding  from  the  back,  with  coldness  of  the  whole 
body  from  evening  till  morning. — Chilliness  is  accompanied  by  empty 
eructations,  yawning,  thirst,  pain  in  the  smaU  of  the  back,  biting  as  of  ants 
over  the  whole  body  '(by  night),  excessive  stitches  in  the  cars.— Increased 
warmth,  with  anxiety  and  perspiration.— Night-sweat  all  over.— Violent  diirst 
in  the  evening. 


Gastein. 

The  hot  springs  of  Wildbad  Gastein  in  Salzburg,  Austria,  contain 
Sodium  Sulphate  predominantly,  but  also  Silicic  Acid,  Potassium 
Sulphate  and  Carbonate,  Lithium  Chloride,  Magnesium  Car- 
bonate, Ferrum  Carbonate,  Aluminium  P)iosphate,  and  traces 
of  Calcium  Fluoride,  Strontium,  Arsenicum,  Titanic  Add,  Ruhi- 
dimn,  Caesium  ;  also  free  Carbonic  Acid.  Lapis  albus  is  a  kind 
of  gneiss  found  in  the  spring.  It  is  a  Silico-fluoride  of  Cafcium. 
Dilutions. 

GUaleaL— Amenorrhoea.  Apoplexy.  Calculi.  Callosities.  Cold,  easily  taken. 
Constipation.  Debility.  Diarrhoea.  Gout.  Haemorrhoids.  Memtxanous  dys- 
menorrhoea.  Paralysis.  Rheumatism.  Scars.  Sexual  weakness.  Typhlitis. 
Varicose  ulcers. 

Charaeteristies.— The  e£Eects  of  the  baths  are  thus  described 
by  Constantin  James  :  '^  General  unpleasant  sensation.  Instead  of 
expanding  [as  would  be  expected  in  a  warm  bath]  the  skin  is  drawn 
up  upon  itself  as  if  by  a  tight  astringent.  There  is  slight  dyspnoea ; 
the  abdominal  walls  draw  together  ;  the  testicles  rise  to  the  inguinal 
rings.  Soon  an  unusual  warmth,  accompanied  by  shocks  and  tremors, 
spreads  throughout  all  the  limbs.  The  pulse  becomes  hard  and 
vibrating ;  the  face  becomes  suffused  ;  there  is  hununing  in  the 
ears.  It  is  now  time  to  leave  the  bath  ;  to  stay  longer  is  attended 
with  danger.  .  .  .  After  the  seventh  to  the  fourteenth  bath  the 
thermal  influence  tends  to  concentrate  itself  entirely  on  the  nervous 
system.  Thus  it  seems  to  the  patient  that  an  increase  of  vitality 
spreads  through  his  whole  being  ;  he  feels  more  active  than  before ; 
the  longest  walks  cause  hardly  any  fatigue,  and  that  is  promptly 
repaired  by  sleep.  But  this  influence  is  particularly  predominant 
in  the  sexual  system ;  it  shows  itself  in  phlegmatic  patients  in  an 
increase  of  force  and  tone,  causing  the  disappearance  of  involuntary 
losses  of  semen.  In  energetic  or  irritable  temperaments  it  will 
provoke  erotic  dreams  and  unwonted  excitement,  like  cantharides  ; 
in  such  cases  the  waters  are  aphrodisiac." 

Such  is  the  general  description  of  the  effect  of  the  baths.  Among 
individual  symptoms  noted  are  :  Diminished  secretions.    Activity  of 


GASTEIN  803 

all  the  veins  ;  excitement  of  the  cifculation.  Weakness  and  weari- 
ness, with  dragging  sensation  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  it  were  too  heavy. 
Exhaustion  and  inclination  to  sleep.  Takes  cold  very  easily  (caused, 
then  cured).  Sensation  of  indescribable  mental  and  physical  comfort 
runs  through  all  the  fibres  during  the  bath.  Pulsation  in  the  body, 
especially  in  the  arms,  with  jumping  in  them.  All  symptoms  < 
before  a  storm  ;  or  during  the  Sirocco.  Contractive  sensations 
predominate.    Scar  tissues  and  callosities  are  affected. 

RelatioiiB.— Coifi^r^ ;  Lap.  alb.,  Fluor,  ac.,  Sil.,  Canthar.,  Phosph. 

SYMPTOMS. 

z.    Mind.— Lively  mind ;  vivid  fantasies ;  conversational. 

2.  Head.—- Vertigo,  as  if  apoplexy  impending ;  rush  of  blood  to  head. 
— Dizzy  heaviness,  as  after  a  night's  debauch ;  reeling  forward  ;  afterwards 
pressure  in  forehead,  with  nausea. — Dull  headache  in  morning. 

4.  Ears. — Noises  :  rumbling,  thundering,  singing,  bells,  trumpets. 

5.  Nose. — Sensation  of  constriction  in  mucous  membrane  of  nose. — 
Liability  to  take  cold. 

fi.  Face. — ^Exprtssion  becomes  lively,— Colour  fresh  and  clear. — Feeling 
of  swelling  in  face,  esp.  nose. 

7.  Teeth. — On  biting  teeth  together  they  feel  as  if  coated  with  mucus. — 
The  teeth,  esp.  the  carious  ones,  become  sensitive  and  painful 

8.  Mouth. — Slimy  saliva. — Dryness  and  contraction  in  mouth. — Much 
mucus  in  mouth  and  spitting. 

Q.    Throat. — Great  dryness  in  throat 

11.  Stomach. — Rising  from  the  stomach  in  the  morning ;  was  obliged 
to  keep  it  down  by  swallowing.— Gastralgia  and  water-brash,  continuing  two 
months. — ^A.  feeling  of  contraction  in  stomach. 

12.  AtkLomen.— Feeling  of  uncertainty  in  abdomen. — Most  violent  pain 
in  region  of  caecum,  almost  causing  f  aiutness. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Bleeding  haemorrhoids.— Feeling  of  contraction 
in  rectum.— Two  violent  stitches  in  left  side  of  anus. — Diarrhoea,  greenish 
and  bloody. — Gallstones  passed.— Constipation  and  moving  of  flatulence  in 
abdomen,  with  ineffectual  desire  in  rectum.— Very  hard  stool. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Passage  of  stones  from  kidneys  and  bladder.— 
Excessive  amount  of  watery,  cloudy,  odourless  urine. — Deposit :  mealy,  white, 
sand-like ;  brick-dust ;  slimy,  purulent. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Scrotum  drawn  up.— Increased  desire.— 
Desire  increased  at  first,  disappears  later,  and  coitus  is  not  followed  by 
emission. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs* — Passage  of  fibrous,  membranous 
formation  from  uterus. — Menstruation  suppressed. — Suppressed  menstrua- 
tion reappears. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness. — Profuse  expectoration,  with 
unpleasant  dryness  of  throat. 

19.  Heart. — Pressive  pain  in  region  of  heart  in  evening. — Febrile,  full, 
hard  pulse. 

ai.  Limbs.— Weakness  and  heaviness  in  limbs,  with  a  sensation  in  arms 
as  if  compressed  with  iron  band  or  forcibly  drawn  out. — ^Tightness  in  limbs. 


8o4  GAULTHERIA 

82.  Upper  Limbs.— Veins  of  hands  swollen.— Callous  spot  on  palm  of 
right  hand  becomes  painful. — Feeling  as  of  a  splinter  in  first  phalanx  of  ring- 
finger. 

Q.  Lower  Limbs. — Pains  in  L  hip  extending  to  kneei  most  violent 
when  rising,  and  making  her  scarcely  able  to  walk  without  support^-^ies 
painful  when  stepping  on  them  ;  a  callous  spot  becomes  painful. 

25.  Skin. — Skin  becomes  dry  and  red. — Skin  becomes  soft  and  velvety. 
— Old  scars  break  out  anew,  and  foreign  bodies  are  throvim  out. — Urticaria ; 
hydroa;  pustules;  erysipelas;  itch-like  eruption. 

96.  Sleep. — Great  drowsiness. — Confused  dreams  towards  momiog.-- 
Dreams  of  sexual  excitement. 

27.  Fever. — Slight  creeping  chills  over  back.— Warmth  and  tnrgescence 
increased. — Perspiration  pungent,  clammy,  staining  linen  red  (staining  it 
yellow  in  patients). 


Ganltheria. 

Gaultheria  procmnbens.  Wintergreen.  N,  O.  Ericaceae.  Tincture 
of  fresh  leaves.  Oil  obtained  from  leaves.  An  evergreen 
trailing,  vine  found  in  cool,  damp  woods.  The  oil  contains 
methyl  salicylate,  and  is  one  of  the  sources  of  Salicin. 

diniosl* — Gastritis.    Neuralgia.    Pleurodynia.    Rheumatism.    Sciatica. 

Ohuaoterlstios. — Several  cases  of  poisoning  with  the  oil  have 
been  recorded  in  which  symptoms  of  acute  gastritis  appeared: 
prolonged  vomiting,  set  up  afresh  by  the  least  thing  taken,  as  a 
cup  of  water  ;  severe  pain  in  epigastrium,  slow,  laborious  breathing, 
insensibility  and  hot  skin.  Inhalation  of  Ammonia  aroused  the  patients 
from  stupor.  B.  F.  Lang  {H.  R.,  ix.  214,  340)  has  related  his  ex- 
perience with  material  doses  in — ciliary  neuralgia  ;  facial  neuralgia  ; 
gastric,  ovarian,  uterine,  and  menstrual  neuralgias  ;  sciatica ;  and 
inflammatory  rheumatism. 

Relations. — Compare:  Bry.,  Rhus,  SaloL,  Nat  salicyl.,  Kalmia, 
Ledum. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.    Mind.— Very  stupid  soon. 

4.    Ears. — Marked  dulness  of  hearing. 

8.    Throat. — ^Tongue  dry,  smooth,  and  slightly  swollen  ;  speech  rather 
indistinct  from  the  swelling. 

II.  Stomach. — Inordinate,  uncontrollable  appetite  for  food,  notwith- 
standing irritability  of  stomach  ;  everything  taken,  even  cold  water,  is 
immediately  rejected. — Very  severe  pain  in  epigastrium  and  inferior  part 
of  the  hypochondria,  greatly  <  by  pressure  of  finger. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.  —  Pleurod3aiia  with  pain  in  anterior 
mediastinum. 


GELSEMIUM  805 

Gelsemiom. 

Gelsemium  sempervirens.  G.  Lucidum.  G.  Nitidum.  Bignonia 
sempervirens.  Yellow  Jessamine.  iV.  0.  Loganiaceae.  Tincture 
of  the  bark  of  the  root. 

dinieal.  —  Amaurosis.  Anterior  crural  neuralgia.  Aphonia.  Astigmatism. 
Bilious  fever.  Brain^aj^ecHonsof.  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.  Choroiditis.  Colds. 
Constipation,  Convulsions.  Deafness.  Dengue  fever.  Diarrhoea.  Diphtheria 
DupuytretCs  contraction.  Dysentery.  Dysmenia.  Emotions,  effects  of.  Epilepsy. 
EycSy  ajgfections  of.  Fever.  Fright,  Gonorrhoea.  Hay-fever.  Headache.  Heat, 
effects  of.  Heart,  diseases  of.  Hydro-salpingitis.  Hysteria.  Influenza  Intermit- 
tent fever.  Jaundice.  Labour.  Liver,  affections  of.  Locomotor  ataxia.  Mania. 
Measles.  MeniTtgitis.  Menstruationy  painful ;  suppressed.  Metrorrhagia.  Myalgia. 
Neuralgia.  Nystagmus.  (Esopha^us^  stricture  of  Paralysis.  Paralysis  agitans. 
Paraplegia.  Pregnancy,  albuminuria  of .  Ptosis.  Puerperal  convulsions.  Remittent 
fever.  Retina,  detachment  of.  Rheumatism.  Sexual  excess,  effects  of.  Sleep, 
disordered.  Spasms.  Sun-headache.  Sunstroke.  Teething.  Tic^ouloureux. 
Tobacco,  effects  of.  Tonguef  affections  of.  Toothache.  Tremors.  Uierus,  affections 
of.    Vertigo,    Voice,  loss  of.    Writer's  cramp. 

Charaoteristios. — Gelsemium^  which  belongs  to  the  same  order 
of  plants  as  Nux  vomica  and  Curare^  is  not  only  one  of  the  most 
important  additions  to  the  materia  medica  for  whose  introduction 
we  are  mainly  indebted  to  Hale,  but  it  is  also  in  the  first  rank  of 
importance  among  the  vegetable  polychrests.  A  drug  is  of  import- 
ance in  homoeopathy  not  so  much  by  reason  of  the  great  number  of 
the  symptoms  it  causes,  as  by  possessing  a  number  of  well-marked 
and  clearly  characterised  symptoms  which  correspond  to  symptoms 
constantly  met  with  in  every -day  practice.  It  was  this  which  at  once 
gave  Gelsetn.  a  place  among  the  polychrests  of  homoeopathy.  Like 
its  botanical  relatives,  Gelsetn.  is  a  great  paralyser.  It  produces  a 
general  state  of  paresis,  mental  and  bodily.  The  mind  is  sluggish  ; 
the  whole  muscular  system  is  relaxed ;  the  limbs  feel  so  heavy  he 
can  hardly  move  them.  This  condition  exists  in  the  cases  of  t3rphoid 
that  call  for  it ;  the  lassitude  is  expressed  by  the  patient ;  with  Mur. 
ac,  there  is  the  lassitude,  but  the  patient  does  not  express  it.  The 
same  paretic  condition  is  shown  in  the  eyelids,  causing  ptosis ;  in  the 
eye  muscles,  causing  diplopia ;  in  the  oesophagus,  causing  loss  of 
swallowing  power  ;  in  the  anus,  which  remains  open  ;  in  diarrhoea 
from  depressing  emotions  or  bad  news ;  in  relaxation  of  the  genital 
organs.  Functional  paralyses  of  all  descriptions.  This  is  shown 
again  in  some  features  of  the  headaches.  They  are  accompanied  by 
blurring  of  the  sight,  and  relieved  by  a  copious  discharge  of  watery 
urine  from  a  paretic  condition  of  the  kidneys.  Conversely  there  may 
be  a  desire  to  urinate  during  the  night,  and  if  the  call  is  not  imme- 
diately responded  to  a  violent  headache  supervenes.  Post-diphtheritic 
paralysis  ;  debility  after  pollutions  ;  great  prostration  from  irritability 
of  seminal  vesicles.  The  mental  prostration  is  typified  in  '^  funk,"  as 
before  an  examination,  stage-fright,  effects  of  anger,  grief,  bad  news, 
and  is  accompanied  by  drooping  eyelids.  Alcoholic  stimulants  relieve 
all  complaints  where  iiels.  is  useful    Hysterical  dysphagia  or  aphonia, 


8o6  GELSEMIUM 

after  emotions.  Measles  and  eruptive  disorders,  with  drowsy  state, 
suffused  face,  and  even  convulsions.  €k>nvulsions  are  no  less  marked 
in  Gek.  than  paralyses.  Erskine  White  (//.  IF.,  xxxii.  501)  cured  an 
infant  bom  in  convulsions  three  weeks  after  its  mother  had  been 
terribly  frightened  by  seeing  her  little  brother  nearly  burnt  to  death. 
The  only  guiding  symptom  was  "  the  child's  chin  quivered  incessantly" 
In  thirty  seconds  after  the  dose  the  quivering  ceased  ;  in  three 
minutes  the  convulsions  were  at  an  end.  White  had  to  ride  twelve 
miles  over  mountains  to  reach  the  patient  after  receiving  the  summons, 
so  the  convulsions  must  have  lasted  a  considerable  time.  Tremor  is 
a  keynote  of  the  remedy.  Gek,  is  adapted  to  children  and  young 
people  ;  to  persons  of  a  nervous,  hysterical  temperament ;  to  irritable, 
sensitive,  excitable  people.  The  following  provings  related  by  Dr. 
George  Logan,  of  Ottawa  {Med.  Adv.,  xxiii.  125)  show  the  power  Gels. 
has  over  the  mental  sphere.  The  subject  of  the  first  was  Mrs.  Logan, 
who  describes  her  experience  thus : — 

'^  A  few  moments  after  taking  the  medicine  there  is  an  extreme 
feeling  of  restlessness — ^not  able  to  be  still  for  a  second,  keep  turning 
and  twisting  all  the  time.  This  is  succeeded  by  intense  pain  over  the 
right  eye,  always  the  right ;  it  seems  as  if  my  forehead  would  come 
right  over  my  eyes  and  close  them  ;  my  eyes  feel  as  if  they  were 
turning  into  my  head,  roll  up  all  the  time.  Then  a  strong  inclination 
to  commit  suicide.  Want  to  throw  mvself  from  a  height ;  invariably 
think  of  going  to  the  window  and  dasning  myself  down — ^feel  as  if  ft 
would  be  a  relief.  This  is  sticceeded  by  an  inclination  to  weep,  and 
I  generally  have  a  good  cry,  but  before  I  cry  and  while  the  feeling 
lasts  of  wishing  to  throw  myself  from  a  height,  I  clench  my  hands, 
and  nervous  rigors  or  sensations  run  all  over  my  body  down  to  my 
fingers  and  toes ;  it  seems  as  if  I  would  lose  my  senses.  Then  a  great 
dread  of  being  alone  seizes  me,  and  I  am  afraid  of  what  may  happen ; 
think  I  may  lose  all  self-control.  The  pain  still  continues  over  the 
right  eye,  and  often  the  back  part  of  my  head  seems  to  have  a  spot 
about  tour  inches  square  that  is  turning  to  ice.  These  feelings  are 
followed  by  a  strong  inclination  to  talk  or  write,  very  great  exhilara- 
tion, and  a  better  opinion  of  my  mental  capacity — ^indeed  it  seems  as 
if  my  memory  was  better,  that  I  can  recall  almost  anything  I  ever 
read  ;  nearly  always  repeat  long  passages  of  something  to  myself  that 
I  have  read  years  before.  It  appears  to  me  that  I  can  remember 
almost  anything  I  love  to  recall.  Now  this  is  my  invariable  experience 
whenever  I  take  Gelsemium — no  matter  whether  in  the  3rd  or  1,000th 
potency — ^and  I  have  been  in  the  habit  of  using  it  for  twenty  years.  I 
am  writing  this  under  the  influence  of  the  drug.  I  could  not  give  the 
symptoms  so  accurately  at  any  other  time.  As  I  am  getting  over  the 
effects  of  the  drug  I  have  to  urinate  every  few  minutes.  While 
suffering  I  like  to  have  people  in  the  room — ^have  a  perfect  horror  of 
being  alone.  I  find  Cinchona  an  antidote  for  most  of  the  symptoms, 
but  it  leaves  me  much  exhausted,  thoroughly  tired,  and  with  a  wish 
to  be  quiet." 

Dr.  Logan  adds  that  he  first  gave  the  patient  Gels.  2  for  insomnia 
and  headache.  It  produced  the  symptom  <'  wishing  to  throw  herself 
from  a  height "  so  markedly  that  he  was  alarmed  lest  she  should  cany 


GELSEMIUM  807 

it  out  A  year  or  two  after,  wishing  to  give  the  remedy  again,  he  gave 
two  pellets  of  the  30th — ^witti  the  same  result.  He  next  prescribed  the 
lyOooth,  and  the  result  of  that  was  the  proving  now  related.  Here 
is  the  second  case  in  Dr.  Logan's  words  : — 

"  I  gave  Mr.  Dorion,  since  Dr.  Dorion,  of  St.  Paul,  five  or  six 
drops  of  Gekemium  ist  for  some  ailment  the  nature  of  which  I  fail 
now  to  remember.  Within  a  few  hours  after  taking  the  Gelsetnium  I 
was  sent  for  to  see  Mr.  Dorion,  who,  I  was  told,  was  '  insane.'  He 
was  brandishing  a  sword  in  a  threatening  manner,  and  frightening  all 
the  occupants  of  the  house.  On  my  arrival  at  his  room  I  found  him 
in  the  position  of  '  shouldering  arms '  with  his  sword.  I  playfully 
admired  his  military  appearance,  and  thus  secured  the  dangerous 
M^eapon,  very  much  to  the  relief  of  his  fellow-boarders.  It  then 
occurred  to  me  that  the  symptoms  were  produced  by  Gekemium^  and 
placing  him  in  charge  of  one  of  the  boarders,  I  returned  to  my  office 
in  order  to  procure  the  antidote,  of  which  I  was  unaware  at  the  time. 
I  gave  Cinchona  30  each  half-hour,  which,  in  the  course  of  two  or 
three  hours  brought  him  all  right  again."  J.  H.  Nankivell  drank  two 
ounces  of  tincture  of  Gclscm,  instead  of  a  glass  of  sherry.  He  walked 
a  few  feet  with  assistance  and  in  another  minute  his  legs  were 
paralysed.  He  dragged  himself  to  the  bedside  widi  his  arms,  but 
they  were  unable  to  help  him  to  bed,  into  which  he  had  to  be  l^ted. 
As  long  as  he  lay  c^uiet  there  was  no  trouble,  but  on  the  least  exertion 
there  were  excessive  tremors.  Vomiting  occurred  during  the  next 
twenty-four  hours.  Temperature  rose  to  101-5®  F.  Heart's  action 
very  violent  and  intermittent  (possibly  an  aggravation  of  existing 
disease).  All  the  masdes  of  the  eyes  were  affected,  but  of  voluntary 
muscles  those  of  the  right  side  suffered  most  Prolonged  conversation 
involved  paralysis  of  upper  lip.  There  was  somnolence  ;  absence  of 
mental  excitement ;  and  good  appetite.  The  effects  passed  away  in 
the  order  of  occurrence,  from  below  upwards ;  but  after  the  arms 
had  recovered,  vision  was  not  perfect  for  twenty-four  hours.  A 
padent  of  mine  once  took  a  drachm  of  the  tincture  for  a  headache. 
On  going  out  he  could  not  tell  which  side  of  the  street  he  was  on. 
He  was  near  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  and  saw  two  cathedrals  instead  of 
one.  The  following  case  of  poisoning  was  recorded  by  Dr.  Edward 
Jepson  {Brit  Med.  jaur.j  Sept  19,  1891,  p.  644).  Although  Gek.  was 
given  with  other  drugs,  and  on  the  last  occasion  with  one  of  its  anti- 
dotes (quinine^,  which  probably  saved  the  patient's  life,  the  symptoms 
are  unmistakaoly  those  of  Gels. : — 

''  About  two  months  ago  Miss  W.,  aged  about  forty,  an  inmate  of 
my  house,  was  seized  with  very  severe  neuralgia  about  both  temples* 
I  gave  her  tincture  of  Gelsemium  10  minims,  with  a  bismuth  mixture 
to  be  taken  every  two  or  three  hours.  After  taking  this  for  about  a 
day  and  obtaining  no  relief — ^but  rather  she  grew  worse,  being,  as  is 
described,  '  nearly  mad  with  pain' — I  gave  her  the  full  dose  of  the 
tincture  of  Gelsemiumj  according  to  Squire's  Companion  of  the  Phar- 
nutco^ceia^  1882,  and  Whitla's  Materia  Medico^  third  edition,  namely, 
20  nunims  in  a  quinine  mixture.  This  was  taken  every  three  hours, 
but  with  only  moderate  relief,  three  or  four  doses  having  been  taken 
during  the  night    At  about  eight  o'clock  the  following  morning 


8o8  GELSEMIUM 

Miss  W.  was  able  to  speak  pretty  well,  and  said  she  thought  she  was 
better.  At  about  nine  o'clock  she  was  speechless  and  in  the  greatest 
distress  of  mind  and  body  ;  there  was  total  loss  of  power  in  the 
tongue  ;  it  could  not  be  protruded,  she  could  not  articulate,  and  with 
very  great  difficulty  could  she  swallow  the  brandy  and  water  we 
forced  upon  her.  There  was  alteration  in  vision;  she  could  not 
distinguish  us  clearly,  and  the  pupils  were  widely  dilated.  She  had 
uncertain  power  over  the  muscles  of  the  hand  and  arm,  so  that  she 
could  not  write  her  name.  All  this  time  she  was  perfectly  conscious, 
and  nodded  her  head  in  answer  to  questions.  She  was  greatly 
alarmed  as  to  herself,  and,  as  she  imormed  us  afterwards,  she 
thought  she  was  about  to  have  a  fit.  Not  knowing  of  any  special 
antidote  for  Gelsemium^  and  seeing  that  there  was  no  time  to  lose 
if  we  wanted  to  avert  any  increase  of  the  paralysis,  it  fortunately 
came  into  my  mind  to  give  her  a  subcutaneous  injection  of  Sifych- 
ninCf  using  i  minim  of  the  Uquor  Sitychnina^  or  i-i20th  part  of  a 
grain.  Ten  minutes  after  this  the  change  for  the  better  was  most 
marked  ;  there  was  return  of  power  in  the  tongue  and  in  the  hands, 
and  an  improvement  in  the  vision.  ...  I  again  injected  a  minim  of 
the  Strychnine^  and  with  further  improvement  in  the  condition  of  the 
patient.  After  this  she  took  food  and  stimulants,  and  all  paralysis 
disappeared.  The  vision  was  not  perfectly  restored  for  some  hours, 
the  pupils  being  less  dilated.  She  had  some  return  of  the  neuralgia, 
and  was  very  weak  for  a  few  days,  but  eventually  she  quite  recovered, 
and  has  had  altogether  better  health  since  this  event  than  she  had 

frior  to  if  Gelsem,  in  the  attenuations  is  a  great  neuralgic  remedy, 
have  cured  among  other  cases  one  of  neundgia  of  the  anterior 
crural  nerve.  The  paralysis  of  the  tongue  recalls  another  condition, 
trembUng  of  the  tongue,  which  is  one  indication  for  Geh.  in  typhoid, 
in  which  it  is  a  leading  remedy.  The  tongue  is  only  thinly  coated, 
and  has  not  the  dark  streak  of  the  BapU  tongue.  The  Gels.  &ce  is 
flushed  crimson,  but  not  quite  as  besotted  as  that  of  BapL  There  is 
excessive  weakness  and  trembling,  but  the  consciousness  is  not  so 
clouded.  In  coryza  and  hay  fever  Gels,  has  an  important  place. 
Early  morning  sneezing  and  streaming  colds  are  a  strong  indication. 
The  characteristic  headache  of  Gels,  begins  in  the  occiput  and 
spreads  over  the  whole  head,  settling  down  over  eyes.  Dizziness  and 
dim  vision,  and  dizziness  rising  up  from  occiput  and  spreading  over 
whole  head,  with  depression,  from  heat  of  summer.  Headache  with 
stifif  neck,  <  in  morning ;  >  urinating ;  preceded  by  blur  before 
eyes,  drowsiness  with  headache,  difficulty  in  keeping  eyes  open,  dull 
headache  over  eyes  to  vertex  and  occiput,  with  irregular  action  of  eye- 
muscles.  Neurotic  symptoms  in  cigar-makers,  impotence,  palpitation. 
Many  symptoms  occur  in  connection  vdth  the  sexual  organs,  male  and 
femade.  [J.  H.  Allen  (H.  P.,  xiii.  244)  cured  a  case  of  hydrosalpingitis, 
of  gonorrhceal  origin,  vdth  Gels.  im.  The  symptoms  were  :  Peeling 
of  fulness  and  heaviness  in  uterine  region,  cramp-like  pains  during 
menses,  sharp  pains  moving  from  uterus  to  back  and  hips.  A  languid 
aching  in  back  and  hips  a  day  or  so  before  menses  ;  great  weakness 
and  loss  of  power  in  lower  extremities  ;  very  little  pain  after  menses 
began.    Lump  in  throat  which  she  cannot  swallow.    After  menses, 


GELSEMIUM  809 

pains  in  back  of  head  and  spine.  Pains  running  up  back  of  neck, 
with  a  feeling  of  tighbiess  in  the  brain  ;  irritable,  easily  angered. 
Fever  in  afternoon,  twitching  of  muscles.  Menses  last  eight  days ;  for 
first  three  days  appear  natural,  but  afterwards  very  light-coloured, 
like  serum.  The  tumour,  which  was  in  the  left  side  of  abdomen, 
disappeared  in  three  months,  improvement  having  set  in  from  the 
first.]  Dysmenia  ;  epileptiform  convulsions  at  menstrual  period  ;  rigid 
OS  in  labour  ;  chill,  beginning  in  hands  ;  or  feet ;  and  running  up  back. 
There  is  <  both  before,  during,  and  after  menses.  Itching  of  skin  ; 
eruption  like  measles.  Sensations  of  lightness :  of  head,  of  body. 
Sensation  as  if  the  head  were  enlarged  ;  as  if  there  were  a  tape  round 
the  head ;  as  if  the  skin  were  contracted  in  the  middle  of  the  fore- 
bead  ;  sensation  from  throat  up  into  left  nostril  like  a  stream  of 
scalding  water ;  sensation  as  if  a  lump  were  in  oesophagus ;  load  in 
stomach  ;  as  if  stomach  were  quite  gone ;  as  if  the  uterus  were 
squeezed  by  a  hand ;  as  if  he  would  die ;  as  if  the  blood  ceased  to 
circulate ;  as  if  the  heart  would  stop  unless  he  kept  moving ;  as  if  a  knife 
were  thrust  through  from  occiput  to  forehead  ;  as  if  eyes  were  jumping 
out  of  head  ;  as  if  a  lump  were  in  throat  which  could  not  be  swallowed. 
The  stools  of  Gelsem,,  whether  loose  or  constipated,  are  mostly  yellow, 
like  the  flower.  The  colour  comes  out  also  in  the  colour  of  the  tongue, 
and  bilious  symptoms  generally.  Wants  to  lie  down  and  rest.  Wants 
to  be  held,  that  he  may  not  shake.  Motion  <  most  symptoms  ;  > 
muscular  pains ;  >  heart.  Rising  from  seat  s  paio  in  heart.  Shaking 
head  >  heaviness  of  head.  Lifting  arms  =s  trembling  of  hands.  Play- 
ing pianos  tired  sensation  in  arms.  (J.  G.  Blackley  pointed  out  the 
suitability  of  Gek,  to  writer's  cramp  and  professional  paralyses.  I  have 
relieved  with  it  cases  of  Dupuytren's  contraction.)  Great  distress  and 
apprehensive  feeling  at  approach  of  a  thunderstorm.  Heat  of  sun  or 
summer  <.  Hot  applications  >  pain  back  of  head.  Mast  be  covered 
in  all  stages  of  the  paroxysm.  Complaints  from  sudden  change  from 
hot  or  dry  to  damp  air.  Catarrh  occurring  in  warm,  moist,  relaxing 
weather.  <  Damp  weather  ;  cold,  damp  atmosphere  ;  >  cold,  open 
air ;  <  from  fog.  Cold  drinks  are  vomited  immediately ;  warm  or 
spirituous  drinks  can  partially  be  swallowed.  ^*  >  From  stimulants" 
is  a  very  general  characteristic. 

HdsMom^—Antidoied  by  :  Atrop.,  Chi.,  Coff.,  Dig.,  Nux.  mos.  In 
cases  of  poisoning,  artificial  respiration  and  faradisation  of  respiratory 
muscles.  Foy  found  Nitro-glycerine  a  perfect  antidote  in  one  case. 
Jephson  antidoted  his  case  with  Strychnine.  //  Antidotes:  Mag. 
phos.  //  antagonises :  Atrop.,  Op.  Compatible :  Bap.  (in  typhoid, 
influenza) ;  Ipec.  (in  dumb  ague).  Cotnpare  :  Bell,  (labour) ;  Caulo., 
Caust.  (complaints  of  women) ;  Coccul.,  Con.,  Curare  (paralysis)  ;  Fer. 
phos.  (fever) ;  Phos.  (effect  of  thunderstorms) ;  01.  an.,  Verat.  (head- 
ache) :  Borax  (sense  of  falling).  Bry.  (typhoid ;  dreads  movement, 
Gels,  because  he  is  so  weak,  Bry.  because  movement  <  pains) ; 
Hyper.  «  from  fog). 

Causation. — Depressing  emotions.  Fright.  Anger.  Bad  news. 
Sun.  Heat.  Damp  weather,  warm .  or  cold.  Thunderstorms. 
Alcohol.    Self-abuse. 


8io  GELSEMIUM 


SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — ^Great  irritability,  does  hot  wish  to  be  spoken  to.^Irritable» 
sensitive  ;  desires  to  be  let  alone. — Incapacity  to  think  or  fix  the  attention. — 
Vivacity,  carelessness,  followed  by  depression  of  spirits. — Unconnected  ideas; 
cannot  follow  an  idea  for  any  length  of  time ;  if  he  attempts  to  think  con- 
secutively he  is  attacked  by  a  painful  vacant  feeling  of  the  mind. — Loss  of 
memory,  with  headache. — Unconsciousness. — Delirium  in  sleep  ;  half -waking, 
with  incoherent  talk. — ^Acts  as  if  crazy,  brandishes  a  sword  in  a  threatening 
manner. — Stupor,  cannot  open  the  eyes. — Dulness  of  the  mental  faculties. — 
Sensation  of  intoxication,  with  diarrhoea.— Cataleptic  immobility,  with  dilated 
pupils,  closed  eyes,  but  conscioos. — Confusion ;  when  attempting  to  move, 
the  muscles  refuse  to  obey  the  will;  head  giddy. — Strong  inclination  to 
suicide. — ^Want  to  throw  myself  from  a  height  Invariably  think  of  going  to 
the  window.  This  is  succeeded  by  an  inclination  to  weep,  and  I  generally 
have  a  good  cry,  and  while  the  desire  to  throw  myself  from  a  hei^t  ]asts»  I 
clench  my  hands  and  nervous  rigors  run  all  over  my  body  down  to  fingers 
and  toes.  It  seems  as  if  I  should  lose  my  senses. — Dread  of  being  alone ; 
afraid  of  what  may  happen  ;  think  I  may  lose  self-controL  These  feelings 
are  followed  by  a  strong  inclination  to  talk  or  write,  increased  sense  of  mental 
capacity  and  memory. — Every  exciting  news  causes  diarrhoea;  bad  effects 
from  fright  and  fear.— Cowardice. 

8.  Head.—- Staggering  as  if  intoxicated  when  tr3ring  to  move;  < 
from  smoking. — Light-headed  and  dizzy;  <  by  sudden  movement  of 
the  head,  and  walking. — Giddiness  as  if  intoxicated,  as  if  he  should  fall 
down. — Dizziness  and  blurred  vision.— Giddiness  with  loss  of  sight,  chilliness, 
accelerated  pulse,  dulness  of  vision,  double  vision. — Sensation  of  falling  in 
children ;  child  starts,  grasps  nurse  or  crib  and  screams  out  from  fear  of 
falling. — Intense  pain  over  r.  eye,  as  if  forehead  would  come  right  over  eyes 
and  close  them. — Sick  headache,  principally  r.  temple,  beginning  in  the 
morning  and  increasing  during  day ;  <  from  motion  and  light ;  >  after 
lying  down ;  >  by  sleep  or  vomiting. — Neuralgic  headache,  beginning  in 
upper  cervical  spine ;  vertebra  prominens  sensitive ;  numbness  c^  occipital 
region ;  pains  extend  over  head,  causing  a  bursting  pain  in  forehead  and 
eyeballs  ;  <  at  lo  a.m.,  when  lying ;  with  nausea,  vomiting,  cold  sweat,  cold 
feet. — Cerebro-spinal  meningitis,  stage  of  congestion  ;  severe  chill ;  dilated 
pupils ;  congestion  of  spine  and  brain. — Fulness  in  the  head,  with  heat  in 
the  face  and  chilliness. — Great  heaviness  of  the  head,  relieved  by  profuse 
micturition. — Pressure  on  vertex,  so  great  as  to  extend  into  shoulders  ;  head 
feels  very  heavy. — Pain  as  from  a  tape  around  the  head. — Dull  pain  in  the 
back  part  of  the  head  after  breakfast,  worse  when  moving  and  stooping^ — 
Back  part  of  head  seems  to  have  a  spot  four  inches  square  that  is  turning  to 
ice. — Sensation  as  if  the  brain  were  bruised. — With  the  headache  giddiness, 
f  aintness,  pain  in  the  neck,  pulsation  of  the  carotid  arteries,  pain  in  the  limbs, 
great  drowsiness,  sneezing,  double  vision,  loss  of  sight— Sensation  of  con- 
traction of  the  skin  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead. — Itching  on  the  head  (face, 
neck,  shoulders),  preventing  sleep. 

3.  Byes. — Eyes  feel  bruised. — ^Yellow  colour  of  the  eyes. — Dnx^nng  of 
the  eyelids ;  they  are  heavy ;  can  hardly  open  them  or  keep  them  open.— 


GELSEMIUM  8ii 

Fulness  and  congestion  of  the  eyelids ;  paralysis  of  the  eyelids. — ^Double 
vision  controllable  by  the  strength  of  the  will,  or  when  looking  sideways,  not 
when  looking  straight  forward. — Eyeballs  oscillate  laterally  when  using  them. 
— Doable  vision,  cannot  tell  which  side  of  the  street  he  is  on. — Diplopia  and 
dim  vision  during  pregnancy. — ^Amaurosis  from  masturbation. — Smoky  ap- 
pearance before  the  eyes,  with  pain  above  them. — Detached  retina. — Dimness 
of  sight,  and  vertigo. — Cannot  see  anything  (complete  blindness). — Sudden 
blindness — Pupils  dilated.— Aversion  to  light ;  more  to  candle-light. — ^Thirst 
for  light. — Ck)nfusion  of  sight ;  blindness ;  astigmatism. 

4.  Ears. — Sudden  loss  of  hearing  for  a  short  time  ;  rushing  and  roaring 
in  ears. — Catarrhal  deafness,  with  pain  from  throat  into  middle  ear. — (Deaf- 
ness and  loss  of  speech  from  quinine.) — Earache  from  cold. 

5.  Nose,— Sneezing  followed  by  tingling  and  fulness  in  the  nose. — 
Early  morning  sneezing;  streaming  of  water  from  nose.— Sneezing  with 
fluent  coryza ;  profuse  watery  discharge  excoriates  the  nostrils. — Sensation 
of  fulness  at  root  of  nose  extending  to  neck  and  clavicles. 

6.  Face. — Heavy,  dull  expression  of  the  countenance. — Heavy,  besotted 
expression ;  flushed  and  hot  to  the  touch. — Heat  of  the  face  with  fulness  in 
head  and  cold  feet. — Lips  dry,  hot,  and  coated. — Paralysis  of  upper  lips  after 
prolonged  conversation. — ^Yellow  colour  of  the  face. — Paleness  and  nausea, — 
Erythema  of  the  face  and  neck. — ^The  muscles  of  the  face  seem  to  be 
contracted,  esp.  around  the  mouth,  making  it  difficult  to  speak. — Orbital 
neuralgia  in  distinct  paroxysms,  with  contractions  and  twitching  of  the 
muscles  on  the  affected  side. — Stiffness  of  the  jaws,  the  jaws  are  locked. — 
Lower  jaw  dropped. — Chin  quivers  incessantly. — Lower  jaw  began  wagging 
sideways ;  had  no  control  over  it. 

8.  Mouth. — Saliva  coloured  yellow  as  from  blood.— The  tongue  is 
coated  yellowish-white  with  fetid  breath. — Putrid  taste  and  fetid  breath. — 
Sticky,  feverish  feeling  in  the  mouth. — Lips  dry ;  coated  with  dark  mucus. — 
Thick  coating  of  the  tongue  (during  the  chill).— Tongue  red,  raw,  painful, 
dry,  inflamed  in  the  middle. — Numbness  of  the  tongue ;  feels  so  thick  he  can 
hardly  speak ;  partial  paralysis. 

9.  Throat. — Dryness  and  burning  in  throat — Dry  roughness  in  throat 
when  coughing. — ^Dryness  of  throat  with  hoarseness. — Sensation  of  heat  and 
constriction  in  throat. — Burning  in  the  mouth  extending  to  throat  and 
stomach. — Spasmodic  sensations  and  cramp-like  pains  in  gullet. — Sensation 
as  if  a  foreign  body  were  lodged  in  the  throat. — Difiicuit  deglutition  (paralytic 
dysphagia). — Swallowing  causes  shooting  into  the  ear. — Diphtheria;  local 
tingling  of  the  parts  during  the  fever ;  incipient  paralysis. 

ix«  Stomach. — ^Thirst  (during  the  perspiration). — Increased  appetite, 
easily  satisfied  with  small  quantities  of  food. — Sour  eructations. — ^Nausea 
(with  giddiness  and  headache). — Sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  stomach. — 
Feeling  of  emptiness  and  wealcness  in  the  stomach  and  bowels.-^Oppression 
and  fulness  in  stomach;  <  from  pressure  of  clothing. — Burning  in  the 
stomach  extending  to  the  mouth. 

IS.  Abdomen. — Gnawing  pain  in  the  transverse  colon.  —  Sudden 
spasmodic  pains  in  upper  part  of  abdomen,  compelling  him  to  cry,  leaving  a 
sensation  of  contraction. — Sensation  of  soreness  in  abdominal  walls.— Tender- 
ness in  r.  iliac  region  during  typhus.— Rumbling  in  abdomen  with  discharge 


8i2  .       GELSEMIUM 

of  wind  above  and  below. — Periodic  colic  with  diarrhoea  (yellow  discharges 
setting  in  in  the  evening.) — ^Acute  catarrhal  enteritis  daring  damp  weather. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Frequent  discharge  of  flatus.— The  soft  stool 
is  passed  with  difficulty  as  if  the  sphincter  ani  resisted  the  passage  by  con- 
traction.— Paralysis  of  the  sphincter  ani,  with  disposition  to  prolapsus  ani.— 
Stools  loose,  colour  of  tea,  dark  yellow. — Stools  yellow;  fsecal ;  bilious ;  cream- 
coloured  ;  clay-coloured ;  green. — Diarrhoea  with  intermittent  fever.— Diarr- 
hoea after  sudden  emotions,  grief,  fright,  bad  news;  anticipation  of  any 
unusual  ordeal. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  micturition  (relieving  the  headache). 
— Copious  discharge  of  clear,  limpid  urine,  relieving  the  headache. — Incon- 
tinence from  paral3rsis  of  the  sphincter ;  in  nervous  children. — ^Tenesmus  of 
the  bladder. — Irritable  neck  of  bladder  (in  hysterical  women),  calling  for 
constant  urination. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Genitals  cold  and  relaxed. — Invduntaiy 
emission  of  semen  without  an  erection  ;  also  during  stool. — ^Excitable  sexual 
desire  (spermatorrhoea). — Sexual  power  exhausted,  slightest  caress  causes  an 
emission. — Painful  redness  at  the  urethra.— (Secondary  gonorrhoea.) 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  uterus.— 
Sensation  as  if  uterus  squeezed  by  a  band. — Suppressed  menstruation  with 
convulsions  (every  evening). — Metrorrhagia ;  almost  continuous  flow  without 
any  pain  ;  after  ague  suppressed  by  quinine. — Severe,  sharp,  labour-like  pains 
extending  to  back  and  hips. — Dizziness  and  headache  with  amenorrhcea.— 
Ailments  from  masturbation  with  depression  and  languor. — Rigidity  of  the 
neck  of  the  uterus. — Spasmodic  or  neuralgic  djrsmenorrhoea. — ^Vaginismus. 
— Leucorrhoea ;  white ;  in  gushes  ;  with  backache. — Spasmodic  labour-pains. 
— False  labour-pains  ;  rigid  os. — Premature  labour  (abortion)  (after  fright).— 
During  pregnancy,  violent  pains  in  the  uterus,  headache,  drowsiness,  double 
vision,  obscuration  of  sight,  giddiness,  pulsation  of  the  carotid  arteries,  small, 
slow  pulse. — Cramps  in  the  abdomen  and  legs  during  pregnancy ;  diplopia ; 
drowsiness ;  loss  of  muscular  power  ;  convulsions. — Inefficient  labour-pains 
or  none  at  all ;  os  widely  dilated ;  complete  atony. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Voice  weak.— Paralysis  of  the  glottis  with 
difficult  deglutition. — Spasm  of  the  glottis,  in  evening,  threatening  su£Focation. 
— Roughness  of  the  throat,  raw,  as  if  ulcerated  in  the  larynx. — Bronchitis.— 
Hoarseness  with  dryness  of  the  throat-^Burning  in  the  larynx,  descending 
into  the  trachea. — Dry  cough  with  soreness  of  the  chest  and  fluent  coryza.— 
Breathing  frequent. 

18.  Chest. — Heaviness  in  middle  of  chest  (afternoon). — Sensation  of 
constriction  in  the  lower  thorax. — Extreme  and  alarming  difficulty  of  tMreath- 
ing ;  extreme  restlessness  from  threatened  suffocation. — Stitches  in  the  chest 
in  region  of  heart. — Paralysis  of  the  lungs. 

19.  Heart  and  Pulse. — Irregular  beating  of  the  heart ;  palpitation.— 
Peeling  as  if  the  heart  would  stop  beating  if  she  did  not  move  about— 
Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  heart. — Pain  in  the  heart  when  rising  from  a 
seat — Pulse  frequent,  soft,  weak,  almost  imperceptible. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Pulsation  of  the  carotid  arteries  (during  preg- 
nancy).— ^The  muscles  of  the  neck  feel  bruised. — Sensation  of  constriction  in 
r.  side  of  neck. — Pains  in  the  neck  and  under  L  shoulder-blade.— Pains  in 


GELSEMIUM  813 

neck  like  those  of  cerebro-spinal  congestion. — Myalgic  pains  in  the  neck, 
mostly  in  upper  part  of  the  sterno-cleido  muscles,  back  of  the  parotid  glands. 
— Pains  from  the  spine  to  the  head  and  shoulders. — Congestion  of  spine ; 
prostration ;  languor  ;  muscles  feel  bruised,  and  do  not  obey  the  will. — Dull 
aching  in  lumbar  and  sacral  regions ;  cannot  walk,  muscles  will  not  obey. — 
Locomotor  ataxia. — Paraplegia. 

21.  Limbs.^Trembling  in  all  the  limbs. — Deep-seated,  dull  aching  in 
the  muscles  of  the  limbs  and  in  the  joints. — Neuralgic  and  rheumatic  pains 
in  the  extremities. 

28.  Upper  Limbs. — In  the  shoulders  pain  during  the  night.— Arms 
weak,  ntunb. — Sensation  as  if  r.  elbow  were  sprained.— Pain  in  elbow  (L)  from 
draught  of  air  (at  night). — Cramps  in  forearm  on  attempting  to  write. — Pain 
as  if  sprained  in  the  r.  wrist. — ^Trembling  of  the  hands  when  lifting  them  up. 
— Coldness  of  the  wrists  and  hands. — Hot  dry  hands,  esp.  the  palms  of  the 
hands. — Spasmodic  contraction  of  fingers. — Dupuytren's  contraction. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Unsteady  gait. — ^Fatigue  after  slight  exercise. — 
Loss  of  voluntary  motion. — ^Violent  lancinating  pain  in  the  thigh. — Obstinate 
sciatica ;  pains  <  at  rest  and  particularly  when  beginning  to  walk ;  burning 
pains,  <  at  night,  compelling  her  to  lie  awake ;  pain  in  sole  of  foot  when 
walking. — Deep-seated  muscular  pains  in  legs  >  by  motion. — ^Anterior  crural 
neuralgia. — Paroxysmal ;  shooting  pains. — ^Violent  lancinating  pain  in  thigh. 
—Thighs  sore  to  touch  as  a  boil ;  pains  all  >  when  in  a  sweat. — Rheumatic 
pains  during  the  night  in  the  knees. — Sudden  dislocation  or  slipping  of  the 
knee-pan  (during  breakfast). — ^The  calves  of  the  legs  feel  bruised,  pain  at 
night — Cold  feet. — Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  toes. 

24.  Generalities. — Hyperaesthesia. — Excessive  irritability  of  mind  and 
body. — Paralytic  affections,  muscles  weak  and  will  not  obey  the  will. — Com- 
plete relaxation  and  prostration  of  the  whole  muscular  system,  with  entire 
motor  paralysis. — ^Trembling  and  weakness;  listless  and  languid;  easily 
fatigued. — Rheumatic  pains  (wandering)  in  the  bones  and  joints  (night). — 
Spasmodic  contractive  pains. — Sensation  as  if  bruised. — Neuralgia;  acute, 
sudden,  darting  pains ;  shooting,  tearing  along  the  tracks  of  the  nerves ;  esp. 
if  aggravated  by  changes  in  the  weather. — Congestions,  arterial  or  venous, 
with  sluggish  circulation. 

25.  Skin. — Papulous  eruptions  resembling  measles,  esp.  on  the  face. — 
Itching  on  the  head,  face,  neck,  and  shoulders.— Skin  hot  and  dry. 

26.  Sleep. — Sleepiness  and  long-continued  sleep. — ^As  soon  as  he  goes  to 
sleep  he  is  delirious. — ^Yawning. — Languid  and  drowsy,  but  cannot  compose 
the  mind  for  sleep. — Sleeplessness  from  nervous  irritation. — Cannot  go  to 
sleep  on  account  of  violent  itching  on  the  head,  face,  neck,  and  shoulders. — 
Restless  sleep ;  unpleasant  dreams. — He  wakens  from  sleep  with  headache  or 
colic. — Night-terrors,  from  nose  being  stopped. — Dreamed  of  dying,  and  felt 
his  eyes  sinking  into  their  sockets. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse  slow,  accelerated  by  motion. — Limbs  cold  with 
oppressed  breathing. — Cold  hands  and  feet. — In  the  evening,  when  entering 
a  warm  room,  thirst,  pain  in  the  back  and  loins  and  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
thighs. — Chilliness  in  upper  part  of  body  and  back. — Chilliness  every  day  at 
same  hour. — Chilliness  esp.  in  the  morning. — ^Chilliness,  languid  aching  in 
back  and  limbs,  sense  of  fatigue,  every  afternoon,  4  to  5  o'clock. — Nervous 


8i4  GENISTA 

chill,  the  skin  is  warm ;  wants  to  be  held  that  he  may  Aot  shake  so  macL— 
ChUl  with  arid  hands,  feet,  and  headache.— Chills  begin  in  the  hands ;  chiUs 
running  up  the  back,  hands  and  feet  cold. — Chilliness  esp.  along  spine.— 
Chill  with  weak  pulse. — Coldness  of  the  feet  as  if  they  were  in  cold  mter, 
with  heat  in  the  head  and  face,  and  headache. — Chill  followed  by  heat  and 
later  by  perspiration. — Heat  principally  on  the  head  and  face.— T^hoid  fe?er 
when  so-called  nervous  symptoms  predominate. — In  eruptive  and  other  fevers 
less  restlessness  than  in  Aeon. ;  less  violence  and  suddenness  of  aggravation 
than  Bell, ;  languid  asthenic  fever. — Profuse  perspiration  relieving  the  pains. 
— Perspires  freely  from  slight  exertion. — (Intermittent  fevers.— Children's 
remittent  fever.— Cerebro*spinal  meningitis. — Measles.) 


Genista. 

Genista  Tinctoria.    Dyer's  Greenweld.    i\^.  O.  Leguminosae.    Tinctcoe 

of  whole  plant. 

GUnloaL— Diarrhoea.    Earache.    Headache. 

OlianusteFlsties.— G^ts/tf  was  proved  by  E.  B.  Gushing.  Its 
principal  effects  are :  Sharp  piercing  pains  in  the  head  and  ear. 
Brain  feels  loose  and  sensitive.  Sensitive  feeling  in  brain,  eye,  and 
throat.  Urgent  desire  for  stool,  which  is  expelled  suddeiUy.  A 
pectdiar  eruption  of  dark  red  confluent  spots.  <  Rising;  turning 
quickly  ;  shaking  head  ;  walking.  In  the  night,  water-br^.  >  In 
open  air  ;  in  cool  rooms ;  by  eating  (headache). 

Relatiomu — Compare  :  (Brain  feels  loose)  Cic.  v.,  Nat  s.,  Bar.  c., 
Rhus. 

8TMPT0HS. 

a.  Head.— Vertigo  and  headache  on  rising  or  shaking  head,  >  after 
dinner. — Sensation  as  if  brain  were  loose  and  very  sensitive. — Frequent,  sharp 
pain  in  r.  temple  from  within  outwards. — Piercing  pain  in  1.  temple. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  sensitive  to  touch  in  forenoon. 

4.  Ears.— Once,  a  sensation  in  1.  ear,  as  though  some  sharp  instrument 
were  thrust  into  it  (forenoon). 

^    Throat. — ^Throat  dry  and  sensitive. 

II.    Stomach. — Awakened  several  times  in  the  night  with  water-brash. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Desire  for  stool  with  violent  sneezing  as  from 
snuff. — Urgent  desire  for  stool,  lasting  only  a  short  time,  soon  after  the  dose. 
— Stool  soft  and  scanty. — Stool  tinged  with  blood ;  the  faeces  though  large 
were  expelled  like  a  wad  from  a  pop-gun  (forty  minutes  after  third  dose). 

25.  Skin. — Peculiar  eruption,  consisting  of  roundish,  dark-red,  con- 
fluent spots,  scarcely  elevated  above  the  skin,  which,  itching  very  much, 
becomes  scarlet-red,  then  pale,  and  disappears  in  twenty-four  hours;  it 
occurred  on  feet  to  knees,  and  hands  to  elbows. 


GENTIANA  CRUCIATA  815 

Gentiana  Crnoiata. 

Kreutz-Enzian.   Cross-leaved  Gentian.   N,  0.  Gentianaceae.  Tincture 

of  root. 

GUaicaL-^DiarrhaBa.    Dyspepsia.    Dysphagia.     Hernia.     Hoarseness.     Stiff- 
neck*    Stomach,  affections  of.    Thrcxat,  sore. 

CShanoteristios.— ''  G.  crudata^^^  says  the  Treasury  of  Botany^  ^'  has 
been  invested  with  imaginary  virtues,  because  its  leaves  grow  in  the 
form  of  a  cross ;  it  has  been  recommended  in  hydrophobia."  Its 
virtues  are  not  all  imaginary,  and  its  reputation  as  a  remedy  for 
hydrophobia  is  partly  justified  in  the  provings.  The  proving  of 
GenL  cruc.  (by  Watzke  and  ten  others)  developed  a  number  of  striking 
symptoms  in  the  throat  and  digestive  tract.  Movings  about  in  stomach 
and  abdomen.  Pressure  in  the  stomach  as  if  a  stone  was  in  it,  with 
inclination  to  vomit  All  the  symptoms  of  right  inguinal  hernia 
occurred  in  one  prover.  A  peculiar  sense  of  apprehensiveness  ;  faint- 
ness ;  uneasiness.  One  prover  felt  as  if  all  the  nerves  were  tense, 
so  that  walking  was  difficult.  Creeping  over  the  body  as  from  fleas 
in  the  evening.  The  symptoms  are  <  after  eating.  >  From  warm 
soup  ;  from  drinking  fresh  water  ;  in  open  air. 

RelatianB.— Com^a/v ;  Gent,  lut ;  Lye.  (>  from  warm  drink|) ; 
Bry.,  Puis.,  Ab.  n.,  &c.  (pressure  in  stomach  as  from  a  stone) ;  Kal.  bi. 
(tenacious  mucus  in  throat). 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — ^Weeping  mood,  with  disinclination  to  talk. — ^Very  peculiar 
apprehensiveness,  and  acceleration  and  difficulty  of  breathing,  swelling  of  the 
temporal  veins  and  feeling  of  pressure  in  the  temporal  region ;  on  reading, 
print  seemed  indistinct  and  as  if  covered  with  a  veil. 

a.  Head. — Confusion  and  whirling. — Sensitiveness  of  whole  head  and 
whole  t>rain  after  dinner,  <  by  violent  motion  of  head. — Swelling  of  temporal 
veins  and  feeling  of  pressure  in  temporal  region. — Sudden  stitch  through  1. 
temple. — Distressing  tension,  and  at  times  transient  jerking  in  region  of  vertex; 
tension  soon  became  a  very  acute  constant  pressure,  <  by  exerting  eyes,  or 
constant  thought. 

3*  Eyes. — Sensation  as  though  eyes  were  lying  deep  in  orbit ;  piercing 
inward  sensation  in  r.  eye. — Print  indistinct  as  if  covered  with  a  veil. 

8.  Mouth.— Two  aphthous  ulcers  on  margin  of  lower  lip  on  either  side 
of  frenum. — Flow  of  saliva  increased. 

g.  Throat. — Slight  redness  and  distressing  sensation  of  constriction 
within  the  throat,  so  that  swallowing  is  very  difficult ;  constantly  obliged  to 
hawk  up  tenacious  and  firmly  adherent  mucus. — Rawness  and  scraping, 
causing  frequent  hawking;  with  constriction  on  swallowing. — Intermittent, 
deep  redness  of  fauces. — Stitches  in  tonsils. — Swallowing  difficult ;  with  an 
anxious  constrictive  sensation  ;  slight  redness  of  fauces. 

II.    Stomach. — ^Appetite  increased;  or  lost. — ^Acid  eructations;  watery 


8i6  GENTIANA   LUTEA 

vomiting.— Great  nausea,  with  inclination  to  lie  down.— Vomiting,  with  some 
difficulty,  a  small  quantity  of  mucus  of  an  add  odour,  intensely  bitter, 
leaving  a  scraping  and  rawness  in  throat — Movings  about  in  stom2u:h,  and 
afterwards  in  abdomen,  diss^peared  on  walking. — Sensation  in  stomach  and 
cBSophagus  as  though  he  had  swallowed  a  morsel  of  hot  food  followed  by  cold 
water ;  lasted  the  whole  day,  <  by  eating ;  >  by  drinking  fresh  water.— 
Burning  ;  fulness ;  pressure  in  stomach. — Pressure  in  stomach  as  if  a  stone 
were  in  it,  with  inclination  to  vomit. — Sensation  of  pressing  inward  in  pit  of 
stomach. 

12.  Abdomen. — Sensitive,  griping,  sore  sensation  in  umbilical  region, 
<  after  dinner,  >  sitting  and  lying,  <  standing,  walking,  and  after-  smoldng, 
obliging  him  to  bend  forward;  therewith  umbilicus  seemed  to  be  drawn 
inward. — Movings  about  in  intestines  with  slight  headache,  followed  by  copious 
pasty  evacuation. — Distension  ;  fulness ;  tightness ;  constriction  in  abdomen. 
— Dragging  in  r.  inguinal  region  with  feeling  of  protrusion,  >  sitting  or 
lying ;  on  violent  sneezing  actual  protrusion  occurred,  size  of  hazel-nut,  very 
sensitive. 

i^  Stool  and  Anus. — Constant  violent  urging,  followed  by  three 
watery  evacuations. — Pasty  diarrhoea.— Free  pasty  stools  without  the  usual 
itching  in  anus. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menstruation  three  days  earlier  than 
usual,  during  which  there  was  a  headache  as  if  head  too  full,  with  feeling  of 
distension  in  the  skull,  >  during  rest  and  <  by  motion,  preventing  sleep  for 
a  long  time. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness ;  voice  gave  out  in  middle  of 
speech. — Frequent  attacks  of  hoarseness  and  sensitiveness  of  the  throat 

20.  Neck  and  Back.— Drawing  and  jerking  along  r.  side  of  neck, 
extending  to  shoulder. — Drawing  in  cervical  muscles,  extending  to  ears,  <  by 
turning  head,  an  uneasiness  so  that  he  could  not  remain  long  in  one  position. 
— Repeated  drawings  in  cervical  muscles. — ^Tension  in  lumbar  region. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Distressing  drawing  in  r.  shoulder  lasting  several 
minutes. 

23.  Lower  Limbs.— Cramp-like  pains  in  soles  of  feet 


Gentiana  Lntea. 

Yellow  Gentian.    AT.  O.  Gentianaccae.    Tincture  of  root 

Cliniosl*— Anorexia.     Biliousness.     Colic     Debility.    Diarrhoea.    Dyspepsia. 
Fever.    Gout.    Headache.    Stomach,  disorders  of.    Throat,  constriction  of. 

Charaotaristios. — ^The  Yellow  Gentian  is  the  source  of  the  well- 
known  "  tonic  "  of  allopathic  practice.  In  the  homceopathic  provings 
(by  Watzke,  Buchner,  and  others)  the  chief  symptoms  have  beoi 
noted  in  the  alimentary  sphere,  and  among  them, ''  ravenous  hunger/' 
as  well  as  ^'  diminished  appetite."  It  has  thus  some  claim  to  be  a 
''  positive  tonic/'  as  it  may  cause  increased  appetite  in  the  healthy.  It 


GENTIANA  LUTEA  817 

has  :  dry  mouth  ;  bitter  or  earthy  taste ;  nausea  ;  vomiting  ;  colic  ; 
diarrhoea  with  yellow  stools  (it  is  the  yellow  Gentian) ;  rheumatic 
pains  ;  sensations  of  constriction  are  marked  and  common.  Weak- 
ness, dull  feeling,  morose  mood  ;  febrile  condition.  The  symptoms 
are  <  in  the  afternoon  ;  after  eating ;  on  motion. 

Bid^iXoiuu^^ompare :  Gent,  c,  Hydrast,  Nux  v.,  Epipheg. 
(thick  saliva). 

STHPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Dull  feeling  of  whole  body  and  morose  mood. — General 
dejection. 

2.  Head. — Head  confused  and  dull  while  writing,  or  else  with  tension 
and  pressure  in  the  forehead. — BewDderment  and  heat  in  the  head,  and  heat 
in  the  cheeks. — Cloudiness,  as  after  taking  spirituous  liquors. — Sensation  of 
vertigo  in  the  head. — Sensation  of  vacuity  and  bewilderment  in  the  head,  with 
dull  pressure,  from  within  outwardly,  at  the  forehead.— Pressure :  at  the 
occiput ;  in  the  forehead,  sometimes,  simultaneously,  in  the  eyes. — Full,  as  if 
enlarged. — Head  feels  as  after  intoxication. — Fulness  and  dull  pressure,  from 
above  downwards,  in  the  frontal  region,  like  a  violent  pulsative  cephalalgia. — 
Lancinations  in  the  frontal  region. 

3.  Eyes.— -Pressure  in  eyeballs. — Frequent  aching  in  the  eyes  ;  sensitive- 
ness and  pain  in  the  eyes,  followed  by  lancinations  in  the  upper  eyelid. — Red- 
ness of  the  conjunctiva. — Obscuration  of  the  sight  for  some  moments,  so 
that  objects  immediately  before  the  eyes  cannot  be  distinguished ;  could  not 
see  the  person  with  whom  he  was  talking  for  a  few  moments. 

5.  Nose— Irritation  in  nose,  as  in  coryza,  followed  by  a  watery 
discharge. 

8»  9.  Mouth  and  Throat.-— Dryness  of  the  mouth  and  throat ;  saliva 
thicker  than  usual ;  roughness  of  the  throat— Taste  intensely  bitter.— Swell- 
ing, fine  sticking  in  throat,  mostly  in  posterior  portion  of  palate. — Frequent 
hawking  of  mucus  which  is  difficult  to  loosen.— Rawness  in  throat.— Earthy 
taste. 

II.  Stomach. — Risings,  sometimes  with  borborygmi  in  the  abdomen. — 
Add  risings,  like  vinegar,  with  hiccough ;  nausea,  almost  to  vomiting,  with 
watering  of  the  eye ;  inclination  to  vomit,  sometimes  with  uneasiness,  yawning 
and  slight  vertigo,  or  else  with  tears  which  flow  from  the  eyes. — ^Vomiting  in 
weak  subjects. — Sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  stomach. — Ravenous  hunger  in 
evening. — Diminished  appetite. — Nausea  after  simplest  meal. — ^Aching,  some- 
times anxious,  or  else  with  tightness,  or  with  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit, 
followed  by  pressure  at  the  anus.— Weight  and  aching  at  the  stomach,  with 
anguish,  nausea,  inclination  to  vomit,  and  respiration  full  and  impeded. — 
Inflation  and  tension  in  the  abdomen  and  in  the  stomach. — FeeUng  of  con- 
striction in  the  stomach. 

IS.  Abdomen. — Uneasiness  and  pressure  in  1.  hypochondrium. — Colic, 
with  aching  in  region  of  stomach,  and  urgency  to  go  to  stool. — Painful  sensi- 
tiveness of  the  whole  abdomen,  with  tightness  in  the  lower  region,  esp.  in  r. 
side  and  posteriorily,  with  pressure. — Umbilical  region,  sensitive  to  touch,  with 
pressive  pain. — Steady  pressure  in  umbilicus  like  an  inward  drawing. — Pains, 
esp.  below  the  navel,  and  principally  when  the  part  is  touched. — On  walking 
VOL.  I.  53 


8i8  GENTIANA  LUTEA 

quickly,  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abd(Mnen,  with  pressure  on  the  anas. — 
Aching  in  umbilical  region,  sometimes  with  tension. — Cutting  pains,  sometimes 
on  awaking,  at  night,  with  heat  and  quickened  respiration. — Cutting  pams^ 
from  the  pubic  region  to  the  colon  transversum,  from  the  touch,  with  paiaful 
sensitiveness  of  the  abdomen ;  when  lying  on  the  back,  with  the  l^s  retracted, 
the  pains  are  more  supportable. — Fixed  drawing  pain  in  the  wmKii^^  region, 
with  heaviness  and  fulness  of  the  head,  and  stoppage  of  the  nose. — ^Inflatioo 
and  tension  of  the  abdomen,  sometimes  with  heaviness  and  fulness,  or  dtse 
with  painful  sensitiveness  to  the  touch. — ^Tightness  of  lower  part  of  abdomen, 
<  towards  the  evening,  with  shortness  of  breath. — ^Borborygmi  in  the 
abdomen,  or  else  gurgling,  as  of  bubbles  which  ascend.— Continual  emissioti 
of  wind  above  and  below,  without  relief. — Painful  and  general  sensitiveness 
of  the  teguments  of  the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — ^Urgent  inclination  to  evacuate,  sometimes  sudden, 
with  abundant  stools,  followed  by  painful  sensitiveness  of  the  abdomen; 
pressure  on  the  anus  while  wanting  to  go  to  stool. — Dragging  towards  anns 
with  tenesmus. — Sudden  urging  with  copious  evacuation. — Soft  stools,  imme* 
diately  after  rising. — Bilious  diarrhoea  (in  afternoon). — Stool  soft,  yellow,  pre* 
ceded  by  colicky  pains,  which  become  so  severe  after  the  stool  that  they  force 
the  patient  to  bend  double. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness  of  the  voice. — ^Frequent  hawk> 
ing  without  power  to  detach  the  mucus  from  the  throat 

z&  Chest. — Oppression  of  the  chest ;  fulness  in  the  chest,  sometimes 
with  pressure  and  difficulty  of  respiration. — Pressure  on  1.  side  near  thethrosL 

80.  Back. — Pain  in  the  t>ack  and  bowels,  much  <  by  motion,  >  by  sitting. 
—Sensation  of  a  cord,  or  pressure  and  weight  round  the  loins. 

as.  Upper  Linib& — Rheumatic  tension  and  dragging  in  the  r.  hand, 
with  inflammatory  redness  of  two  articulations  of  the  fingers,  spasmodic 
symptoms,  and  pain  of  the  part  during  movement — (Gout  in  r.  hand). 

83*  Lovver  LimtMi.— Aching  in  the  hips  (and  the  loins),  sometimes,  esp. 
on  leaning  forward  to  look  out  of  the  window.— Tingling  in  the  knees. — Fun, 
SIS  of  dislocation,  in  1.  articulation. — Lancinations  and  tearing  pains  in  the  sole 
of  1.  foot,  when  walking. 

86.  Sleep. — ^Yawning. — Inclination  to  sleep,  without  power  to  go  to  sleep ; 
sleep  retarded ;  sleep  impeded  by  colic,  which  obliges  the  patient  to  torn  in 
bed,  sometimes  on  one  side  and  sometimes  on  the  other,  and  which  does  not 
permit  the  least  repose  until  two  o'clock  in  the  morning. — Uneasy  sleq> 
disturbed  by  abdominal  symptoms  and  fever. 

87.  Fever. — Febrile  shuddering,  as  from  electric  shocks,  commencing  at 
the  back  and  traversing  the  posterior  part  of  the  body,  followed  by  lassitude, 
depression,  and  tension  in  the  limbs. — Increase  of  natural  heat  over  head, 
cheeks,  and  whole  body. — Heat  originating  in  the  lumbar  vertebrae. — ^Pulss 
accelerated. 


GERANIUM  MACULATUM  819 

Gentiana  Qainqaeflora. 

Five-flowered  Gentian.  Gall  of  the  Earth.  N.  O.  Gentianaceae. 
Decoction  of  the  herb.  Tincture  of  fresh  plant  in  flower 
(September,  October). 

Clfataal.— Anorexia.    Intermittent  fever. 

Gharaoteristios. — ^This  unproved  Gentian  has  a  great  popular 
reputation  in  Ohio  and  other  parts  of  the  United  States  as  an  anti- 
periodic  and  tonic.  Hale  quotes  Yelvington  of  Susquehanna  (who 
says  he  learned  its  value  from  a  tribe  of  Indians)  as  saying  "  he  has 
succeeded  in  obstinate  intermittents  where  Quinine  and  other  anti- 
periodics  had  failed.  He  used  the  decoction  of  the  herb.  A  fluid 
extract  or  the  saturated  tincture  is  a  better  form  for  administration  in 
fever.  It  is  a  valuable  tonic  for  old  cases  of  dyspepsia  and  torpid 
liver.'^  It  is  a  pleasant  bitter,  and  appears  to  be,  like  the  other  Gentians, 
3,  positive  tonic.  Dr.  Yelvington  also  used  it  in  cases  of  infantile  fever 
and  cholera  infantum.  ''  As  a  tonic  in  enfeebled  patients  and  in  chronic 
diseases,"  he  says,  "  it  is  a  remed]r  par  excellence^  appearing  to  exert 
an  action  over  tne  organs  of  nutrition  and  assimilation,  as  well  as  being 
a  stimulant  to  the  excretory  organs." 

Geranium  Macolatum. 

Wild  Cranesbill.    N.  O.  Geraniaceae.    Tincture  and  triturations   of 
root.    Infusion  of  the  plant. 

OUbImL— Diarrhoea.  Diplopia.  Dysentery.  Haemorrhages.  Leuoorrhoea.  Stool, 
ineffectual  urging  to.    Throat,  sore. 

Ghuaoteristies.— There  are  two  fragmentary  provings  of  Geran. 
mac.  one  made  with  root  preparations,  one  with  infusion  of  the  plant 
The  chief  symptoms  observed  have  been  diplopia  and  other  disorders 
of  vision  (these  were  observed  by  the  prover  of  the  decoction  ;  the 
remaining  symptoms  resulted  from  the  root  preparation) ;  and 
constant  and  ineffectual  desire  for  stool.  In  the  mother-  tinctures 
and  lower  attenuations  it  has  been  used  successfully  in  cases  of 
haemorrhage  from  various  parts — nose,  stomach,  lungs.  Under  the 
use  of  the  drug  the  blood  in  haemorrhages  becomes  darker,  clots  more 
easily,  and  is  much  less  in  quantity.  The  root  contains  both  tannic 
and  gallic  acids.  It  has  also  been  used  for  chronic  diarrhoea  and  for 
leucorrhoea. 

BalfttioiUk — Compare:  Hamam.,  Hydrast.,  Haematoxylon,  Ratan., 
Ficus  relig.,  Erodium. 

STHPTOMS. 

2.  Head. — Giddiness,  with  diplopia,  >  closing  eyes  and  lying  down.*— 
Slight  pain  in  occiput,  low  down. 

3.  Eyes. — Fulness  in  the  eyes. — In  a  few  minutes  became  giddy  and 
saw  double ;  when  he  closed  his  eyes  and  lay  down  he  felt  comfortable,  but 


820  GINSENG 

could  not  open  them  without  the  recurrence  of  the  symptoms. — ^Ptosis  and 
dilated  pupils. — Great  difficulty  in  walking  with  eyes  open,  though  he  coold 
walk  with  them  closed. — Fulness  of  the  eyes. 

&  Mouth. — Dryness  of  mouth,  extending  outward  on  the  lips  to  the 
cuticle  prope^i  followed  by  pain  in  1.  side  of  forehead,  and  of  head  direcdy 
over  1.  ear. — Tip  of  tongue  dry  and  burning. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constant  desire  to  go  to  stool  with  inability  to 
pass  the  least  faecal  matter ;  after  the  effects  passed  off  the  bowels  moved 
without  pain. 


Gettysburg. 


The  Salt  of  a  Mineral  Spring  at  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.  Trituration. 

QllaleaL— Bone,  affections  of.    Hip  disease.    Potts' disease.    Scrofula.    Uloert. 

Charaotaristios.— Afa^n«sium  sulphate  is  the  predominant 
ingredient  of  Geitys,^  but  the  water  contains  many  salts  of  alkalis,  and 
earths  with  a  number  of  metals.  Lithium  is  contained  in  it  Its  action 
is  very  like  that  of  Silica  (which  it  contains).  It  is  indicated  in  caries 
of  vertebrae  or  hip  ;  ulceration  of  joints,  when  the  discharge  excoriates. 
Scrofulous  children. 


Geum  Rivale. 

Water  Avens.    N.  0.  Rosaceae.    Tincture  of  the  plant  in  flower. 

GUaloal.— Bladder,  affections  of.    Penis,  pains  in. 

OharaoteristiOB,— Hering  is  the  authority  for  this  medicine. 
Only  one  symptom  has  been  recorded,  but  it  is  very  definite.  Tear- 
ing, jerking  pains,  which  instantly  unfit  him  for  everyttiing ;  seem  to 
shoot  from  deep  within  the  abdomen,  below  the  umbilicus  to  the  end 
of  the  urethra.  As  soon  as  he  eats  anything  they  return  ;  then  he  is 
obliged  to  lie  down.  They  are  like  electric  siiocl^,  excessively  severe, 
and  always  occur  twice  in  succession. 


Ginseng. 


Panax  quinquefolium  (L.)  ;  Aralia  quinquefolia  (Grev).    Schinseng. 
Jv.  0.  Araliaceae.    Trituration  and  tincture  of  tne  root. 

Olinioal.— Appendicitis.  Debility.  Headache.  Lumbago.  Rbeunatism.  Sdatio. 
Sexual  excitement. 

Charaoteristios.— The    symptoms    of    the    Chinese   and  the 
American    Ginseng   are  taken  together,  as  the  two  are  probably 


GINSENG  821 

identical.  The  name  is  said  to  signify  '*  the  resemblance  of  a  man  '^ 
or  man's  thigh.  The  root  is  forked  like  that  of  the  mandrake. 
Fabulous  prices  are  given  for  it  in  Manchuria,  as  much  as  ;^40  per 
pound  being  paid  for  certain  qualities  of  it.  The  wild  Ginseng  of 
Siberia  is  said  to  be  the  best.  The  natives  along  the  Ussuri  river  use 
it  boiled  for  headaches,  colds,  fevers,  stomach  pains.  In  America  it 
is  a  domestic  remedy  for  the  after-pains  of  labour.  The  shape  of  the 
root  might  indicate  an  action  on  the  pelvis  and  lower  Umbs,  and  J.  H. 
Henry  (H.  /?.,  xi.  493)  says  it  acts  on  the  lower  part  of  the  spinal 
marrow  ;  is  indicated  by  ''  bruised  pains  in  small  of  back  and  thighs 
(on  rising  from  bed),  and  great  languor,  with  paralytic,  rheumatic 
pains  in  lower  limbs,  arthritic  swelling  of  the  foot,  which  had  been 
exerted  a  long  time,  violent  pain  in  big  toe."  He  mentions  also 
*'  Nightly  digging  in  right  lower  limb  from  hip  to  big  toe,  cramp, 
pains  from  right  nip  to  toes  ;  lancinating,  tearing  in  right  tarsal  joint." 
He  considers  it  specific  in  lumbago,  sciatica  and  chronic  rheumatism, 
with  frequent  desire  to  urinate,  and  sexual  excitement.  Lembke  and 
others  have  proved  it.  It  is  an  aromatic  stimulant  and  removes 
feelings  of  fatigue,  imparting  a  joyous  sense  of  vigour  and  elasticity 
to  the  hmbs,  especially  the  upper  limbs,  and  clearness  of  mind.  The 
opposite  condition  of  malaise  is  also  produced.  Yawning,  and 
drowsiness.  Drowsiness  with  headache.  Feeling  of  extreme  heat  and 
intense  coldness,  longing  to  expose  the  body  to  cool  air.  The  right 
side  of  the  body  is  most  a£Eected.  There  is  pain  in  right  side  of 
hypogastrium,  extending  into  groin.  Dry  mouth,  tongue,  and  lips. 
Vertigo.  The  respiratory  organs  are  a£Fected  as  with  Aralia  racem. 
Moutn  and  throat  are  sensitive  to  the  ordinary  air  of  room ;  are  < 
in  free  open  air  and  from  talking,  >  at  dinner.  Many  symptoms  are 
<  in  open  air ;  at  night ;  bending  or  turning ;  descending  stairs  ; 
sittins. 

Relations. — Compare :  Aralia  rac.  Hedera,  Coca.  In  ^'  Drowsiness 
with  headache"  :  Brucea,  Herac.,  Gels.,  Nat.  sul.,  Nux  mos.,  and  Sul. 
In  dry  lips,  Bry. 

STHPTOHB. 

1.  Mind. — Mood  quiet  and  contented,  with  good  courage. — Mind 
generally  calm  ;  but  impatient  impulses,  fear  of  accidents. — ^Thinking  difficult. 
— Memory  weak. — Disposition  to  weep  ;  anxious  about  the  future. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  cloudiness,  confusion,  giddiness,  and  heaviness  of 
the  head. — Vertigo  on  going  down  winding  stairs. — While  standing,  the 
ground  seems  to  waver. — Reflection  difficult ;  tendency  to  f orgetf ulness. — 
Reeling  sensation  in  occiput. — Reeling  sensation  in  occiput,  with  grey  spots 
before  eyes. — Head  seems  at  times  enlarged  and  to  sway  to  one  side. — 
Pressure  in  longitudinal  sinuses. — Drawing  in  r.  side  of  frontal  bone;  in 
muscles  of  neck  and  loins. — Drawing  in  occiput ;  he  involuntarily  bends  head 
backward. — Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  head. — Semilateral  cephalalgia. — 
Lancinations  from  r.  side  of  the  forehead  as  far  as  the  orbit,  with  heaviness 
of  the  eyelids,  irrepressible  inclination  to  sleep,  heat  of  the  head,  and  heavi- 
ness in  the  temples. — Sudden  shock  in  occiput,  followed  by  pain,  as  of  a 
bruise. 


BOSTON  u?:iv,:-,?irY 


School  of  Mec: 


4w|IJw« 


822  GINSENG 

3.  Eyes. — Pressure  on  the  eyes,  which  seems  to  force  them  inwards; 
the  upper  eyelids  fall  (esp.  r.). — Great  difficulty  in  opening  the  eyelids,  which 
are  heavy  and  painful ;  itching  of  the  eyelids. — Biting  and  itching  in  margins 
of  lids. — Unpleasant  sensation  of  coldness  on  surface  of  eyebalL — Piqiils 
alternately  large  and  small. — ^Vision  indistinct — Sensation  ol  fatigae  when 
exposed  to  the  light ;  objects  appear  double  when  looked  at  fixedly  ;  in  read« 
ing,  the  characters  become  coniused. 

6.  Face.— Alternation  of  redness  and  paleness. — Burning  eiythematoiis 
redness  on  r.  cheek,  on  the  ala  nasi,  on  the  chin ;  following  chapping  of  the 
parts,  with  itching  and  heat ;  afterwards  an  eruption  of  small  miliaria,  with 
tingling ;  after  this,  mealy  tetters  on  the  skin,  with  desquamation  at  the  end 
of  fifteen  days.*-Lips  red,  dry,  rough,  thick,  cracked  and  bleeding,  esp.  the 
lower  lip  ;  <  in  open  air  and  by  talking. — Drawing  in  jaws  and  bones  of 
face. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  red  and  smarting  with  thirst ;  then  idiite  in  the 
middle. — Tongue  white,  completely  dry,  with  large  glistening  papillae.— 
Mouth,  lips,  and  teeth  very  dry  ;  voice  rough  and  scraping  ;  swallowing  of 
saliva  very  difficult  on  account  of  dryness ;  a  swallow  of  vnder  moistens  only 
for  a  moment — Dry  sensation  in  palate,  with  accumulation  of  much  saliva, 
which  is  swallowed  without  difficulty. — Green  saliva. 

XX.  Stomach. — Great  appetite  at  a  very  unusual  time ;  risings,  empty, 
sometimes  sour;  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  with  eructations  which 
afiFord  relief. — Pressure  on  the  stomach,  with  inflation,  dull  borborygmi  in  the 
abdomen,  tension  and  feeling  of  inflation,  emission  of  wind,  uneasiness  and 
yawning. — Oppression,  pressure  of  clothing  intolerable. — Painful  drawings  in 
the  stomach,  as  from  hunger,  f oUovdng  shiverings,  with  painful  landnatioos 
in  the  precordial  region  ;  violent  colicky  pains,  which  pervade  the  abdomen ; 
swelling  and  pulsation  of  the  stomach,  anguish,  inclination  to  vomit,  and  pain 
in  1.  side  at  the  heart,  following  shiverings,  which  extends  to  the  dbow.— 
Contractive  pain  in  the  stomach,  with  anguish,  difficulty  of  re^ration,  draw- 
ing pains  in  the  stomach,  and  lancinations  in  r.  side,  which  stop  respiratioo. 

xa.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  r.  side  of  lower  region  of  abdomen,  extending 
to  the  groins,  with  painful  tingling  extending  to  the  foot  and  great  toe,  where 
very  painful  lancinations  are  felt. — Pains  in  the  lower  region  of  the  abdomen, 
with  violent  aching  in  the  groins,  inflation,  tension  and  pressure  towards  the 
lower  region ;  colicky  pains  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  from  the  r.  to  L, 
ascending  to  the  precordial  region,  with  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  which  is 
relieved  by  emission  of  wind. — ^Violent  cutting  pains  from  r.  coxo-femorai 
region  to  abdomen,  causing  a  writhing  of  the  body.— Colic,  which  extends 
into  the  stomach,  with  pressure  and  pain  when  pressed  externally ;  painful 
digging  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  extending  to  the  groins  and  stomach,  with 
cutting  pains  throughout  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen ;  inclination  to  vomit, 
and  pain  as  of  excoriation  in  r.  side,  below  the  ribs,  <  by  external  pressure. 
Pains  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  a  girdle,  with  digging  and  starting  in  r.  hip.— 
Pain  in  r.  side  of  lower  abdominal  region,  from  the  hip  to  the  ribs,  with  sharp 
pains  from  the  precordial  region ;  lancinations  in  r.  side  of  the  upper  part  c^ 
the  abdomen,  with  inability  to  bear  tight  clothes,  pains  in  the  abdomen, 
borborygmi,  emission  of  wind  and  lancinations,  like  thrusts  of  a  knife  in  the 
region  of  the  stomach.— Painful  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  extending  on  r. 


GINSENG  823 

side^  below  the  ribs,  with  pains  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  and  eructations 
which  give  relief ;  tense  painful  abdomen ;  >  by  emission  of  flatus  down- 
wards ;  inflated  abdomen,  painful,  with  pain,  as  of  a  fracture,  in  the  loins  ; 
bruise-Uke  pain  in  the  iliac  region,  <  by  pressure ;  general  uneasiness,  and 
pains  which  pervade  the  abdomen  and  the  chest ;  pressure  on  the  stomach, 
and  constraint  from  the  clothes  over  the  parts. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Evacuation  difficult,  without,  however,  being 
hard. — Hard  stool,  which  is  not  emitted  without  efforts,  which  are  followed 
by  burning  at  the  anus. — Slight  sticking  in  rectum. — ^Tenesmus  and  land-  1 
nations  in  the  rectum. — Four  thin  stools  preceded  by  short  violent  pain, 
extending  from  within  the  pelvis  to  the  thighs,  as  though  one  must  sink  to  the 
ground. — Liquid  stools  in  the  evening,  preceded  by  colic. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Sticking  and  voluptuous  twitching  in  navicular 
fossa. — Pruritus  and  burning  in  urethra,  with  frequent  urging  to  urinate. — 
Yellowish  lemon-coloured  urine,  depositing  a  red  sediment. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Great  excitation  of  the  genital  organs.— 
Nocturnal  erections  without  pollutions. — Painful  erections  while  sitting  at 
engrossing  business. — Pressure  in  testicles. — Dreams  vivid,  lascivious,  of  which 
the  recollection  remains,  always  after  taking  the  medicine. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Voice  rough  and  hoarse. — Dry  cough  in 
parox3rsms. — Short  anxious  respiration ;  or  slow  and  deep  with  exertion. — 
Frequent  deep  inspiration,  and  tightness  of  chest  as  if  he  could  not  get 
enough  air ;  >  while  walking. — Contractive  pain  across  lower  thorax. 

i8.  Cheat, — ^Aching  and  oppression  in  the  chest,  with  great  difficulty  of 
respiration. — Oppression  of  the  chest,  with  anxiety  and  lancinations  in  pit  of 
stomach,  and  in  lumbar  region. — Prostration  of  strength,  and  lassitude  in  the 
limbs. 

19.  Heart. — Severe  pain  ;  dagger-like  lancinations  and  stitches  in 
praecordia. — Some  violent  beats  while  sitting,  and  followed  by  sensation  of 
floundering  of  heart,  with  rapid,  small,  indistinct  pulse. — Pulse  very  irregular. 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — Frequent  cracking  in  upper  cervicsil  vertebrae 
on  moving  head. — Heaviness  and  stiffness  in  nape. — Drawings  in  cervical 
mnscles.-*Pulsation  in  vessels  of  r.  side  of  neck. — Painful  lassitude  along 
back,  with  bruised  feeling  down  to  and  in  sacrum. — Stiffness  in  back. — Pres- 
sure in  dorsal  vertebrae. — Deep  lancinations  around  loins. — Lancinations 
between  the  shoulder-blades,  extending  to  r.  shoulder,  or  else  along  the  dorsal 
spine  to  the  sacrum,  esp.  on  standing  upright,  accompanied  by  difficulty  of 
respiration.— Weight  in  nape  of  neck,  with  contusive  pain  along  back  of 
sacrum. 

az.  Limbs. — Much  cracking  in  joints  on  moving. — Peculiar  lightness, 
vigour,  and  flexibility  of  limbs  in  spite  of  much  walking  or  a  bad  night — 
Painful  lassitude  in  limbs. — Bruised  pain  in  limbs  alternating  in  different 
parts. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain  in  shoulders,  with  cracking  in  them. — Peculiar 
sensation  of  coldness  and  crawling  in  r.  elbow  and  parietal  eminence. — 
Violent  compressing  pain  in  muscles  of  lower  1.  forearm,  as  if  a  hoop  were 
tight  around  them. — Object  dropped  from  hands  easily,  hastiness  in  his  move- 
ments.— On  closing  hands  sensation  as  if  they  were  swollen  and  the  skin 
tight. — Contraction  of  the  fingers  of  r.  hand  and  stiffness  in  their  joints. 


824  GLONOINUM 

S3.  Lower  Limbs.— Retraction  of  muscles  of  r.  leg ;  great  weakness  of 
r.  leg.— staggering  gait. — Sticking  in  r.  tibia. — Lancinating  tearing  in  r.  ankle 
joint. — Lancinations  alternately  in  both  great  toes. — Painful  stiffness  of  L 
thigh,  from  the  hip  to  knee. — Heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs,  contraction  of  the 
muscles  of  1.  leg,  with  bruise-like  pain  in  the  coxo-femoral  articulation.— 
Difficulty  in  walking,  tingling  and  stiffness  from  the  thigh  to  the  foot ;  pain 
in  the  knee,  and  violent  incisive  pain  in  the  r.  hip,  which  extends  to  the 
abdomen,  and  occasions  writhing  of  the  body. — Contusive  pains  in  the  thighs 
and  loins,  with  great  lassitude  in  the  morning  on  rising,  with  rheumatic  and 
paralytic  pains  in  the  lower  limbs. — ^Nocturnal  digging  pain  in  r.  leg,  from 
the  hip  to  the  great  toe,  in  which  are  experienced  violent  lancinations.— 
Violent  lancinations  in  1.  great  toe,  already  suffering  from  arthritic  swelling.— 
Alternate  lancinations  in  one  of  the  great  toes. — Cramp-like  pain,  extending 
from  r.  hip,  along  the  leg,  to  the  points  of  the  toes. — Lancinating  tearing  in 
the  articulation  of  r.  foot 

24.  Generalities. — Painful  lassitude  of  the  extremities,  superior  and 
inferior. — Coldness,  trembling,  and  numbness  of  the  hands,  with  deadness  of 
the  Engers.— Tendency  of  the  symptoms  to  show  themselves  more  particularly 
on  r.  side.— As  during  fever,  uneasiness,  with  inclination  to  sleep ;  internal 
shivering,  with  heat  externally,  tingling  in  the  fingers,  yawning  and  stretch- 
ing, trembling,  shivering,  thirst,  dryness  of  the  mouth,  draggings  in  the 
stomach,  and  weakness  of  the  legs,  as  after  a  severe  illness.  — Great  sensitive- 
ness to  cold,  and  tendency  to  feel  bruised  all  over. — ^After  a  walk,  inability  to 
obtain  warmth. — Pulse  natural. 

25.  Skin. — Itching  pimples  on  the  skin  of  the  neck,  and  of  the  chest- 
Itching  below  r.  foot. 

26.  Sleep. — Much  yawning  and  drowsiness. — Awakens  with  difficolty  or 
else  with  a  start. — Pleasant  voluptuous  very  vivid  dreams,  constantly  repeated 
every  time  he  takes  the  drug. 

27.  Fever. — Coldness,  numbness,  trembling  of  hands,  fingers  white- 
Chilliness  through  the  back  extending  into  arms. — Coldness  pierces  into 
interior  of  occiput — Coldness  in  back  extending  into  bones  of  back,  coM 
hands,  blue  nails. — Coldness  in  spine. — ^A  small  glass  of  Malaga  wine  caused 
remarkable  heat  of  body,  esp.  back,  with  distended  veins.— Violent  burning 
heat  in  tips  of  fingers. 


Glonoinum. 

Nitro-glycerine.    C3  H5  (NO3)  O3.    Dilutions  with  alcohol. 

CUbolcwL-^Angina  pectoris.  Aphasia.  Apoplexy.  Brain,  Congestion  of.  Bright's 
disease.  Convulsions.  Epilepsy.  Epistaxis.  FVight,  effects  of.  Goitre,  Headacke, 
Heart,  affections  of ;  palpitation  of ;  jarring,  effects  of.  Location,  sense  of,  lost 
Mania.  Meningitis.  Menses,  suppression  cS.  Neuralgia.  I^ualysis.  Rheuinatisffl. 
Sciatica.  Sea-sickness.  Snow-headache.  Sun-headache.  Sunstroke.  Toothadie. 
Trauma. 

CharacteriBtios. — "  Nitro-glycerine  was  discovered  by  Sohrero 
in  1847,  but  none  could  be  obtained  for  physiological  experiment 


GLONOINUM  825 

until  Morris  Davis,  a  Philadelphia  chemist,  in  the  same  year,  after 
long  and  laborious  trials,  under  direction  of  Hering,  succeeded  in 
producing  the  substance  in  sufficient  quantities  for  proving."  I  quote 
this  from  the  Guiding  Symptoms,  Glon.  is  one  of  the  many  monuments 
of  Hering's  therapeutic  genius.  It  is  to  him  that  we  owe  the  intro- 
duction of  this  notable  remedy  into  the  materia  medica,  and  into 
medicine.  The  note  of  the  action  of  Glon.  is  a  tendency  to  sudden  and 
violent  irregularities  of  the  circulation.  It  acts  very  quickly  and  very 
violently.  The  **  signature ''  of  this  potent  explosive  may  be  said  to 
be  '*  bursting  "  and  "  expansion."  Bursting,  throbbing  headaches  ; 
sensations  of  expanding  in  the  head  and  elsewhere.  Throbbing  of 
carotids  ;  violent  action  of  heart-;  rush  of  blood  to  head  ;  iSushes  of 
heat  rising  from  chest  to  head,  then  throbbing  pain  in  head.  The 
characteristic  neuralgias  of  G/on.are  accompanied  with  much  throbbing, 
and  are  often  <  at  night,  preventing  sleep.  Supra-orbital  neuralgia, 
pulsating  ;  retinal  congestion  from  exposure  to  strong  li^ht.  Facial 
neuralgia,  extending  through  head.  Cardiac  neuralgia  (angina  pectoris) 
with  radiating  pains. 

Guernsey,  with  his  usual  graphic  terseness,  says  that  Glon,  is 
suited  to  **  Troubles  of  the  head  in  type-setters,  and  in  men  who 
work  under  a  gas-light  steadily,  so  that  the  heat  falls  on  the  head ; 
bad  results  from  sunstroke  ;  canH  bear  any  heat  about  the  head;  can't 
walk  in  the  sun,  must  walk  in  the  shade  or  carry  an  umbrella  ;  can't 
bear  heat  from  a  stove  ;  great  vertigo  on  assuming  an  upright  posture, 
from  rising  up  in  bed,  rising  from  a  seat,  &c.  Heat  in  the  head ; 
throbbing  headache."  The  great  sensitiveness  to  the  least  jar,  which 
is  a  very  marked  feature  of  the  Glon,  headache,  causes  the  patient  to 
carry  his  head  very  carefully  in  order  to  avoid  the  chance  of  it. 
The  headache  is  in  the  whole  head  and  every  part — forehead, 
vertex,  occiput.  Many  pains  appear  in  occiput  and  base  of  brain  ; 
gnawing  in  occiput ;  sore  pain ;  pressure ;  severe  pain  in  occiput, 
extending  to  eyes  and  temples ;  sensation  as  if  something  were  moving 
in  nerves  from  back  of  neck  upward  to  head.  The  eyes  may  be 
fixed  or  protrude ;  aversion  to  bright  light ;  black  spots  before  sight 
Face  flushed  or  pale.    Climacteric  disturbances. 

Fainting,  sudden  unconsciousness  ;  convulsions,  especially  during 
labour.  Nausea  and  vomiting  of  cerebral  origin.  Violent,  stabbing, 
neuralgic  pains,  so  violent  as  to  make  patient  frantic,  he  wants  to 
escape,  to  jump  out  of  window.  Bad  eflfects  of  fear  ;  horrible  appre- 
hension ;  fear  of  being  poisoned.  A  characteristic  mental  condition 
is  loss  of  sense  of  location  :  "  well-known  streets  seem  strange  to 
him."  Among  the  peculiar  sensations  are :  Chin  feels  too  long. 
Chest  feels  screwed  together.  Brain  as  if  expanding  ;  as  if  moving 
in  waves ;  as  if  hanging  with  head  downwards  ;  as  if  something 
were  pumped  into  vertex  ;  as  if  everything  were  crowded  out  at 
forehead;  as  if  warm  water  were  running  upwards  from  nape  of 
neck  ;  as  if  the  neck  were  gripped  by  a  hand ;  as  if  some  one 
were  pulling  eyes  from  within  outward.  Noise  in  left  ear  as 
if  it  came  from  heart.  Lower  lip  feels  swollen.  As  if  heart 
would  rise  to  throat.  Pains  are  :  Bursting ;  throbbing  ;  pulsative  ; 
tearing;  piercing;  stabbing;  gnawing.    Burning  between  shoulders. 


826  GLONOINUM 

Sitting  or  lying  still,  or  walking  in  cold  air  >  headache.  Bending 
forward;   bending  head  backward,  and  almost  every  movement 

<  headache.  Rest  <  pain  in  knee.  Excessive  heat  and  cold 
s=  hyperaemia  of  brain.  Heat  generally  <  ;  cold  applications  and 
cool  air  >  ;  but  cold  water  applied  to  head  <  head  symptoms^  even 
=  spasms.  <  Damp  weather.  Bad  effects  of  having  hair  cut ;  of 
exposure  to  sun  or  fire  heat  All  summer,  headache  <  every  day 
with  the  sun.  <  From  wine.  Pains  from  within  outward ;  faom 
front  to  back.    Bad  effect  of  too  much  riding  or  driving ;  sea-sickness ; 

<  from  jarring.  Pressure  >  headache.  Cajmot  bear  weight  of  hair ; 
clothing  seems  too  tight.  Suited  to:  Florid,  plethoric,  sensitive 
women ;  nervous,  sanguine,  readily  affected  persons.  Old  scars  break 
out  ag^. 

1uiaAionB.—Antidot€d  by:  Aeon.,  Camph.,  Coff.,  Nuxv.  Com^ 
pare :  Amyl  nit ;  Act  r.  (waving  in  brain) ;  Petrol,  and  CrotaL  h.  (loss 
of  location) ;  Bell,  (cephalic  cry  but  not  as  marked  in  BelL ;  also 
Bell,  has  >  bending  head  back,  and  >  covering  head ;  Glon.  > 
uncovered) ;  Apis,  Hyo.  (fears  being  poisoned) ;  Gels,  (inclination  to 
jump  out  of  window) ;  Stram. ;  Sang,  (headache  with  the  son ;  ear 
sensitive  to  jar);  Nit.  ac.  and  Bell,  (sensitiveness  to  jar);  MeUiot 
(headache  with  crimson  face) ;  Lvc.  and  Phos.  (burning  between 
shoulders) ;  Dig.  and  Diosc.  (headache  extending  into  nose) ;  Sec. 
(fingers  spread  apart). 

Canaation.— Sun.  Bright  snow.  Fire-heat  Fear  or  fright 
Jarring.    Injuries. 

BTMPTOMB. 

X.  Mind.— Falling  down,  with  loss  of  consciousness  and  alternate  palpi- 
tation of  the  heart)  and  congestion  of  the  head. — Pear ;  throat  feels  swollen, 
chest  as  if  screwed  together ;  apprehensive  of  approaching  death ;  fears  she 
has  been  poisoned. — Fear,  as  if  something  unpleasant  would  happen  to  him.-- 
Unosually  bright  and  loquacious,  with  great  flow  of  ideas. — Confusion  of 
ideas ;  cannot  tell  where  he  is ;  well-known  streets  seem  shange ;  way  home 
too  long ;  forgets  on  which  side  of  the  street  he  lives.— Great  mental  agitation 
(with  headache) ;  frantic,  attempts  to  run  away ;  to  jamp  out  of  window.— 
Cephalic  cry.— The  chin  feels  too  long. 

a.  Head.— Vertigo ;  <  from  stooping  or  moving  head  ;  in  open  air.— 
Giddiness  when  the  head  is  moved. — Heaviness  in  the  head,  principally  in 
forehead. — Doll  headache  with  warm  perspiration  on  forehead. — Headache 
with  accelerated  pulse,  red  face,  perspiration  on  the  face ;  he  becomes  uncon- 
scious.— Headache  <  from  the  heat  of  the  sun  ;  >  in  the  open  air  and  from 
pressure. — Headache,  throbbing,  &c.,  during  or  in  place  of  menses,— Fulness 
in  the  head,  as  if  the  brain  was  expanding  itself,  were  moving  in  waves.— 
Fulness  in  the  head  ;  distinct  feeling  of  the  pulse  in  the  head ;  throbbing 
without  pain. — Sensation  as  if  the  blood  were  mounting  to  the  head.— in- 
gestion of  blood  to  the  head  (apoplexy).— Pulsation  in  the  forehead,  in  the 
temples,  on  the  vertex ;  when  walking  every  step  is  felt  in  the  neck,  when 
moving  the  head.— Throbbing  in  the  head  ;  in  forehead  ;  in  temples ;  in 
vertex ;  in  occiput ;  <  when  moving ;  >  when  sitting  still  and  lying  and 
from  pressure—Throbbing  in  the  temporal  arteries,  which  were  laised. 


GLONOINUM  827 

and  felt  like  cords. — Stitches  in  temples  or  r.  side  of  forehead.-— Sore  and 
faniised  feeling  in  the  brain,  worse  when  shaking  the  head. — Soisation  of 
soreness  through  the  whole  head ;  is  afraid  to  shake  the  head,  as  it  seems 
that  it  would  make  the  head  drop  to  pieces. — ^The  pain,  heat,  and  fulness  in 
the  head  ascend  from  the  chest,  neck,  or  back  part  of  the  head. — Severe 
pain  in  the  occiput,  extending  to  the  eyes  and  temples. — Shaking  <  the 
headache,  as  well  as  stooping  motion,  ascending  steps;  external  pressure 
>  ;  walking  in  the  open  air,  uncovering  the  head  >. — Cracking  sensation  in 
the  brain.---Skull  seems  too  small,  and  as  if  the  brain  were  attemping  to 
burst  the  skull;  violent  action  of  the  heart,  and  a  distinct  pulsation  over 
the  whole  body. — Shocks  in  the  brain  synchronous  with  the  pulse. — 
Undulating  or  wave-like  motion  in  the  brain. — Hemicrania ;  sees  hailf  light, 
half  dark. — Gnawing  in  occiput. 

3.  Eyes. — ^Eyes  dull,  staring,  sunken.— The  white  of  the  eye  is  red,  the 
eyes  protrude,  look  wild.— Eyes  feel  as  if  some  one  were  pulling  them  from 
within  outward. — Pressing,  protruding  pains  in  eyes. — In  the  eyeballs, 
stitches,  twitchings,  soreness,  pressure. — Pupils  dilated,  eyes  rolled  upward. — 
Heat  in  the  balls  of  the  eyes,  lids,  and  around  the  eyes. — Sparks,  flashes  before 
the  eyes. — ^The  letters  appear  smaller. — As  if  focus  of  r.  eye  were  suddenly 
displaced ;  sees  everything  half  light  and  half  dark. — Black  spots  before,  and 
ot>scuration  of  the  eyes  ;  with  fainting. 

4.  Bars. — Sensation  of  fulness,  in  and  around  the  ears. — Ears  sensitive 
to  jarring. — ^Deaf  ness,  ears  feel  as  if  stopped  up. — Stitches  in  the  ears,  the  ears 
feel  as  if  closed. — ^Throbbing,  piercing  from  within  outward  in  r.  ear. — 
Ringing,  singing,  or  cracking  in  the  ears.— Ringing  in  the  ears,  audible  pulse. 

5.  Nose. — Pain  at  root  of  nose.— The  headache  extends  into  the  nose. — 
Epistaxis  on  going  out  into  the  heat  of  the  sun,  face  flushed,  hot,  red. 

(&.  Face. — Paleness  of  the  face  with  heat  and  congestion  of  blood  to 
head  and  chest— Pale  during  heat,  sunstroke,  congestions,  &c. ;  flushed  and 
hot  with  headache. — Heat  in  the  face  with  pulsations  in  the  head  and  palpi- 
tations of  the  heart. — Redness  of  the  face,  esp.  upper  part  of  it,  with  head- 
ache.— Redness  of  the  face,  which  comes  and  goes. — Itching,  esp.  in  the 
middle  of  the  face. — Pain  and  stiffness  of  the  articulation  of  the  jaw. — 
Sensation  as  if  the  under  lip  were  swollen. 

7.  Teeth.— Throbbing  pain  in  all  the  teeth.— Pulsating  toothache  with 
headache. — Stabbing  pains  in  gums  r.  side  passing  to  1.  without  ceasing 
in  r. ;  <  from  hot,  >  from  cold  applications^ 

8.  Mouth. — Taste :  bitter  with  nausea ;  aromatic ;  sweet ;  warm ;  leaves 
a  fatty  taste. — ^Tongue  numb,  as  if  burnt ;  prickling,  stinging.— Tongue  feels 
swelled  and  raw  with  spasmodic  twitchings.— Tongue :  milk-white  without 
coating ;  coated  heavily  at  back. — Difliculty  in  conversing  from  diminished 
power  of  tongue  and  confusion  of  ideas. — ^Tongue  swollen  with  pricking  in  it, 
the  tongue  smarts. — Sensation  of  soreness  and  swelling  on  the  roof  of  the 
mouth  with  pulsation. 

g.  Throat.— The  soft  palate  feels  contracted  and  dry. — Itching  of  the 
soft  palate  and  throat — In  the  throat  tickling,  heat,  soreness. — Sensation  as  if 
the  throat  were  swelling. 

zo.  Appetite.— Appetite  lost.— Wants  cold  water ;  also  from  dry  parched 
feeling. — ^Increased  desire  to  smoke.— Wine  <  all  symptoms. 


828  GLONOINUM 

II.  Stomach. — ^Naosea  causing  perspiration. — Nausea  with  and  caused 
by  the  headache,  with  colic ;  congestion  of  blood  to  the  head  and  chest,  and 
pale  face. — Nausea  and  vomiting  in  brain-congestions,  or  during  sunstroke.— 
Faint  feeling  at  pit  of  the  stomach ;  also  with  throbbing. — Sensation  of  emptiness 
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Sensitiveness  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  esp.  on 
stooping. — Gnawing  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. 

13.  Abdomen. — Colic,  cutting  pain  principally  below  the  navel, 
wakening  one  in  the  morning,  before  and  after  loose  stools. — Gall-stone 
colic. — Rumbling  in  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  principally  when  lying  on 
1.  side. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Diarrhoeic  stools  with  rumbling  and  discharges 
of  flatus,  beginning  in  the  morning  and  lasting  all  day. — Diarrhcea ;  copious, 
loose,  blackish,  lumpy  stools. — Morning  diarrhoea  with  sharp  burning ;  with 
rumbling. — ^Af  ter  eating  peaches  diarrhoea  evening  and  night. — Constipation 
and  haemorrhoids  which  itched  and  pained. — ^At  an  unaccustomed  time,  a 
hard  and  unusual  stool ;  pinching  in  abdomen  before  and  after  it — No  stooL 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Increased  secretion  of  pale  (albuminous)  urine; 
has  to  rise  frequently  during  the  night,  and  must  pass  large  quantities  of 
albuminous  urine. — ^Tubal  nephritis,  with  headache,  brought  on  by  walking 
in  the  sun  ;  numbness  in  arms  and  hands  alternating  with  intense  tinging. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menstruation  suppressed  by  GUm,— 
Instead  of  menses  congestion  to  head ;  face  pale ;  worse  in  vi^arm  room ; 
fainting ;  throbbing. — During  menstruation  congestion  of  blood  to  head  and 
chest ;  headache ;  fainting. — ^At  climaxis,  flushes  of  heat,  pressure  in  head, 
nausea,  loss  of  senses,  vertigo,  swelling  of  feet — During  pregnancy  headache, 
congestions  of  blood  to  the  head  and  chest. — Eclampsia ;  unconscious ;  face 
bright-red ;  pu£Fed  ;  pulse  full,  hard ;  urine  copious  and  albuminous. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Inclination  to  deep  respiration. — Desire  to 
take  a  long,  deep  inspiration. — Sighing. 

A  Chest. — Constriction  of  the  chest. — Constriction  and  oppression  of 
the  chest — Oppression  of  the  chest  alternating  with  headache. — Congestions 
to  the  chest. 

ig.  Heart.— Palpitation  of  the  heart  with  heat  in  the  face,  accelerated 
pulse  and  pulsation  of  the  carotid  arteries. — ^^^olent  action  of  the  heart, 
distinct  pulsation  over  the  whole  body. — Excessive  perceptible  palpitation  of 
the  heart — In  the  heart  sensation  of  fulness,  heaviness,  and  heat,  with 
laboured  beating  of  the  heart.-^Pulse  accelerated ;  rises  and  falls  alternately; 
low  and  feeble  in  sunstroke. — Laborious  action  of  the  heart,  oppression.— 
Sharp  pains  in  heart. — Severe  stitches  from  the  heart,  extending  into  the 
back. — Purring  noise  in  region  of  heart  when  lying,  pulse  intermittent 

90.  Neck  and  Back.— Tightness  around  the  neck.— The  neck  feels  weak 
and  tired,  cannot  support  the  head. — StifiFness  of  the  neck,  clothing  seems  to 
be  too  tight — On  the  neck  sensation  of  fulness,  tension,  pulsation. — ^Burning 
heat  between  the  shoulder-blades. — Hot  sensations  dovrat  back. — Pain  in  tiie 
whole  spinal  column,  or  heat  and  chilliness. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — In  the  arms  restlessness,  weakness,  vvant  of  circu- 
lation.— Sensation  of  weakness  and  numbness  in  1.  arm. — Peels  the  beating  of 
all  the  pulses  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  accompanied  by  trembling  of  the 
fingers. 


GNAPHALIUM  829 

83.  Lower  Limbs.— Weakness  and  numbness  of  1.  thigh.— Weakness 
of  tlie  legs,  the  knees  and  ankles  give  way  (during  headache). — Limbs  relaxed, 
motionless  in  snnstroke. — ^Acute  pain  in  1.  knee  on  moving,  seems  to  be  deep 
in  j<nnt  without  mnch  heat  or  swelling ;  sudden  twinges  or  pricks  while  at 
rest,  is  obliged  to  rise  and  straighten  limb. — ^Jerking  of  limbs  with  loss  of 
consciousness. — Restlessness  in  the  limbs  causes  him  to  rise.— (Sciatica.) — 
Cold  feet,  with  nausea,  palpitation. 

24.  Generalities.- Fainting ;  with  consciousness. — Great  weakness  and 
prostration. — Unconscious  falling  down. — Painless  throbbing  in  the  whole 
body. — Pulsations,  tingling,  thrills,  and  a  peculiar  sensation  of  warmth 
through  the  body,  extending  from  above  downward. — Convulsions  (from  con- 
gestions to  the  head);  the  fingers  are  spread  apart  and  sbretched  out.— 
Seeming  plethora,  rapid  deviations  in  distributions  of  blood. 

26.  Sleep. — ^Yawning  with  headache,  congestion  of  blood  to  the  head. — 
Sleepiness  early  in  the  evening. — He  is  difficult  to  waken. — ^Weakness  as  from 
loss  of  sleep. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse  accelerated,  irregular,  intermitting,  full  and  hard, 
small  and  rapid. — Chill :  after  getting  heated  ;  alternates  with  sweat ;  with 
vomiting;  head  as  if  screwed  up;  intermittent  fever. — Heat,  esp.  in  face, 
ascending  from  pit  of  stomach  to  head. — ^Warmth  general ;  flushes  of  heat ; 
waves  of  heat  upward. — Perspiration  principally  in  the  face,  after  sleeping. — 
Perspiration  on  forehead. — Profuse  sweat,  mostly  on  face  and  chest. — 
Perspiration  relieves  the  nausea. 


Gnaphaliiim. 


Gnaphalimn    polycephalum.      Sweet-scented    Everlasting    Flower. 
N.  0.  Compositae.    Tincture  of  fresh  plant. 

GUaiesL— Anterior   cmral    neuralgia.    Cholera.    Diarrhoea.    Dysmenorrhoea. 
Gout.    Lumbago.    Prostate  gland,  irritation  of.    Rheumatism.    Sciatica, 

OhsraeterisibMU — GnaphaL  has  been  used  mainly  in  a£Fections  of 
the  sciatic  nerve.  But  it  has  also  an  action  on  the  abdominal  organs, 
causing  vomiting^  colic,  and  diarrhoea,  thus  comparing  with  Colocynth. 
in  both  spheres.  The  special  indication  for  its  use  in  sciatica  and 
lumbago  is :  Numbness  alternating  with  the  pain.  The  diarrhoea  is 
watery  and  ofiFensive  ;  occurs  in  the  morning  and  is  repeated  during 
the  day.  There  is  rumbUng  in  the  bowels,  colicky  pains,  and  the 
patient  is  cross  and  irritable,  urine  is  scanty,  appetite  and  taste  are 
lost  There  is  also  sexual  excitement  in  male  provers,  pain  and 
irritation  in  the  prostate  gland.  Dr.  W.  McGeorge  {Hahn,  Menth., 
Oct,  1885,  p.  606)  tells  us  that  among  the  negroes  Gnaph.  has  a 
reputation  for  colds,  fevers,  and  night-sweats.  The  last  was  caused  in 
one  of  the  provers.  It  cured  one  case  of  "  chills " ;  and  the 
periodicity  appears  in  the  intermittent  neuralgia  of  the  upper  jaws. 
A  very  important  observation  made  by  McGeorge  is  on  the  value  of 
Gnaph.  in  dysmenorrhcea.    "  Weight  and  fulness  in  the  pelvis "  are 


830  GNAPHALIUM 

the  only  symptoms  noted  in  the  proving  bearing  directly  on  the 
malady.  '' Dysmenorriicea  when  the  menses  are  scanty  and  very 
painf  m  the  firat  day  "  is  the  clinical  indication.  McGeorge  cared  a 
very  aggravated  case  of  sciatica  (left)  in  a  man,  resulting  from  a  strain. 
The  leg  was  cramped  and  drawn  up ;  <  in  cold  and  damp  weather. 
I  have  cured  a  number  of  cases  in  which  there  was  alternation 
of  numbness  with  the  pain.  Dr.  George  Shelton  has  recorded 
(N.  i4.  y.  H.f  Feb.,  1888,  p.  100)  two  cases,  (i)  A  clergyman,  27,  had 
sharp  cutting  pains,  starting  from  inner  side  right  thigh,  just  bdow 
Poupart's  ligament,  extending  down  course  of  anterior  crural  nerve 
to  a  point  about  its  lower  third.  The  pains  were  paroxysmal,  came 
on  when  walking,  occasionally  when  lying  down ;  had  had  one  or  two 
attacks  in  the  pulpit.  In  several  instances  the  pain  had  extended 
down  the  right  cord  into  the  testicle  and  caused  him  to  draw  up  the 
leg,  flexing  the  thigh  on  the  abdomen.  (This  condition  was  also 
present  in  Dr.  McGeorge's  case,  and  may  possibly  be  a  keynote.) 
A  few  doses  of  Gnaph,  i  ciured  him  completely.  The  second  case 
occurred  in  a  widow,  68,  who  had  had  severe  pains  in  outer  side  of 
right  thigh  for  six  years,  during  part  of  which  time  she  had  been  con- 
fined to  bed.  The  pains  were  paroxysmal,  cutting,  tearing,  extending 
down  the  course  of  the  sciatic  nerve.  Attacks  <  at  night,  and  more 
frequent,  causing  her  to  roll  about  the  bed  and  cry  out  with  the  pain. 
All  the  resources  of  allopathy  had  been  in  vain.  Khus  t,f  Coloc.,  Sulph.^ 
gave  no  help.  Bell,  relieved  slightly.  Gnaph,  t  wrought  graaual 
improvement,  and  in  eight  weeks  the  cure  was  complete.  My  cases 
were  cured  with  Gnaph,  30.  One  was  in  a  very  gouty  man,  the 
alternation  of  numbness  with  pain  being  present  Sciatic  pain  is  <  on 
lying  down ;  by  motion ;  by  stepping ;  >  when  sitting  in  a  chair ; 
>  (Sawing  up  the  limb.  Headadie  >  by  washmg  in  cold  water.  Fur 
on  tongue  removed  by  thorough  washing  with  cold  water. 

BdatioiUk— Coiff^^ :  Coloc,  Ipec,  Merc.,  Puis.,  Lye,  Caulo., 
Xanthox. 

BT1IPT0M& 

X.  Mind.— Very  irritable  for  two  or  three  days,  after  the  diarrhoea  (in 
three  cases). 

a.  Head.— ^ddy»  esp.  after  rising  from  recumbent  position. — Fulness 
about  temples.— Dull,  continuous  pain  in  back  of  head,  with  shooting  pain  in 
eyeballs. — Full  headache  3  to  4  p.m.,  or  on  waking,  >  by  washing  in  cokl 
water  or  bathing  head  with  bay-rum. 

6.  Face. — Dull,  heavy,  bloated  appearance. — ^Neuralgic  pain  of  an 
intermittent  form  in  both  upper  maxillary  bones. 

8.  Mouth. — Flat,  sweetish,  sickening  taste.— Tongue  covered  with  long 
white  fur,  >  by  thorough  washing  with  cold  water. — Mouth  feels  parched  and 
tastes  badly. 

II,  It.  Stomach  and  Abdomen. — Flatus,  windy  eructations,  nausea 
and  hiccough. — Colicky  pains  in  various  parts,  caecum  sensitive. — Borborygmus 
with  emission  of  much  flatus. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Rumbling  in  bowels  with  stool  before  break- 
fast— ^Looseness  of  bowels  with  passage  of  pale-coloured  faeces. — Diarrhoeic 


GOSSYPIUM   HERBACEUM  831 

discharge  in  morning  and  during  day ;  with  irritable  temper ;  pains  in  bowels 
in  children,---Dark-coloured,  liquid,  offensive  stool  in  morning,  afterwards  pain 
in  bowels  all  day.*— Vomiting  and  purging,  like  cholera  morbus^  in  the  night 
and  all  next  day. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Pains  in  kidneys  with  frequent  slight  pain  in 
prostate  gland. — Sensation  of  pain  and  fulness  in  bladder,  even  when  just 
emptied. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Increased  sexual  passion.— Irritation  of 
prostate  gland. 

i6.  Female  Seanial  Organs. — ^Dysmenorrhoea,  menses  scanty  and 
very  painful  Erst  day. — Sensation  of  weight  in  pelvis. — Sensation  of  fulness  in 
pelvis. 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — Numbness  of  lower  part  of  l>ack  with  lumbago. 
— Sensation  of  weight  in  pelvis. 

S8.  Upper  JLimbs.— Feeling  of  weakness,  as  if  incapable  of  raising  the 
slightest  weight — Rheumatic  pains  in  elbows  and  shoulders. 

IQ.  Lo^^er  Limbs. — Pains  dull  or  darting  or  cutting  from  r.  hip-joint 
posteriorly  downward  to  foot;  <  lying  down,  from  motion,  by  stepping, 
>  sitting  in  a  chair.— Intense  pain  along  sciatic  nerve. — Numbness  occa- 
sionally taking  the  place  of  sciatic  pains,  making  exercise  very  fatiguing. — 
Cramps  in  calves ;  in  feet,  at  ni^t  in  bed.— Gouty  pains  in  big  toes. 

97.    Fever.— Night-sweats. 


Gossypium  Herbacenm. 

Cotton  Plant    N.  0.  Malvaceae.    Tincture  of  fresh  inner  root  bark, 
chopped  and  pounded  to  a  pulp. 

OUnlesL— -Abortion.  Amenorrhoea.  Dysmenorrhoea.  Labia,  abscess  of. 
Ovaries,  pains  in.  Pregnancy,  vomiting  of.  Sterility.  Tumour.  Uterus,  bearing 
down  in. 

GharaotaristioSd— Gos5!>^.  has  been  mainly  used  in  affections  of 
the  female  generative  organs.  It  has  been  taken  in  the  form  of  the 
extract  to  procure  abortion.  The  symptoms  of  the  external  organs 
are  strongly  marked,  and  the  ovaries  are  the  seat  of  pains  which  come 
and  go,  and  in  the  uterus  are  bearing-down  pains.  "  Intermittent 
pains  in  the  ovaries"  is  characteristic.  The  morning  nausea  and 
salivation  indicate  the  remedy  for  morning  sickness  of  pregnancy. 
The  pains  are  of  a  stinging,  drawing,  tearing,  and  sometimes  of  a 
burning  character,  extending  from  one  place  to  another,  jumping 
from  one  place  to  another.  Pains  generally  move  from  above  down- 
ward. Pains  are  generally  <  by  motion  ;  >  by  rest  Sympathetic 
symptoms  of  stomach,  heart,  bowels,  aud  nervous  system  arising  from 
msturbance  of  uterine  functions. 

Relations.— Com^ar^ :  Act  r.,  Apis,  Asar.,  Bell.,  Bry.,  Lil.  t.,  Puis., 
Sabi.,  Sec.,  Sep.,  Ustil.  . 


832  GRANATUM 

BTMPTOHB. 

2.  Head. — Pain,  first  burning,  then  stinging,  extending  from  both 
temporal  bones  to  middle  of  frontal  bone. — Drawing  pain  over  eyes,  with 
stinging  pain  in  pupils. 

5.    Nose.— Nostrils  swollen  and  inflamed. 
9.    Throat.— Tonsils  swollen,  r.  <. 

IX.  Stomach. — Nausea,  with  accumulation  of  saliva  in  mouth; 
inclination  to  vomit  before  breakfast — Rotating  psun  in  pit  of  stomach.— 
Anorexia,  with  uneasy,  depressed  feeling  at  scrobiculum  cordis  at  time  of 
menses. 

14.    Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  burning  pains. 

x6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Stinging  pain  in  both  ovarian  regions, 
and  at  the  same  time  drawing  towards  uterus,  lasting  about  ten  minutes  at  a 
time. — Soreness  between  thigh  and  vulva,  with  a  watery  secretion. — Soft- 
tumour  between  1.  thigh  and  vulva,  first  as  large  as  pea,  increasing  to  size  of 
pigeon's  egg,  secreting  a  watery  fluid  with  needle-like  sticking  pain,  <  at 
night — Swelling  of  1.  labium,  outer  part,  with  intolerable  itching ;  some 
swelling  in  r.  labium. — Outer  skin  of  both  labia  studded  with  innumerable, 
full,  somewhat  reddish  granules. — Amenorrhoea. — ^Menses  scanty  and  painful 
or  painless  ;  last  twenty-four  hours  and  then  become  very  sparse  and  painful ; 
too  watery ;  nineteen  days  late. — Sterility  from  uterine  torpor. — Morning 
vomiting,  followed  by  faintness ;  unable  to  rise  from  bed ;  great  distress, 
weakness,  and  prostration. 

so.    Back.— Pain  in  back. 

ss.  Upper  Limbs. — Heavy  feeling  in  both  hands,  >  hanging  them 
down,  <  in  warmth  of  bed. 

86.    Sleep.— Caused  her  to  sleep  a  great  part  of  the  time. 


Granatum. 

Punica  granatum.  Pomegranate.  N.  O.  Granateas.  Homceopatfaic 
provings  were  made  with  a  tincture  or  trituration  of  bark  of 
root.  An  alkaloid,  Pelletierine  (Q  H.j  NO),  discovered 
by  Bertrand  Pelletier  is  obtained  from  the  rind  of  the  fruit 

OlinioaL— Ascarides.    Gastralgia.    Hernia,  umbilical ;  inguinal.    Jaw^  cracking 
in,    Leucorrhoea.    Tapeworm.    Toothache. 

Charaoteristios. — Pomegranate  is  a  well-known  vermifuge 
especially  used  for  the  expulsion  of  taenia.  For  this  a  decoction  of  the 
rind  of  the  fruit  is  used,  or  else  Pelletierine  in  the  following  manner. 
After  a  mild  purge  the  previous  night,  in  the  morning  30  grammes  of 
Sulphate  of  Pelletierine  is  administered  in  a  solution  containing  50 
grammes  of  Tannic  acid.  This  is  followed  by  a  glass  of  water  in  ten 
minutes,  and  a  brisk  purge  in  half  an  hour.  The  homoeopathic 
provings  bring  out  many  symptoms  of  helminthiasis  as :  Pale  bloc 


GRANATUM  835 

rings  round  eyes.  Itching,  crawling  tickling  of  nose.  Ravenous 
hunger ;  craving  for  sour  or  juicy  things ;  fruit ;  cofifee.  Loss  of 
appetite.  Nausea ;  fermenting  in  abdomen ;  griping ;  dragging  in 
inguinal  region  as  if  hernia  would  protrude.  Itching  and  tickling  in 
anus  frequently  during  the  day.  Emaciation.  Convulsive  movements. 
Among  the  general  symptoms  are  :  Great  weariness  and  exhaustion, 
scarcely  able  to  keep  upright  Trembling.  Discomfort  and  nausea. 
Itching  of  the  skin  of  various  places,  face  and  body,  as  if  pimples 
would  break  out.  Biting  and  itching  in  palms  of  hands.  Yawning. 
Great  sensitiveness.  Swelling  of  navel ;  protrusions  in  inguinal 
rings.  All  symptoms  are  >  after  dinner.  Pain  in  abdomen  is  > 
after  drinking  cold  water. 

Relations. — Compare:  Ars.,  Chi.,  lod.,  Cina,  Teucr.,  Kousso., 
Cucurb. 

BTHPTOHB. 

X.  Mind. — Great  sensitiveness  and  impressibility. — Irritability  and 
arrogance. — Penurious  and  quarrelsome  humour. — Hypochrondriacal  scruples. 
— Melancholy,  gloomy  temper,  dejection,  and  discouragement. — Stupefaction, 
and  intellectual  embarrassment. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  esp.  during  intellectual  labour,  or  in  the  morning  on 
rising,  and  sometimes  with  obscuration  of  the  eyes,  or  with  nausea  and  aching 
in  the  stomach. — Sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  head. — Stupefying  pain  and 
painful  heaviness  in  the  head,  esp.  in  the  forehead. — Pressure  on  the  forehead 
and  on  the  occiput. — ^Acute  drawing  pains,  chiefly  on  r.  side  of  head. — Shoot- 
ings in  forehead. — Pustules  on  forehead  and  temples,  with  pain  as  from 
excoriation,  leaving  small  tubercles  on  drying. 

3.  £yes. — Eyes  hollow,  and  surrounded  by  a  livid  circle. — Itching 
and  burning  smarting  in  the  canthi. — Dryness  and  smarting  in  the  eyes. — 
Yellowish  tint  of  the  sclerotica. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  as  in  coryza. 
— Pupils  dilated. — Convulsive  movements  of  the  eyelids. — Obscuration  of 
the  eyes. — ^Weak  sight. 

4.  Ears. — Cramp-like  squeezing,  acute  drawing  pains  and  shootings  in 
the  ears. — ^Tinkling  and  buzzing  in  the  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Burning  heat  and  dryness  of  the  nostrils,  or  an  accumulation 
of  tenacious  mucus. — Crawling  itching  in  the  nose. — Coryza,  alternately  dry 
and  fluent. 

6.  Face. — Complexion  sickly,  yellowish,  and  earth-coloured. — Burning 
heat  in  the  face,  sometimes  transient. — Gnawing  itching  in  the  face,  and  esp. 
in  the  cheeks.— Swelling  of  the  cheek,  which  is  livid  ;  burning  heat,  itching, 
tension,  and  crawling,  as  with  chilblains. — Squeezing  and  acute  drawing  pains 
in  the  face,  in  the  cheek-bones,  and  in  the  root  of  the  nose,  often  on  one  side 
only. — Dryness  of  the  lips  and  burning  sensation  in  them. 

7.  Teeth. — Acute  drawing  pain,  tension,  and  squeezing  in  the  maxillary 
joints,  and  cracking  of  the  joints  during  mastication. — Shooting  pains  in  the 
teeth,  even  at  night,  in  bed. — ^The  teeth  seem  to  be  elongated. — Gums  unfixed, 
and  easily  bleeding. 

8.  Mouth. — Excessive  accumulation  of  saliva,  sometimes  of  a  sweetish 
taste,  in  the  mouth. — ^Tongue  moist  and  white. — Excessive  spitting  of  mucus. 

VOL.  I.  54 


§34 


GRANATUM 


g.  Throat. — Sensation  of  astriction  in  different  parts  of  the  month  and 
of  the  gullet — Contraction  of  the  gullet 

10.  Appetite. — Great  variableness  of  taste  ;  taste  alternately  acute  and 
dull. — Appetite  alternately  diminished  and  increased. — Extraordinary  hunger 
and  voracity,  even  after  a  meal. — Great  variableness  of  appetite ;  desire  for 
different  things,  and  esp.  for  coffee,  for  fruits,  and  for  succulent  and  add 
aliments. — Great  thirst  for  water. — Liquid  aliments,  and  potatoes  cause  nausea 
and  eructations. 

11.  Stomach. — Frequent  and  noisy  eructations. — Frequent  nausea, 
sometimes  with  lassitude,  flow  of  water  in  the  mouth,  pain  in  the  abdomen 
and  in  the  stomach,  frequent  want  to  evacuate  without  any  result,  shivering, 
sickly  looks  and  ill-humour. — ^Vomiting,  even  at  night,  and  sometimes  witii 
lassitude,  trembling,  perspiration,  or  vertigo. — Painful  pressure,  fulness, 
burning  sensation,  and  anxiety  in  the  precordial  region. — Cramps  in  the 
stomach  when  fasting  in  the  morning. 

13.  Abdomen. — Pains  in  the  abdomen,  frequent,  and  often  prolonged, 
sometimes  with  nausea,  flow  of  water  in  the  mouth,  shiverings,  and  prosha- 
tion,  or  with  vertigo. — Pains  in  the  abdomen  after  every  meal,  or  when  fasting 
in  the  morning. — Pains  in  the  abdomen,  mitigated  by  external  heat  and  by 
lying  down,  as  well  as  by  drinking  cold  water. — Pinchings,  shootings,  and 
rotatory  sensation  round  the  navel,  and  in  the  stomach. — Anxious  sensation  in 
the  abdomen.-rPainf ul  inflation  of  the  abdomen,  sometimes  with  voracity.— 
Frequent  production  and  evacuation  of  flatus. — Swelling  of  the  navel,  as  if 
from  umbilical  hernia.— ;Fermentation  in  the  abdomen. — Traction  in  the 
abdomen,  as  if  preparatory  to  a  stool. — Painful  pressure  and  swelling  in  the 
groins,  21s  if  a  hernia  were  about  to  appear. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Several  evacuations  during  the  day. — Copious 
evacuations  of  a  very  deep  colour. — Diarrhoea,  with  frequent  evacuations,  and 
evacuation  of  faecal  matter  and  mucus. — Before  the  loose  evacuations,  nausea 
and  fermentation  in  abdomen  ;  during  the  evacuations,  burning  heat  in  face 
and  pressure  in  rectum  ;  afterwards  burning  heat  in  rectum. — ^Tenesmus,  with 
movements  and  fermentation  in  abdomen. — Prolapsus  of  rectum  during  the 
evacuations. — Insupportable  itching  and  titillation  of  the  rectunL — Burning 
itching  in  the  anus,  on  the  buttocks  and  perineum,  on  the  scrotum,  and  on 
the  hair-covered  parts  of  the  genital  organs,  and  esp.  on  the  thighs. — Shooting 
in  anus  and  rectum. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Incisive,  shooting,  and  gnawing  pains  in  the 
urethra. — Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Mucus  oozing  from  the  urethra,  as  in  a 
gonorrhoea,  with  burning  traction  in  the  cavernous  parts,  as  far  as  the  gfans. 
— Excitement  of  sexual  desire. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Catamenia  premature,  and  too  copious, 
and  accompanied  by  colic  and  pressure  from  the  sacral  region  to  the  groins.— 
Yellowish  leucorrhoea. 

18.  Chest. — Sensation  of  anxiety  in  the  chest,  and  groaning. — Great 
oppression  of  the  chest,  with  lassitude  in  the  legs. — Pressure  on  the  chest  and 
across  the  sternum. — Rheumatic  pains,  shooting  and  drawing  in  the  diaphragm. 
— Shootings  in  the  chest,  esp.  when  walking.— Tension  and  painful  squeezing 
in  the  ribs. 


GRAPHITES  835 

ig.  Heart. — Palpitations  of  the  heart,  sometimes  on  the  least  movement. 
— Pains  and  cramp-like  contractions  in  the  muscles  of  the  chest 

90.  Back. — Frequent  bruise-like  pains,  pains  as  from  an  oppressive 
weight  between  and  on  the  shoulders,  and  the  loins. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Traction,  rheumatic  pains,  crawling,  and  sensation 
of  paralysis  in  the  arms,  with  difficulty  in  raising  them. — Rheumatic  pains  in 
the  joints  of  the  hands  and  fingers,  as  well  as  in  the  forearms. — Painful  and 
paralytic  stiffness  in  the  fingers. — Swelling  of  the  ball  of  the  thumbs,  with 
livid  colour,  burning  heat,  and  marbled  swelling  of  the  veins. — Gnawing  and 
insupportable  itching  in  the  palm  and  in  the  back  of  the  hands. 

z^  Lo\^er  Limbs. — Sensation  of  stiffness  in  the  hips,  as  in  sciatica. — 
Acute  drawing  pain,  paral3rtic  pulling,  heaviness,  and  shootings  in  the  knee. — 
Pain,  as  from  a  sprain  in  the  instep. — Painful  corns  on  the  feet. 

24.  Greneralities.--Oreat  lassitude  and  fatigue,  esp.  in  the  legs,  some- 
times with  inability  to  remain  standing,  and  want  to  lie  down. — Drowsy 
lassitude,  with  headache,  as  if  after  a  nocturnal  debauch. — Great  dejection  and 
prostration,  sometimes  with  burning  heat  in  the  hands.— Trembling  of  the 
limbs. — Relaxation  and  flaccidity  of  the  muscles,  esp.  in  the  lower  extremities. 
— Emaciation. 

26.  Sleep. — ^Yawning,  sometimes  convulsive,  and  frequent  stretchings. — 
Agitated  sleep,  with  frequent  dreams,  cries,  and  tossing. 

27.  Fever. — Partial  and  semi-lateral  shudderings,  sometimes  with  semi- 
lateral  headache. — Dry,  burning  heat  over  the  whole  body,  with  inclination  to 
throw  off  all  covering. — ^The  shudderings  and  shiverings  commonly  take  place 
in  the  morning ;  the  heat  manifests  itself  in  the  evening. — Sweats  on  the  least, 
movement. 


Graphites. 


Plumbago.  Black  Lead.  An  allotropic  modification  of  carbon.  (The 
finest  specimens  contain  traces  of  iron,  '04  to  0*6  per  cent ; 
poor  qualities  as  much  as  4  per  cent.)  Trituration  of  prepared 
Black  Lead  from  finest  English  drawing-pencils. 

GUnioaL— Acne.  Amenorrhoea.  AnuSf  affeciiofts  of.  Blepharitis.  Breasts, 
indurated;  cancer  of.  Cancer.  Catarrh,  Chaps,  Chlorosis.  Colic.  ConsHpa- 
turn.  Deafness.  Dropsy.  Dysmenorrhcea.  Ears^  affections  of.  Eczema.  Epis- 
taxis.  ErysiMas.  Eyes,  affections  of.  Face,  erythema  of.  Futt  affections  of. 
Fissures.  Qastralgia.  Glandular  swellings.  Gleet  Gravel.  Haemorrhoids. 
Headache.  Herpes.  Hydrocele,  Influenza,  Irritation,  Lachrymal  duct  inflamed. 
Leucorrhoea.  Lips,  cracked.  Liver,  indurated.  Menstruation,  disorders  of, 
Menta^.  Nails,  disorders  of.  Noises  in  head.  Nose,  affections  of.  Nose-bleed. 
Obesity.  Ovarian  tumours.  Paralysis.  Parotitis.  Pityriasis,  Priapism.  Pruri- 
tus vaginae.  Psoriasis.  Ptosis.  Rectum,  affections  of,  Rhus  poisoning.  Scars, 
inflamed.  Scrofula.  Seminal  emissions.  Skin,  affections  of.  Smell,  disorders  of. 
Stomach,  cramp  in.  Sycotic  diathesis.  Syphilis.  Trichiasis.  Tumours.  Ulcers. 
Urine,  disordered.  Uterus,  cancer  of.  Vaccination,  effects  of.  Wens.  Whooping- 
cough.    Worms.    Zona. 

CharaoteriatioB. — ^The  first  idea  of  using  this  substance  as  a  drug, 
says  Hahnemann,  is  due  to  S.  Weinhold,  who  was  led  to  it  by  seeing 


836  GRAPHITES 

workmen  in  a  mirror-factory  use  it  as  a  local  application  for  tetters. 
Ruggieri  followed  him,  using  it  both  internally  and  locally.  Hufeland 
relates  the  cure  of  a  lady,  41,  by  the  internal  and  external  use  of 
Graph,,  of  an  acne  rosacea  which  bad  defied  aU  other  modes  of  treat- 
ment. Teste  classes  Graph,  in  the  Pulsaiilla  group  with  Silic.,  Cole,, 
Hepar,  and  Phos.  He  gives  the  following  among  other  symptoms  as 
common  to  Pufc.,  Si/ic,  and  Graph. :  "Anxious,  changeable,  wavering 
mood  ;  aversion  to  work ;  vertigo  with  cloudiness  ;  a  sort  of  intoxi- 
cation in  the  morning  ;  sense  of  fulness  or  emptiness  in  the  head ; 
drowsiness  in  daytime ;  single,  acute,  deep  shocks  in  right  half  of 
brain ;  flickering  before  eyes ;  suspension  of  visual  power ;  photo- 
phobia ;  lachrymation  in  open  air ;  foul  smell  t>efore  nostrils ; 
amenorrhoea ;  swelling  of  right  testicle ;  swelling  of  veins ;  wandering 
pains ;  pain  in  the  parts  not  lain  upon ;  heaviness  in  a£Eected  parts ; 
rheumatism  at  nape  of  neck  ;  sweat  at  night  having  odour  of  urine ; 
drowsiness  in  daytime." 

Hahnemann  was  quick  to  perceive  that  Graph,  was  much  more 
than  a  mere  remedy  for  skin  affections.  Like  that  other  great  skin 
remedy.  Sulphur^  Graph,  proved  to  be  a  leading  antipsoria  Hahne- 
mann's provings  and  observations  defined  its  powers  over  skin  affec- 
tions. Its  special  characteristic  is :  "  Eruptions  oozing  out  a  thick, 
honey-like  fluid."  Wherever  such  eruptions  are  found  Graph,  is  in  all 
probability  the  remedy.  I  have  cured  many  cases,  notably  some 
occurring  on  the  occiput,  and  behind  the  ears.  It  is  no  less  frequently 
a  remedy  for  the  results  of  repelled  eruptions  of  the  kind,  Nash 
records  such  a  case  :  A  child  had  been  "relieved"  of  an  eczema 
capitis  under  old-school  treatment,  whereupon  entero-colitis  set  in, 
and  became  so  alarming  that  it  was  pronounced  "  consumption  of  the 
bowels."  Nash  when  called  in  found  the  child  greatly  emaciated, 
with  little  or  no  appetite,  very  restless,  passing  *' stools  of  brown  fluid 
mixed  with  undigested  substances,  and  of  an  intolerably  fetid  odowrP 
Graph.  6m  (Jenichen)  cured  promptly.  Graph,  being  one  of  the 
forms  of  Carbon,  it  is  therefore  related  to  Carbo  anim.,  and  Carbo 
veg. ;  and  as  it  contains  a  small  percentage  of  iron,  it  is  also  related  to 
Ferrum. 

Graph,  causes  slight  erethism  at  first,  then  a  weak,  relaxed, 
condition  ;  anaemia  ;  chlorosis.  The  typical  Graphites  patient  is 
"  fat,  chilly,  and  costive."  Lymphatic  glands  are  swollen.  like  the 
skin,  the  mucous  membranes  are  cracked  and  fissured,  and  have 
scanty  secretions.  Irregularities  in  the  distribution  of  the  blood 
occur,  pallor  of  skin  and  mucous  membranes.  The  circulation  is  at 
first  excited,  then  follows  loss  of  energy  and  consequent  venous 
hyperaemia.  Fainting  readily  occurs  with  great  anxiety ;  motion  is 
impaired  and  the  tissues  relaxed,  but  paralysis  is  not  complete.  A 
marked  characteristic  of  Graphites  is  a  rush  of  blood  to  head,  with 
flushed  face.  I  have  cured  two  very  severe  cases  of  nose-bleed  in 
elderly  people  where  this  symptom  was  present.  In  one  case  there 
had  been  flushing  of  head  and  neck  for  many  months  previous  to 
the  attack,  and  flushing  preceded  and  accompanied  each  occurrence 
of  the  bleeding.  In  the  other  case  the  patient  said  the  precursory 
flush  seemed  to  come  up  from  his  toes.     He  had  had  his  nostrils 


GRAPHITES  837 

plugged,  without  avail,  before  I  saw  him.  GraphiteSj  in  a  high 
potency,  cured  promptly  in  both  instances.  Hahnemann  gives  the 
symptom  on  which  I  based  the  prescription  as  follows  :  ''Bleeding  of 
the  nose  at  10  p.m. ;  preceded  in  the  afternoon  by  rush  of  blood  to 
the  head,  and  heat  of  face."  There  is  also  "  rush  of  blood  to  head, 
with  distension  and  flatulence." 

Graphites  is  suited  to  persons  who  have  a  tendency  to  put  on 
unhealthy  fat.  Defective  animal  heat  from  defective  oxygenation  ; 
always  cold,  indoors  or  out.  Chlorotics.  Affections  of  glands,  skin, 
and  mucous  membranes,  especially  at  orifices.  The  Graphites  con- 
dition is  not  sensitive  and  herein  it  differs  from  Hepar,  which  has 
extreme  sensitiveness  of  affected  parts.  The  tone  of  mind  is  sad  and 
foreboding.  The  eyes,  ears,  and  nose  are  affected,  especially  the 
integumentary  parts.  There  is  a  very  characteristic  symptom  in 
reference  to  the  hearing  :  ''  hardness  of  hearing  >  when  riding  in  a 
carriage."  There  is  a  sore  throat  like  that  of  Lachesis  ;  sensation  of 
a  lump,  <  on  empty  swallowing.  It  has  also  a  ''  lump  "  sensation 
at  the  stomach.  It  resembles  Lachesis^  too,  in  its  flushings  ;  in  gas- 
tralgia  >  by  eating.  Hurries  to  meals  to  relieve  violent  pain  at 
epigastrium ;  especially  to  dinner  and  supper.  GouUon  cured  two 
notable  cases  of  cramps  in  the  stomach  with  "  improvement  of  the 
cramps  by  eating."  There  was  also  clean  tongue.  Milk  agreed  well, 
especially  hot  milk.  In  one  case  roast  meat  agreed,  but  not  boiled 
meat,  and,  still  less,  potatoes.  In  the  morning  there  was  a  fishy  taste, 
disappearing  later  in  the  day.  Another  cure  by  GouUon  was  of  a 
young  lady  who  was  troubled  with  salivation,  coming  on  any  time  ; 
sometimes  just  before  sitting  down  to  dinner ;  oftenest  when  riding 
in  a  carriage,  less  often  when  riding  in  a  train.  She  was  prevented 
by  it  from  seeing  company,  and  was  low-spirited.  There  was  also 
habitual  costiveness.  Graph.  12  at  first  aggravated  and  then  rapidly 
cured.  Goullon  understood  the  power  of  Graphites^  perhaps,  more 
completely  than  any  other  writer,  and  I  will  give  another  of  his  cures, 
as  it  illustrates  several  points  in  the  drug's  action.  A  well-grown, 
healthy-looking  girl  of  fifteen  had  violent  headache  in  right  temple 
every  four  vfeeks  ;  the  pain  was  stinging.  Glittering  before  the  eyes 
frequently  preceded  and  followed  tibe  attack,  which  recurred  to  the 
hour,  ancl  sometimes  also  on  the  following  day.  Drowsiness  accom- 
panied the  attack,  deep  sleep,  heat  and  redness  of  the  head,  followed 
by  a  chill.  Sep.  6  reheved  the  headache,  but  the  glitter  remained. 
The  heaviness  of  the  eyelids  led  Goullon  to  Graph,  (which  causes 
ptosis).  His  choice  was  strengthened  on  learning  that  there  had 
been  no  menstruation,  and  finally  she  ''  had  a  degree  of  hoarseness 
that  indicated  chronic  hypertrophy  of  the  tonsils.  (A.  Vogel  claims  this 
to  be  a  sign  of  scrofula  derived  from  syphilis.")  Gr^h.  2x  trit.,  in 
two-grain  doses,  was  given  six  mornings  in  succession.  The  period  for 
the  headache  passed  without  recurrence,  and  the  sensation  of  lights 
completely  disappeared  {H.  R.,  vi.  271).  Graphites  causes  suffocative 
spells  which  arouse  the  patient  from  sleep,  he  must  jump  out  of  bed, 
<  after  midnight  {Lach.  <  after  sleep).  There  is  a  diarrhcea  of  thin, 
offensive,  partly  digested  stools.  Constipation  is  more  common,  the 
stools  bdng  in  lumps  coated  with  mucus,  and  with  mucous  shreds. 


838  GRAPHITES 

Habitual  costiveness  and,  in  females,  scanty  menses  form  a  keynote 
indication  when  found  associated  with  other  complaints,  as  heacJache, 
sldn-affections,  &c.  Moist  itching  excoriation  around  anus  and 
fissures.  The  male  sexual  organs  are  affected  as  well  as  the  female : 
Uncontrollable  sexual  excitement,  with  violent  erections.  Priapism. 
(I  have  frequently  seen  this  condition  produced  in  patients  taking 
Graph,  for  other  tnings  ;  and  have  frequently  relieved  priapism  with 
Graph,)  Impotence.  In  the  female  the  breasts  are  affected.  Pain 
imder  left  breast  at  menstrual  period,  often  waking  patient  in  the 
night.  Hysterical  melancholia  with  occipital  headache.  Leucorrhoea 
profuse,  in  gushes,  excoriating.  It  has  many  symptoms  in  common 
with  Sepia,  but  Graph,  affects  the  ovaries  more  markedly  than  the 
latter.  There  is  a  feeling  as  if  the  uterus  would  press  out  at  the 
vagina.  Stiffness  of  knees.  The  skin  of  Graphites  is  rough,  hard, 
and  dry.  Eczematous  and  herpetic  eruptions  predominate.  Erup- 
tion on  occiput  exuding^  gluey  humour ;  eczema  of  ears  ;  moist 
eczema  round  anus.  Pimples,  acne.  Wens.  Gastro- intestinal 
affections  alternating  with  acne  and  erythema  of  face,  herpetic 
lesions  or  scrofulous  hypochondriasis.  Excoriations  between  toes. 
Syphilitic  and  "constitutional"  ulcers.  Recrudescence  of  scars. 
Cracks  and  fissures.  Offensive  discharges  and  secretions.  Sweat : 
stains  yellow  ;  sour,  offensive. 

The  senses  are  abnormally  acute  :  music  causes  weeping ;  cannot 
tolerate  the  smell  of  flowers.  Weak,  exhaustion  of  whole  body. 
Spasms ;  contractions  of  muscles  ;  twitching  of  eyelids.  Cataleptic 
condition.  Sensitiveness  of  internal  parts ;  numbness  in  various 
parts  ;  drawing  pain  in  whole  body.  F^n  as  if  head  were  numb,  or 
pithy,  or  made  of  wood.  Pain  as  if  constricted  in  occiput,  extending 
to  nape  of  neck,  which  pains  as  if  broken.  "  Intense,  heavy  weight 
in  occiput,  as  if  head  drawn  back,  must  rest  it,  unable  to  read  or 
think  "  (result  of  2x  and  3X,  on  three  separate  occasions  in  a  patient 
of  Dr.  W.  Epps.  Chi.  ix.  relieved  in  a  few  days — Horn.  Rev.,  xl.  162). 
As  if  skin  of  forehead  was  drawn  into  folds.  As  if  a  skin  were 
t)efore  ear.  As  if  a  hard  body  as  large  as  an  egg  were  behind  ear. 
As  of  a  cobweb  over  the  face.  As  of  a  lump  in  stomach,  with 
beating  as  of  two  hammers.  As  if  intestines  were  torn  ;  croaking 
as  of  a  frog  in  abdomen.  As  if  everything  would  be  torn  to  pieces 
during  menstruation.  Bearing-down  pains  in  various  parts.  Rest 
>  ;  motion  <.  Riding  in  a  carriage  <  many  complaints ;  but  > 
hardness  of  hearing.  <  Lying  on  left  side.  Cold  drinks,  cold 
air,  damp,  wet  atmosphere,  washing  <.  Warmth  <  tearing  pain  in 
teeth  ;  warmth  of  bed  <  itching  ;  >  crampy  pain  in  stomach ; 
scrofulous  affections  of  bones.  Eating  >  cramps  in  stomach ;  hot 
drinks,  especially  hot  milk,  >.  <  In  open  air ;  in  vriiid.  Bathing 
after  measles  ==  paralysis  of  face.  Getting  feet  wet  =  delayed 
menses.  Attacks  occur  during  summer  and  autumn.  Ears  feel 
stuffed  at  the  full  moon.  Suffering  parts  emaciate.  Overlifting  easily. 
Haemorrhages.  (When  giving  GraphiL  internally  in  cases  of  anal 
eruption  I  have  found  the  external  use  of  an  ointment  made  with  a 
drachm  of  the  3X  trituration  to  an  ounce  of  Cetacean  ointment  of  great 
service.  Hirsh,  of  Prague,  has  also  used  Graph,  locally  in  cases  o£ 
disease  of  the  nails,  with  very  good  results.) 


GRAPHITES  839 

BalatlonB. — Aniidoted  by :  Aeon.,  Arsen.,  Chi.,  Nux  v.  Antidote 
to :  Arsen.,  lod.,  Rhus  t.  It  follows :  Calc,  Lye,  Puis.,  Sep.,  Sul. 
Complementaty  :  Caust.,  Hep.,  Lye.  Compare :  Petrol.,  Laeh.,  Carb.  v., 
Carb.  a.,  Caust,  Nit.  ae.,  Rhus  (erysipelas,  left  then  right ;  Graph., 
right  then  left),  Ant.  c.,  Ratan.,  Paeon,  Nit.  ae.,  Sil.  In  priapism, 
Pic.  ae.  In  affeetions  of  right  ovary,  Pallad.,  Op.  Laughing  and 
weeping  alternately,  Aur.,  Pul.,  Lye.,  Stram.,  Alum.  Hears  better  in 
cars.  Nit.  ae.  Obesity,  Cale.  ars.  Trichiasis,  Borax.  Erysipelas 
beginning  on  nose,  Canth.  Fat  constitutions,  Cale.  Burning  excoria- 
ting discharge  from  eyes,  Ars.  (but  with  Ars.  there  is  spasmodic 
closing  of  lids) ;  Sul.  has  margins  of  Uds  reddened  ;  with  Graph,  they 
are  paler  than  usual ;  Euphr.  has  thick,  purulent  discharge.  Graph, 
has  thin.  Profuse  salivation,  Bism.  Graph,  is  a  chronic,  or  over- 
grown Puis,  (but  Puis,  has  <,  and  Graph,  has  >  from  milk). 

Caiuatioii. — Grief.    Fear.    Overlifting. 

BTHPTOHB. 

1.  Mind. — Dejection,  sadness  and  profound  melancholy  with  dis- 
couragement and  much  weeping. — Feels  miserably  unhappy. — Agitation, 
compression  of  the  heart,  and  anguish,  as  if  at  the  point  of  death,  or  under 
the  fear  of  some  calamity,  often  with  headache,  vertigo,  nausea,  and  perspira- 
tion.— ^Anxious  agitation  (with  inclination  to  grief,  anxiety  about  the  future), 
sometimes  when  seated  at  work,  or  at  night,  with  impulse  to  quit  the  bed. — 
Agitation  and  inquietude  in  the  morning. — Much  inclined  to  grieve  and  cry 
in  evening,  whilst  in  forenoon  she  had  laughed  about  every  trifle,  contrary  to 
her  habit — ^Weeping  without  cause. — Obliged  to  weep  at  music. — ^Timid 
disposition. — Irresoluteness  with  excessive  cautiousness  and  hesitation. — ^Too 
great  susceptibility  to  impressions. — ^Tendency  to  be  frightened. — Irascibility. 
— Dread  of  labour. — Extreme  hesitation  ;  unable  to  make  up  her  mind  about 
anything. — ^Absence  of  mind. — Forgetf ulness  with  misapplication  of  words  in 
speaking  or  writing. 

9.  Head. — Fatigue  in  consequence  of  inteUectual  lat>our. — Sensation  of 
numbness  in  the  head. — Intoxication  and  vertigo,  esp.  in  the  morning  on  rising, 
or  on  awaking  (the  forehead  is  contracted,  with  nausea  and  vomiting) ;  as 
well  as  in  the  evening,  with  want  to  lie  down. — Confusion  in  the  head. — 
Attacks  of  headache,  sometimes  semi-lateral,  with  nausea  and  acid  vomiting. 
— Feeling  of  looseness  of  the  whole  brain. — ^Violent  headache  with  eructa* 
tions  and  nausea,  during  menstruation. — Periodical  unilateral  headache,  with 
constipation  and  amenorrhoea. — Pain  in  the  head  as  if  the  head  were  numb 
and  pithy. — Violent  headache  in  the  morning,  driving  out  a  cold  perspiration, 
and  inducing  syncope. — Headache  from  the  motion  of  a  carriage,  as  weU  as 
on  moving  the  head,  or  during  and  after  a  meal. — Headache  on  the  side 
which  presses  the  pillow. — ^Tension  and  pressive  constriction  in  the  occiput, 
with  stiffness  at  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Intense  heavy  weight,  or  dull 
pressure,  in  upper  part  of  occiput,  with  a  feeling  as  if  the  head  were  drawn 
back,  obliging  him  to  rest  his  head ;  unable  to  read  or  work  while  pain  lasts. 
— ^Sensation  of  compression  and  contraction  in  the  forehead. — Compressive 
pain  in  the  vertex  in  the  afternoon,  with  rotatory  movement  in  the  head. — 
Burning  on  the  top  of  the  head  on  a  small  spot.— Ebullition  of  blood,  with 


840  GRAPHITES 

beating  and  buzzing  in  the  head. — Fulness  in  and  congestions  to  the  head, 
the  menstruation  being  suppressed. — ^Tearing  and  pulling  in  the  scalp,  in  the 
teeth,  and  in  the  glands  of  the  neck. — Itching  in  the  scalp. — Humid  scabs 
on  the  head. — Humid,  spreading,  scurfy  eruption  on  the  top  of  the  head, 
painful  to  the  touch,  as  if  from  subcutaneous  ulceration,  and  emitting  a 
disgusting  odour ;  extending  down  to  sides  of  the  head  into  the  whiskers ; 
after  scratching,  more  sore  and  humid ;  later  drying  up  to  a  white  scuif . — 
Sweat  on  the  head,  while  walking  in  the  open  air. — Smooth  large  wens  on 
the  hairy  scalp ;  the  hairy  scalp  is  very  hot,  and  itches  very  much,  esp.  when 
walking  in  the  open  air. — ^Abundant  desquamation  of  the  scalp. — Falling  off 
of  the  hair,  even  on  the  sides  of  the  head  and  the  whiskers. — Rheumatic  pains 
in  the  scalp,  principally  in  the  sides,  extending  to  the  teeth  and  cervical 
glands ;  <  when  walking  and  becoming  cold  in  open  air,  >  from  warmth 
and  while  getting  warm  when  walking. — Perspiration  smelling  acid  or  very 
offensive,  colouring  the  linen  yellow ;  on  the  head  (as  on  the  whole  body)  at 
night  and  during  the  day,  from  the  least  exercise ;  <  even  while  talking, 
>  when  walking  in  the  open  air. — The  hair  turns  grey. 

,  3.  Eyes. — Eyelids  heavy  and  falling,  as  if  paralysed. — ^Aching  in  the 
eyes  and  eyelids,  as  if  sand  had  been  introduced  into  them. — Shootings  in  the 
eyes. — Heat  and  burning  sensation  in  the  eyes,  esp.  by  candle-light — ^Inflam- 
mation of  the  eyes,  with  redness  of  the  sclerotica,  injection  of  the  veins, 
swelling  and  abundant  mucous  secretion  of  the  eyelids. — Hordeolum,  with 
drawing  pain. — Dry  humour  in  the  eyelids,  and  in  the  eyelashes. — ^Agglutina- 
tion of  the  eyelids  and  lachrymation. — Pressure  and  stinging  in  the  eyes,  with 
lachrymation.— Agglutination  of  the  eyes  early  in  the  morning. — Dry  gam  in 
the  eyelashes. — Obscuration  of  the  sight  on  stooping. — Myopia. — Confusion 
of  characters  on  reading. — Sparkling  before  the  eyes. — Photophobia,  esp. 
by  day,  inflammation  and  red,  swollen  eyelids. — Intolerance  to  the  hght  of 
day. 

4.  Ears. — Shootings  and  beatings  in  the  ears. — Dryness  of  the  internal 
ear. — Fetid  smell  and  discharge  of  blood  and  of  pus  from  the  ears. — Scabs, 
tetters,  running,  and  excoriation,  behind  the  ears.— Hardness  of  hearing. — 
Hardness  of  hearing,  >  by  the  motion  of  a  carriage. — Singing,  tinkhng 
buzzing,  and  rumbling  like  that  of  thunder  in  the  ears. — Buzzing  in  the  ears 
at  night. — Sensation,  as  if  air  were  enclosed  in  the  Eustachian  tube.— Sensation 
as  if  the  (1.)  ear  were  filled  with  water. — Sensation  as  if  a  skin  were  before 
the  ear. — WhistUng  in  the  ears. — Cracking  in  the  ears  when  moving  the  jaw. 

5.  Nose. — Swelling  of  the  nose. — Sensation  of  tension  in  interior  of 
nose. — Black  pores  on  nose. — Dry  scabs  in  nose. — Painful  dryness  of  nose. — 
Nostrils,  excoriated,  cracked  and  ulcerated. — Fetid  smell  from  nose. — ^Dis- 
charge of  blood  when  the  nose  is  blown. — Epitaxis,  esp.  in  the  evening  and  at 
night ;  preceded  by  rush  of  blood  to  head,  and  heat  in  the  face. — Discharge  of 
fetid  pus  from  the  nose. — Sense  of  smell  sharpened  (too  sensitive,  cannot  bear 
the  smell  of  flowers). — Stoppage,  and  troublesome  dryness  of  nose. — Quotidian 
coryza,  on  being  chilled. — Dry  coryza,  with  headache  and  nausea,  which 
compel  the  patient  to  lie  down. — Flow  of  mucus  from  the  nose,  Hquid,  or 
yellowish,  or  thick,  with  putrid  smell. — Fluent  coryza,  with  catarrh  (as  soon 
as  he  becomes  cold). 

6.  Face. — Pale  yellow  complexion,  with  livid  circles  under  eyes. — 


GRAPHITES  841 

Flushes  of  heat  in  face. — Erysipelatous  inflammation  and  swelling  of  the 
face  (burning  and  stinging ;  the  erysipelas  spreading  in  rays),  with  eruption  of 
vesicles. — Erysipelas  preceded  by  chills  and  heat  alternating ;  beginning  r.  side 
of  face,  going  to  1. — Encysted  tumour  on  the  cheek. — ^Constant  sensation,  as  if 
the  face  were  covered  with  cobweb. — Semi-lateral  paralysis,  and  distortion  of 
the  muscles  of  the  face,  with  difficult  articulation.-rDrawing  and  tearing 
pains  in  the  bones  of  the  face. — Eruption  on  the  face,  in  appearance  as  if  the 
skin  were  raw. — Scabs  and  moist  pimples  on  the  face. — Ep^elis. — Falling  ofiF 
of  the  beard. — Ulcers  on  the  internal  surface  of  the  lips. — Fissures  in  the 
ulcerated  lips. — Ulcerated  corner  of  the  mouth. — Lips  cracked. — Scabby 
eruption  on  the  chin  and  round  the  mouth. — Painful  nodosities  in  the  lower 
jaw. — Swelling  and  hardness  of  the  submaxillary  glands. 

7.  Teeth.— -Toothache  at  night,  or  in  the  evening  in  bed,  <  by 
heat,  and  sometimes  with  heat  of  the  face  and  swelling  of  the  cheek. — 
Pains  in  the  molars,  on  closing  the  jaws. — Lancinating  and  drawing  tooth- 
ache, esp.  after  drinking  anything  cold,  and  <  by  warmth.— Pain,  as 
from  excoriation,  in  teeth  and  gums,  during  and  esp.  after  a  meal. — Easy 
bleeding  and  swelling  of  the  gums. — Fetid  odour  from  the  gums  and  mouth. 
— Discharge  of  black  and  sour  blood  from  the  teeth. 

8.  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  mouth  in  the  morning. — Putrid  and  urine- 
like smell  from  the  mouth,  gums,  and  nose. — Pain,  as  from  excoriation,  vesicles 
and  ulcers  on  the  tongue. — Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  the  tongue  being  much 
coated. — ^Taste  of  rotten  eggs  in  the  morning,  after  rising. — Profuse  salivation, 
and  accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  palate  and  throat. — Speech  impeded  by 
paralysis  of  the  muscles. 

g.  Throat. — ^Almost  constant  soreness  of  the  throat,  on  swallowing, 
generally  lancinating,  with  feeling  of  strangulation. — Pain  in  the  throat,  even 
at  night,  as  if  there  were  a  plug  within  it,  or  as  if  the  food  had  stopped  there. 
— Swelling  of  the  tonsils,  with  pain  when  swallowing. — Cramps  in  the  throat, 
with  feeling  of  strangulation. — Roughness  and  scraping  in  the  throat. 

10.  Appetite. — Bitter  or  acid  taste,  with  sourness  in  the  mouth  and 
throat — Great  thirst  in  the  morning,  and  after  a  meal. — Immoderate  hunger 
(with  acidity  of  the  stomach). — Repugnance  to  cooked  food,  and  to  meat : 
also  to  anything  saline  or  saccharine.— Weakness  of  digestion,  with  drowsi- 
ness, headache,  pains  in  the  stomach,  fulness,  and  inflation  of  the  abdomen, 
after  a  meal. — Hot  things  disagree  with  stomach. 

11.  Stomach. — Frequent  and  sometimes  abortive  risings. — Sour  risings, 
with  bitterness  in  the  mouth« — Sour  regurgitation  of  food. — Bitter  and  green 
regurgitations. — Frequent  hiccough,  esp.  after  a  meal. — Nausea,  esp.  in  the 
morning,  or  after  every  meal,  with  inclination  to  vomit — ^Water-brash,  at 
night. — Obstinate  vomiting  of  food. — ^Vomiting  after  the  slightest  loathing, 
with  great  nausea  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen. — Retching,  with  rising  up  of 
mucus. — ^Acid  vomitings. — Colic,  and  pressure  on  the  stomach,  sometimes 
with  vomiting,  >  by  a  recumbent  position,  and  by  the  heat  of  the 
bed. — Cramplike  pains,  or  squeezing,  as  from  claws  in  the  stomach. — At 
night,  pinching  in  the  stomach,  with  digging  in  the  chest. — Burning  pain  in 
the  stomach,  which  compels  eating. — Cramps  in  stomach  >  by  eating. 

19.  Abdomen. — Tension,  shootings,  and  beatings  in  the  hypochondria. 
— Hepatic  pains  after  breakfast,  which  render  it  necessary  to  lie  down. — 


842  GRAPHITES 

Fulness  and  heaviness  in  abdomen. — ^Abdomen  enlarged,  tight,  inflated.  - 
Inflation  of  the  abdomen,  with  congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  heaviness  in 
the  head,  and  vertigo. — Hardness  in  the  abdomen. — Nocttirnal,  cramp-like 
pain  in  all  the  intestines,  with  deficient  secretion  of  urine. — Incarceration  and 
accumulation  of  flatus  in  the  abdomen. — Expulsion  of  an  excessive  quantity 
of  fetid  flatus,  preceded  by  pinchings. — Rumbling  in  the  abdomen. — Croaking, 
as  of  frogs  in  the  abdomen. — Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  groins. — Painful 
sweUing  of  the  inguinal  glands. — Erysipelatous  inflammation,  with  large 
vesicles  near  the  navel. — Pressive,  stitching,  boring  pain  in  region  of  navel ; 
extending  into  back  and  hypochondria;  with  habitual  costiveness;  < 
evening. 

13.  Stool  and  Anua. — Obstinate  constipation,  with  hard  faeces  (the 
lumps  being  united  by  mucous  threads),  and  hardness  in  the  hepatic  region. 
— Faeces  hard,  knotty,  of  too  great  a  size,  and  scanty.— A  quantity  of  vdiite 
mucus  is  expelled  with  the  stool. — ^Faeces  too  90ft — Stools  of  a  putrid,  soar 
smell  (with  burning  at  the  rectum),  or  of  sanguineous  mucus. — Mucous  diar- 
rhoea.— Diarrhcea,  with  tightness  of  the  abdomen. — Faeces  of  a  very  small 
size,  like  a  worm. — Lumbrici  and  ascarides. — ^Taenia. — ^Itching,  sensation  o€ 
excoriation,  and  swelling  of  the  anus. — Large  haemorrhoidal  excrescences  in 
the  anus,  with  pain  as  from  excoriation,  esp.  after  a  stool. — Painful  and 
burning  cracks  between  the  haemorrhoidal  tumours. — Prolapsus  recti  with  the 
varices,  as  if  the  rectum  were  paralysed. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urgent,  anxious,  and  painful  want  to  make 
water,  with  emission  drop  by  drop,  with  a  stitch  in  the  urethra,  when  emitting 
it. — Scanty  secretion  of  a  deep-coloured  urine,  soon  becoming  turbid^  with 
white  or  reddish  sediment. — Urine  of  an  acrid  sour  smell. — Stream  of  water 
small,  as  if  from  contraction  of  the  urethra. — During  micturition  pain  in  the 
OS  sacrum. — Involuntary  emission  of  urine. — Noctural  emission  of  urine. — 
Wetting  the  bed  at  night. — Pain  in  the  coccyx  when  urinating. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Tension  and  cramp-like  pains  in  the  gienital 
parts,  with  troublesome  voluptuous  ideas. — Eruption  of  pimples  on  the 
prepuce,  and  on  the  penis. — Dropsical  swelling  of  the  prepuce  and  the 
scrotum. — Dropsical  swelling  of  the  testes. — ^Voluptuous  excitation  in  the 
genital  parts. — Indifference,  or  extreme  excitement  of  sexual  desire.— Violent 
erections. — Uncontrollable  sexual  excitement. — Priapism. — ^Absence  of  erec- 
tions in  the  morning. — Emission  of  semen,  almost  involuntary,  without  erec- 
tion.— During  an  embrace  painful  cramps  in  the  calves. — ^After  an  embrace 
coldness  of  the  legs,  exhaustion,  heat  of  the  body,  and  perspiration. — ^Absence 
of  emission  of  semen  during  coition. — Feeble  enjoyment  during  ccntion. — 
Flatulent  colic  during  the  excitement  in  the  genital  parts. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.-~Great  aversion  to  coitus.-— Vesicles  and 
pimples  on  the  vulva. — Excoriation  on  the  vulva  and  between  the  thighs. — 
Soreness  of  the  vagina. — Painful  swelling  of  the  ovaries  ;  <  every  time  she 
takes  cold  or  gets  her  feet  wet. — Swelling  and  hardness  of  ovaries  after 
menses. — ^Tearing,  grinding,  bursting  in  r.  ovary,  as  if  it  would  burst,  before 
and  during  menses.-— Tumour  in  r.  iliac  fossa ;  also  1.— Pain  in  uterus  when 
reaching  high  with  arms.— Sensation  of  bearing  down  towards  the  genital 
parts.-— Catamenia  too  slow,  too  scanty,  and  too  pale.— The  first  menses  delay. 
—Suppression  of  catamenia,  with  heaviness  of  the  limbs  and  congestions  ol 


GRAPHITES  843 

blocxl  to  the  head. — Cutting  pains  on  the  appearance  of  the  catamenia.— « 
Dnring  the  catamenia,  flow  of  blood  from  the  anus,  pains  in  the  limbs,  ulcers 
become  worse,  swelling  of  the  cheeks  or  of  the  feet,  catarrh,  with  hoarseness 
and  coryasa,  toothache,  or  cramps  and  violent  cuttings  in  the  abdomen,  head- 
ache, nausea,  pain  in  the  chest,  and  weakness. — Before  and  during  the 
menstruation,  fatiguing  cough  (morning  and  during  the  day.) — Leucorrhoea, 
white  and  liquid,  like  water,  w^h  tension  of  the  abdomen,  and  weakness  in 
the  back. — Leucorrhoea,  before  and  after  the  catamenia. — Leucorrhoeic  dis- 
charge occurs  in  gushes  day  or  night. — Painful  sensibility  and  excoriation  of 
the  breasts,  with  eruption  of  running  phlyctenae. — Obstruction  and  induration 
of  the  mammary  glands. —  Hard  cicatrices  remaining  after  manmiary 
abscess. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Sensitiveness  of  the  larynx.— Catarrhal 
roughness  and  hoarseness,  with  sensation  of  excoriation,  burning  pain  and 
scraping  in  the  throat,  coryza  and  obstruction  in  the  chest. — ^Voice  false  tf or 
singing). — ^Accumulation  of  slimy  matter  in  the  chest. — Cough,  produced  by 
roughness  of  the  throat. — Cough  at  night,  or  in  the  evening  in  bed,  excited  by 
taking  a  full  inspiration,  with  oppression  of  the  chest. 

18.  Chest. — Difficulty  of  respiration  and  oppression  on  the  chest. — 
Nocturnal  attacks  of  suffocation,  on  going  to  sleep,  or  on  walking  in  the  open 
air. — Su£Focative  paroxysm  at  night,  awakens  him  out  of  sleep,  usually  after 
midnight ;  must  quickly  jump  out  of  bed,  hold  himself  firmly  to  something, 
and  quickly  eats  whatever  is  at  hand,  which  gives  relief ;  or  hoarse  cough 
(asthma). — Wheezing  respiration. — Pain  in  the  chest  on  ascending,  on  riding 
on  horseback,  on  yawning,  or  on  putting  the  hand  on  the  chest. — Perspiration 
on  the  sternum  every  morning.— -Swelling  and  induration  of  the  mammary 
glands. — Soreness  of  the  nipples,  with  small  corrosive  blisters. — Pressive, 
cramp-like  pain  in  the  chest. — Spasms  in  the  chest. — Shootings  in  the  chest 
on  the  least  movement. 

19.  Heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart  on  the  least  movement. — (Constant 
emptiness  and  coldness  about  the  heart  and  in  chest,  with  sadness.)--Region 
of  heart :  constriction  ;  pressure ;  stitches. — Sensation  like  electric  shock 
from  heart  toward  front  of  neck. — Strong  pulsations  of  blood  in  whole  body, 
but  esp.  about  heart,  <  by  every  motion. — ^Throbbing  in  region  of  heart,  in 
evening,  after  lying  down,  when  lying  on  1.  side  so  violent  that  the  covering 
was  moved  thereby,  with  anxiety ;  disappearing  on  turning  over. 

00.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiffness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck.^-Violent  pain 
in  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  the  shoulders,  on  stooping  the  head,  and  on 
raising  the  arms,  like  a  tearing  incision. — Blisters  on  the  neck. — Swelling  of 
the  glands  of  the  neck. — Tearing  in  the  glands  of  the  neck. — Bruising  pains  in 
the  loins,  or  violent  achings  in  the  loins,  like  squeezing  from  claws,  or  from 
twisting  the  body. — Contractive  pain  in  the  back  (between  the  shoulders). — 
Sensation  of  tingling  in  the  back. — Formication  in  the  back. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Tearing  and  lancinating  in  the  shoulders. — Sensa- 
tion of  contraction  in  the  joint  of  the  elbow,  on  extending  the  arms. — Cramp 
and  tearing  in  the  hands. — Emaciation  of  the  hands. — Erysipelas,  callosities, 
dry  skin,  and  cracks  in  the  hands. — Pain  as  from  dislocation,  in  the  joint  of 
the  thumb. — Swelling  and  inflexibility,  stiffness  and  distortion  of  the  fingers. 
— <7ranulated  eruption  and  corrosive  vesicles  on  the  fingers. — ^Arthritic  nodo- 


844  GRAPHITES 

sities  on  the  fingers.^Tettery  excoriation  between  the  fingers.— Thickness  of 
the  nails  of  the  fingers. 

93.  Lower  Limbs. — Heaviness,  lassitude,  and  numbness  of  the  legs  in 
the  open  air. — Excoriation  between  the  legs. — ^Arthritic  tearing  in  the  hip- 
joint,  the  feet,  and  the  toes. — Numbness  and  stiffness  of  the  thighs,  and  of  the 
toes. — Restlessness  in  the  legs. — ^Tetters  on  the  thighs,  on  the  hands,  and  on 
the  tibia. — Sensation  of  contraction  in  the  tendons  of  the  ham,  and  in  the 
tendo  Achillis. — ^Tension  in  the  varices,  on  extending  the  legs. — Stiffness 
and  want  of  flexibility  in  the  knee,  which  does  not  permit  sitting  squat. — 

.  Cramps  and  starting  of  the  muscles  in  the  calves  of  the  legs.— Congestion  in 
the  legs  and  in  the  feet,  when  standing  upright — Ulcers  in  the  legs. — Swelling 
of  the  legs  and  of  the  feet,  with  hardness  and  shooting  pain. — Stiffness  of  the 
instep. — Shooting  pain,  like  that  of  an  ulcer,  in  the  heel  and  in  the  soles  of 
the  feet,  on  rising  from  the  sitting  posture.— Cold  feet,  even  in  the  evening  in 
bed. — Feet  burning.— Fetid  sweat  on  the  feet— Contraction  of  the  toes. — 
Swelling  and  distortion  of  the  toes. — Sore  pain  of  the  corns.— Callous  skin, 
corrosive  vesicles  and  ulcers  on  the  toes. — Ulceration  on  the  borders  of  the 
big  toe. — ^Tettery  excoriation  between  the  toes,  with  violent  itching. — ^Thick- 
ness  and  deformity  of  the  toe-nails. 

94.  Generalities.— Cramp-like  pains,  cramps  and  contraction  in  diffe- 
rent parts. — ^Tension  in  some  parts,  as  from  contraction  of  the  tendons. — 
Starting  and  distortion  of  the  limbs.— Arthritic  pullings  and  tearing  in  the 
limbs  and  joints,  esp.  in  ulcerated  parts. — ^Arthritic  nodosities. — ^Tendency  to 
strain  the  back. — Limbs  become  easily  numbed. — Stiffness  and  complete 
inflexibility  of  the  joints. — Hard  swellings,  with  shooting  pains. — Nocturnal 
pains,  which  are  felt  even  during  sleep. — The  symptoms  disappear  after  a 
walk  in  the  open  air. — ^Varices,  with  shootings,  tension,  and  itching. — 
Swelling  and  hardness  of  the  glands. — Pains  during  change  of  weather. — 
General  uneasiness  (sensation  of  debility),  which  extorts  groans,  without  any 
distinct  sensation  of  pain. — Strong  pulsation  in  the  whole  body,  and  esp.  in 
the  heart,  augmented  by  the  least  movement — Pulling  in  the  whole  body, 
with  urgent  inclination  to  extend  the  limbs. — Sensation  of  trembling  in  the 
whole  body,  with  jerking  of  the  limbs. — Great  emaciation. — Great  tendency 
to  take  cold,  and  fear  of  the  open  air,  and  of  currents  of  air. — Geileral  lassi- 
tude.— Rapid  failure  of  strength. 

95.  Skin. — Obstinate  dryness  of  the  skin,  and  absence  of  perspiration. 
— Ephelides. — Red  spots  on  the  skin,  like  flea-bites. — Erysipelatous  inflam- 
mations.— ^Vesicular  erysipelas,  like  zona,  on  the  abdomen  and  on  the  back. — 
Itching  of  the  varices  on  the  lower  limbs. — Itching-stinging  on  the  surface  of 
a  mole. — Eruptions  oozing  out  a  thick  honey-like  fluid. — ^Tetters,  and  other 
humid  or  scabby  eruptions,  sometimes  with  secretion  of  corrosive  serum,  or 
with  itching  in  the  evening,  and  at  night. — Eruption  of  pimples  and  nodules 
(principally  under  hair  and  on  covered  parts)  which  itch  very  much. — Swell- 
ing and  induration  of  the  glands. — Encysted  tumours. — Corrosive  nodules. — 
Excoriation  of  the  skin  (in  the  bends  of  the  limbs,  groins,  neck,  behind  the 
ears),  esp.  in  children. — Unhealthy  skin,  every  injury  tending  to  ulceration. — 
Proud  flesh,  and  fetid  pus,  in  ulcers,  with  tearing  pains,  burning,  and  shooting. — 
Scrofulous  and  syphilitic  ulcers. — Burning  pain  in  an  old  cicatrix. — Deformity 
and  thickness  of  the  nails. 


GRATIOLA  845 

25.  Sleep.— Great  drowsiness  during  the  day,  and  early  in  the  evening. 
—Difficulty  in  falling  asleep.— Agitated  sleep  at  night,  with  frequent  waking. 
— Nocturnal  sleep  incomplete,  as  if  only  dozing.— Unable  to  fall  asleep  before 
midnight  on  account  of  a  fixed  idea.— Unrefreshing  sleep  at  night,  followed 
in  the  morning  by  a  comatose  sleep.— At  night,  profusion  of  ideas,  sometimes 
troublesome.— Great  agitation  at  night,  with  anxious  and  frightful  dreams, 
oppression  and  choking.— During  sleep,  starts,  with  fright— Dreams  of  death 
and  of  fire;  dreams  with  meditations. — ^At  night,  discomforting  ideas,  anguish, 
heat,  inquietude,  startings,  gastric  sufferings,  and  many  other  affections.- 
Perspiration  about  the  head,  when  falling  asleep.— Bleeding  from  the  nose  at 
night— Wakens  at  night  from  a  suffocative  attack.— Constant  talking  during 
sleep.— Wetting  the  bed  at  night  while  asleep. 

27.  Fever.— Pulse  full  and  hard,  but  not  accelerated.— Shiverings, 
morning  and  evening,  with  or  without  heat,  and  followed  by  perspiration.— 
Chill  and  chilliness,  principally  in  the  evening,  after  4  p.m.— General  dry 
heat,  evening  and  night,  preceded  by  a  chill.— Heat  when  riding  in  a  carriage. 
— Perspiration  sour,  colouring  the  linen  yellow,  of  offensive  smell.— Inability 
to  perspire.— Perspiration,  often  very  fetid,  on  the  least  movement,  or  on  the 
least  fatigue,  even  from  speaking.— Nocturnal  sweat,  sometimes  fetid.— Quo- 
tidian fever ;  shaking  chill  in  the  evening ;  an  hour  afterwards  heat  in  the 
face,  and  cold  in  the  feet,  without  any  subsequent  perspiration. 


Gratiola. 

Gratiola  officinalis.  Hedge  Hyssop.  "The  Herb  of  Grace."  N.  0. 
Scrophulariaceae  (grows  in  moist  places).  Tincture  of  fresh 
plant  before  flowering. 

OlialoaL — Cholera.  Coccygodynia.  Constipation.  Cramps.  Diarrhoea. 
Dropsy.  Eves,  affections  of.  Gastralgia.  Gout.  Haemorrhoids.  Headache. 
Hydrocephalus.  Hypochondriasis.  Hysteria.  Mania.  Masturbation.  Mesenteric 
glands,  affections  of.    Neuralgia.    Nymphomania.    Tetanus.    Vision,  disordered. 

CharaoteriBtios. — Graiiola  is  one  of  the  most  important  members 
of  the  great  Scrophularian  group — DigiU^  Euphras,,  Tabac,,  Scroph. — 
and  should  be  carefully  studied  with  these.  A  large  proportion  of  the 
effects  of  Gratiola  are  expended  on  the  gastro-intestinal  tract.  It  is  an 
inodorous  plant,  of  bitter  taste,  and  very  poisonous,  causing  violent 
colic,  diarrhoea,  bloody  stools,  enteritis,  jaundice,  trembling  of  ex- 
tremities, convulsions,  cramps,  excitement  and  disordered  condition  of 
the  sexual  powers,  and  death.  Symptoms  of  a  fully  developed,  rapid 
attack  of  Asiatic  cholera  are  produced.  On  the  other  band,  the  mind 
is  strongly  affected.  Peevishness,  Ul-humour^  irresolute;  hysterical; 
cerebrai  affections  without  fever.  It  is  useful  in  mental  troubles  from 
overweening  pride.  Teste  considers  Graiiola  the  Chamom,  of  chronic 
diseases.  There  is  <  during  and  after  eating :  vertigo  during  and 
after  a  meal.  Hunger  after  a  meal  with  feeling  of  emptiness.  The 
diarrhoea  is  yellowish,  gushing,  watery,  as  though  rushing  from  a 
hydrant.    There  is  also  vomiting  of  yellowish  fluid.    Summer  diar- 


846  GRATIOLA 

rhoea  from  excessive  drinking  of  water  whether  cold  or  hot  Sore- 
ness, burning  or  irritation  of  anus  follows  the  stools.  Two  excellent 
cures  with  Graiiola  have  been  recorded  by  C.  W.  Sonnenschmidt 
{H.  /?.,  xi.  547).  (i)  Mrs.  C,  53,  attacked  in  June  with  diarrhcea; 
yellow,  watery,  frothy  stools  gushing  out  with  force.  Severe  cutting 
pains  in  abdomen ;  rumbling  of  flatulence.  Occasional  nausea  and 
vomiting.  Cohc.  and  Ipec,  failed  to  relieve  ;  then  on  dose  inquiry  it 
was  elicited  that ''  a  cold  feeling  in  the  atxlomen  "  had  been  a  feature 
throughout  GraL  off.  3,  cured  promptly.  (2)  A  three-weeks*  old 
infant  was  attacked  with  diarrhcea  and  colic.  There  were  two  or 
three  passages  in  quick  succession,  and  then  an  interval  of  an  hour  or 
two.  Passages  green  or  yellow,  watery,  frothy,  expelled  suddenly  ; 
nausea,  vomiting,  severe  pain  before  stools,  relieved  after,  for  a  short 
time.  Cham,,  co/oc,  VeraL  failed  and  GraL  rapidly  cured.  It  also 
removed  in  this  case  ''redness  around  anus,  and  on  one  side  an 
abrasion  of  half  an  inch  in  extent,  which  caused  some  oozing  of 
blood."  E.  E.  Case  {Med.  Adv.,  xxix.  343)  cured  a  woman,  aet.  50,  of 
haemorrhoids  with  the  following  symptoms  :  (i)  Constipation,  dimcult 
stools.  (2)  External  piles  from  any  exertion  and  after  stool.  (3) 
Biting,  stinging  tension  in  tumours.  (4)  During  stool,  a  sensation  as 
if  the  rectd  membrane  was  torn.  (5)  After  stool,  all  the  nerves  of 
the  pelvis  seem  in  a  high  state  of  tension  ;  the  flesh  on  the  perineum 
feels  as  if  torn  from  the  bone.  [Compare  ''Wrenching  pain  in 
coccyx."]  Sleepless  before  midnight ;  peevish  ;  melancholy.  GraL 
200  cured.  Cooper  has  used  it  wim  great  success  in  a  case  of  goufy 
acidity  with  great  constipation  ;  and  in  the  constipation  of  cancer.  He 
regards  it  as  "  the  vegetable  antacid."  It  is  said  to  have  formed  the 
basis  for  a  once  famous  nostrum  for  gout,  "Eau  Medicinale." 
Indications  are:  Constant  sinking  but  cannot  eat;  bitter  taste. 
The  affection  of  the  solar  plexus  is  very  marked  ;  cramps  beginning 
at  pit  of  stomach,  and  pains  radiating  therefrom;  anxiety  ;  gnaiiving; 
empty  feeling ;  rolling  about  in  epigastric  region.  Urine  is  diminished, 
reddish,  turbid.  Buvier,  says  Teste,  saw  four  cases  of  nymphomania 
in  females  to  whom  herb-doctors  had  given  injections  of  a  decoction 
of  freshly  gathered  Graiiola.  Burnett  considers  it  specific  in 
female  masturbation  and  nymphomania.  A  number  of  pains 
are  experienced  in  the  coccyx.  ChiUy ;  shuddering  on  entering 
a  warm  room.  Heat  ascending  to  face,  with  redness  and  increased 
external  warmth.  Constant  vaporous  exhalation  from  body.  Sensa- 
tions :  as  if  brain  contracted  ;  as  if  head  grew  smaller ;  as  if  brain 
would  fall  forward  ;  as  if  sand  in  eyes  ;  as  itthroat  contracted  ;  as  if  a 
stone  rolling  from  side  to  side  in  stomach.  The  left  side  is  more 
affected  than  the  right.  The  head  and  eye  symptoms  are  of  the  first 
importance.  Rush  of  blood  to  head  with  vanishing  of  sight  I  consider 
a  keynote.  With  GraL  30. 1  cured  this  symptom  in  a  patient :  "  Some- 
times everything  seems  to  assume  a  yellowish  tint,  and  occasionally, 
when  I  have  been  taking  notes,  a  rush  of  blood  to  my  head  seems  to 
shut  the  book  from  my  sight  and  for  the  moment  I  have  been  unatde 
to  follow  the  speaker  by  writing  although  I  could  by  thought''  Motion 
<  ;  rest  >.  >  In  open  air ;  <  in  warm  room  (some  headaches^and 
vertigo  have  the  opposite  modality).    CofiFee  ss  neuralgia. 


GRATIOLA  847 

Belaiioiuu — Antidoted  by :  Caust.,  Bell.,  Euphorb.,  Nux  v.  It 
antidotes  :  lodum.  Compare  :  Apis,  Bell.,  Helleh.,  Cham.,  Nux  v., 
£lat.  Pod.  Hunger  after  meals  with  feeling  of  emptiness,  Lauro., 
Calc,  Cascaril.,  Chi.,  Cin.  ;  (emptiness  after  stool^  PetroL) ;  vanishing 
of  sight  and  headache,  Gels. ;  botanical,  Dig.,  Tab.,  Euphr.,  Scroph. 

Causation. — ^Abuse  of  coffee. 

BTMPTOMB. 

I.  Mind. — Serious,  taciturn^  absorbed  in  reverie. — Self -concentration.— 
Irresolute,  want  of  perseverance. — Ill-humour,  tired  of  life,  apprehensive  of 
the  future;  hysteria;  hypochondriasis. — Loquacity  and  gaiety. 

a.  Head. — ^Whirling  vertigo  on  shutting  the  eyes.— Vertigo  when  read- 
ing, and  when  seated,  as  if  the  head  were  waving  backwards  and  forwards. — 
Headache,  with  nausea  and  drowsiness. — Intoxicated  feeling  during  and  after 
a  meal. — Rush  of  blood  to  the  head  and  feeling  as  if  intoxicated  in  whole 
brain. — ^Violent  rush  of  blood  to  head,  with  throbbing  in  forehead  amounting 
to  vertigo,  with  blackness  before  the  eyes ;  <  by  motion,  esp.  nding,  in- 
creasing even  to  loss  of  consciousness,  only  disappearing  after  several  hours' 
sleep. — Pressive  headache,  esp.  in  the  forehead  and  occiput<--Lancinating 
and  pulsative  headache.---Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  forehead,  as  if  the 
brain  would  fall  forward,  with  stoppage  of  the  nose. — Sensation  as  if  the  head 
were  shrinking  from  contraction  of  the  brain. — Sudden  attack ;  sudden  vibration 
in  the  head,  which  suspends  the  senses  of  sight  and  hearing. — ^The  headache 
is  <  when  rising  from  a  seat,  during  movement,  and  while  walking  in  the 
open  air. — ^The  head  is  very  sensitive  to  cold. — Heat  in  the  head,  on  raising 
the  head. — ^Tightness  in  the  forehead  with  wrinkles  in  the  skin. 

3.  £yes.~Itching,  quivering,  and  sensation  of  weakness  in  eyelids. — 
Itching  of  eyelashes. — ^The  eyes  feel  dry  and  as  if  sand  were  in  them. — Burn- 
ing pain  and  pressure  on  the  eyes. — Eyes  watery  and  weak  when  reading. — 
Mist  before  eyes,  when  reading  or  writing. — Myopia  on  reading. — Sees  distant 
objects  better  than  near  ones. — ^While  writing,  or  looking  at  light  objects,  sight 
suddenly  vanishes ;  >  by  closing  eyes,  but  constantly  returns. — ^All  objects 
seem  white  on  opening  the  eyes,  even  green  trees  and  turf. 

4.  Ears. — ^Tearing  and  sheetings  in  ears. — Itching  of  the  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Frequent  sneezings,  with  shootings  in  1.  side  of  the  chest 
and  of  the  hypochondria. — Stoppage  of  the  nose. — Smarting-itching  in  1. 
nostril. — Pressure  at  upper  part  of  nose. 

6.  Face. — Burning  heat  and  redness  of  the  face. — ^Tingling-buming  in 
malar  bones. — Sensation  of  tension  in  the  face  ;  it  feels  swollen. — Swelling  of 
upper  lip  (every  morning,  with  stinging). — ^Tearing  on  one  side  of  face. — 
Painful  crack  in  L  side  of  chin. 

7.  Teeth. — Nocturnal  tearing  or  piercing  in  the  molars. — Sensation  of 
cold  in  the  teeth. 

8.  Mottth.— -Accumulation  of  much  saliva  in  the  mouth.— Accumula- 
tion of  clear  water  in  the  mouth.--Mouth  bitter  or  clammy.— Tongue  rough, 
covered  with  mucus. — Fetid  breath  in  the  morning  after  waking. 

g.  Throat.— Pressure  in  throat,  as  from  thick  mucus.— Accumulation 
of  mucus  in  throat. — Pain  in  throat  obliging  one  to  swallow  constantly ;  the 
swallowing  is  difiBcnlt,  as  if  the  throat  were  contracted ;  <  during  empty 


848  GRATIOLA 

deglatition. — Stinging  in  throat  (1.  side). — ^Tingling,  rottghness,  and  scraping 
in  throat — Phlegm  in  throat,  with  inability  to  throw  it  off. 

10.  Appetite. — Gnawing,  as  from  hunger  after  eating. — Constant  sinking 
at  epigastrium,  but  cannot  eat. — Hunger,  sometimes  with  loathing  and  horror 
of  all  food. — Increased  thirst 

11.  Stomach. — Bitter  or  sweetish  risings. — Ineffectual  efforts  to  eruc- 
tate, with  pressure  from  stomach  to  throat,  which  suspends  respiration.— 
Empty  or  cold  feeling  in  stomach. — Hiccough. — Regurgitation  of  bitter 
^(^ter.-^Constant  nausea,  with  retching. — Nausea,  with  cold  in  the  abdomen. 
— ^Vomiting,  with  stoppage  of  the  nose. — Bilious  vomiting,  or  vomiting  of  acid 
or  bitter  substances. — Uneasiness,  and  sensation  of  fulness  in  stomadL— 
Pressure  on  the  stomach  after  a  meal,  with  nausea. — Searching  and  dig- 
ging in  the  stomach,  with  inclination  to  vomit — Pressure  on  the  epigastrium 
after  a  meal,  as  from  a  stone ;  which  moves  back  and  forth. — ^The  sufferings 
of  the  stomach  and  of  the  epigastrium  are  often  accompanied  by  nausea,  or 
ineffectual  efforts  at  eructation. — Paroxysms  of  inclination  to  vomit,  > 
by  eructations. — Rolling  about  in  epigastrium. 

18.  Abdomen. — Shooting  pains  in  the  abdomen. — Beatings  in  1.  hypo- 
chondrium  (heating  pain,  burning).-^Pressive  pain  in  abdomen,  with  pindi- 
ings  (in  umbilical  region),  which  force  the  patient  to  bend  double  (>  by  the 
emission  of  flatulence). — Inflation  of  the  abdomen. — Flatulent  and  pressive 
colic,  with  nausea  and  disagreeable  risings. — Rumbling,  with  nausea,  eructa- 
tion, and  vertigo. — Feeling  of  coldness  in  abdomen,  lasting  half  an  hour. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Urgent  and  fruitless  want  to  evacuate.— 
Constipation. — ^Faeces,  hard,  scanty,  and  tenacious,  expelled  with  great  effort 
— Nocturnal  slimy  diarrhoea,  with  tenesmus. — Diarrhoea  :  stools,  watery 
yellow-green,  succeeded  by  burning  at  the  anus ;  green  frothy,  coming  out 
with  great  force. — Stools  with  burning  and  protrusion  of  large  stinging- 
burning  tumours. — Passage  of  faeces  without  being  conscious  of  it — Discharge 
of  ascahdes. — Pain,  as  from  excoriation  in  the  rectum. — Burning  pain  in  the 
rectum,  during  and  after  the  evacuation. — Shootings,  itching,  smarting,  and 
throbbing  in  the  anus. — Blind  haemorrhoids. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Diminished  secretion  of  urine. — Scanty  and 
reddish  urine,  which  becomes  turbid  on  standing,  with  cloudy  sediment- 
Burning  in  the  urethra  during  and  after  micturition. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Stitches  in  1.  spermatic  cord,  ascending 
through  the  abdomen  up  to  the  chest. — Painful  rigidity  of  the  penis  after 
pollutions.— Drawing  pain  in  glans. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Catamenia  premature,  too  profuse,  and 
of  too  long  duration. — Masturbation. — Nymphomania. — ^Irritable  condition  of 
sexual  organs,  with  congestions. — Shootings  in  r.  breast,  <  on  rising,  during 
menses. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Dry  cough,  excited  by  a  sensation  of 
roughness  in  the  chest,  esp.  in  the  morning  or  at  night — Nocturnal  cough, 
with  pain  as  from  excoriation  in  the  trachea,  oppression  of  the  chest  and 
shivering.— Choking  when  ascending. 

18.  Chest.— Heat  in  the  chest,  then  the  head  and  hands,  with  redness  of 
the  face.— Pressure  on  the  chest — Shootings  in  the  chest  on  breathing.— 
— Pimples  on  the  chest,  which  burn  after  having  been  scratched. 


GRINDELIA  849 

xg.  Heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart. — Violent  palpitation,  particularly 
immediately  after  a  stool,  and  with  oppression  of  the  chest. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Sensation  as  if  the  neck  were  seized  with  the 
hands. — Darting  from  the  1.  scapula  to  the  shoulder  and  mamma. — Sticking 
pain  in  lower  dorsal  vertebrae ;  in  r.  kidney. — Bruised  pain  in  loins. — Painful 
cramps  in  coccyx. — Pressive  or  wrenching  pain  in  cocc3rx  after  stool. 

S8  Upper  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  shoulders,  arms,  fingers, 
particularly  in  elbow  and  wrist-joint. — Itching  in  the  palm  of  the  (r.)  hand. 

83  Lower  Limbs.— Bruised  pain  in  the  thigh,  after  a  short  walk. — 
Lancinating  tearing  in  tibia  when  sitting,  disappearing  when  walking.— 
Smarting  itching  on  tibia. — Shootings  in  legs  and  feet. 

94.  Generalities. — ^Tearing  in  the  limbs. — ^Tetanus,  with  full  conscious- 
ness while  lying  down  after  a  meal,  followed  by  a  deep  sleep  with  emission 
of  semen ;  bruised  feeling  of  the  body,  back  and  1.  arm  on  waking. — ^The 
majority  of  symptoms  appear  at  night,  or  when  sitting,  and  after  rising  from 
a  seat,  or  in  the  open  air  ;  contact  >  them. — Great  languor  and  prostration. 
— Great  loquacity  and  gaiety. 

85.  Skin.  — Itching,  with  burning  after  scratching. — Running  and  corrosive 
eruptions,  which  resemble  scabies. 

86.  Sleep. — Irresistible  drowsiness  with  yawning. — Great  drowsiness, 
with  frequent  yawning  and  inclination  to  lie  down,  esp.  in  the  afternoon. — 
Deep  sleep,  like  stupor. 

87.  Fever. — Pulse  small,  intermitteht — Great  tendency  to  chilliness. — 
Chilliness  in  a  warm  room,  during  sleep,  after  an  evacuation ;  with  the 
hair  standing  on  end. — Heat  ascending  to  the  face,  with  redness  and 
increased  external  warmth. — Constant  vaporous  exhalation  from  the  body. 


Grindelia. 

Grindelia  robusta  and  Grindelia  squarrosa.  N.  0.  Compositae.  The 
Grindeliae  are  a  genus  of  asteroid  composites  growing  on  the 
Pacific  coast  and  inland  on  the  mountains.  The  terminal 
heads  of  yellow  flowers  and  the  leaves  are  usually  covered 
with  a  viscid  balsamic  secretion,  from  which  they  have  been 
called  **  gum  plants."  A  tincture  is  made  of  the  leaves  and 
unexpanded  flowers.  Bundy's  proving  of  G.  squarrosa  was 
made  with  a  tincture  of  the  dried  plant. 

CUiiiieaL— -Asthma.  Bites.  Bronchitis.  Cheyne-Stokes  breathing.  Conjunc- 
tivitis. Emphysema.  Erythema.  Eyes,  pains  in.  Glaucoma.  Heart,  affections  of. 
Iritis.  Itching.  Liver,  pain  in.  Pruritus  vulvae,  pruritus  vaginae.  Rhus-poisoning. 
Spleen,  pain  in.    Ulcers. 

GharaoteriBtiOB.— Following  Hering  I  have  not  thought  it  neces- 
sary to  separate  the  two  Grindelias  which  have  been  used  in  homoeo- 
pathy, but,  as  far  as  possible,  I  shall  indicate  the  species  used  in  any 
definite  experience.  Several  species  have  been  used  in  cases  of 
asthma,  bronchitis,  /Mfis-poisoning  and  heart  and  skin  affections. 
VOL  L  55 


850  GRINDELIA 

The  only  proving  is  by  Dr.  T.  H  Bundy,  who  took  a  teaspoonfol  of  a 
tincture  of  the  dried  plant  of  G.  squarrosa  and  in  half  an  hoar 
followed  it  by  another,  with  the  result  that  he  produced  some  in- 
tensely severe  pains  in  head  and  eves  (left  then  right),  and  symptoms 
in  liver,  spleen,  nervous  system  and  lungs,  and  altogether  passed  "the 
most  terrible  night  of  his  life."  The  proving  is  remarkable  for  the 
number  of  peculiar  symptoms  induced.  First  there  was  ''  fulness  in 
head  as  after  a  heavy  dose  of  quinine."  Then  intense  pain  in  left 
eye  and  right  knee-ioint  exactly  like  acute  rheumatism.  The  knee 
pain  lasted  only  half  an  hour  and  then  the  third  teaspoonful  was 
taken.  The  eye-pain  became  most  aj^onising,  the  pupil  became 
widely  dilated.  It  was  two  hours  before  the  right  eye  became 
afiFected  and  then  the  misery  was  doubled.  At  this  time  unlxouable  pain 
in  whole  of  liver  and  spleen  came  on,  so  severe  it  was  impossible  to 
lie  still  a  moment,  with  intense  soreness  of  the  region  affected  like 
that  of  acute  rheumatism.  The  eye  pains  were  in  the  balls  of  the  eyes 
running  directly  back  into  brain,  much  <  by  movement.  There  was 
a  kind  of  paralysis  of  the  vagus  nerve :  on  falling  asleep  the  respi- 
ratory movement  would  cease  and  would  not  be  resumed  until  he 
waked  up  from  the  resulting  suffocation.  In  the  clinical  experiences 
recorded  it  is  the  Robusta  which  is  chiefly  mentioned,  though  some- 
times it  is  not  specified  which.  One  writer  obtained  excellent  results 
from  "  Grinddia "  in  a  number  of  cases  of  asthma  and  emphysema 
with  dilated  heart.  H.  W.  Foster  reported  the  cure  of  a  case  of 
asthma  with  G.  robusta  which  shows  that  Dr.  Bund/s  proving  of  G. 
squarrosa  is  good  for  each  drug.  (Hering  erroneously  gives  Bundy's 
proving  under  the  heading  "Grindelia  robusta.")  Dr.  Foster's 
p>atient  was  awakened  by  asthmatic  attacks,  the  room  seeming  too 
small.  After  getting  quiet,  just  as  he  would  conmience  to  lose  him- 
self in  sleep  he  would  suddenly  awaken  again  because  he  seemed  to 
have  forrotten  to  breathe.  GrifuL  r..  30  relieved  at  once.  Gatchell 
found  a  lotion  of  Grinddia  robusta  0.  (one  part  to  ten  of  water)  a 
sovereign  application  in  itching  or  painful  erjrthematous  eruptions.  It 
is  also  useful  for  bites  and  stings  of  insects.  It  removed  aversion  to 
darkness  in  one  patient,  who  wanted  a  light  in  the  room  all  ni^t 
Symptoms  are  <  by  movement;  <  in  the  dark;  <  on  fedling 
asleep. 

Belaiioilt. — It  antidotes :  Rhus.  Compare :  Anun.  mur.,  Ant.  t., 
Kali  bi. ;  Lach.  (  <  from  sleep  ;  left  then  right) ;  Gels.  (  <  from 
sleep).  Gels,  has  waking  up  feeling  the  heart  has  stopped,  must  keep 
moving  to  keep  it  going  ;  Grind,  feels  respiration  has  stopped  ;  Stram. 
(fear  of  the  dark).  Op.,  Lach.,  Carb.  an.  (fears  to  go  to  sleep.) 
Dyspnoea  on  falling  asleep  :  Am.  c,  Ant  t.  Arum  t.,  Badiag.,  Bry., 
Cadm.  s.,  Carb.  an.,  Carb.  v.,  Graph.,  Lach.,  Nux  m.,  Op.,  Ran.  b., 
and  both  the  Grindelias. 

8TMPT0MB. 

2.  Head. — Terrible  fulness  in  head»  as  though  from  quinine  (S). 

3.  Eyes. — Conjunctiva  injected,  eyes  look  as  in  congestion  of  brain. — 
Pain  in  eyeballs  running  directly  back  to  brain,  <  from  moving  eyes. — Pain 


GUACO  851 

in  1.  eye  and  r.  knee  like  rheumatism ;  pain  in  knee  did  not  last  more  than 
half  an  hour,  but  that  in  the  eye  became  more  intense,  pupil  becoming 
dilated;  two  hours  later  r.  eye  became  affected  in  the  same  way  (S). — 
Purulent  ophthalmia. — Iritis :  traumatic ;  from  cold ;  metastasis  of  rheu- 
matism ;  the  pain  is  intense,  the  fever  high. 

18.  Abdomen. — Unbearable  pain  in  region  of  liver  and  spleen,  so 
severe  he  cannot  lie  still  a  moment ;  soreness  like  that  of  acute  rheumatism 
in  the  same  region  (S). 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Orj^ana — Pruritus  of  vagina  and  vulva,  whether 
from  leucorrhoea,  or  aphthas,  or  of  venous  origin  (R). 

17.  Respiratory  .Organs. — Fear  of  going  to  sleep  on  account  of  loss  of 
breath  which  awakens  him  (S). — On  falling  asleep  respiratory  movement 
ceases,  and  is  not  resumed  until  awakened  by  sufiEocation  resulting. — Humid 
asthma  from  catarrhal  bronchitis. — Cardiac  asthma. — Cough  from  reflex 
causes. — Much  tenacious  mucus  difficult  to  detach. 

85.  Skin. — Epidermic  rash  like  roseola,  suffusing  face,  neck,  and  often 
the  whole  body,  with  severe  burning  and  itching  (R). — Irritable  eruptions, 
papular  or  vesicular  (R). — Ulcers  of  leg  with  fetid  secretion,  pain,  much 
swollen  purplish  black  skin  (R). 


Guaco. 

Mikania  guaco  (a  climbing  composite  of  Tropical  America).    N.  O. 
Compositae.    Tincture  or  decoction  of  leaves. 

CUniosL— Cholera.   Diarrhoea.    Hydrophobia.   Leucorrhoea.   Paralysis.   Phos- 
pbaturia.    Rheumatism.    Spine,  a£Fections  of.    Tongue,  paralysis  of. 

Charaoterisiics. — Guaco  has  a  local  repute  as  a  remedy  for  the 
bites  of  serpents,  for  hydrophobia,  cholera,  and  cancer.  In  the 
homoeopathic  provines  rice-water  stools  occurred ;  and  difficulty  of 
swallowing  as  in  hydrophobia.  One  proving  also  showed  an  action 
on  the  bladder  and  urinary  organs,  producing  excess  of  phosphates. 
A  lady  who  took  a  decoction  for  four  months  steadily,  was  obliged  to 
discontinue  h&cause  it  produced :  Copious,  corrosive,  putrid  leucor- 
rhoea, causing  great  debility,  tanning  the  inside  of  the  thighs  and 
staining  linen  yellow.  She  felt  as  u  fire  was  running  out  of  her. 
Terrible  itching  and  smarting.  Another  prover  had  severe  spinal  and 
occipi^  pains  ;  paresis  of  tongue  and  difficult  deglutition.  Burning 
and  tearing  in  soles.  Pains  as  if  beaten.  Pains  extend  to  other 
parts,  mostly  from  above  downwards.     <  At  night.    Motion  <. 

fialitionB. — Antidoted  by :  Kre.  and  Sul.  (leucorrhoea).  Compare: 
Alum.,  Bell,  (menstrual  flow  feels  hot)  ;  Flios.  ac.  (phosphaturia). 
Leucorrhcea  staining  yellow,  Carb.  an.,  Kre.,  Nit.  ac. 

BTMPTOMB. 

I.    Mind. — ^An  excited  condition. 

8.  Head. — Severe  aching  in  occiput  which  sometimes  extends  over 
upper  half  of  back.— Headache  and  heat  of  head. 


852  GUAIACUM 

4.    Ears.-— Deafness. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  heavy,  difficult  to  move. 

9.  Throat. — Difficult  deglutition. 

12.  Abdomen. — Pain  and  rumbling  in  bowels  followed  by  watery 
stools. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — ^Awakened  4  a.m.  with  pain  and  sudden  call 
to  stool  of  dark  brown  fsecal  matter,  thin  and  watery.  Slept  till  6,  when  he 
had  another  stool,  sudden,  forcible,  profuse,  with  appearance  as  of  rice-water; 
some  pain  in  back  afterwards,  with  feeling  of  weakness  and  fatigue. — 
Congestion  of  haemorrhoidal  vessels. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Unusual  flow  of  urine  with  excess  of  phosphates ; 
pain  over  region  of  bladder  and  weight  and  weariness  through  hips  and  loins. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Leucorrhoea,  copious,  corrosive,  debili- 
tating ;  tanning  thighs,  staining  linen  yellow ;  felt  as  if  fire  running  out  of 
her  ;  terrible  itching  <  at  night. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Constriction  of  larynx  and  trachea. 

20.  Neck  and  Back. — Burning  in  nape  extending  to  shoulders. — ^Tearing 
stifiFness,  drawing-tearing  extending  to  axilla. — Drawing-tearing  in  and  between 
scapulae  extending  into  forearm. — Frequent  fine  stitches,  tearing  and  violent 
drawing  pains  along  spine,  <  bending. — ^Aching  and  pressure  forward  in  the 
lumbo-sacral  region. — ^Weight  and  weariness  through  hips  and  loins. — Pain 
in  sacrum  and  back  with  feeling  of  weakness  and  fatigue  (after  diarrhoea). 

S8.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Aching  drawing  and  simple  drawing  pains  in  deltoid 
with  a  paralysed  sensation  extending  to  forearm. — ^Tearing  and  dislocation 
pains  in  shoulders  extending  to  forearm. — Burning  in  shoulder-joint — 
Tearing  in  elbows  and  fingers. 

83.  Lower  Limbs. — Soreness  and  pains  as  if  beaten  about  hip-joint— 
Drawing  in  thigh. — Drawing  and  swollen  feeling  in  calves. — Uneasiness  and 
drawing  in  legs. — Tearing  in  ankle-joints. — Burning  and  tearing  in  soles. 


Guaiaomn. 

Gum  goaiacum.  Guaiacum  officinale.  The  gum-resin  of  Lignum 
sanctum  or  Lignum  vitas,  a  large  tree  growing  in  W.  Indies. 
N,  O,  Zygophyllaceae.    Tincture  of  the  gum-resin. 

OUnlosl. — Abscess.  Amenorrhoea.  Aneurism.  Bonea,  affections  of.  Bronchitis. 
Caries.  Cholera  infantum.  Constipation.  Contraction.  Cough,  Diarrhcea. 
Diphtheria.  Dysmenorrhoea.  Earache.  Emaciation.  Fever.  Gout  Growing- 
pains.  Headache,  internal  and  external.  Hernia.  Membranous  dysmenorrhoea. 
Mercury,  effects  of.  Neuralgia.  Osteomalachia.  Otitis.  Ovaries,  inflammatioD 
of.  Phthisis.  Pleurisy.  Pleurodynia.  Rheumatism.  Sciatica.  Stomach,  affec- 
tions of.  Syphilis.  Throat,  affections  of.  Tonsillitis.  Toothache.  Torticollis. 
Vomiting. 

Charaeteristics. — Guaiacum j  which  is  one  of  Hahnemann's  anti- 
psorics,  is  best  known  as  a  remedy  in  gout  and  rheumatism  and  as  a 
diuretic,  but  latterly  it  has  also  taken  a  place  in  old-school  thera- 
peutics as  a  remedy  for  consumption.  Homoeopathic  provings  have 
developed  and  defined  the  sphere  of  its  utility  in  all  these  respects 


GUAIACUM  853 

and  many  more.  It  acts  on  mucous  membranes,  muscles,  joints  and 
bones,  and  causes  contraction  of  tendons  with  resulting  deformity. 
Gouty^odosities  on  joints.  Verwey  (H.  /?.,  ix.,  627)  treated  a  lady  who 
for  several  years  had  a  frequently  recurring  gouty  inflammation  of 
the  Imees.  Guai,  30  was  given  (after  Chi.  30  had  failed  to  relieve) 
without  obvious  benefit.  Guai,  1  was  now  given  and  after  a  few 
hours  the  swelling  broke  and  the  pains  quickly  subsided.  A  short 
time  after,  the  same  patient  accidentally  injured  the  same  knee.  Under 
Guai.  1  the  swelling  soon  broke  and  the  pain  was  relieved.  But  an 
abscess  formed  at  the  same  time  on  the  upper  thigh.  The  pain  became 
unbearable  and  the  patient's  husband  ''  begged  for  more  of  the  drops 
that  had  twice  before  made  the  swelling  break."  It  was  again  given 
and  in  six  hours  the  abscess  evacuated.  On  two  later  occasions  Dr. 
Verwey  saw  Guai.  act  in  the  same  way  on  scrofulous  and  gouty 
abscesses.  This  is  probably  analogous  to  its  action  in  quinsy.  In 
cases  indicating  Guaiac.  the  affected  parts  are  very  sensitive  to  touch, 
and  there  is  <  from  heat.  Rheumatism  in  syphilitic  and  mercurial 
patients.  Acute  tonsillitis,  simple  or  rheumatic.  Syphilitic  sore  throat. 
"  Bmning  in  the  throat"  is  the  keynote  symptom  of  most  cases  of 
sore  throat.  It  was  first  recommended  by  Brinton  in  the  Lancet  in 
1857  for  quinsy  ;  was  given  in  full  doses  and  produced  a  crisis  of 
sweat  and  profuse  urination.  Ozanam  gave  it  in  the  ist,  2nd,  and 
3rd  centesimal  dilutions  and  found  that  he  got  the  curative  effects 
without  crisis,  which  was  an  unnecessary  effect  of  the  drug.  Guaic, 
says  Ozanam,  seems  to  combine  the  properties  of  Bell.y  Apis,  and 
Bar.  c.  It  has  the  erythematous  or  inflammatory  angina  with  bright 
redness  of  Bell.;  the  oedema  of  Apis;  and  the  phlegmon  with 
tendency  to  suppuration  of  tonsils  of  Bar.  c.  and  Apis  {H.  /?.,  ii.  217). 
Proell  records  the  cure  of  a  case  of  secondary  syphilis  in  a  gentleman 
who  had  inflammation  of  the  palate  supervening  on  hard  chancre. 
The  isolated,  sore,  red  spots  threatened  to  extend  deeper  and  perforate. 
Merc.  cor.  3X,  Nit.  ac.  3,  Aur.  mur.  3,  and  Mez.  3  were  given  in 
succession,  each  for  one  or  two  weeks,  without  avail.  The  syphilitic 
imflammation  continued  to  spread,  the  brain  became  affected  as 
shown  in  confusion  of  thought,  remarkable  depression  of  spirits  and 
weakness  of  memory.  Guaiac.  3X  was  now  given,  and  even  on  the 
next  day  improvement  was  noticable.  In  fourteen  days  the  whole 
trouble  had  vanished,  the  mind  was  clear,  cheerfulness  and  memory 
returned  and  remained  {H.  R.,  i.  109).  The  growing  pains  of 
children  are  relieved  by  it.  The  secretions  of  Guaiac.  are  very 
offensive.  Burning  sensations  in  mouth,  throat,  and  stomach, 
stitches  in  chest  going  from  front  to  back,  or  from  below  upward ; 
in  region  of  apex ;  <  from  motion  and  from  deep  inspiration : 
"  Sharp  pain  about  mid-day  under  right  breast  to  shoulder "  was 
removed  in  a  case  of  mine  by  Guaiac. 

The  mental  state  is  one  of  weakness:  weak  memory  and  disinclina- 
tion to  labour.  Sad  and  depressed.  Fretful,  obstinate,  sharp  stitches 
in  brain.  Sensation  as  if  the  brain  were  loose.  Neuralgia  of  left  side 
of  head  and  face,  extending  to  neck.  External  headache,  with  sensa- 
tion as  if  blood-vessels  were  over-filled  ;  extending  to  face  and  neck. 
Tearing  pains  in  skull.    Swellings  and  sensation  of  swelling  in  eyes 


854  GUAIACUM 

and  nose.  Eyes  feel  protruded.  Houghton  cured  with  Guaiac.  3X 
a  case  of  gouty  inflammation  of  the  meatus  of  the  ear  and  tympanum 
after  failure  with  Fcr.  ph.  Concomitant  rheumatic  lameness  and  sore- 
ness led  him  to  Guaiac.  Heat,  swelling  and  blotchiness  of  face. 
Prosopalgia  every  day  from  6  p.m.  to  4  a.m.  Toothache  when  biting 
jaws  together.  '^  Violent  hunger,  afternoon  and  evening  '*  shows  its 
relation  to  the  ''sinking"  sensations  of  Sulphur  and  the  antipsorics. 
There  is  a  desire  for  apples  which  >  gastric  symptoms  ;  and  aversion 
to  milk  and  food  generally.  Flatulence  is  marked.  There  is  nausea 
from  sensation  of  phlegm  in  throat.  "  Every  morning  vomits  a 
mass  of  watery  phlegm  with  great  exertion,  followed  by  great 
exhaustion."  There  is  morning  diarrho&a  with  sldn  dry  and  chilliness. 
In  cholera  infantum  the  face  is  like  that  of  an  old  person.  In  con- 
stipation the  stool  is  hard,  dry,  crumbling,  and  very  offensive. 
Some  marked  symptoms  appear  in  the  urinary  organs :  Continuous 
urging  even  after  urination,  with  profuse  fetid  urine.  Stitches  in 
neck  of  bladder  after  ineffectual  pressure  to  urinate.  Cutting  while 
urinating.  Chilly  crawls  over  mammae.  There  are  many  marked 
symptoms  in  the  respiratory  sphere.  Violent,  spasmodic,  inflam- 
matory affections  of  windpipe  and  larynx,  with  palpitation  preventing 
motion,  or  calling  for  help,  feels  suffocating.  Cough  dry  or  with 
copious  bloody  or  purulent  expectoration  of  very  offensive  odour. 
Contractive  pain  between  scapulae.  Chilliness  in  back.  Yavming 
and  stretching  >  general  ill-feeling.  The  least  motion  <.  After  a 
cold,  has  violent  pains  in  limbs.  Clothes  feel  damp.  On  walking  in 
open  air  has  perspiration  on  head.  Cannot  bear  heat  with  pains  in 
limbs.  Periodicity  is  marked.  Stomach  affection  returns  every 
summer. 

RelationB. — AniidoUd  by:  Nux.  Antidote  to:  Caust.,  Rhus. 
CompatibU :  After  Merc,  (rheumatism,  gout,  and  syphilis)  ;  after 
Sulph.  (in  cholera  infantum) ;  after  Caust.  (in  torticolUs).  Compare : 
Phos.  ac.  (growing  pains) ;  Act.  r.  (pleurodynia  and  tuberculosis)  ; 
Bry.  (chronic  rheumatism  when  the  joints  are  distorted  ;  <  motion  ; 
pleurisy  in  second  stage  of  phthisis) ;  Coloc.  (contractions  after  rheu- 
matism) ;  Caust.  (Guaiac.  is  better  than  Caust.,  which  it  follovrs  weU, 
when  either  gout  or  rheumatism  causes  distortion  of  limbs  <  every 
attempt  at  motion  ;  especially  if  there  are  gouty  nodosities  on  joints) ; 
Araceae  (late  tuberculosis ;  pleuritic  pains  left  apex) ;  Kal.  i.,  Mezer., 
PhytoL,  Rhode,  Stilling. 

STHPTOMS. 

z*  Mind. — Obstinacy. — Strong  desire  to  criticise^  and  to  despise  eveiy- 
thing. — Indolence  and  dread  of  movement. — ^Weakness  of  memory,  and 
excessive  forgetfulness^  esp.  of  names. — Fixed  look,  and  absence  of  ideas^ 
esp.  in  the  morning. 

8.  Head. — Pressive  pain,  extending  from  the  base  of  the  brain  upwards, 
or  traction  and  tearing  in  the  sinciput  and  temples. — Violent  lancinations  in 
the  brain,  from  the  base  upwards. — Tearing  (rheumatic  pains)  in  one  side  of 
the  head  only,  as  far  as  the  cheek. — Pulsations,  throbbings  (and  shootings)  in 
the  temples,  with  sensation  as  if  the  head  were  swollen,  and  the  blood-vessels 


GUAIACUM  855 

congested. — Sensation  as  if  brain  were  detached  and  loose. — Pulsative  throb- 
bing in  the  outer  parts  of  the  head,  with  stitches  in  the  temples ;  removed 
for  a  short  time  by  external  pressure  and  by  walking,  <  by  sitting  and  stand- 
ing.— Lacerating  in  whole  1.  side  of  head. — Neuralgia  1.  side  of  head  and  face 
extending  to  neck. — Sweat  chiefly  on  head  and  forehead  (when  walking  in 
open  air). — ^Tearing  pains  in  skull. 

3.  Eyes. — Sensation  of  swelling,  or  actual  swelling  of  the  eyelids,  with 
sensation  as  if  the  eyes  were  protruding,  and  as  if  the  eyelids  were  too  short. 
— Pupils  dilated. — ^Amaurosis. — Pimples  in  the  eyebrows ;  and  round  eyes. 

4.  Ears. — Tearing  and  squeezing  in  the  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Pains  in  nasal  bones. — Nose  swollen. — Fluent  coryza. 

6.  Face. — Redness  and  painful  swelling  of  the  face. — Shootings  in  the 
cheek-bones  and  in  the  muscles  of  the  cheeks,  as  if  knives  were  plunged  in. — 
Neuralgia  1.  side  of  face,  head  and  nape  6  p.m.  to  4  a.m.  daily. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Aching  in  the  teeth,  on  closing  them.— Pulling  and  tearing 
in  the  teeth,  terminating  in  shootings. 

g.  Throat. — Burning  pain  in  the  throat. — ^Acute  tonsillitis,  r.  tonsil 
much  swollen,  dark-red,  constant  aching  pains,  sharp  stitches  towards  ear  on 
swallowing. — Syphilitic  sore  throat. — Throat  dry,  cannot  swallow  without  a 
drink. 

ID.  Appetite. — Insipid  taste,  with  want  of  appetite,  and  disgust  for 
everything,  accompanied  by  expectoration  of  mucus. — Empty  risings. — Im- 
moderate hunger. — Nausea,  excited  by  a  sensation  as  if  the  throat  were  filled 
with  slimy  mucus. — Repugnance  to  milk. — ^After  eating  without  appetite  she 
gets  sick. 

II.  Stomach. — Burning  in  stomach  and  abdomen. — Cramps  and  pains 
in  stomach. — Every  summer  a  severe  stomach  afFection  with  vomiting  of 
blood. — ^Anxious  sensation  of  constriction  in  the  region  of  the  stomach, 
which  impedes  respiration. 

18.  Abdomen. — Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  incarceration  of 
flatus. — Sensation  of  emptiness,  with  borborygmi,  and  rumbling  in  the 
abdomen. — Pain,  as  from  hernia  in  the  groins. — ^Twitchings  of  the  muscles 
of  the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool. — Diarrhoea  commencing  in  morning,  skin  dry ;  chilly.— Thin 
mucous  stool. — Soft  stool  in  pieces. — Cholera  infantum,  emaciation ;  old- 
looking  face. — Constipation. — Faeces  hard,  crumbling,  and  very  offensive. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Constant  want  to  make  water  (even  after 
urinating)  with  copious  discharge  of  very  fetid  urine. — Incisive  pains  in  the 
urethra,  on  making  water. — Ineffectual  want  to  urinate,  with  shootings  in  the 
neck  of  the  bladder. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Emissions  without  lascivious  dreams. — 
Gonorrhoea-like  discharge. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Subacute  and  chronic  ovaritis,  esp.  in 
rheumatic  women. — ^Amenorrhcea. — Membranous  dysmenorrhoea. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.-^Dry  cough  with  sensation  in  the  epigas- 
trium as  if  there  were  not  sufficient  air  in  it. — Dry  cough,  >  by  detaching  a 
little  mucus. — Cough,  with  expectoration  of  fetid  pus. 

18.  Chest. — Shootings  in  the  (1.  side  of  the)  chest,  <  by  breathing ;  by 
moving  head. — Stitches  from  middle  of  r.  chest,  ending  in  one  below  r.  scapula. 


856  GUARANA 

ig.    Heart.— Palpitation. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Pressure  on  the  vertebrae  of  the  neck.— Sti£Fness 
in  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Constant  frequent  stitches  on  L  side  of  nape*  ex- 
tending from  scapulae  to  occiput,  on  motion,  also  on  holding  head  stilL — 
Stiffness  along  the  back,  on  one  (1.)  side  only,  from  the  neck  extending  to  the 
small  of  the  back  and  sacrum,  intolerable  on  slightest  motion,  or  turning  the 
part,  not  noticed  on  touch  or  during  rest. — ^Tearing  and  shooting  in  one  side 
of  the  back  only. — Contractive  pain  between  the  shoulder-blades. — Corrosive 
itching  in  the  back  (by  day). — Shiverings  in  the  back  in  the  afternoon. 

83.  Upper  Limbs. — ^Weakness  in  the  arms.— Tearing  and  shooting  in 
the  shoulder-blades,  and  in  the  forearms. — Sharp  stitches  in  the  top  of 
r.  shoulder. — Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  arm  from  shoulder  to  wrist. — Lancinating 
rheumatic  pains  from  elbow  to  wrist  (1.). — Rheumatic  pains  in  L  wrist-joint. 
— Stitches  in  r.  thumb. 

93.  Lower  Limbs.— Pains  in  the  bones  of  the  thighs,  pres^ve  and 
tingling  pains  in  the  thighs,  when  seated. — Paralytic  tension  in  the  thighs*  on 
walking. — ^Weakness  in  the  thighs. — Pricking  in  the  nates,  as  if  sitting  on 
needles. — ^Tearing,  drawing  landnations  in  the  leg,  from  r.  tarsus  to  the  knee. 
— ^Tension  in  thighs,  esp.  r.,  as  if  the  muscles  were  too  short,  with  languor 
when  walking ;  <  by  contact,  >  when  sitting. 

24.  Generalities. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  joints.— Arthritic  pains  in 
the  limbs,  with  shootings  and  tearings,  and  contraction  of  the  parts  affected. 
— ^The  pains  are  provoked  by  the  least  movement,  and  are  accompanied  by 
heat  in  the  parts  affected. — Numbness  of  the  limbs. — Painful  weariness  and 
weakness  in  the  arms  and  thighs,  with  dread  of  movement. — Immovable  stiff- 
ness of  the  contracted  limbs. — Frequent  inclination  to  yawn,  and  to  stretch 
the  limbs,  proceeding  from  a  general  sensation  of  uneasiness. — ^The  majority 
of  symptoms  show  themselves,  when  sitting,  as  well  as  in  the  morning  after 
rising,  or  in  the  evening  before  lying  down. — Exostosis. — Consumption. 

26.  Sleep. — Great  drowsiness  in  the  afternoon. — Late  sleeping  and  early 
waking. — Frequent  waking  with  fright,  sometimes  on  going  to  sleep. — Restless 
tossing  during  the  night. — Nightmare,  when  lying  on  the  back,  waking  with 
screams. — Feeling  in  the  morning  as  though  the  sleep  had  been  insufficient 

27.  Fever. — Shivering,  chilliness,  and  shuddering,  even  near  a  fire, 
principally  in  the  afternoon  and  evening. — ^Shivering,  without  thirst,  morn- 
ing and  evening. — Heat  in  the  face,  esp.  in  the  evening. — Sweat  in  the 
morning. — Copious  perspiration,  esp.  on  the  head,  when  walking  in  the 
open  air. — Pulse  accelerated ;  small,  weak,  soft 

Guarana. 

PauUinia  sorbilis.     Brazilian  Cocoa.     N.  O.  Sapindaceas.    Alcoholic 
solution  of  dried  paste  made  from  seeds. 

OliniosL— Alcohol,  effects  of .  Coffee,  effects  of.  Diarrhoea.  Eyelids,  twitching 
of.    Headache. 

Characteristics. — Guarana  is  a  climbing  shrub  of  Brazil,  the 
seeds  of  which  contain  Coffeinc^  and  are  used  by  the  natives  for  making 


GUAREA  857 

a  beverage.  In  medicine  it  has  found  its  principal  use  in  conditions  of 
nervous  ^chaustion  ;  sick  headache  in  those  who  have  abused  tea  and 
coffee,  the  headache  being  followed  by  vomiting  and  excited  by  any 
error  in  diet  or  depression  of  mind.  Throbbing,  congestive  headache 
after  excessive  use  of  liquor.  Persistent  twitching  of  eyelids  is  one 
of  its  indications.    Diarrhcea. 

Relationfl. — Compare :  Agar,  (twitching  of  eyelids) ;  Ign.,  Nux 
in  sick  headache;  Coff.,  Coca.,  Thea. 

BTHPTOHB. 

I.  Mind. — Gaiety;  extravagant  behaviour. — Mental  hyperaesthesia  ; 
intellectual  excitement. 

a.  Head. — Sick  headache  in  those  who  have  abused  tea  and  co£Fee,  or 
in  whom  nervous  headaches  followed  by  vomiting  are  excited  by  any  error  in 
diet  or  depression  of  mind. — ^Throbbing,  congestive  headache  after  excessive 
use  of  alcohol. 

3.    Eyes. — Persistent  twitching  of  eyelids. 

13.  Stool. — Profuse,  green,  odourless  mucous  stools. — Diarrhcea  of 
phthisis. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Spasm  of  bladder. 

34.  Generalities. — Restlessness,  nervousness,  weariness. — Neuralgia. — 
Reduced  vital  powers;  grief;  depression  of  spirits;  loss  of  appetite. — 
Debility  after  prostrating  diseases. — Paralysis. — Chlorosis. 

25.    Skin. — Urticaria. — Prurigo. 


Guarea. 

Guarea  trichilioides.    Red-wood.    Ball-wood.    N,  O.  Meliaceae. 
Tincture  and  trituration  of  bark. 

Clinical. — ^Apoplexy.  Asthma  millari.  BoneSi  affections  of.  Chemosis. 
Dysphagia.  Eyes,  affections  of.  Hernia.  Intermittent  fever.  Liver-spots.  Lupus. 
Pterygium.  Ptosis.  Tongue,  affections  of .  Tonsils,  swollen.  Vertigo.  Whooping- 
cough. 

CSiaraotepistics. — Petroz  is  the  authority  for  this  drug,  which 
produces  a  number  of  symptoms  in  the  eyes,  and  cases  of  chemosis 
and  pterygium  have  been  reported  cured  with  it.  R.  K.  Ghosh 
(H,  R.f  viii.  459)  cured  a  number  of  cases  of  both.  He  foimd  a  lotion 
of  Guarea  ^  (gtt  i.  to  5i.)  of  great  assistance.  In  the  head  there  is  a 
sensation  as  if  the  brain  were  falling  forward  ;  and  a  sensation  as  of 
a  blow  on  the  head  leaving  numbness  and  diminished  thinking  power. 
The  eye  symptoms  alternate  with  diminished  hearing.  A  number  of 
grmptoms  were  experienced  in  the  umbilicus  and  inguinal  rings. 
Flow  of  blood  between  menses.  Pains  in  periosteum.  On  the  skin 
there  were  liver-spots,  and  an  eruption  with  burning  vesicles. 
Sleepy  in  open  air.  Aromatic-smelling  sweat.  Sensations  of 
constriction  are  common.    Sudden  shocks  of  whole  body.    Bruised 


858  GUAREA 

pains.    Acids  and  cold  water  <  ;  hot  drinks,  and  wrapping  warmly  >. 
Sweat  when  eating  or  after.    Bone  pains  <  at  night 

RttlatioiiB. — Bov.  (flow  of  blood  between  menses^  ;  Crotal.  (as  if 
had  a  blow  on  the  head) ;  Anac.  (peg  in  ear) ;  Gels,  (vertigo, 
ptosis) ;  Azadiracta  indica  (botan.)  ;  Apis  Tchemosis,  asthma  millari) ; 
Am.  (injuries) ;  Phos.  (steatoma) ;  Ign.  (nerves) ;  Merc,  and  Silic. 
(bone-pains,  suppuration). 

SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — ^Anxiety. — Fear  of  losing  reason. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo  ;  when  stooping ;  objects  appear  upside  down. — 
Whirling  dizziness. — Sensation  as  if  the  brain  were  failing  forward.— Sensation 
as  if  from  blow  on  the  head,  leaving  a  kind  of  numbness  and  diminished 
thinking  power ;  as  after  apoplectic  seizure. — Constriction,  heaviness,  shocks ; 
in  forehead. — Constriction,  hammering  in  occiput. 

3.  Eyes. — Sickly  look  round  eyes  and  within  orbits, — Swelling  beneatii 
eyes. — Swelling  of  lachrymal  gland. — Pain  in  eyes  during  fever. — Twitching 
of  eyebrows. — Paralysis  of  lids. — Pressure  on  lids. — Lachrymation. — Inflam- 
mation of  conjunctiva,  which  is  swollen. — Pain  in  ball  as  after  weeping. — 
Tearing  pain  in  eyeballs;  tension;  forced-out  feeling. — Pupils  dilated. — 
Objects  appear  grey;  during  vertigo  they  appear  upside  down. — Eye- 
symptoms  alternate  with  diminution  of  hearing. 

4.  Ears. — Swelling  of  periosteum  behind  ears. — Sensation  in  ears  as  of 
a  peg ;  of  a  worm  ;  pushing-out  feeling. — Roaring  in  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Coryza ;  with  hardened  secretion ;  with  heat. — Nose  sta£Fed ; 
ineffectual  desire  to  sneeze ;  constriction  at  root  of  nose. 

6.  Face. — Suppurating  swellings  on  face. — Swelling  of  upper  lip. 

7.  8.  Teeth  and  Mouth. — Pains  in  teeth  accompanied  by  pain  m 
zygoma,  excited  by  draught  of  air,  by  pressure  of  tongue ;  <  lying  on  painful 
side ;  by  hot  food ;  by  walking. — ^Tongue  coated  during  the  fever. — ^Tongue 
coated  greyish  yellow;  swollen;  paralysed;  bleeding. — ^Tongue  feels  oold 
and  dry. — Lancinations  in  tongue. — Mouth  smells  of  cheese. — ^Taste,  sweet — 
Food  tastes  insipid. 

9.  Throat.-— Tonsils  swollen.— (Esophagus :  raw  pain;  sensation  of 
contraction  and  burning  heat — Swallowing  difficult. 

10.  Appetite. — Canine  hunger  in  evening ;  speedy  satiety. — ^Aversion  to 
milk,  fish,  and  hot,  greasy,  cooked  food. 

11.  Stomach. — Sour  eructations  with  tension  and  pressure  at  stomach. 
— Inclination  to  vomit  during  fever.— Vomiting,  sour ;  green. — Stomach  : 
constriction  in ;  bruised  feeling  in. 

12.  Abdomen. — Hardness  at  umbilicus. — ^Abdomen  distended  with 
lancination  in  groins  and  inguinal  ring. — Bruised  pain  externally. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constriction  of  anus  and  rectum, — Urging  to 
stool. — Constipation. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Labour  pains  suppressed. — Lochia 
scanty. — Leucorrhoea  after  menses ;  fetid. — Flow  of  blood  between  menstrual 
periods. — Itching  of  pudenda. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Cough :  dry  barking ;  violent  deep-seated ; 
with  expectoration. — The  cough  is  accompanied  by  sweat,  pain,  soreness. 


GYMNOCLADUS  CANADENSIS  859 

tightness  of  chest ;  comes  after  a  crying  spell ;  on  falling  asleep ;  after  getting 
chilled ;  is  excited  by  itching  in  throaty  by  irritation  in  larynx. — Breathing, 
sobbing;  difEcult  during  chill. — Sensation  of  hoUowness  and  dilatation  of 
chest. — Respiratory  symptoms  <  from  putting  hand  to  throat 

21.  Limbs. — Jactitation  of  limbs. — Cracking  in  joints. — Nightly  pains 
in  bones. — Bruised  pain  in  bones. — Caries. 

94.  Generalities.— Steatoma ;  hot  swelling ;  swelling  of  affected  parts. 
— Suppuration  of  glands. 

25«  Skin. — ^Yellow  spots  on  temples. — Liver-spots  on  arms. — ^Eruptions 
behind  ears. — Herpes. — Itching. — Lupus  of  ochre-red  colour. 

86.  Sleep. — Sleepy  in  open  air. — Dreams,  anxious,  melancholy,  full  of 
strife. 

27.  Fever. — Coldness  followed  by  heat  with  sweat. — Heat  of  upper  part 
of  body,  coldness  of  bones.— Sweat  chiefly  during  and  after  eating.— Sweat 
aromatic. 

Gummi  Gutti,  see  Gambogia. 
Gymnema  SylYestre. 

Gymnema  sylvestre.    N.  0,  Asclepiadaceae.    Tincture  oi  leaves. 

GliaiesL— Snake-bite.    Taste,  altered. 

CharMteristics.— This  plant,  which  grows  in  the  Deccan  penin- 
sula, Assam,  and  some  parts  of  Africa,  is  a  woody  climber  with  long, 
slender  branches.  The  powdered  root  has  a  reputation  among  the 
natives  as  a  remedy  for  snake-bite.  It  is  mentioned  here  an  account 
of  a  single  symptom  observed  from  chewing  one  or  two  leaves,  which 
had  a  bitterish,  astringent,  and  slightly  acid  taste.  Immediately  after 
chewing  them  the  sense  of  taste  for  sugar  was  lost,  and  also  the  taste 
for  bitters,  the  effect  lasting  some  hours.  Everything  else  could  be 
tasted,  as  the  ginger  in  gingerbread  but  not  the  sweet.  Quinine  tasted 
like  chalk. 


Gymnooladus  Canadensis. 

Chicot.    American   Coffee-tree.    N.  O.  Leguminosae.    Tincture   of 
fresh  pulp  of  the  pods. 

GUnioaL— Erysipelas.     Fever.     Headache.     Spleen,  pain  in.     Throat,  sore. 
Tongue,  blue.    Toothache.    Whitlow. 

Gharaoteristios. — ^The  most  peculiar  symptom  of  the  Gymnocl. 
proving  is  a  bluish-white  coating  of  the  tongue.  Guided  by  this 
symptom  C.  T.  Bingham  cured  a  man  of  headache  following  influenza 
— "  a  constant  severe  pain  in  front  part  of  head,  especially  under  eye- 


86o    GYMNOCLADUS  CANADENSIS 

brows  and  upper  part  of  nose."  It  had  lasted  over  two  weeks,  never 
ceasing  and  at  times  intolerable.  Bones  of  eye-sockets  sore  to  toucL 
Tongue  covered  all  over  with  bluish- white  coat ;  does  not  enjoy 
food  ;  is  very  wfeak.  Gym.  2X  cured.  Pull,  tight  headache  appears 
in  the  proving,  with  sensation  as  if  the  eyes  were  pushed  forward 
The  fulness  takes  actual  shape  in  ''  erysipelatous  swelling  of  face  and 
head  ;  hot  face ;  it  feels  swollen ;  is  compelled  to  rub  the  eyes." 
Full  sensations  and  burning  pains  are  very  common.  Toothache 
from  slightest  cold  air  or  drink.  Sore  throat,  dark  livid  redness  of 
fauces  and  tonsils.  There  are  a  number  of  fever  symptoms  :  Desire 
for  heat,  wants  to  be  near  the  fire.  Cold  chills  and  pains  in  bowels. 
Perspiration  in  axillary  regions  and  palms.  Epidemic  fevers  of 
typhoid  character  have  been  cured  by  it  Violent  pain  in  left  fore> 
arm  as  if  the  bones  were  crushed.  There  is  aversion  to  motion; 
easily  fatigued  ;  desire  to  lean  the  head  on  something.  Walking  <. 
Cold  <,  cold  drinks  and  cold  draughts  <.     >  From  rubbing  eyes. 

BelktionB. — Compare:  Nux,  Agar.  iCthus.,  BelL,  Cicat,  Hyo., 
Laches.,  Lachn.,  Solan,  n.,  Stram. 

STHPTOMEL 

I.  Mind. — Cannot  think,  comprehend,  or  study ;  forgets  everything.— 
IndifiFerence. 

8.  Head. — Dizzy  with  dimness  of  sight ;  nausea,  belching. — Head  feels 
full,  tight  as  if  bound  up. — Intense  frontal  headache,  eyes  feel  pushed  for- 
ward.— Fulness  and  pressure  in  and  over  eyes,  extending  to  vertex. — Intense 
headache  with  stitches  in  bowels  ;  in  umbilical  region  at  times. — Catarrhal 
headache,  premonitory  stages ;  feeling  of  fulness  in  head,  with  throbbing  in 
temples  and  forehead,  with  vertigo,  heat  of  face,  numbness  and  tired  feeling. 
— Desire  to  lean  the  head  on  something. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  feel  pushed  forward. — Burning  heat  and  pain  throng 
eyes ;  sore  in  morning. — Desire  to  rub  the  eyes. — Sense  of  agglutination  of  L 
eye ;  desire  to  rub  or  scratch  it — Violent  throbbing  pain  over  1.  eye. 

6.  Face. — Sensations  as  if  fiies  were  crawling  over  r.  side  of  face.— 
Erysipelatous  swelling  of  face  and  head  ;  face  feels  hot  and  swollen ;  is  com- 
pelled to  rub  the  eyes. — Pain  as  if  bruised  in  1.  malar  bone. 

7.  Teeth. — Great  sensibility  of  teeth ;  <  1.  side  and  in  upper  teeth ; 
slightest  draught  of  cold  air  induces  it ;  cold  drinks  very  painful. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  coated  bluish-white.  —  Burning,  drawing,  and 
scraping ;  burning  in  roof  of  mouth,  extending  to  mouth  and  tonsils. 

Q.  Throat. — Sore  throat,  dark,  livid  redness  of  fauces  and  tonsils.— 
R.  tonsil  inflamed,  purple. — Stitching  and  shooting  in  throat — Mucus  in 
throat  and  frequent  hawking. 

II*  Stomach. — Belching  of  sour  water. — Nausea  after  eating  with  pain 
and  fulness  in  stomach  and  belching. — Burning  in  oesophagus  and  stomach.— 
Circumscribed  burning  in  stomach  size  of  dollar. 

la.  AtKlomen. — Pain  in  1.  side  as  if  spleen  were  swollen. — Soreness  and 
tenderness  of  abdomen. — Stitches  in  bowds  and  umbilical  region. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation  with  ineffectual  desire.— Aching 
fulness  in  rectum  after  stool. 


GYMNOCLADUS   CANADENSIS  86i 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Pressure  on  bladder  and  frequent  desire  to 
urinate ;  urine  passed  in  small  stream. 

15.  Male   Sexual    Organs. — Itching  of  glans  and  prepuce. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Smarting  in  larynx. — ^Tickling  in  throat  in 
morning  causing  cough,  increasing  through  day ;  cough  dry,  hard,  and 
racking. — Pressure  on  chest  and  sternum. 

83.  Upper  Limbs. — Violent  pain  in  1.  forearm,  in  radius,  as  if  bones 
were  crushed  and  broken.— Pulsation  in  1.  index  finger  as  if  panaritium  were 
forming. 


J;:^TOK  liKlVbKSITV 


HsBmatoxylon. 

Haematoxylon  campechianum.    LiOgwood.    (Central  America.)   N,  0. 
Leguminosae  Cassalpinise.    Tincture  of  the  heart-woocL 

OUnieaL — Angina  pectoris.  Colia  Diarrhoea.  Dysmenorrhoea.  Headacbe. 
Indigestion.    Ptosis.    Throat,  sore. 

OhanoteriatioB. — Logwood  is  the  well-known  dye  of  commerce. 
The  tincture  was  proved  by  Jouve  in  1839,  and  some  very  distinctive 
sjrmptoms  were  produced.  Constriction  appears  in  many  parts,  cul- 
minating in  the  stomach  and  abdomen  in  coHc  and  in  the  chest  in 
symptoms  very  like  many  cases  of  angina  pectoris.  This  is  the  most 
characteristic  of  all  the  symptoms  of  n{em. :  Sensation  as  if  a  bar  lay 
transversely  across  from  region  of  heart  to  right  side,  with  acute  pain 
in  left  upper  portion  of  chest."  This  bar  sensation  has  been  fre- 
quently removed  by  Ham,]  and  in  a  case  of  zona  with  agonising 
pain  as  if  a  bar  lay  across  the  chest,  arresting  the  breathing,  Hiem, 
did  signal  service  for  me.  Disordered  digestion  accompanies  and 
complicates  most  other  conditions.  Chilliness  predominates,  but  the 
symptoms  are  >  in  open  air.  <  At  night ;  on  stooping ;  by  pres- 
sure ;  by  touch.    There  is  much  general  sensitiveness. 

Beiationa. — Aniidotcd  by  :  Camph.  Compare :  (in  compressive 
pains)  Cact.,  Lil.  t.,  Coloc,  Aur.,  Naja. 

STHPTOHS. 

I.  Mind. — Ill-humour;  sadness;  melancholy;  vezation. — ^Inclination 
to  repose  ;  desire  to  weep. 

a.  Head. — Head  heavy,  painful,  with  difficulty  in  reflecting,  and 
expressing  one's  ideas. — ^Vertigo,  so  as  to  occasion  falling,  and  dnlness  of 
ideas.— Constriction  in  the  forehead,  and  in  the  occiput,  with  burning  heat  in 
the  head. — Headache  at  night,  as  from  indigestion,  with  swelling  of  the 
stomach  and  abdomen,  anxiety,  inclination  to  vomit,  sour  risings  of  food. — 
Headache,  esp.  in  the  forehead,  with  inclination  to  vomit  on  stooping. — ^Pain 
in  1.  forehead,  spreading  over  face  and  a£Fecting  1.  teeth. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  downcast  and  surrounded  by  a  livid  circle. — ^Painful 
pressure  on  the  eyes,  with  sensation  of  constriction  of  the  aperture  of  the  eye^ 
lids. — Redness  of  the  conjunctiva,  and  of  the  lachrymal  canmcula.— Redness 
of  the  eyes  with  blue  margins. — Sensation  as  if  sand  were  introduced  into  the 

86a 


HiEMATOXYLON  863 

eyes. — Heaviness  of  the  eyelids,  which  compels  them  to  close. — Heaviness  in 
the  eyes,  and  appearance  as  of  a  veil  before  the  sight. — Pupils  contracted, 
and  sight  confused. — Mist  before  the  eyes ;  on  reading,  the  letters  vanish. — 
Amelioration  of  the  symptoms  of  the  sight  in  the  open  air. 

4.  Ears. — ^Violent  pain  in  r.  ear,  extending  to  throat ;  throat  feels  con- 
tracted, with  burning  pain  during  deglutition. 

0.  Face. — Face  pale,  dejected,  and  changed,  face  discomposed.—  Pain 
in  the  lower  jaw,  with  stinging  in  the  teeth  and  cheek. 

g.  Throat. — Sore  throat,  with  difficulty  of  swallowing,  sensation  of  con- 
traction, inclination  to  swallow,  salivation,  and  smarting. — Sensation  of  a 
foreign  substance  in  the  throat,  with  yawning  and  stretching. 

iXy  18.  Stomach  and  Abdomen. — Painful  swelling  in  the  stomach, 
with  pressure  at  the  epigastrium,  and  risings  of  flatus. — Pain  in  the  abdomen, 
with  yawning,  inclination  to  vomit,  and  stretchings. — Painful  digging,  which 
proceeds  from  the  abdomen  to  the  throat,  and  which  causes  a  convulsive  pain 
in  the  region  of  the  heart,  increased  by  the  touch,  and  accompanied  by 
oppression. — ^Attacks  of  tearing  pains  in  the  stomach  and  the  abdomen,  as  if 
caused  by  poisonous  substances. — Colic,  with  painful  sensibility  of  the 
abdomen  to  the  touch,  inflation,  tension  and  digging  in  the  abdomen,  bor- 
borygmi,  soft  faeces,  with  cuttings,  lassitude  in  the  limbs,  palpitation  of  the 
heart,  and  uneasiness,  with  anguish. — ^Tympanitic  distension  of  the  abdomen 
and  rising  of  air. — ^After  the  colic,  general  cold,  with  burning  heat  in  the 
palms  of  the  hands. — Ck>llc,  with  pains  in  the  loins,  and  nausea. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Borborygmi,  colic,  and  diarrhoea  in  morning. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  red,  scanty,  and  burning. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Colic,  as  if  the  catamenia  were  going  to 
appear,  with  slimy,  whitish  discharge  from  the  vagina. 

18.  Chest.— -Constriction,  extending  from  the  chest  to  the  epigastrium, 
with  smarting  and  burning  pain,  increased  by  the  touch. — Sensation  as  if  a 
bar  lay  transversely  across,  from  region  of  heart  to  r.  side,  with  acute  pain  in 
1.  upper  portion  of  chest. 

19.  Heart.— Convulsive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  increased  by 
the  touch,  and  accompanied  by  oppression. — Great  soreness  in  the  region  of 
the  heart,  with  anguish,  redoubled  throbbing,  small  pulse,  burning  in  the 
hands,  and  shivering  of  the  body.— Palpitations  oi  the  heart,  with  diminished 
perspiration  of  the  feet. 

SO    Back. — Pain  and  chilliness  between  the  shoulders. 

91.  Limbs — ^The  limbs  are  painful  and  languid. — Pain  in  1.  shoulder,  as 
if  inflamed.-^uppression  of  the  habitual  sweat  of  the  feet 

24  Generalities. — Painful  sensibility  of  the  limbs,  with  lassitude. — 
General  uneasiness,  with  anxiety  arising  from  the  stomach,  and  colic. 

sO.    Sleep. — Irresistible  drowsiness. — Frequent  yawning. 

27.  Fever.— Chilliness  predominates,  shuddering,  goose-flesh.  —  Dry 
skin. 


864  HALL 


Hall. 

The  salt  springs  of  Hall  in  Upper  Austria,  cx>ntainiiig  chlorides, 
iodides,  bromides,  and  carbonates  of  the  alkalies  and  alkaline 
earths  and  iron ;  but  by  far  the  largest  ingredient  is  chloride 
of  sodium.    DUutions. 

GlinieaL— Breast,  affections  of.  Exophthalmic  goitre.  Glands,  enlarged. 
Goitre. 

CharacteriBtios. — Provings  have  been  made  of  this  water,  many 
of  them  on  patients  suffering  from  goitre.  Great  weakness  and 
exhausting  night-sweats  were  produced  and  all  the  symptoms 
of  cold  in  the  head  and  chest.  Many  marked  symptoms  appeared  in 
the  mammary  gland.  Three  different  provers  experienced  them.  A 
number  of  symptoms  occur  after  sleep  and  some  of  them  wake  the 
prover  in  the  night.  One  prover  had  a  sensation  as  if  her  stomach 
would  fall  out,  and  as  if  her  breasts  would  fall  off.  In  many  cases  the 
pains  are  transient  and  acute,  and  return  after  a  short  interval. 

Relatioiis. — Compare :  Nat.  mur.,  Silica  marit. ;  (stitches  shooting 
out  of  nipple)  Ol.  an. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.    Mind.— <^nfusion  of  the  senses. 

8.  Head.— Vertigo  as  if  intoxicated. — Headache,  esp.  at  first,  sometimes 
increasing  in  severity  and  accompanied  by  vertigo,  roaring  in  ears,  sparks 
before  eyes. — Drawing  tearing  in  vertex  towards  r.  temple. — ^Transient, 
painful  tearings  in  occiput 

3.  Eyes. — Heat,  burning  and  violent  watering  of  eyes,  with  feeling  of 
catarrh  in  nose,  as  after  smelling  strong  ammonia. 

4.  Ears. — Great  difficulty  of  hearing. 

5.  Nose. — Frequent  (violent)  sneezing  and  feeling  of  commencing 
coryza. 

6.  Face. — Painful  swelling  of  the  lymphatic  gland,  size  oi  pigeon's  egg, 
r.  side  of  face  close  to  ear. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Accumulation  of  saliva. 

9.  Throat. — Frequent  hawking  with  expectoration  of  mucus. — Burning 
and  tickling ;  rawness  as  if  tough  mucus  collected,  difficult  to  loosen,  with 
hoarseness ;  scraping. — Swelling  of  one  of  cervical  glands  (in  a  prover  who 
had  never  had  a  swollen  gland  in  her  life  before) ;  in  anterior  portion  of  neck 
between  hyoid  bone  and  thyroid  cartilage,  size  of  walnut,  painless,  easOy 
movable.— Goitre  gradually  disappeared. 

II.  Stomach. — Regurgitation  of  bitter  nauseous  fluid  from  stomach. — 
Acidity,  like  heartburn. — Qualmish  nausea  :  in  evening ;  on  going  to  bed ;  on 
awaking. — ^Vomiting. — Painful  sensation  of  emptiness  in  stomach  and  hunger, 
although  she  had  eaten  much  supper ;  the  stomach  felt  painful  and  sick,  as  if 
it  would  fall  out — ^Violent  gnawing,  like  hunger,  in  stomach  extending  down- 
ward into  intestines. 


HALL  865 

12.  Abdomen. — Cutting  griping  in  abdomen,  commencing  near  r.  side 
of  navel,  extending  outward,  then  following  course  of  colon  to  rectum, 
involving  a  large  circle  about  navel,  followed  by  rumbling  as  if  for  stool, 
lasting  an  hour  and  returning  at  short  intervals. — ^Transient  painful  sensation 
in  r.  flank. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — ^l^hin,  pasty  evacuations,  increasing  to  diarrhcea. 
— Unusually  hard,  difficult  stool. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Increased  secretion  of  pale  urine. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Menstruation  unusually  profuse  at  first, 
at  the  right  time. — Menstruation  lasting  only  one  day  (usually  three). — 
Menstruation  appeared  without  any  pain  (very  remarkable,  as  she  had  always 
been  subject  to  pains  in  abdomen  therewith.    The  cure  was  permanent). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarse ;  piping  voice,  scarcely  audible. — 
Cough  in  morning  after  rising. — Dry  cough  in  evening  with  catarrh,  which 
became  loose  in  morning. — Cough  hoarse,  barking,  very  violent,  dry,  croupy 
or  like  the  cough  of  laryngeal  phthisis. — Remarkable  dyspnoea,  with  palpitation 
on  ascending  a  slight  elevation,  followed  by  the  appearance  of  menstruation. 

18.  Chest. — Oppression  of  chest  with  difficult  breathing. — Frequent 
waking  from  sleep  on  account  of  sticking  in  r.  side  of  thorax. — ^A  transient 
stitch  in  sternum,  above  pit  of  stomach,  wakes  her  from  sleep  at  night. — ^Two 
very  violent  stitches  r.  side,  just  below  r.  breast,  during  rest. — Her  breasts, 
which  were  usually  firm  and  full,  became  small  and  flabby. — ^Transient 
burning  and  sticking  in  1.  mamma. — Itching-sticking  and  burning  superficially 
in  1.  nipple,  temporarily  >  by  rubbing,  lasting  8  to  10  seconds,  and  returning 
after  a  ^prt  time. — Frequent  stitches  beneath  1.  breast. — Frequent  transient 
stitches  (very  violent  at  times)  in  both  breasts,  with  extreme  sensitiveness, 
pressure  of  linen  or  bedclothes  unendurable ;  sensation  as  if  an  ulcer  forming 
deep  in  the  breast ;  <  by  motion  and  touch  ;  <  at  night,  often  waking  her 
from  sleep  (lasted  three  weeks,  and  disappeared  with  the  goitre). — ^Violent 
stitches  in  substance  of  r.  breast,  piercing  the  nipple  from  within  outward, 
wakens  her  at  night. — Great  painfulness  and  heaviness  in  both  breasts,  esp. 
on  touch  and  motion,  both  feeling  as  though  they  would  fall  off. 

19.  Heart. — Palpitation. — Pulse  greatly  accelerated. 

20.  Back. — Pain  like  sprain,  extending  from  r.  lumbar  region,  across  r. 
side  of  small  of  back  into  r.  ischium. 

8i.    Limbs. — ^Trembling  of  the  limbs. 

22,  Upper  Limbs. — Unable  to  exert  r.  arm  without  violent  pain  in 
axilla,  where  was  found  a  gland,  dark  red,  swollen,  hot,  very  painful  to  touch, 
size  of  a  walnut  (it  gathered  and  broke  in  five  days). — Drawing  tearing  pain 
in  1.  humerus  to  elbow;  lower  end  of  1.  elbow  as  if  in  periosteum  while 
sitting  still,  followed  by  some  violent  stitches  just  below  1.  breast  close  to  its 
margin. 

23,  Lov^er  Limbs, — Violent  sticking  as  with  needles  in  r.  heel  (lasts  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  and  returns  after  short  pause). 

35.  Skin. — Boils  :  r.  eyebrow ;  r.  breast ;  1.  breast ;  back  of  r.  upper  arm. 
— Burning  pains  in  skin  of  dorsal  surface  of  1.  forearm  on  oblong  spot  with 
slight  redness. 

s6.    Sleep. — Night  restless,  with  many  dreams ;  unpleasant. 

VOL.  I.  56 


866  HAMAMELIS 


Hamamelis. 

H.  macrophylla.  H.  dioica.  H.  virginica.  Witch-hazel.  N.  O, 
Hamamelidaceae.  (A  shrub  growing  in  all  parts  of  U&,  in 
damp  woods  or  along  streams ;  flowers  in  autumn,  flowers 
vellow,  the  seeds  ripen  the  year  following).  Tincture  of  fresh 
bark  of  twigs  and  root  A  resinoid,  Hamamelin,  is  also 
prepared. 

GUnioal. — Abortion,  threatened.  Ankles,  weak.  Black-fye.  Bruises.  Burns. 
Cancer,  Chilblains.  Consumption.  Enteric  fever.  Gastrin  ulcer.  Hctmatemesis. 
Haimaturia.  Hofmorrhages.  Hcenufrrhagic  diathesis,  Hamorrkaids.  LeaoorrhGea. 
Melsena.  Menstruation,  disorders  of;  vicarious.  Nipples,  sore.  Noises  in  the  head. 
Nose^  bleedingfrom.  Ovaries,  affections  of.  Pelvic  heematocele.  Phimosis.  Phlegmasia 
alba  dolens.  Purpura.  Rheumatism.  Scapula,  rheumatism  of.  Scurvy.  Small-pox. 
Testicles,  inflamed.  Ulcers.  Uterus,  affections  of.  Vagina,  spasm  of.  Varicocele. 
Veins,  varicose.    Wounds. 

Charaoteristics. — The  deep  red  colour  of  the  tincture  of 
Hamamelis  may  be  taken  as  the  signature  of  its  therapeutic  action. 
No  remedy  has  a  wider  sphere  of  usefulness  in  cases  of  haemorrhage 
and  disordered  blood-vessels.  It  has  also  a  decided  relation  to  the 
effects  of  mechanical  injuries  including  bums  of  the  iirst  degree,  and 
as  a  local  application  it  takes  rank  wiu  Arnica  and  Calendula  in  the 
homoeopathic  amamentarium.  Hering,  who  learned  its  properties  from 
Mr.  Pond,  of  "  Pond's  Extract "  fame  (Pond  was  a  patient  ot  Hering's), 
made  the  first  provings  and  introduced  the  remedy  into  homoeopathy. 
He  defines  its  position  as  being  between  Aeon,  and  Am.  ''  Pond's  Ex- 
tract "  is  an  aqueous  distillate  prepared  from  the  leaves.  A  number  of 
interesting  superstitions  are  associated  with  the  shrub  ;  and  shoots  of 
it  are  used  as  "  divining  rods  "  for  discovering  water  and  metals.  Hale 
has  given  a  very  full  account  of  the  remedy.  Phlebitis  ;  varicosis  ; 
haemorrhoids  ;  venous  haemorrhages — ^these  are  the  conditions  likely 
to  require  Hamam.  The  local  appUcation  of  Hamam.  to  a  sprained 
knee  nas  been  known  to  set  up  inflammation  in  the  veins  of  the  ]>art, 
and  the  provers  who  had  varicose  veins  experienced  in  them  increased 
sensitiveness  and  unusual  sensations,  and  a  number  were  cured  In 
congestion,  inflammation,  and  bleeding  of  haemorrhoidal  vessels.  Ham, 
has  a  great  range  of  action  ;  and  like  that  other  great  {»le  remedy, 
jEsculus  A.,  it  has  also  a  marked  action  in  the  throat  Ham.  is  called 
for  in  cases  of  '*  varicose  angina,''  where  the  veins  of  the  pharynx  are 
large  and  blue.  The  haemorrhsiges  in  which  Ham.  is  indicated  are 
mostly  dark.  They  may  occur  from  any  orifice.  Metrorrhagia, 
menorrhagia,  vicarious  menstruation  and  haemorrhages  between  the 
periods  are  met  by  it.  In  this  connection  a  case  recorded  by  Dr. 
Ward  {Pact/.  Coast  y.  ofH,j  November,  1899)  is  noteworthy.  He 
cured  a  case  of  intermenstrual  pain.  Alien  mentions  in  the 
provings  an  intermenstrual  flow^  and  Dr.  Ward  acutely  observes 
that  if  his  patient  has  had  the  flow,  the  soreness  so  distinctly  felt  might 
not  have  been  reaHsed.  "Intense  soreness"  is  one  of  the  notes  of 
Hamamelis.    The  part  from  which  the  flow  of  blood  proceeds  feels 


HAMAMELIS  867 

9ore  and  bruised.  This  distinguishes  it  from  Chi.  in  passive 
haemorrhages.  It  is  a  leading  indication  for  it  in  cases  of  orchitis 
and  ovarian  affections  ;  and  also  in  phlebitis  and  varicose  veins.  In 
piles  there  is  much  bleeding  and  marked  soreness  of  the  part ;  the 
back  feels  as  if  it  would  break  {Msc,  h.  has  little  or  no  bleeding). 
There  is  taste  of  blood  in  the  mouth.  The  headache  of  Ham,  is 
chiefly  in  the  temples,  throbbing,  hammering ;  especially  over  left 
eye.  Hughes  gave  Ham.  ^  to  a  young  lady  suffering  from  daily 
epistaxis  and  throbbing  headache.  The  first  dose  was  followed  by  a 
flushing  of  the  face  and  most  distressing  throbbing-aching  and  sense 
of  fulness  in  the  head.  The  second  dose  brought  back  all  the 
symptoms  in  the  head,  and  a  feeling  as  if  it  would  burst  Some  days 
later  the  3X  was  given,  and  again  the  dilatation  of  the  cerebral  vessels 
occurred,  though  the  symptoms  were  not  so  severe.  The  haemorrhage 
of  Ham.  causes  great  exhaustion  (out  of  proportion  to  the  amount  of 
loss),  but  there  is  also  a  tired,  aching  feeling  in  the  back  and  lower 
limbs,  independently  of  haemorrhages.  Many  rheumatic  symptoms 
occur,  and  with  them  always  the  characteristic  soreness.  A  woman, 
thirty-five,  to  whom  I  gave  Ham,  i  for  varicosis  with  great  advantage, 
developed  marked  loss  of  appetite  and  these  additional  symptoms  : 
"  Pain  all  round  lower  abdomen,  dreadful  aching,  rheumatic  pain  at 
top  of  left  shoulder  and  under  right  shoulder-blade,  also  right  side 
of  chest  under  arm.  Pains  <  during  the  day  and  when  at  rest, 
entirely  absent  during  the  night.  Stupid  feehng  in  head."  This 
scapular  pain  bears  on  the  experience  of  Dr.  Koech,  who  cured 
wim  Ham,  many  cases  of  scapular  rheumatism.  He  regards  it  as  a 
specific  in  affections  of  the  last  five  cervical  nerves.  There  is  a  ^ood 
deal  of  thirst  in  the  Ham,  pathogenesis,  and  Bree  says  (H.  P.,  xii.  01)  it 
will  relieve  the  excessive  thirst  that  most  patients  with  heart  troubles 
complain  of.  Motion  and  exertion  in  general  <•  <  In  open  air  ;  in 
rainy  weather.  Takes  cold  easily  from  every  exposure,  but  especially 
to  warm,  moist  air.    Toothache  <  in  warm  room.     <  From  touch. 

Ralftttons,— i4nhVio/d<^  by :  Am.,  Camph.,  Chi.,  Puis,  (toothache). 
CompUmentaty  to  :  Perrum  in  haemorrhages.  Can^are :  Am.,  Calend. 
C'is  better  than  either  in  hastening  the  absorption  of  intra-ocular 
haemorrhage,"  Hering) ;  Chloral,  Secal.  (purpura) ;  Fl.  ac,  Lach.,  Se<^., 
Puis.,  Nux,  i£sc.,  Nit  ac.  (in  varicose  veins  and  piles) ;  Spo.,  Puis, 
(orchitis — Ham.  has  more  soreness) ;  Act.  r.  ^abdominal  soreness  after 
labour ;  Ham.  is  an  excellent  external  apphcation) ;  Bry.  (vicarious 
menstruation) ;  Nit.  ac.  (haemorrhage  in  typhoid ;  Nit  ac.  light.  Ham. 
dark) ;  Bell.,  Euphorb.,  Rhus,  Tereb.  (as  an  application  in  bums  of 
first  degree) ;  Sanguisuga  (haemorrhages). 

GaiuatioiL— Injuries. 

STHPTOHS. 

I.  Mind. — Forgetful. — No  desire  to  study  or  work. — Depressed  in 
mind ;  also  after  emissions,  with  regretful  mind. — Irritable. 

8.  Head. — ^Vertigo  when  stooping. — Swimming  sensation  on  rising. — 
Nausea  and  vertigo,  with  desire  to  lie  down. — Stupor ;  headache ;  crowding 
fulness  in  head  and  neck,  also  in  forehead. — Stupid  feeling  in  head. — Feeling 


868  HAMAMELIS 

as  if  a  bolt  were  passed  from  temple  to  temple,  and  tightly  secured. — ^Folness 
in  forehead,  with  pressing  in  root  of  tongue. — Bursting  headache  on  awaking, 
insupportable  on  bending  downward. — Dulness  and  fulness  in  head  all  day. — 
Headache  after  an  emission. — Hammering  over  1.  eye,  as  if  he  would  go  oat 
of  his  mind. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  feel  weak,  but  are  less  inflamed ;  painful  weakness  of 
the  eyes. — Feeling  as  if  both  eyes  would  be  forced  out  of  head,  >  by  pressing 
them  with  the  fingers,  but  <  a  few  moments  afterwards. — Sore  pain  in  eyes ; 
eyes  painful  under  slight  pressure. — Swelling  of  eyeballs  and  lids,  with  blood- 
shot appearance  of  r.  eye. — Eyes  inflamed ;  vessels  greatly  injected ;  caused 
by  a  foreign  substance,  as  melted  sugar ;  after  operations ;  intense  soreness. 

4.  Ears. — Deafness  in  r.  ear,  passes  ofiE  by  noon. — Bleeding  at  r.  ear, 
also  nose-bleed,  which  clears  her  head,  relieving  her. — Buzzing,  ringing  in 
ears. 

5.  Nose. — Over-sensitive  smell. — Bad  smell  from  the  nose. — Sneezing 
spells,  watery,  excoriating,  burning  discharge. — Nose  feels  stopped  op. — 
Epistaxis,  flow  passive,  non-coagulable. — Epistaxis,  with  a  feeling  of  tightness 
of  the  bridge  of  the  nose,  and  crowding  pressure  in  forehead  between  the 
eyes. — The  nose-bleed  clears  her  head  and  affords  great  relief. — Profuse 
epistaxis ;  flow  venous ;  idiopathic  or  vicarious. 

6.  Face. — Burning  in  r.  cheek. — Occasional  shooting  pains  along  r. 
superior  maxillary  to  malar  bone. — Muscles  feel  sore  and  stifl. — Lips  :  dry ; 
sore ;  cracked. 

7.  Teeth. — Sharp,  lancinating  along  the  molar  teeth,  extending  to  the 
malar  bone ;  also  in  temporal  region. — Teeth  ache,  can  scarcely  sleep,  yet 
not  decayed. — Pains  <  in  warm  room.— Gums  sore,  painful,  swollen;  bleed 
easily ;  dark  fluid. — Passive  venous  haemorrhage  after  extraction  of  teeth. 

8.  Mouth. — Metallic  taste  ;  tongue  coated  white. — Scalding  sensation 
on  tongue. — Blisters  on  sides  of  tongue  ;  canker  spots  near  the  tip. 

9.  Throat. — Severe  stinging  in  uvula,  as  if  it  would  break,  when  he 
coughs.— Dryness  of  the  lips  and  fauces  ;  tonsils  and  fauces  congested,  veins 
enlarged,  varicose ;  must  drink  large  quantities  of  water  to  assist  d^lutition. 
—Sore  throat  <  r.  side,  r.  tonsil  more  swollen ;  reddened. — Sore  throat  in 
those  predisposed  to  fulness  of  the  veins,  <  in  warm,  moist  air. — Hawks  con- 
siderably. 

ID.  Appetite. — No  appetite  for  breakfast;  considerable  thirst,  >  by 
small  quantities  of  water. — ^Appetite  good. — ^Very  thirsty ;  in  afternoon  and 
evening ;  throat  dry.^Averse  to  water,  makes  him  sick  to  think  of  it — Pork 
nauseates. 

II.  Stomach. — ^Af  ter  eating :  nausea,  must  keep  quiet ;  eructations  ; 
hiccough. — Eructations  after  a  meal,  taste  of  the  food. — Nausea,  eructations 
and  violent  hiccough  after  pork,  followed  by  burning  in  stomach  and 
oesophagus ;  later,  cramp  pains  in  stomach  and  chest. — Nausea,  vertigo,  must 
lie  still  to  prevent  vomiting. — Nausea,  headache  in  frontal  bone  on  awaking. 
— Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  after  a  meal. — Haematemesis,  blood  black  ; 
sensation  of  trembling  in  stomach,  or  fulness  and  gurgling  in  abdomen; 
feverish  by  spells ;  weak,  cold,  quick  pulse,  profuse  sweat. — Heaviness  at 
back  of  stomach ;  pain  back  of  stomach,  along  the  spinal  colunm. — ^Violent 
throbbing  in  stomach. — Cramp  in  stomach  after  eating. 


HAMAMELIS  869 

Id.  Abdomen. — Cramps  in  stomach  and  transverse  colon  two  hours 
after  a  hearty  dinner. — Flatulence. — ^Burning  in  the  epigastrium  and  umbilicus. 
— Pain  all  round  lower  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Stools:  costive;  hard,  coated  with  mucus. — 
Dysentery  when  the  amount  of  blood  is  unusually  large ;  dark,  small  clots,  or 
patches  through  the  mucus. — Large  quantities  of  a  tar-like  blood  (typhoid).^ 
Piles  :  bleeding  profusely ;  with  burning  soreness,  fulness  and  weight ;  Imck 
as  if  it  would  break ;  urging  to  stool. — Itching  at  the  anus. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Increased  desire  to  urinate. — Urine  clear 
copious. — Scanty  high-coloured  urine. — Hasmaturia;  passive  congestion  of 
the  kidneys ;  dull  pain  in  renal  region.— Irritation  of  the  urethra,  followed  by 
a  discharge  and  ardor  urinae. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Emissions  at  night,  without  being  aware 
of  it;  headache,  depression  of  mind. — Erections ;  great  desire  for  an  embrace. 
— Severe  neuralgic  pains  in  testicles  suddenly  shifting  to  bowels,  causing 
nausea  and  faintness. — Pain  running  down  the  spermatic  cords  into  the  testes. 
— Profuse  cold  sweat  on  scrotum ;  capillary  stasis. — Orchitis,  intense  soreness 
and  swelling. — Varicocele. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Dysmenorrhoea,  with  severe  pains 
through  the  lumbar  and  hypogastric  region  and  down  the  legs ;  fulness  of 
the  brain  and  bowels,  with  severe  pain  through  the  whole  head,  causing 
stupor,  deep  sleep ;  varicose  veins. — ^Active  uterine  hasmorrhage  blood  bright 
red. — Metrorrhagia,  passive  flow,  venous  blood  ;  anaemia. — Amenorrhcea, 
vicarious  bleeding  from  nose  or  stomach  ;  costive ;  varices  on  legs. — 
Leucorrhoea,  great  tenderness  of  vagina ;  flow  bloody. — ^Vaginismus,  intense 
soreness ;  prurigo  of  vulva.— Ovaritis  after  a  blow  ;  diffused  agonised  sore- 
ness over  the  whole  abdomen  ;  menses  irregular ;  <  at  time  of  menses ; 
retention  of  urine. — Phlegmasia  alba  dolens. — Sore  nipples. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Hoarse  on  arising ;  awoke  hoarse.— When 
lying,  felt  a  smothering  sensation.— Tickling  cough,  taste  of  blood  on  awaking. 
—Dry  cough,  severe  stinging  in  the  uvula,  as  if  it  would  break. — Expectora- 
tion thick,  yellowish  or  greenish  grey,  tasting  putrid. 

18.  Chest. — Haemoptysis,  tickling  cough,  with  taste  of  blood,  or  of 
sulphur ;  dull  frontal  headache ;  tightness  of  the  chest ;  cannot  lie  down, 
because  of  difficult  breathing  from  congestion ;  fulness  in  the  head ;  mind 
calm. — Stitches  in  lower  part  of  lungs. — Sensation  of  constriction  across  chest 
<  by  a  long  or  deep  breath. — Dull  aching  pain  constantly  in  muscles  of  1. 
chest,  <  using  arms,  afternoon  and  evening. 

19.  Heart  and  Pulse.— Palpitation.— Pricking  pain  in  region  of  heart 
and  superficial  veins  of  both  arms. 

SO.  Neck  and  Back.— Sore  pain  down  the  cervical  vertebrae.— Dull 
pain,  constantly  under  angle  of  1.  scapula. — (Rheumatism  of  scapula.) — ^Tearing 
pains  across  small  of  back,  with  fulness  of  joints  of  legs.— Small  of  back  feels 
as  if  it  would  break. 

21.  Limbs.— Tired  feeling  in  arms  and  legs. — Great  lassitude  and  weari- 
ness of  the  limbs  and  elsewhere. — Rheumatism,  with  great  soreness  of  the 
muscles. 

as.  Upper  Limbs.— Bruised  feeling  in  upper  anns  and  shoulder,  < 
from  motion. — Dreadful  aching  rheumatic  pain  at  top  of  L  shoulder,  and 


870  HECLA 

ofider  r.  scapula  and  r.  side  of  chest  tmder  anns ;  <  during  day  and  at  rest ; 
entirely  absent  during  night. — Sti£Fness  in  arms  and  shoulders.— Tenderness 
of  r.  biceps,  <  by  pressure. — Stiffness  of  elbow-joint — Rheumatic  pain, 
constant  aching  in  L  arm. — Lancinating  in  L  wrist-joint. — ^Violent  pain  in 
back  of  r.  hand  to  shoulder-joint— Hands  chapped.-— Thumb  nail  becomes 
sore,  pus  discharges  after  a  slight  knock. 

^  Lower  Limba. — Sore  pain  in  r.  femur,  muscles  of  thighs  sore,  as  if 
bruised.— Soreness  in  femoral  vessels  to  middle  of  thigh.— Weakness  of  knees, 
afternoon.— Forcing  feeliQg  in  the  varices ;  veins  sensitive,  dilated. 

24.  Generalities.— Takes  cold  easily  from  every  exposure  ;  but  esp.  to 
warm,  moist  air  ;  subject  to  varicose  veins. — ^Venous  constitutions. — Prick- 
ling stinging  :  in  veins,  muscles,  skin. — Phlebitis ;  prickling  pains. 

85.  Skin  and  Tisauea.— Chilblains  always  bluish.— Varicose  veins  and 
ulcers,  with  stinging  or  pricking.— Bruised  soreness.— Purpura. 

aO.  Sleep.— Restlessness  at  night— Uneasy,  restless  morning  sleq>.— 
Emissions  of  semen  during  sleep. 

•7.  Fever.— Chilly  on  going  to  bed;  dreaded  an  attack  of  fever.— 
Cold  creeps  in  the  open  air,  chills  run  up  the  legs,  head  stopped  up,  dull  pain 
over  orbit.— Chilliness  over  back  and  hips,  extending  down  the  extremities. — 
Fever  at  night ;  hands  hot,  burning  in  the  eyelids  on  closing  them. — Sweats 
freely  at  night,  after  lying  down. — Pulse  accelerated ;  full. 


Heda. 

Heclae  lava.    The  finer  ash  from  Mount  Heda,  falling  in  distant 
localities.    Trituration. 

GllaieaL— Antrum  of  Highmore,  tumour  of.  Boncs^  affections  of.  Breast, 
tumours  of.  Dentition,  difficult.  Exostoses.  Glands,  affections  of.  Jaws,  tumours 
on.  Milk,  deficient  Neuralgia.  Osteitis  deformans.  Osteomalachia.  Osteo- 
sarcoma. Periostitis.  Rickets,  Syphilis.  Teeth,  caries  of .  Toothache.  Tumours. 
White  swelling.    Whitlow. 

CharaoteristloB. — I  have  chosen  the  single  word  Hecla  in  pre- 
ference to  Heclcc  lava^  as  being  simpler  and  more  convenient.  The 
ash  and  scoriae  of  this  volcano  contain  Silica,  Alumina,  Lime,  Magnesia, 
with  some  Oxide  of  Iron.  When  travelling  in  Iceland,  Garth  Wilkinson 
noticed  that  the  sheep  in  the  vicinity  of  Hecla  had  immense  exostoses 
on  the  jaws.  Another  efiFect  noticed  was  the  drying  up  of  the  milk 
both  in  sheep  and  cows.  The  finer  ash  which  fell  on  pastures  at  a 
distance,  was  the  most  deleterious  ;  the  gross  ash  uear  the  mountain 
was  inert.  In  cows,  post-mortem  examination  showed  the  intestines 
filled  with  ashes,  hardened  to  a  mass,  and  stomach  coated  over  with  a 
pitch-black  membrane  spotted  with  brown,  and  difficult  to  remove  by 
washing ;  the  jaw  teeth  were  covered  with  a  shining  metallic  crust. 
Several  young  horses  died  from  lumps  on  the  jaw-bones,  so  large  as 
to  cause  dislocation.  Sheep^  when  slaughtered,  were  found  to  be  of 
bluish  hue  internally,  and  the  intestines  were  friable.    In  many  cases 


HECLA  871 

wonns  from  two  to  three  inches  long,  with  pale  grey  bodies  and 
brown  heads,  and  a  little  thicker  than  a  horse-hair,  were  found  in 
the  bronchia.  In  sheep  the  osseous  and  dental  systems  were  much 
affected.  The  head-bones,  and  especially  the  jaw-bones,  swelled  and 
became  so  friable  that  when  boiled  they  fell  to  pieces.  The  thigh, 
and  especially  the  shin  bones,  swelled  and  bulged.  The  jaws  were 
sometimes  covered  with  large  swellings,  which  spread  and  were  looser 
of  texture  and  darker  in  colour  than  the  bone ;  these  could  be  separated 
from  the  bone  without  injuring  it ;  but  in  some  fatal  cases  a  hole 
going  down  to  the  marrow  was  discovered  under  the  swelling. 
Garth  Wilkinson  adds  to  the  above  that  he  has  used  Hecla  with 
excellent  effect  in  toothache,  gum  abscess,  swellings  about  the  jaws 
and  in  difficult  dentition.  Clinical  experience  has  shown  the  power 
of  Hecla  to  arrest  many  forms  of  bone  disease,  including  osteo-sarcoma, 
scrofulous  and  syphiUtic  osteitis  and  exostoses.  The  swellings  amen- 
able to  it  are  painful  and  sensitive  to  touch ;  <  from  touch  and 
pressure.  The  glands  are  affected  almost  as  much  as  the  bones : 
''induration  and  infiltration  of  cervical  glands,  studding  neck  like 
a  row  of  pearls."  The  right  side  has  been  more  predominantly 
affected.  The  subjoined  schema  is  compiled  mainly  from  cured 
symptoms. 

RdaMonn.— Compare :   ConchioL,  Silic,  Calc,  Slag,  Phos.,  StiUing., 
Sulph.,  Kali  iod,  Amphisb.,  Symphyt.,  Ruta. 
Causation. — Injury  to  bone. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2.  Head. — ^Vertigo,  everything  goes  up,  down  and  sidewise. — Chronic 
headache. 

5.  Noae. — Destructive  (syphilitic)  ulceration  of  nasal  bones. 

6.  Face. — Facial  neursdgia  or  headache  dependent  on  irritation  of 
dental  nerves  or  carious  tooth. — Polypoid  growth  commencing  in  antrum  of 
Highmore,  deforming  face,  forcing  eyeball  upward  and  everting  lid,  obstruct- 
ing nostrils;  extending  downward  into  mouth,  impeding  breathing  and 
mastication;  epistaxis;  headache. 

7.  Teeth. — ^Toothache,  esp.  if  teeth  are  very  sensitive  to  pressure; 
with  swelling  about  jaws. — Neuralgia,  from  carious  tooth ;  in  cavity  from 
which  tooth  has  been  extracted. — ^Abscess ;  or  enlargement  of  bone  remaining 
after  tooth  extraction. — R.  cuspid  of  upper  jaw  very  sensitive  to  slight  pressure 
on  crown  ;  swelling  and  indurated  tumour  as  large  as  a  pea  under  r.  ala  nasi, 
very  sensitive  to  touch;  conjunctivitis  of  r.  eye.— Difficult  dentition  in 
scrofulous  and  rachitic  children. 

16.    Female  Sexual  Organs. — Dries  up  the  milk  (sheep  and  cows). 

18.    Chest. — Myalgia,  esp.  of  intercostal  muscles. 

90.  Neck. — Induration  and  infiltration  of  cervical  glands,  studding  neck 
hkearowof  pearls. 

23.  Lower  Limbs. — Hip  disease.— Exostoses  of  tibia ;  severe  continuous 
pain  incapitating  from  work. 


B?i  HEDEOMA 

Hedeoma. 

Hedeoma  pulegioides.  American  Pennyroyal  (the  British  "Penny- 
royal "  is  Mentha  pulegium,  also  a  Labiate).  N.  0.  Labials. 
Tincture  of  whole  fresh  plant. 

CllnieaL— Amenorrhoea.    Dysmenorrhoea.    Leacorrhoea. 

CharaoteristioB. — Both  the  American  and  the  British  "  Penny- 
royals "  have  a  popular  reputation  as  "female  regulators,"  which  is  by 
no  means  undeserved.  Homoeopaths  have  verified  the  relation  of 
the  drug  to  uterine  ailments,  and  an  observation  by  Dr.  Toothaker 
of  a  case  of  poisoning  affords  valuable  ground  for  homoeopathic 
prescribing.  Bearing-down  pains  were  most  marked,  <  by  any 
movement,  and  accompanied  by  almost  paralytic  weakness  of  the 
legs.  Nervous  symptoms  were  very  prominent,  jerkings  and  twitch- 
ings.  Weak,  faint,  >  lying  down  ;  inability  to  sit  up.  Pains  in 
abdomen  <  after  eating  or  drinking.     <  By  touch  and  pressure. 

Relations. — Compare :  Mentha  pulegium,  Sep.,  Sabi.,  Lil.  t 
Veratrum  antidoted  some  of  its  effects. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2.  Head. — Dull,  heavy  feding  in  bead  in  morning,  not  continiied 
through  day.— Sore  pain  in  1.  temporal  ridge,  as  of  a  cut  or  wound,  lasting 
about  six  weeks. 

9.  Throat. — Sensation  of  something  rising  in  throat,  or  as  if  her  breast 
were  coming  up  into  her  mouth. — Great  difficulty  in  swallowing,  it  nearly 
took  her  breath  away. 

II.  Stomach. — Nausea,  a  rising-up  sensation  from  stomach,  producing 
occasional  retching. — Excessive  retching,  nausea  and  straining. 

18.    Abdomen. — ^Abdomen  very  sore  and  sensitive  to  touch  and  pressure. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Obstinate  constipation ;  painful  evacuations  every 
four  or  five  days. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  urgent  desire  to  pass  water ;  passes 
very  little ;  cutting,  burning  pains  with  tenesmus  of  sphincter  urinarius. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Excessive  bearing-down  pains  with 
pressure  outward  towards  vulva,  from  whole  lower  abdomen,  accompanied 
by  almost  unendurable  pains  in  back,  drawing  down  from  upper  sacral  spine, 
extending  also  to  epigastrium  and  stomach ;  like  veritable  labour-pains ; 
returning  with  regular  periodicity  if  she  remained  at  rest ;  greatly  <  by  the 
least  movement ;  she  lay  on  the  floor  on  a  small  mattress,  and  could  not  be 
removed,  on  account  of  the  aggravation,  until  the  following  day  ;  <  by  the 
least  food  or  drink. — Leucorrhoea  with  itching  and  burning  (commenced  sixth 
day  and  lasted  some  weeks). 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Shortness  of  breath  as  if  from  an  asthmatic 
attack. — Frequent,  periodical  dyspnoea  with  oppression  of  thorax. 

90.  Back. — Unendurable  pains  in  back,  esp.  in  sacral  spine  near  the 
upper  vertebras,  dragging  down  from  that  point  to  uterus. — Excessive  pains 
in  back  and  head. 


HEDERA  HELIX  873 

di.  Limbs. — Semi-paralysis  of  limbs  ;  could  not  stand  or  move,  or  l>ear 
the  pain  of  movement — Pain  and  coldness  of  limbs,  esp.  of  feet 

24.  Generalities. — AfFected  all  her  nerves ;  nervous  twitchings  and 
jerkings  in  all  the  fibres  of  the  body,  sensible  in  the  pulse  or  wherever  the 
observer's  fingers  touched  the  flesh. — Semi-paralysis. — Prostration  following 
retching. — General  soreness. 


Hedera   Helix. 

Common  Ivy.    N,  0.  Araliaceae.    Tincture  of  young  shoots. 

Glinieal* — Cataract.     Hydrocephalus,  chronic.     Rhinorrhoea  cerebro-sptnalis. 
Rickets. 

ChaFaoteriBtioB. — Our  knowledge  of  the  therapeutic  properties 
of  Ivy  we  owe  to  Dr.  Cooper,  whose  experience  has  shown  it  to  have 
a  relation  to  ricket  and  rickety  conditions.  The  only  published  case 
(H,  W,y  xxxiv.  489)  is  that  of  a  girl  of  twenty,  whom  he  cured  of  chronic 
hydrocephalus  with  a  single  dose,  once  repeated  after  eighteen 
months  on  a  threatened  return  of  the  symptoms.  The  circumference 
of  the  patient's  head,  when  she  was  brought-to  Cooper,  was  27^  inches, 
rendering  her  an  object  of  wonder  and  ridicule  to  street  arabs,  and 
reacting  on  her  disposition  and  nervous  state.  The  condition  had 
existed  from  childhood  and  was  apparently  growing  much  worse. 
There  were  two  large  oedematous  swellings  on  the  nape  of  the  neck, 
one  on  either  side  and  immediately  below  the  occiput,  evidently  the 
result  of  intra-hydrocephalic  pressure.  One  drop  of  Hed.  h.  0  was 
placed  on  her  tongue.  Next  morning  clear  fluid  began  dripping  from 
the  nostrils,  a  "  cerebro-spinal  rhinorrhoea  "  in  fact.  This  continued 
three  weeks,  between  twenty  and  thirty  pocket-handkerchiefs  being 
used  in  a  day.  Simultaneously  the  swellings  began  to  diminish  and 
had  completely  disappeared  when  the  discharge  ceased.  Thirteen 
months  later,  when  being  measured  for  a  hat,  it  was  found  that  the 
size  of  the  head  was  reduced  to  25  inches,  and  no  longer  occasioned 
remark.  When,  later  on,  some  symptoms  of  brain-pressure  seemed 
to  threaten  a  second  dose  of  Hed,  h,  completely  dispelled  them.  The 
disposition  of  the  patient  was  completely  changed  ;  from  being 
nervous,  unhappy,  and  diffident,  she  became  lively,  cheerful,  and 
active.  In  cases  of  rhinorrhoea  cerebro-spinalis  tied,  A.  must  be 
thought  of.  Hed,  A.  has  been  used  as  a  sternutatory  for  <'  clearing  the 
sight "  from  time  out  of  mind,  and  Cooper  tells  me  it  has  cured  cases 
of  cataract. 

BieiBHomM.— Compare :  Aral,  r.,  Ginseng  (botan.)  ;  Silic,  Nat.  m. 


874  HELIANTHUS 

Hedysarnm  ndefonsianum. 

Hedysarum  desmodium.      Barba  de  Roy.     Carapicho.      Brazilian 
Burdock.    N»  0.  LfeguminosaB. 

Gliiileftl« — Gonorrhoea.    Gonorrhoea!  ophthalmia.    Penis,  inflammation  of. 

Cluunotorlstios.— This  plant  is  named  hv  Mure,  who  gives  a 
figure  of  it  in  his  book  and  describes  it  thus:  '^The  brownish 
ligneous  stem  of  this  plant  is  about  three  feet  high  ;  it  is  ramose, 

{)ubescent,  especially  above.  Leaves  alternate,  pinnate,  trifoliate ; 
olioles  oval  and  slightly  tormentose,  on  a  hairy,  bistipulate  petiole. 
The  flowers,  which  are  small  and  seated  on  filiform  unifloral  peduncles, 
form  loose,  terminal  spikes.  Fruit  oval,  hairy,  on  bent  peduncles,  and 
attaching  itself  very  intimately  to  clothes  and  to  hairy  skin  of 
animals."  I  give  this  description  in  full  because  the  species, 
according  to  Allen,  is  doubtful.  The  symptoms  are  not  many  but 
they  are  very  definite,  and  knowing  the  value  of  Mure's  observations 
in  the  case  of  Odm,  can,  and  other  remedies  I  give  them  in  full.  The 
chief  effect  was  inflammation  of  the  penis  and  of  the  eyes,  which 
should  indicate  it  in  some  cases  of  gonorrhoeal  ophthalmia. 

SYMPTOMS. 

3.    Eyes. — Pain  and  pricking  in  eyes. — Redness  of  sclerotica. — Smarting, 
with  lachrymation. 

18.    Abdomen. — Painful  tearing  from  loins  to  navel  (better  second  day). 

13.  Stool. — Diarrhoea. — Constipation. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Profuse  urination. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sudden  appearance  of  yellowish  dis- 
charge from  urethra. — Itching  of  penis. — Redness  and  smarting  of  penis. — 
Painful  swelling  of  penis  with  erysipelatous  inflammation. — ^Thin  stream  of 
urine  in  consequence  of  the  glans  being  swollen. 

81.  Limbs. — Pain  in  upper  and  lower  limbs. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — Fingers  contract  with  pain. 

86.  Sleep.— No  sleep  for  several  nights  running. 

27.  Fever. — Fever  and  rheumatic  pains. 


Helianthus. 

Helianthus  Annuus.     Sunflower.     N.  O.  Compositae.     Tincture  of 
mature  flower-heads.    Tincture  of  ripe  seeds. 

Gllnleal.— Cold.    Constipation.    Epistaxis.    Haemorrhoids.    Nasal  obstruction. 

Spleen,  affections  of.    Throat,  sore.    Urticaria.    Vomiting.    Wounds. 

ChanuiteristioB.— >Dr.  Cessoles  proved  the  expressed  juice  of  the 
flowers  ;  some  observations  have  also  been  made  on  the  effects  of 


HELIANTHUS  875 

eating  the  seeds.  In  some  parts  of  America  the  Indians  use  the 
seeds  as  an  article  of  food  In  the  provers  there  were  marked  effects 
on  stomach,  nausea,  and  vomiting.  In  one  haemorrhoids  appeared, 
the  stools  were  black  and  soft,  and  with  them  there  was  an  emission 
of  semen ;  and  later  the  stools  were  hard  and  black  and  occurred 
every  other  day.  The  skin  was  affected  also.  Burnett  regards 
Helianth.  as  a  great  spleen  remedy.  Helianihus  tuberosus  is  the  Jeru- 
salem artichoke.  I  know  many  persons  who  cannot  eat  these  on 
account  of  the  excessive  flatulence  they  produce.  The  symptoms  of 
Helianlh,  were  >  after  vomiting.  Skin  is  <  by  external  warmth. 
Hansen  says  it  equals  Arnica  and  Calendula  (also  yellow- flowered 
composites)  as  an  application  to  wounds. 

Relatioiis. — Compare :  Lept.  (black  stools)  ;  Am.,  Calend, 
Hyperic.  (wounds) ;  Cean.  (spleen). 

STHPTOHS. 

9.    Head. — Headache. 

3.  Eyes. — Slight  redness  on  margin  of  I.  upper  lid,  with  smarting  in 
inner  canthus. — Eyes  suffused. 

5.  Nose.— (In  a  rover  who  had  a  slight  nasal  obstruction  causing  con- 
stant passage  of  secretion  through  the  posterior  nares),  after  a  short  time 
epistaxis  occurred,  and  the  nostrils  became  free,  and  during  the  ensuing 
winter  the  secretions  were  healthy,  and  discharged  through  the  natural 
passages. 

6.  Face.— Anxious  countenance.— Face  deeply  flushed. 

8.  Mouth. — Sticking  in  upper  back  teeth.— Tongue  and  fauces  very  red 
and  inclined  to  dryness. — Unusually  hot  taste  when  eating. — Difficulty  in 
articulation. 

9.  Throat. — Stiffness  and  dryness  of  the  throat. — Sensation  of  glowing 
in  the  throatand  stomach  immediately. — Severe  burning  in  fauces,  oesophagus, 
and  epigastrium. 

11.  Stomach. — ^Thirst ;  nausea. — ^Vomiting,  produced  apparently  by  too 
powerful  a  dose  of  the  medicine ;  this  recurred  frequently,  though  in  slight 
degree,  when  Helian,  was  taken  for  an  ordinary  cold. — Symptoms  increased 
in  severity  till  she  vomited  freely  when  she  felt  rather  better. 

12.  Abdomea. — (Spleen  enlarged  and  painful.) 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Haemorrhoids. — ^Stools :  soft,  black,  with  emission 
of  semen  ;  hard,  black  every  second  day. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Voice  hoarse. — Cough,  in  forenoon,  with 
gelatinous  expectoration  streaked  with  blood. — Breath  rather  difficult  and 
hurried. 

Q.     Lower  Limbs. — Rheumatic  pain  in  1.  knee  on  descending  stairs. 

85.  Skin. — Skin  generally  of  scarlet  redness  and  very  hot. — Groups  of 
red  pimples  inner  side  of  knee  with  slight  itching. — Many  urticaria-like 
pimples,  esp.  inner  side  of  forearm,  afterwards  on  leg,  afterwards  itching  in 
external  warmth,  in  morning  and  night — Small  red  tetter  to  r.  of  navel.— 
Tingling  of  skin. 


876  HELIOTROPIUM 


Heliotropium. 

Heliotropium  peruvianum.     Heliotrope.     Cherry-pie.     N,  O.  Bora- 
ginaceae.    Tincture  of  whole  fresh  plant  when  in  flower. 

Glinieal. — Clergyman's  sore  throat.  Dysmenorrhoea,  membranous.  Hoarse- 
ness.   Leuoorrhoea.    Uterus,  misplacement  of. 

ChaFaoterifltioB. — Heliotrope  has  been  slightly  proved.  Symptoms 
of  pressure  and  tension  were  produced  in  many  parts :  pressure  on 
the  sternum  impeding  breathing  ;  pressure  on  the  head  ;  on  mons 
veneris ;  pain  as  if  beaten  in  leg  muscles.  Cooper  has  used  this 
remedy  clinically  and  considers  hoarseness  and  "  thick  voice  "  a  great 
indication.  He  has  cured  with  it  clergyman's  sore  throat  It  has 
also  an  action  resembling  that  of  Natrum  hyperchlorinosum  in  utarine 
displacement,  leucorrhoea,  backache.  With  Nat.  hyper,  there  is  pas- 
sive bearing  down  from  heavy,  water-logged  condition  of  uterus. 
With  HelioL  the  bearing  down  is  active.  The  effect  of  Heliot,  given 
by  Cooper  to  a  lady  who  had  been  advised  by  several  surgeons  to  have 
various  organs  either  braced  up  surgically,  or  removed,  was  described 
by  her  as  having  made  her  ''  feel  just  as  if  braced  up  "  six  hours  after 
taking  the  dose.  It  is  especially  indicated  if  there  is  also  a  tendency 
to  loss  of  voice.  It  has  cured  membranous  dysmenorrhoea.  The  head 
symptoms  of  the  proving  were  >  on  walking  in  the  open  air.  Other 
symptoms  were  <  after  resting  ;  <  on  inspiration. 

RelatioilB. — Compare :  Nat.  hyperchl.  ;  Borax  (membranous 
dysmenorrhoea) ;   Symphytum  (bruised  pain  in  leg). 

SYMPTOMS. 

2,  Head. — Headache  in  forehead,  like  a  pressure  and  drawing  pressing, 
>  walking  in  open  air. 

3.  Eyes. — Feeling  of  tension  in  1.  inner  cantbus  extending  down  into 
nasal  bone,  as  if  a  swelling  were  there  ;  eye  seems  drawn  together  and 
smaller. 

II.  Stomach. — Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  and  internal  surface  of 
sternum,  at  times  with  fine  sticking  externally  in  the  same  place  ;  esp.  <  on 
inspiration,  and  the  epigastric  region  is  sore  to  touch ;  most  violent  after 
eating  and  in  evening. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Pressure  on  mons  veneris  only  when 
sitting. — (Membranous  dysmenorrhoea;  leucorrhoea;  uterine  displacements; 
with  backache  ;  esp.  if  subject  to  loss  of  voice.) 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — (Voice  thick ;  clergjrman's  sore  throat.)— 
Pressure  and  oppression  of  external  parts  of  chest,  without  affecting 
breathing. 

23.  Lov^er  Limbs. — Pain  in.  outer  part  of  leg  above  ankle,  extending 
up  the  muscles,  as  if  beaten,  even  when  sitting. — Itching  on  tibia,  with  sensa- 
tion as  if  there  was  an  eruption. 


HELLEBORUS   FCETIDUS  877 

Helix  Tosta. 

Toasted  snail.    N.  0.  Helicidae.    Trituration. 

CUnleaL— Haemoptysis.    Phthisis. 

ChaFaoterlfltios* — Snails  have  a  traditional  virtue  in  curing  con- 
sumption, and  homoeopaths  have  put  the  remedy  to  the  test  by 
potentising  it.  W.  H.  Leonard  {Med.  Adv.,  xxii.  310)  reports  two 
cases  cured  with  Helix  L  cm.  (i)  A  gentleman  had  frequent  attacks 
of  haemoptysis.  Continuous  hoarseness  ;  dry,  tickling  cough  ;  <  at 
night,  preventing  sleep;  dyspnoea,  <  ascending  stairs.  He  had 
already  had  all  Sie  usual  remedies.  Helix  tost  cm.,  three  powders 
given.  There  was  no  more  haemorrhage.  A  few  weeks  later  a  return 
was  feared  and  a  few  more  doses  were  given.  Four  months  later  the 
patient  was  greaUy  improved  in  health  and  remained  well.  (2)  A 
lady  of  tubercular  diathesis  developed  the  disease  after  confinement. 
Several  well-indicated  remedies  failed  to  check  its  progress.  At 
length  haemorrhage  set  in.  Helix  was  given  as  in  the  other  case  with 
prompt  effect  Haemorrhage  ceased ;  cough  and  expectoration 
gradually  improved,  and  in  eight  months  the  patient  was  well  and 
remained  so. 


Helleborus  Foetidus. 

Bear's  foot.    N,  0.  Ranunculaceae.    Tincture  of  the  root. 

CninieaL— Cholera.  Hair,  falling  o£f.  Nails,  falling  o£F.  Scarlatina.  Skin, 
peeling.    Stiff-neck. 

Oharaoteristios. — ^The  effects  of  Hel  f.  have  been  observed  on 
several  persons.  It  is  a  violent  narcotico-acrid  poison,  and  in  fatal 
poisoning  cases  death  has  taken  place  in  convulsions.  The  vision  is 
disordered ;  choleraic  symptoms  occur  ;  skin,  hair,  and  nails  exfoliate. 
The  anxiety  is  >  after  vomiting. 

Relations. — Compare:  Verat.  alb.  (copious  liquid  stools)  ;  Hell,  n.. 
Hen.  v.,  Colch, 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.    Mind. — Dreadful  anxiety  ;  >  after  vomiting. 

3.  Eyes. — Great  difficulty  in  reading,  in  evening,  by  candle-light ;  the 
sensation  is  as  when  the  light  flickers  from  a  draught  of  air ;  cannot  follow 
the  lines. 

4.  Ear. — ^Thumping  pain  below  and  behind  1.  ear. 

8.  Mouth.— Smarting  at  tip  of  tongue.— Painful  sensation  like  aphthae 
in  mouth  (inhaling  fumes  of  triturated  plant).— Taste  of  manure ;  tongue 
yellow  in  middle. — Excoriation  of  mouth  and  throat 

xiy  X8.  Stomach  and  Abdomen.— Nausea  and  vomiting  of  food 
(taken  an  hour  before  with  relish). — Constant  inclination  to  vomit.— When 


878  HELLEBORUS  NIGER 

pounding  the  plant  it  seems  that  the  epigastrinm  with  difficulty  keeps  time 
with  the  inflation  of  the  chest  on  in^iration. — Frightful  pain  in  pit  of 
stomach. — Colic. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Violent  purging  and  vomiting  with  pain  in 
stomach. — ^Abundant  liquid  stool  during  night ;  next  day  two  liquid,  whitish 
stools ;  again  a  liquid  stool  forty-eight  hours  later. 

18.    Cheat. — Tightness  of  chest,  can  scarcely  half  draw  his  breath. 

80.  Neck. — Numbness  in  muscles  of  neck ;  sensibility  to  touch  blunted ; 
it  becomes  stifiF  eighteen  hours  later. 

84.  Generalities.— Fatal  convulsions.— Swooning. 

85.  Skin.— Skin  of  whole  body  peels,  hair  falls  out,  all  the  nails  fall  off 
— Profuse  discharge  from  ulcerated  surface  (from  application). 

ad.    Sleep.— Stirs  a  good  deal  in  his  sleep. 


Helleborus  Niger. 


Black  Hellebore.  Christmas  Rose.  N.  O.  Ranunculaoeas.  Tincture 
of  dry  powdered  root.  Juice  of  fresh  root  mixed  with  equal 
parts  of  alcohol. 

GUnlesL — Albuminuria.  Amenorrhoea.  Aphthae.  Apoplexy.  Cholera.  Con- 
cussion. Convulsions.  Cystitis.  Depression  of  sfirits.  Diarrhoea.  Drop^.  Epi- 
lepsy. Headache.  Hernia.  Home-sickness.  Hydrocele.  Hydrocephalus,  Kidneys, 
congestion  of.  Melancholia.  Meningitis,  Night-blindness.  Puerperal  convulskms. 
Scarlatina.    Tetanus.    Typhoid  fever.    Ulcers.    Wounds. 

Chanotarlstios. — Black  Hellebore  was  one  of  the  drugs  used  to 
produce  the  ''  Helleborism  of  the  ancients/'  the  subject  of  Hahne- 
mann's famous  essay  ;  but  the  dru^  most  conunonly  employed  was 
the  White  Hellebore^  or  Veratrum  cubum,  which  belongs  to  another 
family,  the  Melanthaceae.  "  Black  "  hellebore  receives  its  name  from 
the  external  colour  of  its  root ;  the  root  of  Ver.  alb.  is  extremely  white. 
Teste  quotes  Hahnemann  as  saying :  "  I  conclude  from  various  obser- 
vations that  one  of  the  first  effects  of  Black  Hellebore  is  a  kind  of 
stupor,  a  dulness  of  the  sensorium  commune^  a  condition  where,  with 
sight  unimpaired,  nothing  is  seen  very  fully,  and  the  patient  does  not 
pay  any  attention  to  anything ;  with  the  hearing  perfectly  sound, 
nothing  is  heard  distinctly  ;  with  perfectty  constituted  gustatory 
organs,  everything  seems  to  have  lost  its  taste ;  where  the  mind  is 
often  or  always  without  ideas  ;  where  the  past  is  forgotten  or  little 
remembered ;  where  nothing  gives  one  any  pleasure  ;  where  one's 
sleep  is  very  light,  and  a  really  sound,  refreshing  sleep  is  not  to  be 
had ;  and  where  one  desires  to  work  without  having  the  necessary 
strength  or  attention  required  for  it."  Teste  groups  Hell.  n.  in  the 
Chatnomilla  class,  with  Gratiola  and  Viola  trie.,  all  of  which  cause  "  a 
particular  derangement  of  the  cerebral  functions  and  even  of  the 
whole  nervous  system;  a  painful  increase  of  the  sentient  action, 
followed  by  a  considerable  depression  of  the  vital  forces,  and  a 
certain  disorder  of  the  mental  faculties.''    He  cured  with  Hell,  n. 


HELLEBORUS   NIGER  879 

a  case  of  epilepsy  in  a  little  girl  five  weeks  old  after  the  failure  of 
Cham.  Cham,  was  given  to  the  nurse.  Hell,  «.  directly  to  the  patient. 
The  history  was  this :  The  child,  which  was  well  formed,  was  consti- 
pated from  the  day  of  birth.  The  mother,  twenty-eight,  dark,  robust, 
but  of  irritable  temperament,  laid  the  child's  sickness  to  a  fear  she 
had  had  towards  the  end  of  her  pregnancy.  This  may  have  been  the 
case,  but  the  lady  had  lost  a  boy  in  convulsions,  precisely  similar,  the 
previous  year.  The  little  girl  had  every  day  five  or  six  paroxjrsms, 
each  lasting  from  one  to  three  minutes,  and  almost  always  followed  by 
sleep.  There  was  sudden  inability  of  the  body,  without  any  marked 
stiffness  ;  head  slightly  thrown  back  ;  repeated  oscillations  of  tongue 
from  right  to  left,  the  tongue  being  slightly  protruded  from  the  mouth. 
Staring  look,  convulsive  rolling  upward  of  eyes  when  the  paroxysms 
were  very  violent ;  a  few  acute  cries  followed  by  drowsiness,  when 
the  spasm  was  near  its  end.  During  the  paroxysm  the  child  remained 
so  perfectly  sensible  that  a  slight  shock,  as  the  shutting  of  a  door, 
arrested  the  paroxysms  at  once,  and  then  shortened  them  a  good  deal. 
HelL  n.  cured  in  two  or  three  days.  From  a  purely  nervous  derange- 
ment of  this  kind,  the  action  of  Hdl,  n.  goes  on  to  actual  inflammatory 
states  of  the  brain  and  its  meninges.  The  drowsiness  so  prominent 
in  Teste's  case  is  a  leading  note  of  the  conditions  of  meningitis  and 
fever  to  which  the  drug  is  homeopathic.  Such  a  condition  is  found 
when  effusion  has  taken  place  from  the  inflamed  membranes,  and 
here  the  ancient  reputation  of  HelL  n.  in  dropsical  conditions  is  con- 
firmed. The  forehead  is  wrinkled  ;  there  are  automatic  movements 
of  one  arm  and  leg,  whilst  the  other  is  paralysed  ;  the  head  rolls  from 
side  to  side  with  screams ;  greedy  drinking  of  water  ;  chewing  motion 
of  jaws ;  urine  scanty  or  entirely  suppressed,  sometimes  with  sedi- 
ment Uke  coffee  grounds.  This  condition  of  urine  is  an  indication  for 
HelL  n.  in  many  states,  and  a  sign  of  the  favourable  action  of  the 
remedy  is,  as  Nash  points  out,  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  flow.  In 
post-scarlatinal  dropsy  with  these  indications  it  is  of  great  service. 
It  has  cured  concussion  of  the  brain  resulting  from  a  blow  on  the 
head  after  Am,  had  failed.  In  this  case  one  pupil  was  larger  than 
the  other ;  the  patient  was  drowsy,  answered  questions  slowly ;  one 
leg  dragged  on  walking.  In  fever  there  is  sooty  appearance  of 
nostrils ;  dry,  yellow  tongue  with  red  edges ;  breath  horribly  offen- 
sive ;  drinks  roll  audibly  into  stomach ;  fever  <  4  to  8  p.m. ;  face 
pale,  almost  cold ;  pulse  faint,  imperceptible  ;  picks  clothes  and  lips. 
Guernsey  sums  up  the  remedy  thus :  '^  In  dropsical  affections  ;  dropsy 
of  outer  parts  and  of  inner  parts  ;  parts  which  are  usually  white  turn 
red ;  absence  of  thirst  in  all  complaints  ;  chilliness,  heat,  perspiration 
without  thirst.  Discharge  of  urine  too  scanty ;  urine  with  dark  sedi- 
ment like  coffee  grounds — ^top  part  is  clear,  but  leaving  this  sediment. 
Nausea  at  the  stomach  ;  rumbling  and  rolling  in  the  bowels ;  darting 
in  the  joints,  also  in  the  bones  ;  heat  with  shuddering."  In  addition 
to  the  "  absence  of  thirst "  there  is  '*  drinks  with  avicSty,  bites  spoon, 
but  remains  unconscious,"  and ''Thirst  with  disgust  for  drink,"  as 
there  is  also  "  Hunger  :  child  nurses  greedily  with  disgust  for  food." 
Hunger,  yet  food  is  repulsive  though  it  tastes  natural.  The  hungry, 
nauseated,  uneasy  sensation  at  the  epigastrium  showing  its  profound 


88o  HELLEBORUS   NIGER 

action  on  the  solar  ganglion.  Cooper,  who  has  studied  the  Helle- 
bores very  closely,  says  that  they  produce  the  ''  sinking  sensation  " 
more  intensely  than  any  other  drugs.  The  Winter  Aconite  {Eranikis 
f^emalis)f  a  close  ally  of  Hell,  it.,  '^  acts  on  the  solar  plexus  and  works 
upwards,  causing  dyspnoea."  He  quotes  (H.  W.,  xxx.  210)  from 
Flora  Historica  an  interesting  account  of  how  French  prisoners  of 
war  at  Norman-cross  were  sufiFering  from  an  epidemic  of  night-blind- 
ness (nyctalopia),  when  for  lack  of  snuff  they  took  to  using  powdered 
Black  MclleborCf\v/iib  the  result  that  they  were  cured  of  their  bUndness 
in  a  few  days.  Among  the  dropsies  cured  may  be  mentioned  hydrocele 
from  suppressed  eruptions.  The  old  use  of  Helleb,  as  an  application 
to  ulcers  seems  to  have  depended  on  its  property  of  draining  the 
tissues.  In  the  pathogenesis  of  Hell.  feet,  is  a  symptom  bearing  on 
this  : ''  profuse  discharge  from  ulcerated  surface.''  Cooper  has  cured 
tdcers  with  dropsical  conditions  with  Hell.  n.  and  Hell.  v.  given 
internally.  The  headaches  of  Hell.  n.  are  stupefying;  sensation  as 
though  contents  of  head  were  bulging  at  forehead  and  eyes  ;  shocks 
pass  through  the  brain  like  electricity  ;  boring  and  shaking  in  fore- 
head and  occiput ;  bruised  pain  ;  heat  in  brain.  Pains  in  occiput  and 
nape  of  neck  I  have  frequently  cured  with  Hell.  n. ;  also  headache 
which  the  patient  can  only  describe  as  a  '^  stupid  headache."  There  is 
vomiting  and  purging  as  with  the  other  Hellebores,  the  vomit  is  apt 
to  be  green  and  the  stools  jelly-like.  The  pulse  is  slow  and  feeble,  the 
respiration  is  slow  and  the  temperature  low.  Torpidity  and  apathy 
run  through  the  remedy.  In  this  it  approaches  Opium.  Apoplexy 
followed  by  idiocy.  The  symptoms  are  <  4  to  8  p.m.,  and  in  the 
evening  and  night  (sees  spirits  ;  rolls  head ;  dry  cough  ;  night- 
blindness)  ;  <  in  cool  air  ;  from  uncovering ;  >  in  warm  air  ;  by 
wrapping  up.  <  From  exertion  ;  from  motion ;  from  stooping ; 
breathing  easier  when  lying  down  ;  lying  perfectly  quiet  >  pains  in 
head.  Touch  <.  <  When  thinking  of  ailment ;  >  when  mind  is 
diverted. 

Relations. — Anlidoied  hy:  Camph.,  Chi.  Compatible:  Zinc, 
Bell.,  Bry.,  Chi.,  Lye,  Nux  v.,  Phos.,  Puis,,  Sul.  Compare:  Apis. 
(Apis  has  exouisite  sensitiveness  of  abdomen  ;  Hell.  n.  complete 
sensorial  apathy  ;  Hell.  n.  has  puckering  of  face,  dropping  of  jaw, 
and  automatic  action  of  limbs  of  one  side  ;  Apis  has  <  from  heat, 
Hell.  n.  >  from  heat)  ;  Apocy.,  Digit,  (slow  pulse) ;  Kali  bro.,  Lach.; 
Dig.,  Tereb.  (breathes  better  lying  down) ;  Phos.  ac.  (sensorial  depres- 
sion, drowsiness,  apathy  ;  but  Phos.  ac.  can  be  roused  eaisily ; 
muscles  not  completely  relaxed,  has  not  the  dirty  nostrils  of  Hell.  n.). 
Opium  (but  the  stupor  of  Op.  is  more  profound  ;  face  dark,  breathing 
stertorous) ;  Zinc,  (checked  exanthemata  ;  hydrocephalus  ;  Zinc,  has 
fidgetty  motion  of  feet) ;  Lach.  (co£Fee-ground  sediment  in  urine  ; 
muscular  weakness ;  jelly-like  mucous  diarrhcea  accompanying 
dropsy) ;  Pip.  meth.,  Ox.  ac.  (>  when  mind  diverted);  Nat.  m.  « 
from  consolation). 

Causation, — Checked  exanthemata.    Blows.    Disappointed  love. 


HELLEBORUS   NIGER  88i 


SYMPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Melancholy  taciturnity.  —  Excessive,  and  almost  mortal 
anguish. — Home-sickness. — Hypochondriacal  humour. — ^Taedium  vitae;  en- 
vious seeing  others  happy. — Suicidal. — Indolence. — Sobbing  lamentation. 
— Obstinate  silence. — Irritable,  <  from  consolation. — Suspicious. — Dulness 
of  the  internal  senses. — Stupidity  and  want  of  reflection,  with  (thoughtless) 
fixedness  of  look  on  one  single  point,  much  moaning,  and  inability  to  think. — 
Weakness  of  the  memory  .—The  mind  seems  to  lose  command  over  the  body  ; 
the  muscles  refuse  their  office  as  soon  as  the  attention  is  diverted  (if  the  will 
is  not  strongly  fixed  upon  their  action ;  if  he  talks  he  lets  fall  what  he  holds 
in  his  hand). 

2.  Head. — Giddiness  on  stooping. — Stupefying  headache,  with  coryza 
(4  to  8  p.m.)  ;  <  from  stooping,  >  at  rest  and  in  the  open  air. — Stupefying 
pain,  and  sensation  of  bruising  in  the  head.— Pressive  and  numbing  head- 
ache.— Pressive  headache  from  outward  to  inward,  with  stupefaction  and 
heaviness  of  the  head ;  <  on  moving  the  head,  from  exertion  ;  >  in  open  air 
and  from  distraction  of  mind. — Inflammation  of  the  brain,  with  stupefaction  ; 
heat  and  heaviness  of  the  head ;  <  from  thinking  of  the  pain. — Hydroce- 
phalus with  stupefaction ;  stupor  ;  boring  with  the  head  in  the  pillows ;  cold- 
ness of  the  body  ;  <  from  stooping. — Painful  heaviness,  with  burning  pain  in 
the  head,  coldness  of  the  fingers,  sensation  of  general  shivering,  and  paleness 
of  the  face. — The  headache  is  more  bearable  on  keeping  quiet,  and  endea- 
vouring to  sleep. — Bruised  pain  externally  on  vertex  and  occiput ;  esp.  during 
the  febrile  chill ;  at  every  movement,  esp.  when  stooping  and  going  upstairs, 
the  pain  changes  into  a  violent  twitching  in  integuments  of  head  >  by 
external  pressure. — Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  exterior  of  the  head,  and 
esp.  at  the  occiput,  as  if  it  were  bruised,  on  its  being  touched,  and  oh 
moving  the  head. — Uninterrupted  pressive  pain  in  occiput  extending  toward 
nape  of  neck.— Headache  extending  from  nape  to  vertex. — Jerking  in  the 
integuments  of  the  head,  during  movement,  when  stooping,  and  when  going 
up  stairs. — Disposition  to  bury  the  head  in  the  pillow, when  sleeping. — Small 
swellings  in  the  skin  of  the  forehead,  with  bruise-like  pain. — Moist  scabs  on 
the  scalp. — Falling  ofiF  of  the  hair  (on  the  head  and  on  the  whole  body),  with, 
pricking  pain  on  the  scalp,  esp.  on  the  occiput,  with  pale  dropsical  swelling  of 
the  face  and  body. 

3.  Eyes. — Pain  in  the  eyes,  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  the  orbital 
margins. — Pressive  heaviness  in  the  eyes,  in  a  downward  direction. — Pupils 
dilated  (one  pupil  larger  than  the  other)  without  inflammation. — Involuntary 
fixedness  of  look  on  one  single  point. — Twitching  in  the  levatores  palpe- 
brarum and  the  cheeks,  with  heat  in  the  face. — Night-blindness. — Photo- 
phobia by  day. 

4.  Ears. — Shootings  in  the  ears,  day  and  night,  with  searching 
piercing. 

6.  Face. — Face  pale,  sometimes  yellowish.  —  Pale  and  (Edematous 
swelling  of  the  face. — Forehead  wrinkled. — White  vesicles  on  the  lips, 
which  are  swollen. — ^The  upper  lip  is  cracked. — Soreness  of  the  corners 
of  the  mouth. — Dull  aching  pain  in  the  cheek-bone. 

VOL.  I.  57 


882  HELLEBORUS  NIGER 

7.  Teeth.— Toothache  at  night,  with  shooting  and  tearing  pains,  <  by 
cold  and  heat. 

8.  Mouth.— Troublesome  dryness  in  the  palate,  with  incisive  and 
scraping  pain  during  deglutition.— -Constant  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the 
mouthi  and  salivation,  with  excoriation  of  the  commissures  of  the  lips. — 
Vesicles  and  apthae  in  the  mouth,  and  on  the  tongue. — Numbness  and  swell- 
ing of  the  tongue.  —  Pimple  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  painfully  stinging 
when  touched.-— Dry,  white  tongue  (in  the  morning).— Bitter  taste  in  the 
throat,  <  by  eating. 

Q.  Throat. — Scraping  feeling  on  back  of  palate. — ^Tiresome  dryness  on 
palate  and  cutting  and  scraping  pain  on  moving  the  parts  in  swallowing^ — 
Aching,  sore  throat  on  swallowing ;  feels  excoriated. 

II.  Stomach. — Nausea,  sometimes  with  excessive  hunger. — Speedy 
satiety,  with  repugnance  as  to  rest  of  meal. — Has  appetite,  but  on  eating 
has  no  taste,  and  becomes  suddenly  nauseated,  which  ceases  immediately 
after  eating. — (Nausea  of  palate  and  throat.) — Nausea  rising  up  from  pit  of 
stomach. — Nausea  in  whole  abdomen,  with  frequent  empty  eractation& — 
Dislike  to  food,  esp.  meat,  green  vegetables,  and  saurkrauL  —  Green, 
blackish  vomiting,  with  pains  in  the  abdomen. — Heaviness,  fulness,  and 
inflation  of  the  stomach.— Inflation  of  the  epigastrium,  with  pain  of  ulcera- 
tion, and  impeded  respiration. — Sensation  of  excessive  uneasiness  of  the 
epigastrium. — Painful  pressure  on  the  epigastrium  at  every  step. — Sensation 
of  retraction  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Painf  ulness  of  the  stomach  when 
coughing  and  walking. — Burning  pain  in  the  stomach. — Burning  and 
scraping  in  the  stomach. 

la.  Abdomen. — Pinchings  in  the  abdomen. — Sensation  of  coldness  in 
the  abdomen. — Heaviness  in  the  abdomen.— Dropsical  swelling  in  the  abdo- 
men.— Clucking  in  the  abdomen,  esp.  on  breathing  deeply,  as  if  there  were 
water  in  the  intestines. — Rumbling  and  borborygmi  in  the  abdomen. — In  r. 
nguinal  region  single  pressures  ending  in  a  stitch,  a  sensation  as  if  a  hernia 
would  ensue. — Severe  hard  pressure  on  middle  of  os  pubis. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.- Tenesmus,  with  discharge  of  (white)  gelatinous 
mucus,  preceded  by  pinchings  in  the  umbilical  region. — Stools  consisting  of 
pure,  tenacious,  white  mucus. — Stools  like  frog-spawn. — Diarrhoea,  with  pain 
in  the  abdomen,  and  nausea. — Watery  and  frequent  evacuations. — Hard, 
scanty  stool,  during  and  immediately  after  which  violent  cutting,  shooting  in 
rectum,  from  below  up,  just  as  if  it  contracted  tightly,  and  as  if  a  body  with 
cutting  edges  stuck  there. — After  an  evacuation,  burning  hot  smarting  at  the 
anus. — Feeling  as  if  intestines  had  no  power  to  evacuate  fseces,  during  soft 
stool. — Involuntary  stools.— Blenorrhoea  of  rectum  with  spasm  of  bladder.— 
Haemorrhoids. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Frequent  want  to  make  water,  vnih  scanty 
emission. — Scanty  urine,  with  sediment  like  coffee  grounds. — Feeble  stream. 
— Deep-coloured  urine. — ^A  large  quantity  of  pale,  watery  urine  is  emitted. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Suppression  of  sexual  desire,  with  flacddity 
of  the  genital  parts. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Pain  under  1.  nipple,  pains  all  over  her, 
forced  her  menses  on ;  had  to  get  up  at  night  to  pass  water. — Suppression  of 
men8e8.^AmenorrhGea :  from  disappointed  love;  from  damp  feet,  and 
getting  wet  through. 


HELLEBORUS   NIGER  883 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Sighing  respiration. — Breathes  easier  lying 
down. — Breathing  difficult  with  anxiety,  <  every  evening,  must  sit  up. — 
Con^  :  dry,  hacking,  <  at  night,  with  gagging ;  comes  suddenly  while 
smoking. — SufiFocating  constriction  in  the  throat  and  nose. — Short,  dry  cough, 
with  painful  tension  in  the  1.  hypochondrium. — Difficult  respiration,  as  from 
hydrothorax. — ^Accelerated,  or  deep  and  slow  respiration. 

x8.  Chest. — Constriction  of  the  throat,  nose,  and  chest. — Heat  in  the 
chest. 

IQ.  Heart. — Palpitation  of  the  heart.— Anxiousness  about  heart  which 
prevents  him  resting  anywhere. 

20.  Neck  and  Back.— Stiffness  and  painful  sensibility  of  the  neck  and 
the  nape  of  the  neck  during  movement. — Swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  neck. 
— Contractive  pain  in  the  loins. — Gnawing  and  obtuse  lancinations  of  the 
spine. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  between  the  shoulder-blades. 

23.  Upper  Limbs. — Tearing  in  the  bones  of  the  arms  and  joints,  and  in 
the  upper  part  of  the  fingers. — ^Jerking  in  the  muscles  of  the  arms. — Piercing 
and  shooting  in  the  hands  and  joints  of  the  fingers. — Want  of  strength  in  the 
hands. — Spasmodic  stiffness  of  the  fingers. — Humid,  painless  vesicles  between 
the  fingers. — Ulceration  around  the  nails. 

23.  Lovrer  Limbs. — ^Violent  lancinations,  and  burning  pressure  in  the 
hips. — Pricking  pain  in  the  1.  hip. — Want  of  stability  in  the  legs,  with  yielding 
of  the  knees. — Stiffness  and  tension  in  the  thighs  and  hams. — Obtuse  and 
piercing  lancinations  in  the  joints  of  the  knees,  and  of  the  feet. — Humid, 
painless  vesicles  between  the  toes. 

24.  Generalities. — Shooting  and  piercing  pains  in  different  parts,  and 
esp.  in  the  periosteum,  <  by  fresh  air,  corporeal  fatigue,  eating  and  drinking. 
— Pullings  and  tearing  in  the  limbs. — Shooting  pains  in  the  joints. — Sudden 
relaxation  of  all  the  muscles. — The  muscles  refuse  to  perform  their  office, 
unless  sustained  attention  be  paid  to  them  ;  staggering  gait ;  suffering  objects 
to  fall  which  are  grasped  by  the  hand. — Convulsive  twitching  of  the  muscles 
(during  sleep). — Relief  is  found  in  the  open  air,  and  sensations  are  felt  as 
when  recovering  from  a  long  illness. — ^All  things  have  a  freshness  about  them. 
— Convulsions. — Cramps. — Syncope. — Dropsical  swellings. — Falling  off  of  the 
hair  and  nails. 

25.  Skin. — Paleness  of  the  skin.— Miliary  eruptions. — Leucophlegmatic 
swelling  of  the  skin  of  the  whole  body ;  anasarca.— -General  desquamation  of 
the  skin. — The  hair  and  nails  fall  off. 

20.  Sleep. — Stupor,  sopor. — Sleepiness,  with  eyes  half  open,  and  pupils 
turned  upwards. — Confused,  anxious  dreams,  the  renxembrance  of  which  is 
not  retained. — Sleeplessness. — ^Tossing  in  the  bed. 

27.  Fever. — Pulse,  small,  slow,  almost  imperceptible. — Shiverings,  alter- 
nating with  shooting  pains  in  the  limbs. — Chilliness  predominates  during  the 
day,  as  long  as  he  remains  out  of  bed,  with  heat  of  the  face  and  drowsiness. — 
Chill,  with  goose-flesh  and  pain  in  the  joints.  —  The  chill  spreads  from 
the  arms.  —  Coldness  of  the  whole  body,  and  esp.  of  the  extremities. — 
<7eneral  shivering,  with  corrugated  skin,  and  tenderness  of  the  scalp  when 
touched,  and  on  moving  the  head  ;  pullings  and  tearings  in  the  limbs,  lanci- 
nations in  the  joints,  and  absence  of  thirst. — In  the  evening,  after  lying  down, 
burning  heat  throughout  the  body,  and  chiefly  in  the  head,  with  internal 


884  HELLEBORUS  VIRIDIS 

shuddering  and  shivering,  without  thirst ;  dislike  to  liquids ;  when  attempting 
to  drink,  very  little  can  be  taken  at  a  time. — Nocturnal  sweat,  towards  the 
morning.— After  lying  down  in  bed,  the  heat  comes  on  immediately,  generally 
accompanied  by  perspiration. — Heat  followed  by  chill,  with  colic. — Cdd,  at 
times  clammy  perspiration. 

Helleborus  Orientalis. 

Helleborus  orientalis,  Lam.    N.  0,  Ranunculaceae.     Tincture 

of  root. 

OlInlcaL—DiarrhcBa.    Indigestion.    Salivation. 

Ohapaoteristios.— This  was  proved  by  V.  Schrofif  on  Lederer, 
and  produced  symptoms  like  those  of  the  other  Hellebores.  These  are 
peculiar  :  Accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth  with  dean  tongue. 
Bad  taste,  with  clean  tongue.  Prostration,  exhaustion,  and  dis- 
inclination to  work  ;  burning  in  stomach  ;  diarrhoea.  The  symptoms 
were  >  by  coffee. 

SYMPTOMS. 

2.    Head. — Heaviness ;  fulness ;  headache. 

8.  Mouth. — Acctunulation  of  water  in  mouth ;  with  clean  tongue. — 
Bad  taste  with  clean  tongue. 

iz.  Stomach.— Loss  of  appetite. — Eructations. — Hiccough. — Nausea. — 
Burning,  extending  from  stomach  to  lower  portion  of  oesophagus. — Epigastric 
region :  Feeling  of  fulness  with  inclination  to  vomit ;  slight  burning, 
afterwards  extending  to  intestines,  followed  by  pressure  in  stomach. 

13, 13.  AtMlomen  and  Stool. — Frequent  rumbling  along  bowels,  in 
morning  on  waking,  soon  followed  by  four  liquid  stools  in  succession. — 
Pain  esp.  in  region  of  1.  transverse  colon. 

14.    Urinary  Organs.— Urine  more  profuse  and  paler  than  usual 

19.    Pulse. — Pulse  more  frequent,  body  warmer. — Pulse  slowed. 


Helleborus  Yiridis. 

Green  Hellebore.    N.O.  Ranunculaceae.    Tincture  ol  root ;  of  young 

shoots. 

OUnieaL — Colic    Diarrhcea.    Epilepsy.    Sore  throat.    Ulcers. 

Gharaoteristios. — ^This  was  also  proved  by  Schroff .  It  produced 
roaring  in  the  ears  ;  itching  in  the  nose  ;  and  prickling  of  the 
tongue ;  diarrhoea  of  liquid  stools ;  a  condition  of  sopor.  Cooper 
has  cured  with  it  ulcers  of  the  leg,  near  the  ankle,  after  the  failure 
of  Hell.  n.  Also  a  case  of  epilepsy  in  a  child,  the  concomitant 
symptoms  being :  "  Head  sweats  before  the  fit ;  diarrhoea  for  four 
days ;  sleepy." 


HELODERMA  885 


STHPT0M8. 

4.  Cars — Ringing  and  roaring  in  the  ears ;  with  feeling  of  stoppage  in 
both  ears. 

5.  Nose. — ^Violent  itching  of  nose  with  frequent  violent  sneezing  (from 
application  of  extract  to  mucous  membrane  of  nose). 

8«  Mouth. — Prickling  on  tongue  >  by  frequent  rinsing  of  mouth  with 
water. — Burning  in  mouth. — ^At  first  profuse  secretion  of  saliva  and  mucus  in 
mouth,  soon  followed  by  dr3mess. — The  taste  was  so  intensely  bitter  and 
rancid,  that  she  sufiFered  for  a  long  time  from  nausea  and  great  inclination  to 
vomit. 

9*  Throat. — Feeling  of  warmth  in  pharynx  and  stomach,  gradually 
becoming  a  dull  burning,  not  >  by  drinking  much  water. 

1I9  la.  Stomach  and  Abdomen.— Frequent  eructations,  and  gurgling 
in  abdomen. — Digestion  disturbed  several  days. — Abdomen  somewhat  sensi- 
tive and  distended. 

13,  Stool. — ^Very  profuse  liquid  stools. — Three  liquid  evacuations  from 
bowels,  at  short  intervals,  with  intense  colic,  the  last  stool  accompanied  by 
tenesmus,  great  nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  violent  headache  and 
thirst. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Micturition  frequent,  painless,  urine  pale. 

IQ.  Pulse. — ^The  pulse  rose  during  the  first  hour  several  beats  in 
frequency  (apparently  caused  by  the  excessive  nausea  from  the  bad  taste  of 
the  drug),  and  afterwards  sank  below  the  normal  in  one  case  ;  while  in  those 
who  took  doses  of  2  to  4  grains  enveloped  in  a  vehicle,  the  pulse  immediately 
sank  several  beats. 

26.  Sleep. — ^A  condition  bordering  on  sopor,  lasting  the  whole  night,  and 
preventing  refreshing  sleep. — Night  restless,  sleep  frequently  interrupted. 

27.  Fever. — Sensation  of  heat  at  times  over  the  whole  body. 


Heloderma. 


GUa  monster.  Heloderma  suspectum.  N.  0.  Helodermidae  of  the 
Lacertilia.  Trituration  of  sugar  of  milk  saturated  with  the 
venom.    Solution  of  the  venom  in  alcohol. 

GliBteaL>-Brain,  base  of,  affected.  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.  Coldness. 
Headache.  Heart  failure.  Locomotor  ataxy.  Neuralgia.  Numbness.  Paralysis. 
Paralysis  agitans. 

CSharaoteristios. — ^The  information  we  possess  of  the  action  of 
Heloderma  is  contained  in  vols.  v.  to  xi.  of  Horn.  Recorder^  including 
some  remarkable  and  important  provings  by  Dr.  R.  Boocock.  The 
name  given  to  this  remedy  by  the  Recorder  is  Heloderma  horridum^  but 
as  there  is  no  little  confusion  between  two  species,  I  prefer  to  name 
the  remedy  Heloderma  simply.  The  first  notice  of  the  remedy  is  in 
vol.  V.  p.  163,  in  letters  from  Dr.  Charles  D,  Belden,  who  supplied 


886  HELODERMA 

Messrs.  Boericke  and  Tafel  with  a  living  specimen  and  also  poison 
obtained  by  himself.  Dr.  Belden  calls  his  specimens  "  H.  horridum 
OR  Suspedum.*^  Now  Dr.  Belden  writes  from  Arizona,,  and  the  river 
Gila  (pronounced  "  Hee-la  ")  from  which  the  lizard  takes  its  name 
'^  Gila  Monster  "  is  an  Arizona  river,  and  the  Arizona  lizard  is  Hdodcrma 
suspectutn,  Heloderma  horridum,  the  "  Crust  lizard,"  which  is  also 
called  ''  Gila  monster,"  is  a  Mexican  lizard  and  is  generally  regarded 
as  harmless.  At  any  rate  it  is  agreed  that  there  is  one  lizard 
that  is  poisonous,  and  that  lizard  is  a  Heloderma^  and  our  remedy  is 
the  poison  obtained  therefrom.  ''An  ugly,  disagreeable-loolang 
creature,  the  head  long  and  blunt,  eyes  black  and  bead-like,  tail  half 
the  length  of  the  body,  thick-set  and  club-like.  The  entire  body 
cased  in  a  thinly  coated  armour,  marked  curiously  with  yellow  and 
black."  It  is  sluggish  and  slow  of  movement  when  kept  in  the  dark, 
but  may  develop  great  activity  when  brought  into  the  sunlight.  It 
is  most  tenacious  of  life,  the  only  vulnerable  part  seems  to  be  at  the 
junction  of  the  head  with  the  spine,  a  blow  on  which  will  kill  it  Of 
the  bite  of  the  reptile  Belden  says:  "This  animal  does  not  bite 
frequently,  but  when  it  does  it  is  understood  that  the  result  is  a 
benumbing  paralysis,  like  that  of  paralysis  agitansy  or  to  hcomototr  ataxy. 
There  is  no  tetanic  phase."  The  venom  is  alkaline  in  reaction. 
Numbers  of  cases  of  bites  are  on  record.  A  dog  bitten  in  the  nose 
''uttered  fearful  howls,  and  when,  after  great  difficulty,  he  was 
released,  had  symptoms  like  '  blind  staggers,'  began  turning  aroand 
in  a  circle,  and  died  in  twenty  minutes."  A  young  miner  bitten  in 
the  leg,  though  in  robust  health  at  the  time,  at  once  began  to  lose 
flesh,  became  melancholy,  and  died  in  a  few  months  like  one  in  rapid 
consumption.  Helod.  has  the  reputation  of  being  fatal  to  drinkers,  and 
to  affect  the  temperate  less  severely.  This,  says  Belden,  is  borne  oot 
somewhat  by  the  recovery  of  Mr.  Vail,  of  Tucson,  a  man  of  temperate 
habits,  after  a  bite,  and  the  death,  after  lingering  several  months,  of  a 
man  bitten  whilst  drunk.  This  lingering  nature  of  the  action  of  the 
poison  is  markedly  different  from  the  snake  poisons,  which  generally 
kill  quickly  if  at  all.  An  Indian  woman  bitten  in  the  leg,  survived, 
but  the  leg  shrivelled,  and  she  became  a  semi-idiot,  though  she  lived 
over  thirty  years  after.  The  writer  of  an  article  quoted  by  the 
Recorder  from  the  New  York  Sun,  relating  her  case,  thus  describes  the 
effect ;  Where  the  person  survives  an  hour  or  two  after  the  bite, 
the  agony  is  described  as  awful  to  witness.  The  poison  goes  through 
the  human  system  with  lightning  rapidity,  and  causes  unspeakable 
pain  and  excruciating  agony  from  head  to  foot.  Though  paralysed, 
every  muscle,  bone,  sinew,  and  nerve  is  keenly  alive  to  intense  pain. 
The  sufferer's  head  seems  as  if  it  would  split  open.  Very  few 
persons  bitten  can  speak  after  the  first  fifteen  minutes,  but  uncon- 
sciousness seldom  comes  until  a  few  minutes  before  death.  Mr.  Vail 
says  his  suffering  was  intense,  the  pain  proceeding  from  the  wounded 
part  to  the  head  and  back.  Immediately  after  receiving  the  wound, 
which  was  on  his  index  finger,  both  wrist  and  finger  were  tightly 
bandaged.  Two  hours  later  the  wound  was  cleansed  and  dressed  and 
the  bandages  reapplied.  For  three  days  those  intense  pains  would 
shoot  towards  the  head  and  spine  on  loosening  the  bandages  in  the 


HELODERMA  887 

least  degree.  After  three  months  the  only  perceptible  result  was  a 
swollen  tongue  which  seemed  then  unwilling  to  resume  its  proper 
size.  The  treatment  he  received  was  profuse  sweating  by  adminis- 
tration of  Jaborandi.  Experiments  on  animals  seemed  to  show  that 
death  occurred  rather  from  heart  failure  than  from  respiratory 
faUure.  This  much  was  known  when  Dr.  Robert  Boo(x>ck,  of 
Flatbush,  made  his  proving  which  has  given  the  remedy  a  definite 
place  in  the  homoeopathic  materia  medica.  The  first  experience  was 
with  a  solution  of  the  6x  trituration,  one  drachm  in  four  ounces  of 
alcohol.  Of  this  he  took  three  or  four  drops.  He  was  seized  with 
an  internal  coldness  from  the  heart  as  if  being  frozen  to  death 
internally  and  had  no  way  of  warming  himself.  "Coldness  from 
within  outward."  The  coldness  of  this  remedy  is  more  intense  than 
that  of  any  other.  "Arctic  coldness,"  the  prover  called  it  The 
coldness  was  at  times  followed  by  sensations  of  heat  and  burning. 
Dr.  Boocock's  observation  of  the  cold  sensations  of  Helod,  was  con- 
firmed by  a  young  clerk  in  the  employment  of  Messrs.  Boericke  and 
Tafel,  who  took  six  doses  of  Helod,  6  out  of  bravado.  The  second 
night  he  awoke,  and  the  impression  that  he  was  under  the  influence 
of  Hflod.  flashed  on  his  mind.  He  felt  a  cold  sensation  creeping 
down  his  body  and  legs,  and  was  in  a  very  cold  clammy  sweat.  This 
lasted  all  the  rest  of  the  night  and  he  could  get  no  more  sleep.  It 
began  to  pass  off  by  morning,  and  he  felt  no  more  of  it.  The  con- 
stricting sensations  of  the  serpent  venoms  were  produced  by  Helod,, 
also  the  numbness  and  darting  pains  and  the  sensitiveness  to  external 
pressure.  Many  of  the  symptoms  came  on  in  the  night  waking  the 
prover  from  sleep  (like  the  "<  from  sleep"  of  Laches,).  The 
tremors,  spongy  feeling  of  feet  on  walking,  pains  in  back  and  limbs, 
bear  out  Belden's  commendation  of  Helod,  in  locomotor  ataxy  and 
paralysis  agitans.  Dr.  Boocock  gave  great  relief  with  the  medicine 
in  a  case  of  the  latter  ;  and  £•  £.  Case  efiFected  great  improvement  in 
a  case  of  locomotor  ataxy  in  an  auburn-haired  woman,  55.  She  had 
the  classical  symptoms  of  the  complaint  and  "  tingling,  creeping 
sensations  in  legs  as  if  from  insects,  was  <  lying  in  bed  at  night ; 
<  from  exposure  ;  from  touch.  Arms  numb.  LiCgs  insensible  to 
battery.  Tongue  dry  and  cracked.  Swallowing  difficult."  Under 
Helod.  900,  and  later,  45m,  after  the  appearance  of  an  eruption,  she 
recovered  a  fair  degree  of  health  and  usefulness.  C.  £.  Johnson 
reported  to  Dr.  Boocock  (if.  /{.,  ix.  141)  the  relief  of  a  woman  who 
had  many  of  the  symptoms  of  the  proving  (and  had  been  pronounced 
incurable),  complaining  especially  of  the  intense  coldness.  She 
received  Helod,  aoo,  and  the  coldness  disappeared  almost  completely. 
Boocock  cured  a  case  of  "blue  hands,"  remaining  long  after 
diphtheritic  paralysis;  and  he  restored  two  patients  apparently 
moribund.  In  one  case  the  breathing  was  slow,  "  tongue  cold  and 
slate-coloured,  breath  cold."  The  other  case  was  that  of  a  woman,  65. 
In  the  act  of  dressing,  strength  suddenly  left  her,  mouth  fell  open, 
tongue  and  breath  cold,  and  she  was  apparently  dying  and  felt  so. 
There  was  intense  pain  at  the  back  of  the  head."  Helod.  200 
was  given,  as  in  the  other  case,  and  she  made  a  good  recovery. 
The  weakness  Dr.  Boocock  experienced  in  the  proving  he  com- 


888  HELODERMA 

pared  to  that  of  Gels.f  only  Gels,  did  not  dry  up  the  mouth  and 
secretions  as  Helod.  did.  The  modalities  noted  were  <  from  cold 
with  desire  for  warmth.  <  After  sleep ;  at  night.  >  From 
stretching. 

Belationa, — Compare :  Lach.,  Crotal,  &c. ;  Camph.  (coldness)  ; 
Arjg.  n.,  Alumina  (locomotor  ataxy) ;  Ant.  t.  and  Merc  (paralysis 
agitans) ;  Gels.,  Con.,  Hdrphb. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — No  inclination  for  exertion  in  any  way. — Unable  to  confine 
his  mind  to  any  object. — Difficulty  in  rememberhig  the  spelling  of  simple 
words. — In  spite  of  very  severe  S3rmptoms,  not  alarmed ;  passively  in- 
different.— Depressed,  feels  very  blue. 

a.  Head. — Vertigo  and  weakness  when  moving  quickly. — Dizziness, 
with  inclination  to  fall  backward. — Giddiness  and  cold  pressure  from  within 
skull. — Sensation  of  heat  in  head;  heat  on  vertex. — Headache  over  r.  eye- 
brow.— Pressure  in  head  and  scalp  ;  pressure  in  skull  as  if  too  full ;  mind 
clear  all  the  same. — Soreness  and  stiffness  in  occiput,  extending  down  neck  ; 
sore  spot  in  various  parts  of  head. — Intense  pain  over  1.  eyebrow,  through  eye 
to  base  of  brain  and  down  back.  —Very  violent  headache  over  r.  temporal 
bone,  as  if  a  tumour  forming  and  pressing  within  skull,  whole  r.  side  affected, 
producing  numbness  down  1.  side  of  body. — ^Aching  at  base  of  brain. — ^Sharp, 
digging  pains. — Benumbed  feeling  all  over  head. — Burning  feeling  in  brain  ; 
head  hot  and  full  as  if  not  room  enough  in  skull. — ^Throbbing  on  top  of  head ; 
head  sore  and  bruised. — Sensation  of  band  around  head. — Cold  band  around 
head. — Sensation  as  if  scalp  was  drawn  tight  over  skull. — Bores  head  in 
pillow. — ^Awakened  suddenly  with  a  jerking  in  head. — ^Central  part  of  frontal 
bone  so  queer  as  to  awaken  him. 

3.  Eyes.— Itching  of  eyelids;  lachrymation.— Weight  of  eyelids, 
difficult  to  keep  them  open. — Sight  improved ;  astigmatism  removed. 

4.  Ears. — Pressure  behind  1.  ear ;  pressure  in  ear  from  within  outward. 
— Copious  flow  of  wax  (more  1.). — Ears  diy  and  scurfy. — Ringing  in  ear  like 
night-bell. 

5.  Nose. — L.  nostril  sore ;  ulcerated. — Dry,  itching  scurfs  in  nostrils.-- 
Severe  attack  of  sneezing  (a  severe  chill  all  down  back). — Fluent  discharge. 

6.  Face. — Sensation  of  heat  in  face. — Flushes  of  heat. — Cold,  crawling 
feeling  from  temple  down  r.  cheek  ;  from  r.  upper  jaw  to  cheek.— Sensation 
as  if  pricked  with  points  of  ice. — Sensation  as  if  facial  muscles  were  drawn 
tight  over  bones. — Stiffness  of  jaw. — Dryness  of  lips. 

8.  Mouth. — Soreness  of  mouth. — ^Very  thirsty. — ^Tongue  tender  and 
dry. — Tongue  swollen  (lasting  for  three  months  after  bite). 

Q.  Throat.— Dryness ;  parched  sensation  in  throat. — ^Tingling.— Sore- 
ness of  throat  and  tenderness  to  outside  touch. — Stinging,  sore  feeling  in  r. 
tonsil. 

11.  Stomach. — ^Acid  burning  in  stomach. — ^Immoderate  thirst. 

12.  Abdomen.— Gurgling  in  region  of  spleen. — Sharp  shooting  pain  in 
bowels,  more  on  1.  side. — Pain  across  pubic  bones,  extending  down  into  1. 
testicle.— Stitching  pains  in  bowels  (as  if  filled  with  pins). — ^Woke  in  night 


HELODERMA  889 

with  very  hard  pain  in  bowels,  1.  hypogastric  region.— Rumbling  in  bowels. — 
Feeling  as  if  waist-band  too  tight. 

13.  Stoel  and  Anus. — Loose,  copious  stool,  lumpy,  preceded  by 
stitches  in  abdomen. — Stool  loose,  mushy,  with  considerable  flatus. — Bowels 
torpid. — Stool  soft,  dark,  di£Bcult  to  expel. — Haemorrhoids  swollen,  itch  and 
bleed. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Stitch-like  pain  in  r.  kidney  while  sitting ;  as  if 
being  drawn  together ;  followed  by  prickling  in  fingers. — Bladder  irritable, 
frequent  urging  to  pass  urine. — Dreamed  of  urinating  in  bed  but  did  not ; 
awoke  and  passed  a  large  quantity  very  clear  and  bright.— Tenderness  in 
urethra,  with  sensation  of  discharge. — Urine  not  as  free  as  usual,  muddy. — 
Intermittent  flow,  as  if  obstructed  by  calculus. — Urine,  specific  gravity,  loio ; 
greenish  yellow,  fetid  (like  decaying  fruit). 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Erection  ;  but  felt  too  tired  for  coition. — 
Coitus  prolonged,  with  great  enjoyment  and  large  flow  of  semen. — Intensely 
cold  penis  and  testicle ;  tip  like  a  piece  of  ice ;  with  gluey  discharge. — Pain  and 
enlargement  of  1.  testicle. — Pain  under  pubes  and  along  penis. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Slight,  hacking  cough,  with  pain  in  1. 
scapula. — Fulness  in  chest,  requiring  an  e£Eort  to  inflate  the  lungs. — 
Oppressed  for  breath  from  least  exertion. 

18.  Chest. — Sharp  stitch  through  r.  nipple  to  inside  of  r.  arm. — Cold 
feeling  in  r.  lung. 

ZQ.  Heart. — Pressure  at  heart. — Coldness  at  heart  as  if  being  frozen  to 
death ;  cold  from  within  outward. — ^Twitches  about  heart  as  if  difficult  for 
blood  to  get  in  or  out. — Tingling  around  heart. — ^Trembling  and  coldness 
around  heart. — Oppression  around  heart. — Beating  of  heart  felt  all  over 
body. — Heart  bounds  as  if  it  had  not  room,  whole  body  vibrates. — Sticking 
pains,  shooting  from  1.  to  r. — Stitches  in  heart. — Soreness  in  heart,  more  under 
1.  nipple. — Pulse,  56-72  ;  full  and  jerky. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Stiff  neck  ;  aching  in  bones  of  neck. — Painf  ul- 
ness  of  upper  neck. — Coldness  across  scapulae. — Chill  in  back  from  base  of 
brain  to  buttock. — Pain  in  back  ;  intense  pain  in  lumbar  muscles  awakening 
him  (with  stitches  in  intestines). — ^Aching  in  r.  kidney;  stitch  pain  in  r. 
kidney. 

98.  Upper  Limbs. — Numbness  of  r.  arm  and  hand  with  trembling.-*- 
Tingling  in  arms  and  hands. — Tingling  in  palm  of  1.  hand  and  along  fingers. — 
Drawing  in  1.  hand,  followed  by  tingling  and  prickling. — Pains  in  hands,  if 
holding  anything  for  some  time. — ^Trembling  of  hands. — Hands  blue,  cracked, 
and  rough. 

23.  Lower  Limbs.— Numb  feeling  around  and  down  1.  thigh.— Pain  in 
1.  thigh  and  calf  as  if  bruised. — Numb  feeling  down  r.  leg. — Coldness 
extending  from  knee  to  calf. — Coldness  of  legs  and  feet. — Boring,  sharp  pain 
on  tibia  of  r.  leg. — Sensation  of  tight  band  around  1.  ankle. — ^Trembling  of 
limbs. — ^Jerking  of  limbs. — ^Tingling  and  burning  of  feet  as  if  recovering  from 
being  frozen. — Burning  in  feet,  preventing  sleep,  had  to  put  them  out  of  bed.— 
Sensation  as  if  walking  on  sponge  or  as  if  feet  swollen. — Staggering  gait.— 
Tendency  to  turn  to  the  r.  when  walking. — ^When  walking  lifts  feet  higher 
than  usual  and  puts  down  heel  hard. 

24.  Generalities.— Startled   easily.— Trembling,  tired   feeling;    very 


890  HELONIAS 

weak  and  iienrou& — ^Fainttng.— Intense  aching  in  bones  and  all  part9  of 
body.^-Trembling  of  1.  side  ;  hands  shaky. — Trembiing  can  be  contrived  by 
effort  of  will. — ^Trembling  along  nerves,  in  limbs  (mainly  thighs  and  arms), 
when  in  bed,  often  strong  enongh  to  wake  him.--Sometimes  when  quietly 
reading  trembling  will  seize  him  shaking  body  so  as  to  prevent  reading  (or 
writing);  for  a  few  seconds  at  a  time. — ^The  poison  goes  like  lightning 
through  the  system,  causing  agony  from  head  to  foot — ^Though  paralysed, 
every  muscle  and  bone  is  the  seat  of  pain. — ^Pains  proceed  from  part 
bitten  to  head  and  back. — Great  emaciation  and  lingering  death. — ^A  condition 
like  galloping  consumption. — Limb  afiEected  shrivels. — ^All  secretions  dried 
up. — Stretching  relieves  pains  in  muscles  and  limbs. — Stitch  pains  going  frcMn 
1.  to  r. — Numb  sensations. — ^Weak,  giddy,  making  it  difficult  to  stand. — 
"Blind  staggers"  ;  the  animal  bitten  turns  round  in  a  circle  and  dies  in 
twenty  minutes. — Unable  to  balance  myself. — Movement  does  not  increase 
the  pain. — Throbbing  all  over  body. — Startled,  trembling  conditi<Mi  on  sli^t 
noise.— Bone  pains. — Great  swelling  of  bitten  limb  ;  intense  pain  ;  gangrene. 

as*  Skin. — Itching  of  skin  as  from  insects. — Skin  of  hands  very  rough, 
cracked. 

26,  Sleep. — Drowsiness^  but  inability  to  sleep. — Restless  sleep  ;  awakens 
at  3  a.m. — Vivid  dream  about  giving  a  lecture  in  spite  of  feeling  prostrate. — 
Dreamed  of  the  lizard. — Dreamed  of  urinating  in  bed,  but  did  not  ;  awoke 
and  passed  a  large  quantity.  (This  dream  with  consequent  free  micturition 
was  repeated  two  nights  in  succession.) — Dreams  repeated  the  same  night. — 
Awakened  from  sleep  by  jerking  in  head ;  trembling  of  limbs ;  pain  in 
lumbar  muscles. — Awakened  by  feeling  a  cold  sensation  creeping  down  body 
and  legs ;  in  a  very  cold,  clammy  sweat,  lasting  till  morning. 

07.  Fever. — Internal  coldness  ;  as  if  being  frozen  from  within  outward. — 
Cold  waves  ascend  from  feet,  or  go  downward  from  base  of  brain. — ^Severe 
chill  ran  down  back. — Cold  rings  around  body. — Sensitive  to  cold  ;  shrinks 
from  exposure. — Feeling  of  heat  in  head  and  face,  some  headache  over  r. 
eyebrow. — Hot  flushes  and  burnings  in  head  and  along  spine. — Feet  very  hot ; 
heat  throughout  body ;  soon  passing  off,  followed  by  arctic  coldness, — Cold, 
clammy  sweat. 


Helonias. 

Helonias  dioica,  I\irsh  ;  H.  lutea,  Ait. ;  Chamoelirium  luteum.  Gray; 
C.  Carolinianum,  Willd.  ;  Veratrum  luteum,  Linn.  ;  Ophio- 
stachys  virginica,  Delile.  False  Unicorn^  Devil's  Bit,  Blazing 
Star.  N.  0.  Melanthaceae.  Tincture  of  the  root  Tritutatioos 
of  the  resinoid  Helonin. 

OlinleaL—Albuminuria.  Amenorrhcea.  Anaemia.  Breasts,  affections  of. 
Chlorosis.  Debility.  Diabetes.  Dysmenorrhoea.  Impotence.  Kkineys,  pains  in. 
Leuoorrhoea.  Lochia,  prolonged.  Menopause.  Menorrhagia.  Metrorrha^. 
Pruritus  vulvse.    Rheumatism.    Splenalgia.    Sterility.    Uterus^  affections  of. 

CharaoteFistios. — Helonias,  like  Aletris,  to  which  it  is  a  botanical 
ally,  and  with  which  it  has  been  often  confounded  (both  have  been 


HELONIAS  891 

called  "  Unicom  plant,"  or  '*  Unicom  root,"  "  Star  Grass,"  and 
"  Blazing  Grass,"  or  "  Blazing  Star "),  is  a  uterine  remedy  of  great 
power.  It  has  an  extensive  range  of  action,  as  its  provings  show,  but 
the  organ  predominantly  affected  is  the  utems.  It  has  been  called 
with  justice  a  "  uterine  tonic,"  and  one  of  the  keynote  indications 
for  its  use  is  a  "  consciousness  of  the  womb,"  and  relaxation  of  uterine 
ligaments,  misplacements,  and  prolapse  have  been  removed  by  Melon. 

Marvin  A,  Custis  (Am.  //.,  xi.  594)  reports  a  case  in  point :  "  Mrs.  L , 

28,  has  two  children,  both  living.  Has  prolapse  of  uterus,  ulceration 
of  cervix,  dark,  offensive  leucorrhoea.  Her  system  is  wom  out  and 
her  expression  one  of  great  distress.  Is  irritable,  finds  fault  with 
every  one,  and  cannot  bear  contradiction.  Restless,  wants  to  move 
around,  as  she  feels  better  when  mind  and  body  are  employed." 
There  was  severe  backache  and  a  sore  and  heavy  feeling  in  the 
womb  ;  in  fact,  as  she  said,  she  was  always  "  conscious  of  her  womb." 
Melon.  30  every  three  hours  for  two  days,  and  then  every  night,  was 
prescribed,  with  a  warm  water  injection  night  and  morning.  At  the 
end  of  three  weeks  the  leucorrhoea  had  almost  ceased,  the  womb  was 
in  the  first  position,  and  she  ''  forgets  that  she  has  such  an  organ." 
The  mental  symptoms  of  Melon,  are  very  marked,  and  the  extreme 
depression,  gloom,  and  irritability  of  this  case  are  characteristic  of  the 
remedy.  One  of  the  prov^rs  had  a  preliminary  feeling  of  wellness 
before  being  plunged  into  a  mental  hell.  It  is  specially  suited  to 
nervously  run-down  females,  easily  fatigued  by  any  work,  who  com- 
plain of  a  tired  backache,  a  tired  feeling  extending  into  the  Hmbs. 
Some  of  this  passes  off  after  commencing  to  work.  This  looks  rather 
like  the  Rhus :  "  <  on  commencing  to  work,  >  after  working  a  little  ; " 
but  it  is  not  the  same,  for  in  the  case  of  Rhus  the  reUef  comes  from 
a  limbering  up  of  stiff  joints.  The  backache  is  in  the  lumbar  region, 
just  over  the  kidneys,  or  else  in  the  sacrum.  The  kidneys  themselves, 
especially  the  right,  are  the  seat  of  pain,  and  then  the  urine  is  generally 
scanty.  S.  A.  Jones  found  Melonin  turned  an  alkaline  urine  acid ; 
increased  the  amount  of  urea  ;  increased  the  amount  of  luine  secreted. 
He  considers  this  to  be  the  result  of  a  condition  of  debilitv,  venous 
paresis^  the  result  of  previous  arterial  tonic  contraction.  Melon,  pro- 
duces irritation  in  mucous  membranes  ;  sore  mouth  ;  irritable  stomach  ; 
burning  and  scalding  when  urinating ;  but  the  most  intense  effect  is 
produced  in  the  vaginal  mucous  membrane.  L.  L.  Danforth  treated 
Mis.  W.,  who  had  intense  pruritus,  vulvar  and  vaginal,  for  several 
weeks  :  "  She  could  tear  the  flesh  out "  it  was  so  intense.  There  was 
vulvo-vaginitis,  the  labia  and  adjoining  skin  being  red  and  swollen, 
and  covered  with  thin,  white,  curdy  deposits.  Further  examination 
showed,  pouring  from  a  congested  cervix,  a  thin  albuminous  leucor- 
rhoea, evidently  the  cause  of  the  umritus.  It  coagulated  on  the  vagina, 
forming  small  curds  covering  the  mucous  membrane  of  vagina  and 
vulva.  Melon.  ^  on  tablets  speedily  relieved.  The  relation  of  the 
remedy  to  the  climacteric  period  is  indicated  in  the  provings  by 
alternate  sensations  of  heat  and  cold.  ''  A  sensation  as  if  a  cool  wind 
streamed  up  the  back  of  the  legs  along  the  gastrocnemii  muscles  to 
the  popliteal  space  "  was  noticed  by  one  prover  who  had  before  had 
a  burning,  or  warm  numbness,  in  the  legs,  most  marked  in  the  knees, 


892  HELONIAS 

"  seeming  to  begin  at  the  tendo  Acbillis  of  each  leg,  and  very  marked 
over  the  region  of  each  gastrocnemius."  "  Every  movement  of  the 
arms  occasioned  a  chill,  which  seemed  to  radiate  from  the  solar 
plexus  all  over  the  body."  Burning  sensations  are  common.  A 
patient  to  whom  I  gave  it  in  the  6th  had  "  burning-sinking  at  the 
epigastrium "  half  an  hour  after  each  dose.  Motion  <  almost  all 
symptoms,  but  >  numbness  of  the  feet,  and  the  profound  debility. 
>  By  mental  diversion.  The  chest  is  sensitive  to  the  air  ;  toothache 
is  <  in  a  warm  room  ;  and  warm,  moist  air  <  toothache.  Touch  <  : 
cannot  bear  the  least  pressure  of  the  dress  (on  breasts,  nipples, 
kidneys,  &c.) 

Relations. — ^Alet  and  Lil.  t.  are  closely  allied  botanically  and 
medically  with  Helon.  Helon.  antidotes  the  prolapse  of  Lil.  t.  and 
the  mental  depression  of  KaH  brom.  In  general  it  is  a  close  analogue 
of  Pulsat.,  in  its  local  and  general  symptoms.  Compare  also  :  Sep. ; 
Pic.  ac.  (tired  aching  and  some  burning  in  back  and  legs)  ;  PaUad. 
(tiredness  ;  soreness  ;  irritabiUty)  ;  Plat,  (indurated  uterus) ;  Nat.  m., 
Agn.,  and  Caust.  (aversion  to  coitus) ;  Eup.  purp.,  Chi.,  Ferr.,  Hydrast, 
Senec.  ;  Act.  r.  (uterine  symptoms  and  gloom ;  Nat  hyperchlor. 
(sodden  condition  of  uterus) ;  Pip.  meth.  (>  by  diverting  mind). 

STMPTOHB. 

z.  Mind. — Dull,  inactive. — ^Always  better  when  doing  something,  when 
the  mind  is  engaged. — Desire  to  be  let  alone;  conversation  unpleasant — 
Depressed  mood. — Dull,  gloomy. — Irritable ;  cannot  endure  the  least  con- 
tradiction or  receive  any  suggestions  in  relation  to  any  subject. — Fault- 
finding. 

8.  Head. — Pain  in  head  is  <  by  stooping,  and  attended  by  increased 
vertigo. — Fulness  and  pressure  in  the  forehead  or  vertex;  <  or  renewed 
when  thinking  thereof. — ^At  2.30  p.m.  dull  heat  and  pressure  in  vertex  as  if 
skull  were  too  full. 

6.    Face. — Pale,  earthy. — Sallow,  having  an  expression  of  suffering. 
8.    Mouth. — Bitter,  disagreeable   taste,  every  morning,    5   a.m.,   on 
awaking  ;  tongue  and  fauces  dry. — Tongue  white  (diabetes).  —  Salivation 
of  pregnant  women  and  teething  children. — Mouth  gets  sore;   stomatitis 
materna. 

zo.  Appetite. — Loss  of  appetite,  eructations,  fulness,  cramp,  and  painful 
congestion  of  the  stomach. — ^Appetite  poor,  food  tasteless ;  "  bilious  "  ;  sleepy 
during  the  day. 

zz.  Stomach. — Cramp-like  pain  in  the  stomach. — Burning  in  stomach ; 
burning  and  aching  in  spine ;  eructations. — Irritable  stomach,  with  general 
dropsy. 

Z2.  Abdomen. — Pain  in  1.  side,  as  if  in  spleen,  which  feels  as  if 
distended,  causing  a  dull  ache. — Motion  and  rumbling  in  abdomen,  as  if 
diarrhoea  would  come  on  ;  cramps  in  the  stomach. — Colic-like  pains  in 
h3rpogastric  region,  off  and  on  all  day. — Burning  in  the  lower  third  of 
abdomen. 

Z3.  Stool. — Stool  loose,  yellow  in  the  morning ;  lumps  of  faeces  in  the 
evening. 


HELONIAS  893 

'  '  14.  Urinary  Organs. — Constant  aching,  extreme  tenderness  of  kidneys, 
esp.  r. — Burning  sensation  at  the  kidneys ;  can  trace  their  outlines  by  the 
burning. — Pain  in  the  kidneys  with  albuminous  urine. — ^Weariness,  languor, 
weight  in  region  of  kidneys  ;  mind  dull,  inactive ;  afternoon  and  evening. — 
Burning  scalding  when  urinating;  desire  frequent  and  urging. — Strangury. 
— Involuntary  discharge  of  urine  after  the  bladder  seemed  to  be  emptied.— 
Urine  profuse,  clear,  light-coloured ;  albuminous ;  diabetic. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sexual  desire  and  power  increased.— 
Erections  unusually  strong  and  frequent. — Impotence. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Loss  of  sexual  desire  and  power  with 
or  without  sterility.  —  Profound  melancholy,  deep,  undefined  depression, 
with  a  sensation  of  soreness  and  weight  in  the  womb ;  "  a  consciousness  of 
a  womb."— Aching,  dragging  weakness  in  sacral  region,  with  prolapsus  ;  also 
at  climaxis,  with  marked  debility,  profound  mental  gloom.— Prolapsus  uteri 
and  ulceration  of  the  cervix ;  discbarge  constant,  dark,  badly  smelling ;  flooding 
on  lifting  a  weight,  and  on  least  exertion ;  face  sallow,  having  an  expression 
of  suffering;  great  vaginal  irritation;  pain  in  small  of  back. — Excessive 
uterine  haemorrhage  all  through  the  proving ;  pain  in  back  through  the 
uterus. — Prolapsus  uteri,  leucorrhcea  ;  the  os  protrudes  externally. — Uterus 
low  down,  fundus  tilted  forwards  ;  the  finger  passes  with  difficulty  between 
the  OS  and  the  rectum* — Menses  too  frequent  and  profuse  in  women  who  are 
feeble  from  loss  of  blood. — Flow  passive  :  dark,  coagulated,  offensive. — 
Amenia,  arising  from  or  accompanied  by  disordered  digestive  apparatus  and 
anaemia. — Leucorrhaea,  with  atony  and  anaemia. — Threatened  abortion  from 
atonic  conditions. — ^Women  with  prolapsus  from  atony,  enervated  by 
indolence  and  luxury;  feel  better  when  the  attention  is  engaged,  hence 
when  doctor  comes ;  worn  out  with  hard  work,  do  not  care  for  sleep ;  so 
tired,  and  the  strained  muscles  burn  and  ache  so. — Scanty  menstrual  flow 
with  heaviness,  languor,  drowsiness,  and  albuminous  urine. — Prof  use  flooding, 
with  serous  leuoorrhcea,  much  uterine  and  ovarian  pain ;  climaxis. — Labia 
and  pudendum  hot,  red,  swollen,  burning  and  itching  terribly ;  epidermis 
every  morning  falls  off  in  thin,  transparent  exfoliations. — Mucous  surface  of 
labia  red,  swollen,  covered  with  a  curdy  deposit,  like  aphthae. — ^Threatened 
abortion  ;  esp.  in  habitual  abortion. — Albuminuria  during  pregnancy ;  great 
weakness,  drowsiness. — Nipples  sensitive,  painful,  breasts  swollen ;  nipples 
tender,  will  not  bear  th6  pressure  of  ordinary  dress. 

18.  Chest. — Chest  sensitive  to  the  air. — Aching,  as  if  the  front  of  chest 
had  been  compressed  in  a  vice. 

19.  Heart.— Palpitation. 

so.  Back.^Burning  and  heat  in  dorsal  region,  mostly  between  the 
lower  half  of  the  scapulae ;  while  sitting  reading  at  night. — Back  aches  across 
the  lumbar  region ;  feels  tired  and  weak ;  burning  and  tired  aching  in  lumbar 
and  sacral  region  on  sitting  down. — Pain  about  the  upper  part  of  sacrum  and 
pelvis  ;  <  at  night.— Pain  in  lower  part  of  back,  through  to  uterus  ;  piercing, 
drawing. — Aching  pain  in  sacrum,  also  down  into  each  buttock. 

2^  Lxywer  Limbs. — Severe  pains  in  r.  hip-joint,  <  during  motion. — 
Numbness  of  feet  >  by  motion,  only  felt  when  sitting  still. 

84.  Generalities. — ^Tired,  weary,  drowsy. — Languor,  unusually  tired, 
yet    knows   no    reason. — Debility   (diphtheria).— Over-sensitiveness  to  air, 


894  HEPAR 

<  from  uncovering;  >  in  warm  air.— Anaemia,  atony,  from  prolonged 
haemorrhage. — Dropsy  from  albuminuria,  general  debility,  uterine  atony  or 
after  uterine  haemorrhage, 

25.  Skin.— Face  pale,  earthy;  sallow.— Epidermis  (of  labia)  falls  ofiF 
thin,  transparent  exfoliation. 

96.    Sleep. — Drowsy,  heavy. — Sleepy  dunixg  the  day. 

27.  Fever.— Chill,  seemingly  radiating  from  solar  plexus  all  over  body, 
caused  by  motion  of  arms. — Flushes  of  heat  pass  over  him  with  every  move- 
ment while  in  a  room. 


Hepar. 


Hepar  sulphuris  calcareum.  An  impure  Sulphide  of  Calcium  pre- 
pared by  burning  in  a  crucible  the  white  interior  of  oyster 
shells  with  pure  flowers  of  sulphur.    Trituration. 

CHaHcaL— Abscess.  Amaurosis.  Angina  pectoris.  Appetite^  disordered.  Asthma. 
Axilla,  abscess  in.  Beard^  eruptions  of.  Blepharitis.  Boils.  Breast,  affections  of. 
Bronchitis.  Bubo.  Bums.  Carbuncle.  Caries.  Chilblains.  Chlorosis.  CoUL 
Constipation.  Consumption.  Cornea,  ulceration  of;  opacity  of.  Cough.  Cromp. 
Diaphragmitis.  DiarrhoBa.  Ear^  affections  of;  polypus  of.  Eczema.  Emphysema. 
Erysipelas.  Eyes^  affections  of.  Fester,  tendency  to.  GlandtUar  sweUings.  Haemoptysis. 
Haemorrhoids.  Headache.  Hectic.  Herpes  preputialis.  Hip-joint  disease.  Hoarse- 
ness. Jaundice.  Joints,  affections  of.  Laryngitis.  Leucorrhoea.  lAps,  swoUen. 
Ltver^  affections  of.  Lungs,  affections  of.  Lupus.  Marasmus.  Menorrhagia. 
Mouth,  sore.  Nipples,  sore.  Ovaries,  affections  of.  Parametritis.  Pleurisy.  Pneu- 
monia. Pregnancy,  sickness  of.  Pruritus  mercurialls.  Pylorus,  affections  of. 
Quinsy.  Rhagades.  Rheumatism.  Scarlatina.  Scrofula.  Skin,  affections  of. 
Spinal  irritation.  Stye.  Suppuration.  Syphilis.  Tenesmus.  Throat,  sore.  Urip- 
carta.    Wens.    Whitlow.    Whooping-cough. 

CharaoteriBtios. — '*  Liver  of  Sulphur  "  is  a  name  which  was  given 
by  the  old  chemists  to  several  sulphur  compounds  whose  colour  was 
supposed  to  resemble  that  of  liver.  Before  Hahnemann's  time  Hepar 
sulphuris  calcareum^  Sulphuret  of  lime,  was  used  as  an  external  remedy 
for  itch,  rheumatism,  gout,  goitre  and  scrofulous  swellings.  In  1794 
Hahnemann  proposed  to  use  it  internally  to  arrest  mercurial  salivation. 
A  few  years  later  it  was  tried  (Teste  thinks  first  by  Dr.  Busch 
of  Strasburg)  for  asthma  and  pulmonary  phthisis.  That  this  was  a 
happy  inspiration  Hahnemann's  provings  and  cUnical  experience  has 
thoroughly  borne  out.  The  H^ar  of  Hahnemann  is  not  identical 
with  ordinary  sulphuret  of  lime,  being  prepared  with  oyster  shells, 
instead  of  ordinary  lime,  in  a  special  way.  Neither  is  it  identical 
in  composition  or  properties  with  Calcium  sulphate  (Gypsum)  of 
Schussler.  Being  a  chemical  combination  of  Calcarea  carb.  and 
Sulph.  it  has  some  of  the  properties  of  both,  but  is  very  di£Ferent 
from  either,  and  though  it  is  usdful  to  compare  them,  Hepar 
must  be  studied  as  a  separate  entity.  The  one  feature  which 
more  than  any  other  characterises  Hepar  cases  is  aver-sensiUve* 
ness.    It  runs  throughout  the  remedy.    ''Any trouble  occurring  on 


HEPAR  895 

the  skin  where  thetie  is  a  gfeat  sensitiveness  to  the  slightesi  touch  ;  patient 
can't  bear  to  have  even  the  clothes  touch  the  part,  or  have  it  touched 
in  any  way.  Exanthema,  like  nettle-rash,  sore  to  the  slightest  touch. 
Skin  hard  to  heal ;  inflammation  of ;  sensitive  soreness  of/'  is 
Guernsey's  admirable  definition  of  this  feature  as  it  affects  the  skin 
and  touch.  But  the  sensitiveness  is  not  confined  to  touch,  there  is 
excessive  sensitiveness  to  the  air ;  patient  can't  bear  the  least  draught ; 
and  if  a  hand  accidentally  gets  outside  the  bed-clothes  it  brings  on  an 
aggravation  ;  sensitiveness  to  noise,  to  odours.  The  mind  is  no  less 
"  touchy  "  than  the  body.  "  Dissatisfaction  with  oneself  and  others  ; 
dreamy,  atrabilious  mood,  a  sort  of  ferocious  spleen^  as  though  one  could 
murder  a  man  in  cold  blood  (even  in  persons  who  are  generally  of  a 
merry  and  benevolent  disposition^."  This  is  from  Teste,  who  says  he 
has  removed  these  symptoms  witn  Hepar.  Irritable  and  angry,  feels 
inclined  to  kill  any  one  who  offends  him.  Another  instance  of  the 
sensitiveness  of  H^ar  is  in  relation  to  pain  :  the  sUghtest  pain  causes 
fainting.  There  is  also  irritable  heart.  The  sensitiveness  to  cold  air 
is  more  to  the  dry  cold  air  of  Aeon,  and  Bry.  This  distinguishes  it 
from  Nat.  sulph.  in  asthma,  which  has  <  from  damp  cold  {Nat.  sulph. 
is  Grauvogl's  typical  hydrogenoid  remedy) ;  and  also  fixes  its  appli- 
cability in  croup.  Hepar  croup  is  accompanied  with  rather  loose 
cough,  with  wheezing  and  rattling.  Cough  as  if  mucus  would  come 
up  but  it  does  not.  The  time  of  the  Hepar  croup  is  early  morning 
(Aeon,  in  evening).  The  least  breath  of  cold  air  <  the  cough,  or  any 
uncovering.  Another  feature  of  Heparin  the  sensation  of  a  splinter  or 
fish-bone  in  the  throat.  In  quinsy  with  throbbing  pain,  where  sup- 
puration is  imminent,  Hepar  is  indicated.  Throbbing,  stabbing  pains, 
with  general  rigor  are  characteristic.  The  relation  of  Hepar  to  the 
suppuration  process  is  very  marked.  It  meets  the  hectic  condition 
generally  and  the  process  locally.  I  once  cured  with  Hep.  6  a  case  of 
axillary  abscess  with  a  large  collection  of  pus.  The  whole  was 
absorbed  without  breaking.  In  an  article  pubUshed  in  Minneap.  Horn. 
Mag.j  ii.  292,  L.  P.  Foster  distinguishes  between  Hepar^  Calc.  $u/.,  and 
Kali  suL,  in  their  action  on  tissues.  Kali  s.  acts  on  the  epidermis  ; 
Hepar  on  lymphatic  glandular  system,  skin  and  respiratory  mucous 
m^nbrane.  Ode.  5.  acts  much  as  Hep.,  only  more  deeply.  Heif.  acts  on 
abscesses  before  they  open,  Calc,  5.  after.  Foster  cured  a  lady  with 
CMc.  s.,  high,  of  "  several  large  ulcers  in  the  gluteal  region  3  in.  in 
diameter  and  f  in.  deep,  exposing  the  bone."  The  pain  ceased  im- 
mediately, and  the  cure  was  completed  in  two  months.  Calc,  s,  is 
suited  to  quinsy  after  it  breaks,  Hep.  before.  In  this  connection  it 
majr  be  well  to  speak  of  the  relation  of  Hep.  to  Mercurius,  Hahnemann's 
insunct  led  him  to  see  in  Hepar  an  antidote  to  mercurial  poisoning, 
and  it  remains  still  the  chief  antidote,  whether  to  the  effects  of  massive 
doses  or  to  over-action  of  the  potencies.  Silic.  and  Merc,  are  inimical, 
but  if  Hepar  is  given  as  an  intermediary  no  unpleasant  effects  will 
occur.  It  follows  Merc,  when  this  ceases  to  help,  or  has  aggravated, 
In  rheumatism,  quinsy,  boils  and  suppurations.  In  a  case  of  eczema 
pudendi  in  a  young  girl,  11,  three  months  after  puberty,  the  parts 
red  and  itching.  Merc,  was  given  and  the  whole  body  became 
covered  .with   tne  rash ;  Hep.  was   then  given   and  removed  all 


896  HEPAR 

immediately.  ''  Sweats  day  and  night  without  relief."  It  antidotes 
the  sensitiveness  of  Merc,  to  atmospheric  conditions.  In  the  old 
days  of  mercuriaUsation  one  of  the  diief  things  to  be  avoided  by  a 
patient  under  the  ''  course  "  was  exposure  to  chill.  Hepar  has  tliis 
same  sensitiveness  to  chill  and  Uability  to  take  cold  from  every  ex- 
posure. Coryza^  nose  swollen  and  sore  to  the  touch,  especially  inside 
the  alas.  Boring  at  root  of  nose  with  catarrhal  symptoms  or  head- 
ache is  characteristic.  Croupous  inflammations  of  throat,  respiratory 
organs,  bowels  and  kidneys — ^the  inner  as  well  as  the  outer  skin,  in 
fact.  The  ulceration  of  the  skin  is  peculiar.  Guernsey  thus  describes 
it :  "  Ulcers  with  bloody  pus  ;  with  sour-smelling  pus  ;  stinking  pus ; 
putrid  ulcers  ;  with  redness  aroimd  ;  with  little  pimples  around — ^ten, 
twelve,  or  even  as  many  as  fifty  may  surround  the  large  ulcer,  and  tiie 
ulcer  sometimes  spreads  by  the  little  pimples  joining  in.  Painful ;  pain- 
ful at  the  edge  ;  suppurating  ;  with  pain  as  if  sore  ;  difficult  to  heal ; 
inflamed ;  itching ;  looking  like  a  lump  of  lead  with  a  hole  in  it ; 
cancerous  ulcers."  "  Smemng  like  old  cheese  "  is  very  characteristic 
of  Hep,  ulcers  and  discharges.  The  itching  of  Hep,  is  noteworthy  ; 
it  occurs  in  connection  with  jaundice.  It  has  cured  cases  of  pruritus 
especially  when  of  mercurial  origin.  In  the  respiratory  organs  there 
are  sufiFocative  attacks  of  breathing  (in  croup  the  child  chokes  in  its 
coughing  spells  and  there  is  much  rattling).  It  meets  many  cases  of 
asthma  and  whooping-cough.  Respiration  with  mucous  rattle  ;  expira- 
tion in  the  morning,  none  in  the  evening  ;  cough  with  expectoration 
during  the  day,  none  in  the  night  (in  croup  no  expectoration  at  night 
but  only  in  the  daytime — with  the  su£Focative  coughing  spells  ;  low, 
weak  voice  (Guernsey).  There  is  a  semi-paralytic  condition  of  tiie 
rectum  and  bladder  somewhat  like  that  of  Alumina,  The  stools  are 
passed  with  great  difiiculty  even  when  clay-like  and  soft  Fetid  stools 
with  a  sour  body-smell  in  children.  Sour  stools  are  also  very  marked 
in  diarrhcea ;  and  this  may  be  noted  along  with  the  desire  of  Hepar 
for  acid  things.  Micturition  is  impeded ;  obUged  to  wait  awhile 
before  the  urine  passes,  and  then  it  flows  slowly  for  many  days. 
Never  able  to  finish  urinating;  it  seems  as  if  some  urine  always 
remains  behind  in  bladder.  Urine  drops  vertically  down.  The  urine 
is  very  acrid.  There  are  complaints  during  micturition  and  after. 
Nocturnal  emissions.  Escape  of  prostatic  miid  at  any  time,  and  at 
stool.  Affections  of  the  sexual  organs  occurring  on  the  n|^t  side. 
Hepar  is  one  of  the  great  antipsorics.  In  his  "  Medicine  of  Experi- 
ence "  Hahnemann  speaks  of  the  itch-like  eruptions  caused  by  Hepar 
and  its  corrective  properties  in  wool-worker's  itch.  It  is  suited  to :  The 
psoric,  scrofulous,  diathesis.  Debilitated  subjects.  Great  tendency  to 
suppuration.  Strumous,  outrageously  cross  children.  Torpid,  lym- 
phatic constitutions  ;  persons  with  Ught  hair  and  complexion,  slow  to 
act,  muscles  soft  and  flabby.  Slow,  torpid  constitutions  with  lax  fibre 
and  light  hair  ;  great  sensitiveness  to  slightest  contact  of  ulcers,  erup- 
tions and  parts  affected.  (These  conditions  differ  from  the  Sulph, 
type  :  lean,  stoop-shouldered ;  unclean-looking,  aversion  to  warmth.) 
The  symptoms  are  :  <  in  the  night ;  on  awakening  ;  when  blowing 
the  nose  ;  from  cold  in  general ;  in  cold,  dry  weather ;  on  sin^e  parts 
of  the  body  getting  cold ;  from  getting  the  skin  rubbed  off ;  on 


HEPAR  897 

uncovering  the  bead  ;  from  surgical  injuries  in  general ;  from  lying  on 
the  painful  side ;  from  daylight ;  from  pressure  from  without ;  from 
abuse  of  Mercury ;  during  sleep  ;  when  swallowing,  particularly  when 
swallowing  food  (parts  are  so  tender) ;  while  urinating  ;  in  clear,  fine 
weather  ;  in  dry  weather  ;  in  the  least  wind.  Symptoms  are  :  >  from 
wrapping  tip  the  head  ;  from  warmth  in  general ;  the  air  being  warm  ; 
in  damp  and  wet  weather  ;  from  wrapping  up  the  body  warmly  ;  by 
eating  (a  comfortable  feeling  after  eating  is  very  characteristic^.  There 
is  marked  periodicity  in  Hepar :  every  day  ;  every  four  weeks  (attack  of 
paralysis) ;  every  four  months  (scabby  eruptions  on  head)  ;  every 
winter  (whitlows)  ;  spring  and  autumn,  bilious  attacks.  The  bends  of 
the  elbows  and  popliteal  spaces  are  a£Fected  by  Hep,  In  eye  affections 
patient  likes  to  have  them  covered  lightly.  The  following  case  was 
cured  by  Hep.  after  Sul.  and  Calc.  had  failed.  Pustular  ophthalmia  of 
left  eye,  >  keeping  eye  closely  covered  with  some  soft  fabric,  < 
momingSf  >  as  day  advanced.    Pimples  surround  affected  eye. 

RdatioilB. — Antidoted  by :  Acet  ac.,  Bell,  Cham.,  Sil.  //  antidotes : 
Metals,  and  especially  mercurial  preparations.  Nit. ac, Calc, lod.  Kali 
iod.,  Cod-Uver-oil.  It  removes  the  weakening  effects  of  Ether.  Com- 
patible with:  Aco.,  Am.,  Bell.,  Lach.,  Merc,  Nit.  ac,  Sil.,  Spo.,  Zinc. 
Complementary  to :  Calend.  in  injuries.  Cotnpare :  In  >  from  warmth  : 
Ars.,  Calc,  Nux  v.,  Nux  mos.,  Pso.,  Sil.,  Mag.  m.  In  aversion  to  be 
washed  :  Ant.  c,  Clem,,  Rhus,  Sep.,  Spi.,  Sul.  In  aversion  to  be 
touched  :  Ant.  c.  Ant  t.,  Cin.,  Sil.,  Thu.  In  irritable  heart:  Cact., 
Pho.  In  suppuration  :  Sil.,  Luet.  (succession  of  abscesses),  Calc  s., 
Merc.  Every  little  scratch  suppurates  :  Merc,  Cham.,  Sil.,  Lye 
Cries  during  cough  :  (Am.,  before  and  after  ;  Bell,  after).  Sharp 
splinter  or  fish-bone  sensation  :  Arg.  n..  Nit.  ac,  Sil.,  Fl.  ac,  Merc, 
Aim.  Hasty  speech  and  actions  :  Bell,  (hasty  speech,  hasty  drinking), 
Lach.,  Dulc,  Sul.  Little  pimples  round  eye :  Euphras.,  Phos. 
Croup :  Aco.  (Hep.  follows  Aco. ;  Aco.  is  anxious,  high  fever,  dis- 
tressed breathing)  ;  Spo.  (dry,  hard  cough  ;  little  or  no  expectoration  ; 
starts  from  sleep  choking,  <  before  midnight ;  Hep.  <  after) ;  Bro., 
Iod.  Constipation  :  Aim.,  Bry.,  Nux,  Nat.  c  Sour  stools  :  Mag.  c, 
Calc,  Rhe.  Pains  =  fainting  :  Cham.,  Val.,  Verat  Sensitiveness  of 
ulcers,  &c.  :  Lach.  (absence  of  sensitiveness.  Graph.).  Teste  puts  Hep. 
in  his  Pulsatilla  group  with  Sil.,  Calc,  Graph.,  and  Phos. 

CaQSation. — Cold,  dry  winds.    Injuries.     Mercury.    Suppressed 
eruptions. 

SYMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Sadness  and  desire  to  weep. — ^Anguish  and  extreme  appre- 
hension, esp.  in  evening,  and  sometimes  suggesting  suicide. — Ill-humour  ; 
dislike  even  to  see  friends. — Excessive  irritability. — ^Vexation  and  passion,  with 
hasty  speech  and  excessive  weakness  of  memory. — ^The  slightest  cause  irritates 
him  and  makes  him  extremely  vehement — ^A  sort  of  furious  spleen  as  though 
one  could  murder  a  man  in  cold  blood. — ^Anger ;  would  have  no  hesitation  in 
killing  a  man  who  offended  him,  only  he  knows  better.— Visions  in  the  morn- 
ing, in  bed. 

VOL.  I.  58 


M  HEPAR 

8.  Head. — ^Vertigo  on  moving  the  head,  as  well  as  from  the  motion  of  a 
oairiage,  or  in  the  evening,  with  nausea. — Sense  of  swashing  in  the  head. — 
Vertigo,  with  loss  of  intellectual  power,  and  obscuration  of  sight — Headache 
in  the  momtag,  excited  by  the  slightest  shock  «  from  every  contusion).— 
Headache  at  night,  on  moving  the  eyes ;  the  forehead  seems  about  to  be  torn 
asunder. — Pain  in  the  head,  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  it — Boring  headache 
from  without  to  within  in  r.  temple ;  on  one  side  of  head ;  at  root  of  nose, 
when  waking  from  sleep ;  <  by  motion  and  stooping. — Pressure  in  the  head, 
semi-lateral,  as  from  a  plug  or  dull  nail,  at  night  and  when  waking  in  the 
morning ;  <  when  moving  the  eyes  and  on  stooping ;  >  when  rising  and  from 
binding  the  head  up  tight — Pressure  on  the  temj^es  and  on  the  vertex,  with 
palpitation  of  the  heart  in  the  evening. — ^Tension  above  root  of  nose.— Aching 
in  the  forehead,  like  a  b(Ml,  from  midnight  till  morning. — Pain,  as  from 
ulceration,  in  the  head,  directly  above  the  eyes,  every  evening,  or  else  at 
night,  in  t>ed. — Shootings  in  the  head,  esp.  after  having  been  in  the  open  air, 
and  on  stooping,  or  at  night,  as  if  the  head  were  going  to  burst — Piercing  in 
the  head,  esp.  at  the  root  of  the  nose,  every  morning. — Palling  off  of  the  hair, 
with  very  sore,  painful  pimples  and  large  bald  spots  on  the  scalp ;  sensitive- 
ness of  the  scalp  to  contact,  with  burning  and  itching  in  the  morning  after 
rising  (after  abuse  of  Mercury). — Cold  sweat  on  the  head. — Cold,  clammy 
perspiration,  smelling  sour,  principally  on  the  head  and  face,  with  aversion 
to  be  uncovered ;  <  from  least  exercise  and  during  night ;  >  from  warmth  and 
rest. — Disposition  to  catch  cold  when  uncovering  the  head. — ^Tuberosities  on 
the  head,  with  pain  as  of  excoriation,  on  their  being  touched ;  >  from  cover- 
ing the  head  warm  and  from  perspiration. — Humid  scabs  on  the  head,  feeling 
sore,  of  fetid  smell ;  itching  violently  on  rising  in  the  morning  and  feeling 
sore  on  scratching. — ^The  head  is  bent  backward,  with  swelling  below  the 
larynx,  with  violent  pulsation  of  the  carotid  arteries  and  rattling  breathing  (in 
croup). 

3.  Eyes. — Pain,  as  If  the  eyes  were  driven,  or  drawn  back,  into  the 
head. — Painful  and  difficult  movement  of  the  eyes. — Heat,  pressure  and 
shootings  in  the  eyes. — Throbbing  in  and  about  the  eye. — Pressure  in  the 
^es,  as  from  a  foreign  body  (sand). — Pain,  as  from  ulceration,  immediately 
above  the  eye,  every  evening. — Inflammation  of  the  eyes  and  of  the  eyelids, 
sometimes  erysipelatous,  with  pain  as  of  a  bruise,  and  of  excoriation,  on  bei^g 
touched.— Pimples  above  the  eyes,  and  on  the  eyelids. — ^>ecks  and  ulcers  on 
the  cornea.— Nocturnal  lachrymation  and  agglutination  of  the  eyelids. — 
Spasmodic  closing  of  the  eyelids  (at  night). — Eyes  prominent— ObscuraticMi 
of  the  sight  on  reading. — Photophobia  by  day,  and  by  candle-light. — ^The  eyes 
ache  from  the  bright  light  of  day,  when  moving  them.-*Confusion  of  sight,  in 
the  evening,  by  candle-light,  alternately  with  clearness  of  vision. — ^The  objects 
24>pear  to  be  red. 

4.  Ears. — Darting  pain  in  the  ears. — Shootings  in  the  ears,  on  blovring 
the  nose. — Detonation  in  the  ear,  when  blowing  the  nose. — Heat,  redness,  and 
itching  in  the  ears. — Itching  of  the  external  ear. — Discharge  of  pus  from  the 
ears,  which  is  sometimes  fetid. — Scabs  behind  and  on  the  ears. — Hardness  of 
hearing,  with  pulsations  and  buzzings  in  the  ears,  esp.  in  the  evening  in  bed. 
— Increase  of  cerumen. 

5*    Nose. — Inflammation,  redness,  and  swelling  of  the  nose. — Pain,  as  of 


HE  PAR  899 

a  bruise,  and  of  excoriation  in  the  nose,  on  its  being  touched.— Burning  pain, 
as  from  ulceration  and  scabs  in  the  nostrils. — Epistaxis,  in  the  morning,  and 
after  singing. — Want  of,  or  increased  power  of  smell. — Coryza,  chiefly  on  one 
side,  with  roughness  in  the  throat,  inflammatory  swelling  of  the  nose,  fever, 
or  painful  weariness  in  all  the  limbs. 

6.  Face. — Face  yellow,  with  blue  circles  round  the  eyes. — Face  burning, 
and  of  a  deep  red. — Nocturnal  heat  of  face. — Erysipelatous  inflammation  and 
swelling  of  the  face  and  cheeks,  with  pricking  tension,  and  eruption  of 
vesicles. — Drawing  and  tearing  pains,  commencing  from  the  cheeks,  and 
extending  to  the  ears  and  the  temples. — Pains  in  the  bones  of  the  face,  on  the 
parts  being  touched. — Pimples  on  the  forehead,  which  disappear  in  the  open 
air.-^welUng  of  the  lips,  with  tension  and  pains  on  touching  them. — Eruption 
at  the  corners  of  the  mouth. — Ulcer  in  the  corner  of  the  mouth. — Ulceration 
at  the  commissure  of  the  lips. — The  middle  of  the  lower  lip  becomes  chapped. 
— Blisters  (boils)  on  the  lips,  chin,  and  neck,  painful  on  being  touched. — 
Eruption  on  the  face,  scurfy,  very  painful  to  the  touch. — ^Vesicles  on  the  chin. 
— Shootings  in  the  articulation  of  the  jaw,  on  opening  the  mouth. 

7.  Teeth. — Odontalgia,  with  starting  and  drawing  pains,  <  by  closing 
the  teeth,  by  eating,  and  in  a  hot  room. — Looseness  of  the  teeth. — The  hollow 
teeth  feel  too  long. — Swelling  and  inflammation  of  the  gums,  which  are 
painful  when  touched. — Ulcer  on  the  gums  and  in  the  mouth,  with  a 
base  resembling  lard. — The  gums  and  mouth  bleed  readily. 

8.  Mouth. — Accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth. — Salivation,  hawking 
up  of  mucus. — ^The  tip  of  the  tongue  is  very  painful  and  feels  sore. — Speech 
hoarse  and  precipitate. 

Q.  Throat. — Sore  throat,  as  if  there  were  a  peg  in  it,  or  an  internal 
tumour. — Painful  scraping  in  the  throat,  with  dif&culty  in  speaking  and  in 
swallowing  the  saliva. — Hawking  up  of  mucus. — Shootings  in  the  throat,  and 
even  into  the  ears,  as  from  splinters,  on  swallowing,  coughing,  breathing,  and 
on  turning  the  head. — ^Violent  pressure  on  the  throat,  with  danger  of  sufloca^ 
tion. — Deglutition  impeded  and  almost  impossible,  without  great  efforts. — 
Dryness  in  the  throat. — Swelling  of  the  amygdalae. 

10.  Appetite. — Loss  of  appetite. — Bitterness  of  the  mouth  and  of  food. 
— ^Earth-like  and  bitter  taste  in  the  throat,  with  natural  taste  of  food.— Violent 
thirst. — Unusual  hunger  in  the  forenoon. — Bulimy. — Desire  only  for  acids, 
wine,  sour  and  strong-tasting  substances,  or  highly  seasoned  things. — Dislike 
to  fat. — Desire  for  wine. 

11.  Stomach. — Risings,  with  burning  sensation  in  th&  throat. — Burning 
in  the  stomach. — ^Attacks  of  nausea,  sometimes  with  cold  and  paleness. — 
Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit  in  the  morning. — ^Acid,  bilious,  greenish,  or 
mucous  and  sanguineous  vomitings. — Frequent  and  easy  derangement  of  the 
stomach. — Pressure  at  the  stomach,  even  after  eating  very  little. — Pressure  in 
stomach,  as  if  lead  were  in  it — Swelling  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  with 
pressive  pains. — Pressure,  inflation  and  sensation,  as  if  there  were  something 
weighing  heavily  on  the  epigastrium,  with  inability  to  continue  seated,  and 
to  endure  tight  clothes. 

12.  Abdomen.— Shootings  in  the  region  of  the  spleen. — Splenetic 
stitches  when  walking.— Shootings  in  the  hepatic  region,  esp.  when  walking. 
— Pain,  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  morning. — Cramps  and  con- 


900  HEPAR 

tractive  pains  in  the  abdomen. — Sensation  of  violent  clawing  in  the  nmhiiiral 
region,  with  nausea,  anxiety,  and  heat  of  the  cheeks. — Cutting  pains. — Pain, 
as  from  ulceration  in  the  abdomen. — footings  in  abdomen,  esp.  on  L  side. — 
Swelling  and  suppuration  of  the  inguinal  glands  (buboes).— (Rambling  in  the 
abdomen.)— Incarceration  and  difficult  emission  of  flatus,  esp.  in  the  morning. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation;  hard  and  dry  faeces. — Difficolt 
emission  of  scanty  and  soft  excrement,  with  urgent  want,  and  tenesmus. — 
Diarrhcea  of  feculent  matter  with  cutting  pains.— Whitish  diarrhoea,  of  an 
acidulous  smell,  esp.  in  children. — Dysenteric  evacuations,  greenish,  or  of  a 
clay-colour,  with  evacuation  of  sanguineous  mucus. — After  the  evacuation, 
pain,  as  of  excoriation,  and  sanious  discharge  from  the  anus. — Haemorrhage 
from  rectum,  with  soft  stool. — Burning  at  the  rectum. — Protrusion  of  haemor- 
rhoidal  pimples  from  the  rectum. — Perspiration  at  the  perineum. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  slow  and  turbid,  with  whitish  sediment 
— ^The  urine  is  passed  slowly,  with  difficulty ;  drops  out  perpendicularly. — 
Abundant  secretion  of  pale  urine,  with  pressure  on  the  bladder. — ^Acnd, 
corrosive  (corroding  the  prepuce),  or  pale  and  watery,  or  deep-red,  and  hot 
urine. — Nocturnal  emission  of  urine. — ^Wetting  the  bed  (at  night). — Emission 
of  blood  after  urination. — Burning  in  the  urethra  during  micturition. — Stitches 
in  the  urethra. — Redness  and  inflammation  of  the  orifice  of  the  urethra. — 
Discharge  of  mucus  from  the  urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Weakness  of  the  genital  parts. — ^Itching  of 
the  penis  (glans,  fraenulum). — Smarting,  excoriation,  and  oozing,  between  the 
thigh  and  the  scrotum. — Cancerous  ulcer  on  the  prepuce. — Painful,  cramp- 
like, and  tensive  erections. — ^Absence  of  sexual  desire  and  of  erections. — 
Erections  without  energy,  during  coition. — Excitement  of  the  genital  parts, 
as  if  for  emission. — Flow  of  prostatic  fluid,  esp.  after  making  water,  and 
during  a  difficult  evacuation. 

xd.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Excoriation  of  the  vulva,  and  between 
the  thighs. — Congestion  of  blood  to  the  uterus. — Irritation  of  ovaries  (1.);  with 
swelling ;  and  great  sensitiveness. — Discharge  of  blood  between  the  periods, 
with  inflation  of  the  abdomen. — Catamenia  too  long  delayed,  and  diminished. 
— Leucorrhoea,  with  smarting  at  the  vulva. — Cancerous  ulcer  on  the  breast, 
with  stinging-burning  of  the  edges,  smelling  like  old  cheese. — Itching  nipples. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Hoarseness. — Pain  and  great  sensitiveness 
(to  cold)  of  the  larynx,  with  weak  and  rough  voice,  emaciation,  hectic  fever, 
and  sleeplessness. — Rattling  breathing  (during  sleep). — Swelling  below  the 
larynx. — Roughness  in  the  throat. — Croup,  with  swelling  under  the  larynx. — 
Pemanent  pain  in  the  larynx,  <  by  pressure,  speech,  coughing,  and  breathing. 
— Weakness  of  the  organs  of  speech,  and  of  the  chest,  causing  a  hindrance  to 
speak  loud. — Cough,  excited  by  irritation  or  pain  in  the  larynx. — ^TitiUation  as 
from  dust  in  the  throat,  inducing  cough,  which  is  deep,  wheezing,  with 
expectoration,  only  in  the  morning,  of  mucus,  bloody,  or  like  pus,  generally 
tasting  sour  or  sweet. — Cough,  deep  and  dull,  excited  by  difficulty  of  respira- 
tion.— Suffocating,  violent  cough,  with  retching. — Cough,  similar  to  whooping- 
cough. — Cough  after  drinking. — Dry  cough,  in  the  evening,  on  taking  cold  in 
any  part  of  the  body,  or  when  lying  on  the  bed. — Cough  worse  from  evening 
till  midnight.— Cough  caused  by  a  limb  getting  cold ;  from  eating  or  drinking 
anything  cold  ;  from  cold  air ;  when  lying  in  bed ;  from  talking,  crying. — 


HEPAR  901 

Attacks  of  dry,  rough,  and  hollow  cough,  with  anguish  and  su£Eocation,  often 
ending  in  lachrymation. — Barking  cough. — Cough,  with  spitting,  of  blood. — 
Ck>ugh,  with  abundant  expectoration  of  mucus. — Ringing  and  pain  in  the  head 
during  the  cough,  as  if  it  it  were  going  to  burst. — Sneezing  after  the  cough. — 
Bronchitis. 

i8.  Chest. — ^Anxious,  hoarse,  wheezing  respiration,  with  danger  of 
su£Focation  on  lying  down. — Soreness  in  the  chest — Attacks  of  suffocation, 
which  force  the  patient  to  throw  back  the  head, — Shortness  of  breath. — 
Weakness  of  the  chest ;  cannot  talk  from  weakness. — ^Tenacious  mucus  in  the 
chest.— Spasmodic  constriction  of  the  chest. — Frequent  want  to  breathe 
deeply,  as  after  running. — Shootings  in  the  chest  on  breathing  and  walking. — 
Pimples  and  furunculi  on  the  chest,  with  lancinations,  and  pain  as  of  excoria- 
tion on  the  part  being  touched. 

ig.  Heart. — Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  fine  stitches  in  the 
heart  and  1.  half  of  chest — Irritability  of  the  heart. 

90.  Neck  and  Back. — Swellings  on  the  neck,  painful  when  touched. — 
Violent  pulsation  of  the  carotid  arteries. — Burning,  shooting  pain  in  the 
region  of  the  loins. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise  in  the  loins,  extending  to  the 
thighs. — Shootings  and  pulling  in  the  back,  between  the  shoulder-blades  and 
in  the  muscles  of  the  neck. — Stitches  and  rheumatic  pains  in  the  back. — 
Nocturnal  tension  in  the  back,  on  turning  in  bed. — Fetid  sweat  under  the 
armpits. — Suppuration  of  the  axillary  glands. 

92.  Upper  Limbs. — Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  bones  of  the  arm 
(humeri). — ^Arthritic  swelling  of  the  hand,  of  the  fingers,  and  of  the  joints  of 
the  fingers,  with  heat,  redness,  and  pain,  as  of  dislocation  during  movement— 
Skin  of  the  hands  cracked,  rough  and  dry. — Granulated  eruption  on  the  hands 
and  on  the  wrists. — Nettle-rash  on  the  hands  and  on  the  fingers. — Cold  pers- 
piration of  the  hands. — ^Tingling  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers. — Itching  in  the 
palms  of  the  hands. — Steatoma  at  the  point  of  the  elbow. — Easy  dislocation  of 
the  fingers. — Fingers  dead. — Panaris. 

23.  Lower  Limbs.— Pain  in  the  buttocks  on  sitting  down. — Furunculi 
on  the  buttocks.— Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  on  the  thighs. — Painful  tension  in 
the  thighs,  which  prevents  sleep. — Frequent  sudden  lassitude  of  the  limbs, 
when  walking. — ^The  hip-joint  feels  sore,  as  if  sprained  when  walking. — Pain 
as  from  bruises  in  the  knee. — Prickings  in  both  heels. — ^Tingling  in  the  toes. — 
Burning,  stinging  pain  in  the  toes. — Swelling  of  the  knees. — Cramps  in  the 
calves  of  the  legs,  the  soles  of  the  feet,  and  the  toes. — Feet  buming.--Swelling 
of  the  feet,  and  in  the  ankle-bones,  with  difficulty  of  respiration. — Red,  rheu- 
matic sweUing  in  the  ankle-bones,  with  pain,  which  increases  at  night. — 
Cracks  in  the  feet — Shootings  in  the  corns. 

24.  Generalities. — ^Tearing  or  paralytic  puUings  in  the  limbs,  esp.  in 
the  morning  on  walking. — ^Weakness  in  all  the  limbs. — Pains,  as  from  excoria- 
tion or  bruising  on  various  places,  when  they  are  touched. — Rheumatic  pains 
in  the  limbs  and  shootings  in  the  joints. — ^Arthritic  swellings,  with  heat, 
redness,  and  pains  as  from  dislocation. — Swelling,  inflammation,  and  ulceration 
of  the  glands. — ^Appearance  or  aggravation  of  the  pains  at  night,  esp.  during 
the  chills.— -Emaciation,  sometimes  with  anguish,  irritability,  shiverings  in  the 
back,  redness  of  the  cheeks,  sleeplessness,  &c. — Physical  depression  and 
trembling  after  smoking  tobacco,  or  on  walking  in  the  open  air,  with  heat  and 
anxiety. — Fainting  fit,  esp.  in  the  evening,  from  moderate  pains. 


902  HEPATICA 

25.  Skin. — Erysipelatous  inflammations,  even  with  sweBtng  and  vesidcs. 
— ^Yellowish  colour  of  the  skin,  esp.  on  the  face,  with  yellowish  colour  of  the 
sclerotica,  and  urine  red  like  blooid. — ^Jaundice,  with  much  itching^ — ^Burning 
itching  in  the  body,  with  white  vesicles  after  scratching. — ^Nettle-rash. — 
Eruption  of  pimples  and  tubercles,  painful  to  the  touch. — Unhealthy  skin ; 
every  injury  tends  to  suppuration  and  ulceration. — Promotes  sappnratiQD. — 
Cracks  in  the  skin.— Putrid  ulcers,  smelling  like  old  rotten  cheese,  and  easily 
bleeding,  with  shootings,  sensation  of  gnawing  (esp.  at  night),  or  with  bmning 
and  pulsative  pains. — Cancerous  ulcers. — Suppurations  ;  esp.  after  previous 
inflanmiations. — Panaris. — Caries. 

26.  Sleep. — Strong  desire  to  sleep,  morning  and  evening,  with  convulsive 
yawning.— Unquiet  sleep,  with  the  head  turned  back.— Prolonged  sleep  with 
stupefaction,  as  in  lethargy. — Sleeplessness,  caused  by  a  great  flow  of  ideas. — 
Dreams  of  fire,  sickness,  danger,  guns,  &c. — ^At  ni^t,  gastric  sufferings,  head- 
ache, agitation,  starting  of  the  limbs,  and  dry  heat. — Starts  at  night,  dnriiig 
sleep,  as  from  want  of  an-,  with  tears  and  great  anguish. — ^Wakes  at  night 
with  an  erection  and  an  urgent  desire  to  urinate. — The  side  on  which  he  lies 
at  night  becomes  painfully  sore  ;  he  must  change  his  position. 

27.  Fever.- Pulse  hard,  full,  accelerated ;  at  times  intermittiBg. — 
Shuddering  and  shivering  esp.  in  the  open  air. — Shiverings,  with  chattering 
of  the  teeth  and  coldness  in  the  hands  and  feet,  followed  by  heat  smd  sweat, 
esp.  on  chest  and  forehead,  with  little  thirst — Chill  in  the  evening,  6  or  7 
p.m. — Chilliness  and  heat  alternating  during  the  day,  with  photophobia. — 
Chilliness  at  night ;  in  bed  aggravating  all  the  symptoms. — Bitterness  in  the 
mouth,  afterwards  shivering  with  thirst ;  an  hour  after,  heat  with  sleep,  after 
which,  vomiting  and  cephalalgia. — Dry  heat  at  night. — Flushes  of  heat  with 
sweat. — Burning,  feverish  heat,  with  redness  of  the  face  and  violent  thirst — 
Strong  disposition  to  perspire  in  the  daytime,  on  the  least  effort,  and  on  the 
least  movement. — Prcrfuse  perspiration  day  and  night — Perspiration  easily 
excited  through  the  day,  esp.  from  exertions  of  the  mind. — Nocturnal  sweat. 
— Sweat  in  the  morning. — Night  and  morning  sweat,  with  thirst — Viscid  acid 
sweat. — Cold,  clammy,  or  sour  or  offensively  smelling  perspiration. — Inter- 
mittent fever ;  first  chills,  then  thirst,  and,  an  hour  later,  much  heat,  with 
interrupted  sleep. 


Hepatica. 


Hepatica  triloba.    Liver- wort.    N.  O.  Ranunculacese.     Tincture  of 

full-grown  leaves. 

Gllttlcal.— Bronchitis.    Catarrh.    Dyspepsia.    Epistazis.    Throat,  sore. 

Chanoteristios. — ^Tbis  is  an  old  remedy  which  received  its  name 
from  a  fancied  resemblance  of  its  leaves  to  the  shape  of  the  liver. 
All  our  definite  knowledge  of  it  began  with  an  experiment  made  by 
Dr.  D.  G.  Kimball,  who  chewed  the  leaves  every  day  for  "  a  chronic 
irritation  of  the  throat  and  lungs."  A  few  sjrmptoms  were  produced, 
and  the  symptoms  he  complained  of  were  removed,  notably :  tickling 


HERACLEUM  903 

irrifation  in  throat  and  sensation  about  epiglottis  as  of  particies  of 
food  remaining.  Accnmulation  of  viscid,  tenacious  phlegm,  with 
frequent  hawking.  Lungs  became  much  stronger  and  digestion  more 
perfect.  Hale,  experiencing  an  attack  of  circumscribed  pneumonia, 
with  bloody  expectoration  ;  or  else,  profuse,  yellow,  creamy,  exceed- 
ingly sw^/;  some  pain  and  constriction  in  right  chest,  tickling  in  fauces 
<  by  eating  ;  or  trom  inhalation  of  dust ;  chewed  the  dry  leaves,  and 
in  a  few  days  was  well.  Stan,^  Lyc.^  Phos,^  Sul.  had  all  failed  to  relieve. 
Wegge,  of  Copenhagen,  according  to  Hansen,  confirms  its  value  in 
pharyngeal  catarrh,  with  profuse  serous  sputa  and  hoarseness.  In  the 
subjoined  Schema  I  give  both  caused  and  cured  symptoms. 

RelationB.— Com^ar^ ;  Stan.,  Cist.,  Caust.,  Pho.,  Sang.,  Rumex, 
Lach.^  KaU  bi. 

BTMPTOHB. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  somewhat  sensitive  to  light;  itching  and  smarting; 
slightly  agglutinated  in  morning. 

5,  Nose. — Bloody  mucus  frequently  blown  from  1.  nostril  for  three  or 
four  days  in  succession. — Soreness  of  end  of  nose  at  entrance  of  nostrils. 

9.  Throat. — Rough  scraping,  irritative  and  tickling  sensation  in  throat 
and  fauces  disappears,  also  sensation  about  epiglottis  and  larynx  as  of  particles 
of  food  remaining. — ^Accustomed  accumulation  of  phlegm,  sometimes  thick, 
viscid,  and  tenacious,  inducing  frequent  hawking  and  disposition  to  hawk 
disappears. — Pharyngeal  catarrh,  with  profuse  serous  expectoration  and 
hoarseness. — ^An  exceeding,  annoying  irritation  of  fauces  (with  pneumonia), 
tickling,  itching,  scraping,  almost  constant ;  <  by  eating  or  inhalation  of 
dust  (cured). 

II.    Stomach. — Digestion  more  perfect. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.--The  customary  paroxysms  of  coughing, 
and  somewhat  abundant  expectoration,  mostly  daily  about  midday,  a  portion 
of  the  expectoration  being  opaque,  yellowish,  of  the  consistence  of  cream,  the 
rest  mucous  and  frothy,  disappear.---State  of  lungs  and  throat  much  better. — 
Bronchitis,  with  circumscribed  pneumonia,  sputa  bloody  and  purulent ;  sputa 
profuse,  yellow,  creamy,  and  exceedingly  sweet ;  some  pain  and  constriction 
of  r.  chest ;  an  exceedingly  annoying  irritation  of  fauces  (cured). — Uncom- 
monly free  and  easy  expectoration. 


Heracleom. 

Heracleum  sphondylium.    "  Branca  ursina."    N,  0.  Umbelliferae. 
Tinctiure  of  whole  plant. 

CUaitaL— Debility.     Dyspepsia.    Gout.  Headache.   Seborrhoea  capitis.   Skin, 
affections  of.    Spleen,  pain  in. 

Charaoteristios. — HeracL  has  been  proved.  It  was  found  to 
exercise  a  pronounced  action  on  the  digestion,  producing  hunger,  with 
inability  to  eat,  nausea,  vomiting ;  coUc,  diarrhcea,  and  pains  in  the 


904  HERACLEUM 

spleen.  It  also  a£Fected  the  sexual  organs  and  the  skin.  A  charac- 
teristic is  ''  Headache  with  drowsiness ;  <  on  moving  in  open  air ; 
>  tying  up  the  head  with  a  cloth."  Exhaustion,  indolence,  and 
weakness  were  complained  of. 

Relatloill* — Combare :  Con.,  Abies  n.,  Cean. ;  in  headache  with 
drowsiness,  Brucea,  uinseng,  Gels.,  Nat.  s.,  Nux  mos.,  Sul. 

BTMPTOHB. 

z.  Mind. — Prostration  of  strength,  indolence,  moral  depression  ;  fits  of 
hjTpochondriasis. — Ill-humour,  capriciousness. 

9.  Head. — Vertigo,  on  reading  while  seated. — Cephalalgia,  esp.  in  the 
sinciput  and  occiput,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  and  drowsiness,  esp.  <  on 
walking  in  open  air  ;  >  by  wrapping  up  the  head. — ^Violent  itching  on  the 
scalp,  on  scratching  which,  the  fingers  become  greasy ;  much  fatty  perspira- 
tion on  the  head. 

3.    Eyes. — Lachrymation  and  fatigue  of  the  eyes  while  reading. 

S.    Nose. — Frequent  sneezing,  with  stitches  in  region  of  spleen. 

g.  Throat. — Pressure  in  the  throat,  as  from  mucus,  which  it  is  im- 
possible to  detach  ;  accumulation  of  mucus,  tickling  roughness  and  scraping 
in  the  throat. 

II.  Stomach. — Bitter  taste ;  sweet  bitter  risings,  with  regurgitation  of 
bitter  liquid  ;  craving,  with  loathing  and  horror  of  all  kinds  of  food ;  increased 
thirst ;  nausea ;  vomiting,  bitter,  bilious,  with  pains  in  the  stomach,  and  much 
congestion  in  the  head. — Pressure  at  the  stomach,  with  nausea,  or  else  in  the 
scrobiculus,  as  from  a  stone  (after  a  meal) ;  the  pains  in  the  stomach  are 
always  accompanied  by  an  inclination  to  vomit. 

18.  Abdomen. — Lancinating  and  pinching  colics,  which  force  the 
patient  to  writhe ;  pulsation  and  pains  in  region  of  spleen ;  flatus  and  colic, 
with  nausea  and  disgusting  risings. — Frequent  sneezing,  with  lancination  in 
the  region  of  the  spleen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Stools  tardy,  with  pressure  and  pain  in  the 
anus. — Slimy,  fetid  stools. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Drawing  pain  in  the  penis ;  shootings  in 
the  glans. — Itching  and  smarting  in  the  scrotum ;  pollutions. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Transient  sticking  in  the  labiae. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Dry,  hacking  cough,  with  feeling  of  sore- 
ness in  the  chest  and  shooting  pains. 

18.  Chest. — Oppression  of  the  chest,  with  chilliness,  or  else  with 
palpitation  of  the  heart ;  difficulty  of  respiration  on  ascending  a  staircase. — 
Stitches  in  chest  during  inspiration ;  dry  eruption  on  chest,  burning  after 
scratching. 

21.  Limbs.— Gouty  tearing  in  the  limbs.— Shooting  and  burning  pains  in 
the  feet 

35.    Skin. — ^Violent  itching  in  the  skin  and  moist  itch-like  eruption. 

87.  Fever. — Chilliness,  with  frequent  yawning  and  inclination  to  sleep 
in  afternoon. 


HIPPOMANES  905 


Hippomanes. 


"A  normally  white,  usually  dark  olive  green,  soft,  glutinous  mucous 
substance,  of  a  urinous  odour,  which  floats  in  the  allantois  fluid,  or  is 
attached  to  the  allantois  membrane,  of  the  mare  or  cow,  chiefly  during 
the  last  months  of  pregnancy "  (Hering).  Trituration  of  the  dried 
substance  taken  from  the  tongue  of  a  newly-born  filly. 

Gliiiioal.^<^horea.  Melancholia.  Prostatitis.  Wrist,  paralysis  of ;  rheumatism  of. 

ObaraeteriBtios. — ^The  clinical  experience  with  this  remedy  has 
been  so  limited,  that  but  few  characteristic  indications  have  been 
made  out.  These,  however,  are  peculiar :  Icy  coldness  in  stomach. 
Violent  pain  in  wrists.  Paralysis  of  wrist  in  morning  in  bed.  Weak- 
ness of  hands  and  fingers  so  that  he  cannot  hold  anything.  A  case 
of  chorea  was  cured  on  these  last  symptoms.  There  is  weakness, 
restlessness,  melancholy.  The  headache  is  >  lying  on  painful  side, 
<  walking  in  sun.  Chilliness,  >  from  being  covered.  A  peculiar 
sensation  is  as  if  the  head  would  fall  forward  on  walking ;  as  of  a 
plug  in  the  throat ;  as  if  a  swelling  retarded  the  flow  of  the  urine. 
There  is  desire  to  lie  down,  but  no  relief  on  doing  so. 

RelatioiiB. — Antidoied  by:  Co£Fee.  Caust.  relieved  the  paralysis  of 
wrist.    Compare:  Anac.  (plug  sensation). 

STHPTOHS. 

1.  Mind. — Melancholy ;  a  young  man  sits  in  the  corner  and  does  not 
want  to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  world. — Restlessness ;  must  move  from 
place  to  place. 

2.  Head. — Sensation  of  lightness  in  head. — Pressive  pain  in  temples. — 
Headache,  with  giddiness,  heat  in  head,  sleepiness,  yawning,  thirst— Violent 
headache  ;  heaviness  on  vertex  ;  when  walking  it  feels  as  if  head  would  fall 
forward. — Headache  >  when  lying  on  painful  side  ;  <  when  walking  in  sun. 
— ^The  head  feels  so  heavy  that  it  falls  forward  if  he  raises  himself. — The  hair 
becomes  nearly  dry ;  falling  off  of  hair. 

3.  Eyes.— The  light  of  the  candle  looks  blue. — Stitches  in  eyes  (with 
headache). — Painf  ulness  of  eyes  when  moving  them,  with  headache. 

5.  Nose. — Sensation  of  coldness  when  drawing  the  air  in. — Bleeding  of 
nose  in  morning. 

6.  Face. — Involuntary  twitching  of  under  lip. 

8.  Mouth.— Bitter  taste  in  mouth.— Tongue  coated  white,  with  redness 
of  tip. — Increased  secretion  of  saliva,  with  headache  or  sore  throat 

9.  Throat. — Painfulness  of  1.  tonsil. — Sensation  of  plug  in  throat  (1. 
side). 

ID.    Appetite. — Desire  for  acids,  and  aversion  to  sweet  things. 
II.    Stomach. — Nausea,   esp.  in   a   draught  of  air. — Icy  coldness  in 
stomach. — Sensation  of  emptiness  in  stomach  (and  head). 

13.    Stool  and  Anus. — Soft  stool,  with  vomiting ;  discharge  of  pros- 


9o6  HIPPOZ^NINUM 

tatic  fluid  after  micturition. — Hard  stool,  in  balls.— Spasmodic  contraction  of 
sphincter  ani. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  discharge  of  watery  orine. — Urine 
discharged  in  a  small  stream,  with  straining — ^it  feels  as  if  a  swelling  retarded 
it ;  prostatitis. — Drawing  pain  from  anus  through  urethra. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Sexual  desire  increased. — Prostatitis.— 
Drawing  pain  in  testicles. 

lO.    Female  Sexual  Organs.— Menstruation  too  early. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Larynx  feels  raw,  as  if  air  were  too  cold- 
Tickling  in  throat  when  breathing. — Cough,  barking,  during  sleep. 

x8.    Chest. — Stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest 

81.    Limbs. — Heaviness  in  limbs. 

98.  Upper  Limbs. — Left  arm  feels  as  if  paralysed.— Violent  pain  in 
wrists. — Paral3rsis  of  wrist,  every  morning  in  bed. — Sensation  in  wrist  as  if 
sprained,  esp.  1. — Great  weakness  of  hands  and  fingers,  so  that  he  cannot  hold 
anything. — Formication  on  r.  hand. 

83.  Lower  Limbs. — Weakness,  and  as  if  sprained,  in  knees.— Weakness 
and  sensation  of  dryness  in  foot  joints  and  soles  of  feet— Cramps  in  soles  of 
lieet,  in  evening. — Cold  feet 

84.  Generalities. — Great  weakness  of  body  and  mind.— Great  wetness 
and  debility,  with  pale  face. — Desire  to  lie  down,  with  no  relief  on  doing  so. 
— Chorea. 

85.  Skin — Itching  as  from  flannel  on  skin,  esp.  on  chest  and  between 
shoulders. 

87.  Fever. — Chill,  beginning  in  back. — Chill,  >  being  warmly  covered 
in  bed. — Heat  in  evening,  with  dull  headache. 


HippozsBnmiim. 


Mallein,  Glanderin,  Farcin.  The  nosode  of  ganders  or  farcy.  (The 
disease  is  called  "  Glanders"  when  the  catarrhal  symptoms  are 
pronounced  ;  "  Farcy/'  when  these  are  not  noticeable,  the  skin 
being  chiefly  afiFected,  with  deposits  in  the  lungs.  Homoeopathic 
preparations  of  both  have  been  made.  Those  made  from  Farcy 
are  distinguished  by  the  letter  "  F.")  Triturations  oi  sugar  of 
milk  saturated  with  the  virus. 

QUaitsL—Abscesses.  Bed-eores.  Boils.  Bronchitis.  Cancer.  Carbondes. 
Caries.  Catarrh,  chronic.  Colds,  chronic.  Diphtheria.  Elephantiasis.  Erysipelas. 
Glanders.  Glands,  inflamed.  Hip-disease.  Liver,  enlarged.  Lupus  ezcedeos. 
Nasal  cartilages,  ulceration  of.  CBdema.  Ozaena.  Parotitis.  Phl^masia  alba 
dolens.  Phlegmon.  Plague.  Pustules.  Putrid  fever.  Pysemia.  Scrofula. 
Small-poac,  confluent.     Syphilis.     Tuberculosis.     Ulcers.     Whooping-cough. 

CharaoteristiCB. — Of  recent  years  Mallein^  a  toxin  prepared  from 
glanders,  has  taken  an  important  place  in  veterinary  practice  of  the 
old  school  as  a  test  injection  for  deciding  whether  a  horse  suspected 
of  glanders  actually  has  the  disease  or  aot.    If  the  horse  reacts  it  is 


HIPPOZ.ENINUM  907 

concluded  there  is  glanders.  In  a  number  of  cases  in  which  animals 
have  reacted  to  the  first  injections,  a  repetition  of  the  "  test "  has  failed 
to  elicit  reaction,  thus  proving  that  Mallein  is  curative  as  well  as 
diagnostic  (//.  W.j  xxxv.  149).  The  nosode  has  been  used  by  homoeo- 
paths, at  the  suggestion  of  Garth  Wilkinson,  on  the  phenomena  of  the 
disease  as  guides,  and  in  a  large  number  of  cases  involving  low  forms 
of  suppuration  and  catarrh,  malignant  ulcerations  and  swellings, 
abscesses  and  enlarged  glands  ;  and  also  in  conditions  similar  in  kind, 
but  less  in  severity.  I  have  used  it  with  excellent  effect  in  cases  of 
inveterate  nasal  catarrh  and  of.  glandular  enlargement.  The  nasal 
affection  may  go  on  to  ozaena,  ulceration  of  nasal  cartilages  and 
bones.  Glanders  in  the  horse  affects  the  lungs  no  less  than  the  upper 
respiratory  tract,  causing  coughs  and  disseminated  ulcerations  and 
deposits  throughout  the  lungs.  It  has  cured  papules  and  ulcerations 
in  frontal  sinuses,  pharynx,  larynx,  and  trachsea ;  hoarseness ;  old 
cases  of  bronchitis,  especially  in  old  persons  where  suffocation  from 
excessive  secretion  seemed  imminent.  Bronchial  asthma.  Whooping- 
cough.  A  cough  commencing  at  Christmas  and  lasting  till  June  has 
been  cured  by  it. 

Belations. — Compare :  Bacillin.,  Avi.,  Luet.,  Variol.  The  serpent 
poisons,  Aunun,  Cadm.  s.,  Kali  b.,  Hepar,  Psorin. 

SYMPTOMS. 

a.  Head. — Fainting  turns  with  headache. — Inflammation  of  membranes 
of  brain. — Purulent  collections  between  bones  of  skull  and  dura  mater. — 
Scattered  abscesses  in  brain  substance. — ^Tubercles  may  appear  in  periosteum 
of  skull,  in  dura  mater,  in  plexus  choroides. — ^A  diffused  myelitis  malleosa, 
attributable  to  infiltration. — Bones  of  skull  and  face  (frontal  most)  necrosed. 
— Hair  loses  its  glisten. 

3.  Eyes.— Eyes  full  of  tears  or  slime. — Pupils  dilated,  with  coUapse. — 
Papules  on  choroid  coat  of  eye. 

4.  Ears. — ^Tinkling  sounds  in  ears. — Hoarse  and  deaf  before  fatal  termi- 
nation.— Inflammation  of  parotid  gland. 

5.  Nose. — Swelling  and  redness  of  nose  and  adjacent  parts,  with  severe 
pain. — Catarrh :  nose  inflamed  with  thick  and  tinged  defluxion ;  tonsils 
swollen,  fauces  gorged. — Obstinate  catarrh. — Discharge  :  often  one-sided, 
albuminous,  tough,  viscous,  discoloured,  grey,  greenish,  even  bloody  and 
offensive  ;  acrid,  corroding. — Chronic  ozaena. — Nose  and  mouth  ulcerated. — 
Cartilages  of  nose  become  exposed  and  necrosed,  septum,  vomer,  and  palate 
bone  disorganised. — Caries  of  nasal  bones. — Checks  the  liability  to  catarrhal 
affection. 

6.  Face. — Maxillary  gland  swollen,  like  a  distinct  ball  of  sausage,  firmly 
attached  to  the  maxilla,  uneven,  rugged,  tuberculated,  mostly  painless,  burning 
only  at  times. — Submaxillary  and  sublingual  glands  swollen  and  painful  at 
times ;  abscesses  are  formed  which  open  externally. 

7.  Teeth  and  Gums. — Gums  show  a  tendency  to  bleed. — Gums 
covered  with  a  black,  sooty  deposit. 

8.  Mouth. — Act  of  speaking  difficult. — ^Tongue  dry,  thickly  covered 
with  a  black,  sooty  deposit — Ulcers  appear  in  mouth. — Buccal  passages  filled 


9o8  HIPPOZiENINUM 

with  tenacious  lymph  and  mucus.— Odoor  of  breath  putrid.— Scrofolons 
swelling  ol  1.  parotid  gland  in  a  child. 

g.  Throat. — Ulcerations  upon  velum  ol  palate.— Swollen  tonsils  closing 
posterior  channels. — Upon  mucous  membrane  of  pharynx  eochymoses, 
redness,  swelling,  eruptions,  and  foul  ulcers. 

10,  II.  Appetite  and  Stomach.— Thirst  excessive,  esp.  with  diarrhoea. 
— Gastro-intestinal  catarrh;  loss  of  appetite,  indigestion,  constipation ;  in 
later  stage,  diarrhoea. 

19,  Abdomen. — Liver  greatly  enlarged,  often  showing  signs  of  fatty 
degeneration. — Hepatitis  with  gangrenous  and  ulcerative  inflanunation  of 
gall-ducts. — Spleen  enlarged,  filled  with  blood ;  softened  and  liquefied,  of  a 
greyish  or  dark  colour ;  wedge-shaped  abscess  in  spleen. — Inguinal  ^ands 
swollen. 

13.  Stool. — Colliquative  diarrhoea  with  a  general  cachexia  and  exfaaustioa 
precede  the  fatal  termination. — Constipation. 

14.  Urinary  Organs.— Tubercles  and  abscesses  in  kidneys.— Albumen 
in  urine,  also  leucine  and  tyrosine. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — ^Tubercles  and  abscesses  :  of  glans  penis ; 
of  testicles  ;  in  kidneys. 

Id.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Slimy  discharge  from  vagina. — Uterine 
phlebitis. — Abortion. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Papules  and  ulcerations  in  frontal  sinuses, 
pharynx,  larynx,  and  trachea. — Hoarseness  from  the  altered  condition  of 
larynx.— Bronchitis  :  in  the  worst  forms ;  esp.  in  elderly  persons  ;  where 
suffocation  from  excessive  secretion  is  imminent. — Noisy  breathing;  loud 
snoring  respiration  before  fatal  termination ;  breath  fetid. — Cough  and 
obstructed  respiration,  resulting  from  cicatricial  contraction  of  mucous 
membrane  of  nose  and  larynx ;  had  lasted  eleven  years ;  patient  presented 
pictiu-e  of  decided  cachexia. — Respiration  at  first  partially  impeded. — Cough 
commenced  at  Christmas  and  lasted  till  June. — ^Whooping-cough. — Patients 
cough  severely  and  expectorate  profusely,  sputa  usually  bearing  a  strong 
resemblance  to  the  discharge  from  the  nostrils. — ^Tubercles,  size  of  millet 
seed  to  a  pea,  of  a  grey,  yellowish,  or  reddish  colour. — Given  in  phthisis,  it 
diminishes  expectoration,  abates  constantly  recurring  aggravations  of  inflam- 
mation, and  checks  liability  to  catarrhal  affections. — Lung  disease  of  cattle  (P.). 

19.  Pulse. — Pulse  very  frequent  and  small  in  volume,  no  to  120;  in 
some  cases  retarded. 

21.  Limbs. — Obscure  pain  in  limbs,  most  in  muscles  and  joints. 

22.  Upper  Limbs. — With  sore  finger,  swelling  of  arm,  phlegmonous 
and  erysipelatous  with  pustules  and  ulcers. 

23.  Lov^er  Limbs. — Hip-disease. — Psoas  and  lumbar  abscesses  (F.). — 
Old  bad  legs  (ulcers). — ^Anasarca  of  lower  limbs  (P.). 

24.  Generalities. — ^Weakness,  fatigue,  general  discomfort ;  they  ^ve  up 
their  business. — General  prostration  with  considerable  emaciation. — ^Tissues  : 
Numerous  ecchymoses  in  internal  organs  ;  inflammation  of  lymphatic  vessels 
and  swelling  of  glands ;  phlegmasia  alba  dolens. 

25.  Skin. — Erythema,  erysipelatous  or  phlegmonous  processes,  abscesses, 
pustules,  and  ulcers  are  spread  so  extensively  over  surface  of  body  that 
hardly  any  part  remains  free. — Malignant  erysipelas,  particularly  if  attended 


HOANG-NAN  909 

by  large  formations  of  pus,  and  destruction  of  parts.— Confluent  small-pox.— 
Ulcers  have  no  disposition  to  heal,  livid  appearance. 

96.  Sleep. — Insomnia  and  great  restiessness. — Nocturnal  delirium. 

97.  Fever« — Frequent  chilliness. — Chills  and  fever  in  cases  of  abscesses 
and  ulcers. — Skin  becomes  cool  with  collapse. — Fever  when  a  series  of 
abscesses  follow  in  rapid  succession,— Putrid  fever.— Plague.— May  be  tried 
in  scarlatina,  where  odour  of  breath  is  putrid,  buccal  passages  filled  with 
tenacious  lymph  and  mucus,  tonsils  greatiy  swollen. 


Hoang-Nan. 


Strychnos  gaultheriana,  Pierre.    (Tonquin).    N.  0.  Loganiaceae. 
Tincture  of  dried  bark. 

GUnieal.  —  Albuminuria.     Boils.     Carbimcles.     Eczema,    pustular.     Hydro- 
phobia.   Leprosy.    Paralysis.    Prurigo.    Syphilis.    Ulcers. 

GharaoteriBtiOB. — Hoang-nan  is  a  plant  indigenous  to  Tonquin, 
where  it  has  a  great  reputation  as  a  remedy  for  leprosy,  hydrophobia, 
snake-bites,  and  diseases  of  the  skin.  In  an  article  by  Sir  Sherston 
Baker  (Brit.  Med.  Joum,^  March  30,  1889— if.  W.^  xxiv.  371),  it  is 
stated  that  the  medicine  called  Hoang-nan  is  a  powder,  and  contains 
1*5  parts  Alunij  1*5  parts  Realgar^  2-5  Hoang-nan.  But  it  is  added 
that  the  last  is  the  most  important,  and  can  be  employed  alone.  The 
plant  belong  to  the  Strychnos  family,  and  contains  both  Strychnia 
and  Brucea^  the  latter  in  preponderating  <juantity.  The  red  dust  of 
the  bark  contains  the  most  active  properties.  The  native  method  of 
preparing  the  medicine  is  by  moistening  the  mixture  of  the  three 
powders  with  a  little  vinegar,  and  forming  the  paste  into  pills  of  about 
a  centimetre  in  diameter.  When  taken  by  a  healthy  person  these  pills 
produce  :  Fatigue,  general  indisposition,  vertigo,  tingling  of  the  hands 
and  feet,  involimtary  movements  of  jaw.  When  a  person  is  bitten  by 
a  poisonous  animal  a  dose  of  three  or  four  grammes  is  administered 
in  vinegar,  and  if  none  of  these  symptoms  appear  it  is  understood 
that  the  medicine  is  antagonised,  and  the  dose  is  increased  until  some 
of  the  symptoms  manifest  themselves,  when  the  poison  is  considered 
to  be  destroyed.  The  use  of  alcohol  is  forbidden  whilst  a  patient  is 
taking  this  medicine.  Vinegar  appears  to  modify  its  virulence.  In 
animals  poisoned  with  it  tetanic  convulsions  always  begin  in  the  hind 
legs  and  spread  all  over  the  body.  Brain,  liver,  kidneys,  and  lungs 
were  found  congested  post  mortem.  In  1883  a  proving  of  the  drug 
was  made  by  seven  persons  {N.  A.  J.  //.,  March,  1886),  and  a  few 
symptoms  were  produced.  According  to  Hansen,  prurigo,  pustular 
eczema  in  parts  well  supplied  with  sebaceous  glaiids  (face,  neck, 
genitals),  boils,  carbuncles,  constitutional  syphilis,  cancer  of  the 
glands,  and  general  malnutrition  were  also  met  by  the  remedy,  the 
dose  of  which  is  5  to  30  drops  of  the  tincture  three  times  a  day. 

BelatioilS. — Compare:  Nuz  v..  Curare,  Angustura,  Brucea  antidys., 
Hydrocotyle. 


9IO  HOMARUS 

8TMPT0MB. 

I.    Mind. — Mental  jassitude ;  indUpositioa  to  effort 
8.    Head.— Vertigo ;  headache. 
xdy  23.    Abdomen  and  Stool. — Colic  and  diarrhoea. 
14.    Urinary  Organs.— Albuminuria  (in  four  provers). — Mucous  casts 
(two  provers). 

84.  Generalities. — It  improves  nutrition  generally,  esp.  in  constitutional 
syphilis. — ^Tetanic  convulsions  beginning  in  legs  and  spreading  over  body. — 
Glandular  a£Fections. 

85.  Skin.  —  Malignant  ulcers ;  pustular  eczema ;  boils ;  carbuncles ; 
leprosy. 


Homaras. 

Lobster.  N.  0,  Crustaceae.  TrituratioDS  of  sugar  of  milk  saturated 
with  the  digesting  fluid  of  the  lobster,  a  thick,  reddish,  offensive 
liquid  contained  in  a  sac  siti^ated  at  the  back  of  the  mouth. 

OlinieaL — Back,  pains  in.  Bones,  pains  in.  Coryza.  Diaphragm,  pain  in. 
Dyspepsia.  Eyes,  afFections  of.  Flatulence.  Granular  throat  Headadie.  Liver, 
pains  in.  CEdema.  Paralysis,  nervous.  Pruritus,  ^eep,  disordered.  Spleen, 
pains  in.    Throat,  sore.    Wrist,  pain  in. 

Ohuaotaristios* — The  effects  of  lobster  on  some  persons  and 
under  some  conditions  are  well  known.  In  order  to  thoroughly  study 
the  effect  A.  M.  Gushing  adopted  the  happy  idea  of  proving  the 
specific  lobster  poison,  and  the  result  has  been  a  very  valuable  addi- 
tion to  our  armamentarium  {H,  /?.,  iiL  98).  Homarus  is  an  agent  of 
great  activity,  as  the  subjoined  symptom  hst  will  show.  Persons  have 
been  known  to  die  after  eating  lobster  and  thereafter  drinking  milk. 
Gushing  put  a  little  of  the  poison  into  warm  milk,  and  in  ten  minutes 
it  was  a  hard  mass.  Papoid  soon  dissolved  it,  but  pepsin  took  much 
longer.  Gushing  found  that  milk  aggravated  his  symptoms  during  the 
proving.  ''  <  From  milk  "  should  be  a  strong  indication  for  its  use. 
The  more  prominent  symptoms  of  the  proving  were :  Sore  throat, 
which  was  quite  severe^  felt  dry,  looked  much  inflamed  with  large 
blood-vessels,  and  appeared  granulated  ;  headaches  ;  deranged 
digestion  ;  pains  in  back  ;  sexual  excitement ;  disturbed  sleep.  Here 
is  a  peculiar  symptom  not  unfrequently  met  with  in  dyspeptics  : 
'^At  3  p.m.,  ate  a  plain  dinner,  and  at  7  drank  a  httle  milk  ;  at  12 
(midnight),  after  a  few  minutes'  sleep  awoke  with  hurried  desire  for  stools 
and  was  relieved  by  passing  a  large  amount  of  wind.  After  much 
effort  passed  a  large,  long,  tenacious  stool."  For  patients  who  are 
awakened  in  the  night  by  the  necessity  to  pass  wind,  Horn,  should  be 
the  remedy.  Pains  were  sharp  and  sudden,  compelling  him  to  sit 
down.  A  curious  sensation  was  :  '^  Felt  as  though  could  not  move  ; 
on  moving  no  pain  ;  felt  better  by  moving."  On  this  indication,  with 
others,  Gushing  cured  a  case  with  Horn,  4X.    The  patient  had  head- 


HOMARUS  911 

ache,  sore  throat,  loss  of  appetite,  and  when  she  awoke  in  the  morning 
felt  as  if  she  could  not  move  at  alL  On  receiving  Horn,  there  was  a 
speedy  restoration  of  keen  appetite,  both  for  food  and  work,  and 
loss  of  headache  and  sore  throat.  Another  cured  case  had  the 
following  symptoms :  ''  No  appetite ;  distress  in  stomach ;  restless 
sleep  ;  very  tired  in  momingJ*  A  case  of  frequent  "  bilious  spells  " 
was  also  cured  in  a  man  who  had  had  Nux  and  Dioscorea  with 
only  temporary  relief.  The  symptoms  generally  are  <  after 
sleep  ;  in  the  morning  on  waking ;  at  night ;  on  drawing  a  long 
breath  j  from  drinking  milk.  >  From  motion ;  from  passing 
wind  ;  after  eating ;  from  inhaling  cold  air.  L.  H.  Hallock  relates 
{Med,  Adv.y  xxii.  311)  a  personal  experience.  An  hour  after  eating  a 
small  amount  of  lobster  salad,  general  pruritus  commenced,  worse  in 
lower  extremities,  especially  the  calves.  The  itching  was  of  a  biting, 
burning  character,  not  >  by  rubbing  or  scratching,  almost  unendur- 
able. It  lasted  two  hours  in  spite  otbathing  with  hot  and  cold  water, 
fresh  and  salt.  No  sooner  had  the  itching  abated  than  lips, 
nose,  eyes  began  to  swell,  till  the  eyes  were  closed  and  lips 
almost  completely  inverted.  Throat  swollen  and  cedematous  so  that 
it  was  almost  impossible  to  breathe  ,*  profuse  salivation.  Eight  hours 
after  the  meal  he  had  the  appearance  of  a  severe  and  protracted 
debauch.  In  twenty-four  hoiu^  was  as  well  as  ever.  Once  sub- 
sequently he  had  a  like  experience  after  eating  lobster. 

Relations. — Compare:  Sepia,  Murex,  Aster,  r.  Ast  fl.  ;  in  cold 
damp  feet,  Calc.  c.  ;  Lach.  (<  after  sleep) ;  Hydrast,  Phytolacca, 
Pic.  ac. ;  in  <  from  milk,  Calc.  c,  Chi.,  Con.,  Nit.  ac.,Sep.  Sul.,  Mag. 
c.  i£thus. 

Caasafcioii. — Milk,  effects  of. 

STMPT0H8. 

I.  Mind.  —  Frightened  feeling.— *DuU.— Nervous  but  with  dread  of 
moving. 

8.  Head. — Headache,  in  morning ;  sharp  at  times,  mostly  in  temporal 
region,  <  1. — Dizziness. — Frontal  pain ;  just  above  eyes,  at  times  worse  in  L 
temporal  region ;  from  over  eyes  to  occiput,  <  1.  side ;  sharp,  over  1.  eye,  had 
to  scowl  and  rub  the  parts. — Pain  :  sharp,  in  temples  (r.) ;  in  1.  temple,  and  in 
occiput ;  in  front  part  of  1.  temple. 

3.  Eyes. — Aching  in  eyes. — ^Aching  in  r.  eye  and  above  1.  angle  of  r. — 
Aching  in  1.  eye  with  soreness  to  touch. — ^Aching  from  1.  side  of  r.  eye  to 
occiput — ^Aching  in  1.  eye  when  rising,  later  in  r.,  as  if  something  had  been 
blown  in  the  eye  suddenly. — Smarting  in  eyes. — Aching  pain  in  1.  ball,  not 
much  a£Eected  by  the  light. — Lids  stuck  together  in  the  morning. — GSdema  of 
lids. — Profuse  lachrymation. 

4.  Ears.— Frequent  stabbing  through  lower  lobe  of  1.  ear,  had  to 
pinch  it. 

5.  Nose. — Stinging  in  nasal  passages. — Burning  in  nasal  passages  ex- 
tending to  throat  after  rising. — Sensation  of  mucus  in  1.  nostril. — Nose  stopped 
in  morning. — Discharge  from  the  nose;  watery,  from  1.  nostril. — Sneezed 
olten. 


912  HOMARUS 

8.    Mcmth.— Profiise  salhralkm. 

g.  Throat. — Pain  near  L  car;  sharp,  sodden,  transient,  in  L  side 
of  throat,  occasionally  extending  to  ear. — Smarting  and  redness  of  tfannt ; 
<  r.  side;  back  of  it  looks  as  if  covered  with  too^  mncns»  constant 
accomolation  of  mocns  in  fances;  next  day  throat  sore  and  boming, 
looks  mottled,  vessels  show  friainly,  sticky  mocns  in  month  and 
throat,  smarting  in  throat,  <  L  »de. — ^Throat  dry  and  sore  on  waking; 
looked  granulated,  expectoration  salt  —  Irritation;  of  L  side.  —  Sore 
and  raw  feeling;  bnming,  posterior  faoces  grey  and  oo?ered  with 
membrane  or  tongh  mocns,  vessels  show  plainly  where  there  is  no  mocns  or 
appearance  of  deposit — Soreness :  <  L  side,  less  on  r.  than  posterior  parts ; 
>  by  cold  air. — Smarting  and  inclination  to  coogh  >  opening  month  wide 
and  inhaling  very  cold  air. — Pain  in  L  side  of  tiiroat,  ear,  and  neck,  it  seems  to  be 
in  the  muscles  rather  than  the  mucous  membrane,  >  holding  side  of  head  with 
the  hand. — ^Tingling ;  and  inclination  to  cough,  raised  white  mucus. — Bnming 
in  throat,  r.  side,  and  in  oesophagus^  stomach  and  bowels. — GSdema  of  throat 
so  great  he  could  hardly  breathe. 

zx.  Stomach. — Belching  forth  of  tasteless  wind  in  the  morning. — Pain 
all  the  forenoon,  with  occasional  hot  flashes. — Sharp  pain  after  a  light  break- 
fast— Distress  in  stomach  ;  on  waking  in  the  night,  >  in  morning,  returned  in 
evening ;  before  and  after  a  light  breakfast ;  after  a  plain  dinner,  followed  by 
a  littie  ice-cream ;  through  to  back,  <  near  spine,  several  times  during  the 
day  ;  around  body  at  epigastric  region  before  rising,  extending  down  back  to 
region  of  kidneys. — ^Burning  in  stomach. 

13.  AtMlomen. — Pain  :  in  diaphragm ;  in  hypochondria  ;  lower  part  of 
liver ;  liver  and  spleen ;  in  liver  and  spleen  during  the  day ;  in  liver,  <  even* 
ing. — Sharp  pain  in  region  of  liver  (in  morning) ;  in  1.  lobe  of  liver  ;  in  r^on 
of  liver,  <  drawing  a  long  breath  ;  under  ends  of  1.  floating  ribs  after  retiring, 
appeared  to  be  in  the  spleen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Frequent  transient  inclination  to  stool  during 
the  day. — ^Alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation,  changing  every  three  or  four 
days. — After  a  few  minutes'  sleep  awoke  with  hurried  desire  to  pass  stool, 
>  by  passing  large  amount  of  wind. — ^Af ter  much  effort  passed  large,  long 
tenacious  stool  (in  night). 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.  —  Long-continued  excitement  every 
morning ;  and  in  night. 

17,  z8.  Respiratory  Organs  and  Chest.— Difficult  breathing  after 
retiring. — Sharp  pain  in  back  side  of  L  lung. — Pain  :  through  chest ;  in  sides» 
in  r.  lung ;  through  centre  of  r.  lung. — Pain  in  centre  of  1.  lung  after  retiring, 
amd  around  body  at  diaphragm  ;  in  centre  of  r.  lung  and  through  to  scapula. 
— Burning  distress  at  right  of  lower  end  of  sternum ;  in  both  sides  with 
difficult  breathing. — Intense  oedema  of  throat  rendering  breathing  almost 
impossible. 

ZQ.    Pulse.— Pulse  full,  rolling. 

ao.  Back. — ^Aching :  just  below  diaphragm  ;  in  centre  of  r.  scapula  in 
morning ;  inside  of  scapula,  <  r. — Sharp  pain  at  superior  spinous  process  of 
1.  ilium.— Sharp  pain,  transient,  sudden,  in  r.  side  near  kidney,  forcing  him  to 
sit  down. 

sa.    Upper  Limbs. — Grinding  pain  just  above  elbows. — Pains :  in  arms 


HOMARUS  913 

and  legs ;  inl.  arm  in  afternoon ;  just  above  elbows,  <  r. — Pain  just  above  r. 
elbow  seemed  to  be  in  the  bone,  1.  forearm  and  wrist — Pain  in  1.  wrist  in 
afternoon. 

93.  Lov^er  Limbs. — Pain  in  r.  thigh  and  leg.— Pain :  in  legs  <  above 
knees ;  in  bones  of  1.  leg  after  going  to  bed ;  in  knees ;  in  1.  ankle ;  in  feet, 
with  burning. — Lame  pain  in  r.  knee. — Knees  weak ;  <  r. ;  <  afternoon. — 
Knees  weak  and  trembling. — L.  foot  lame  through  metatarso-phalangeal  joints 
at  times. 

94.  Generalities. — Pain  somewhere  all  day  ;  in  eyes  and  various  parts 
of  body  and  limbs  after  retiring. — Strange  feeling  all  over,  was  not  dizzy,  but 
when  trying  to  take  hold  of  door-knob  could  not  do  it  readily,  but  put  my 
hand  all  around  it  and  was  frightened. — Felt  sick,  unable  to  move,  >  moving. 
— Dull  feeling. — Nervous  feeling  ;  but  dread  of  moving. — Restlessness. — 
Weakness;   <  walking. — >  After  eating;  after  dinner. 

25.  Skin. — Sore  pimple  on  1.  thigh,  outside. — Itching  :  in  various  parts 
frequently  day  and  night ;  of  various  parts  before  and  after  retiring,  >  scratch- 
ing, but  appearing  in  another  place. — Itching  sudden,  <  night,  <  in  limbs ; 
frequent  sudden  darting,  on  various  parts,  <  legs. — General  pruritus  most  on 
lower  limbs,  esp.  calves,  burning,  biting,  itching,  not  >  by  rubbing  or  scratch- 
ing, lasted  two  hours  in  spite  of  hot  and  cold  bathing ;  followed  immediately 
on  its  subsidence  with  oedema  of  lips  and  throat. 

s6.  Sleep. — Slept  in  a  chair  (unusual)  after  dinner. — Restless  at  night. — 
Sleepy  after  retiring,  so  that  eyes  ached,  but  could  not  sleep  for  a  long  time. 
— Sleepless  for  nearly  two  hours  after  retiring ;  restless,  hsid  headache,  pain 
in  back,  stomach  and  bowels. — Woke  at  midnight,  after  a  few  minutes'  sleep, 
with  hurried  desire  for  stool,  >  passing  much  wind,  and  after  much  effort 
passed  a  large,  long,  tenacious  stool. — Every  night  go  to  sleep  on  retiring,  and 
in  five  or  ten  minutes  wake  and  lie  awake  one  or  two  hours. — ^Wakefulness  in 
the  morning,  but  later  in  the  proving  it  was  both  in  the  first  and  last  part  of 
the  night. — ^Woke  early  and  could  not  go  to  sleep  on  account  of  pains  all  over, 
<  epigastric  region,  back,  arms,  and  legs,  legs  lame  and  painful  as  from 
severe  exercise  and  cold,  expected  to  be  very  lame  on  rising,  but  felt  nicely. — 
Woke  two  hours  earlier  than  usual,  with  dull  headache,  burning  all  ever  chest, 
seeming  to  be  in  the  pleura,  aching  pain  through  lungs  to  scapula,  aching  in 
back  part  of  shoulder,  outside  of  upper  portion  of  scapula,  pain  in  hypochon- 
dria, extending  down  back,  burning  pain  in  legs  and  feet,  mostly  below  knees, 
so  that  I  could  not  go  to  sleep,  feet  so  hot  that  I  had  to  put  them  out  of  bed, 
then  the  pain  extended  to  the  thighs,  the  pain  was  so  severe  that  I  felt  as  if 
I  trembled  all  over,  but  think  I  did  not;  I  felt  as  if  I  could  not  move,  but  on 
moving  there  was  no  pain  and  I  felt  better  by  moving,  could  not  sleep  again. 
27.  Fever.— Chilliness  all  over  so  that  I  trembled.— Feet  cold;  and 
damp;  afterwards  burning. 


VOL.  1.  59 


914  HURA  BRASILIENSIS 

Homeria. 

Homeria  coUina.    Cape  Tulip.    N.  0.  Iridaces.    Tincture  of  bulbs. 

OUaiiftL— Collapse.    Constipation.    Vomiting. 

Charaeteristioi. — Homeria  is  a  violent  narcotico-acrid  poison 
very  like  Colchicum  in  its  effects.  A  Malay  woman,  with  her  three 
grandchildren^  aet.  12,  8,  and  6,  ate  a  small  basinful  of  the  bulbs  with 
their  supper  (between  7  and  8  p.m.).  About  i  a.m.  the  woman  woke 
with  severe  nausea  and  vomiting,  and  found  the  children  similarly 
affected.  She  tried  to  call  for  help,  but  found  herself  too  weak  to 
leave  her  bed,  and  when  by  five  o'clock  assistance  arrived  the  eldest 
girl  was  found  moribund  and  expired  almost  immediately.  The  boy 
of  8  died  an  hour  later.  The  youngest  child  was  found  in  collapse, 
almost  insensible,  cold  extremities,  pulse  scarcely  50  and  irregular, 
pupils  much  dilated.  The  grandmother's  symptoms  were  similar, 
but  lesser  in  degree,  accompanied  by  constant  efforts  at  vomiting. 
By  using  diffusible  stimulants  she  and  the  child  eventually  recovered. 
Oostinate  constipation  prevailed. 


Hura  Brasiliensis. 

Hura   brasiliensis.     Assacu.      N.  O.    Buphorbiaceae.      Tincture    of 

milky  juice. 

CUnieal. — Blindness.    Hysteria.    Leprosy.    Nares,  affections  of.    Skin,  affec- 
tions of.    Spine,  pains  in. 

OharaoteriatiOB. — ^The  milky  juice  (called  Assacu  by  the  Brazilians) 
of  Hura  is  as  powerful  as  that  of  the  better*known  Buphorbtans.  A 
case  of  leprosy  having  been  reported  cured  with  Assacu  led  to  its 
extensive  use  in  this  disease,  though,  as  Mure  (who  proved  it)  says, 
without  curing  any  others.  Two  of  his  provers  had  been  affected 
with  leprosy,  but  under  homoeopathic  treatment  they  seemed  to  have 
got  well.  One  of  them  during  the  proving  had  symptoms  of  com- 
pression of  the  spinal  marrow  with  very  great  suffering.  All  the 
provers  had  symptoms  of  nervous  excitement,  twitching  and  irritabihty. 
The  gastro-intestinal  irritation  of  the  other  Euphorbians  was  mark^ 
in  the  provings.  Clinical  experience  is  needed  to  bring  out  the 
characteristics.  Farrington  gives  these  indications :  Vesicles  which  are 
so  tense  that  when  pricked  they  eject  their  contents ;  sensation  oi 
a  splinter  under  thumb-nails.  The  eruptions  of  Hura^  he  says,  prefer 
the  skin  covering  projecting  portions  of  bone,  or  the  malar  bones. 
He  compares  it  with  Caniharis.  Mure's  provings  were  made  with 
single  doses  of  the  5th  attenuation. 

Relations* — Compare:  Croton.,  Ricinus,  Euphorb.,  Hura  crepi- 
tans.   Antidoted  by :  Camph.,  Opium. 


HURA   BRASILIENSIS  91S 

BTHPTOMS. 

1.  Mind. — Excited  and  oppressed  as  if  by  some  misfortune. — Causeless 
weeping  followed  by  laughter. — Flow  of  sad  thoughts;  imagines  she  will 
lose  some  one  dear  to  her ;  cries  every  moment,  and  for  several  days  past 
imagines  she  is  seeing  the  dead  person  before  her  eyes. — Exaggerated  con- 
scientiousness. — Irritable. — Indisposed  to  work. 

2.  Head. — Confusion. — Dizziness. — Rush  of  blood  to  the  head. — 
Heaviness  of  the  head. — ^Numbness  of  the  head. — Skin  of  forehead  feels 
drawn  tight. — Painful  lancinations  through  the  head. — Constriction  in  back 
of  head. 

3.  Eyes. — Prickling  and  burning  in  e3res ;  sensation  as  if  sand  in  them. 
— Eyelids  red. — Inflammation  of  the  puncta. — ^Vision  dim. — Blindness  (from 
touching  the  eye  with  the  milk). — Sparks  and  zigzags  before  the  sight  when 
walking. 

4.  Ears. — Pain  behind  and  in  (r.)  ear. — Stoppage  in  ears. — Loud 
whizzing  and  whistling  sound  in  ears. 

5.  Nose. — Redness  of  (1.)  wing  of  nose.— Constriction ;  throbbing  at 
root  of  nose. — Coryza;  epistaxis. — Sense  of  smell  very  acute. 

6.  Face. — Face  weary-looking  as  after  a  debauch  ;  rings  round  eyes. — 
Face  dull  and  dark-looking  with  paleness  mottled  with  red. — Face  scarlet  and 
bloated. — Heat  rising  to  face. — Swellings  on  upper  part  of  r.  cheek. — Lips 
red.— Small  pimples  inside  lower  lip. 

7.  Teeth. — Lancinations  in  teeth  and  gums ;  passing  to  ear. — Pimples 
on  gums. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  white ;  pain  at  tip. — Fleshy  excrescence  on  inside 
of  lips.-*Clammy  mouth ;  foul  smell.— Taste  :  of  copper ;  of  blood  ;  clammy ; 
smoky. 

g.  Throat. — Irritation  of  throat  with  diyness. — Spitting  of  blood  in 
morning. 

II.  Stomach. — Great  hunger  with  pain  in  stomach  ;  hunger  satisfied 
immediately  on  eating. — Hunger  sometimes  immediately  after  a  meal. — 
Qualmishness. — Stomachache ;  as  from  hunger. 

18.  Abdomen. — Frightful  colic  with  diarrhoea  and  shivering. — Throb- 
bing in  1.  side  abdomen. — ^Twisting  pain  in  1.  side,  or  cutting  all  round 
pelvis,  with  very  painful  shooting;  extorting  cries. — Stitch  in  ileo-caecal 
region  <  on  movement. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constriction  at  anus. — Frequent  ine£Fectual 
urging  to  stool. — Diarrhoea  succeeded  by  great  weakness  of  chest. — Stools : 
liquid,  painless,  flowing  constantly;  offensive,  containing  thread-worms. — 
Constipation;  hard,  difficult  stools. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — ^Acute  pain  in  r.  kidney  while  walking,  with 
great  urging  to  urinate. — Urine  :  lig|tit  green ;  clear ;  deposits  a  white  sediment. 

1^  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Intolerable  erections :  amorous  dreams 
with  erections ;  lemon-coloured  semen. — Weight  in  testicles  when  walking. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Pain  in  uterus :  as  if  compressed ;  as  if 
a  sharp  instrument  were  thrust  into  it ;  followed  by  lancinations  in  vagina. — 
Leocorrhcea. — Menses :  scanty ;  eight  days  too  early ;  profuse,  vrith  leucorrhoea. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Dryness  of  glottis  causing  cough. — Con- 


9i6  HURA  CREPITANS 

siderable  yellow,  thick,  frothy  sputa. — Sputa :  rusty-coloured  ;  foul,  bloody ; 
like  milk-chocolate. — Feeling  of  su£Eocation. — Sighs  and  yawns  much. 

18.  Chest. — ^Nervous  shivering  all  over  chest — SufiFocative  sensation, 
esp.  when  thinking  of  anything  that  has  gone  wrong. — Lancinations  in  chest 
preventing  deep  breathing. — ^Throbbings  in  chest. — Sensation  of  a  small  ball 
under  r.  breast — Sharp  pain  shifting  from  shoulder  to  1.  breast. — Stitches  in 
breasts. — ^Throbbing  in  breasts. 

XQ.  Heart.— Constant  pain  at  heart,  sometimes  very  sharp,  arresting 
breathing. 

80.  Neck  and  Back. — Sti£F-neck  (r.  side);  least  motion  is  painfully 
felt  in  nape. — Dislocated  and  tearing  pain  in  dorsal  region ;  on  sitting  down. 
— Severe  pains  in  lumbar  region;  weakness. — Excruciating  pain  in  lumbo- 
sacral region,  when  trying  to  lift  a  weight 

31.  Limbs. — Weariness  of  limbs. — Lancinations,  throbbing,  rheumatic 
pains,  numbness  in  upper  and  lower  limbs. — Dislocated  pains  in  joints. 

22.  Upper  Limbs.— Throbbing  in  finger-tips.— Pain  as  from  splinter 
under  thumb-nail. — Heat  in  nails ;  sensation  as  if  part  of  nail  had  been  torn 
ofiF. 

25.  Skin. — Large  pimples  itching  very  much. — Pimples,  painful  to  touch 
on  1.  cheek  and  eyebrows. — Small  red  pimples  on  r.  cheek-^bone,  with  smarting 
on  r.  cheek. — Cluster  of  pimples  or  vesicles  on  various  parts. — Red  vesicular 
pimples,  the  vesicles  break  on  pressure  and  water  squirts  out  with  great  force. 
— Small  vesicular  pimples,  with  itching,  on  ribs,  arms,  and  all  projecting 
portions  of  bones. — Itching  on  forehead ;  eyelids ;  chin ;  beard ;  back ;  legs ; 
sleep  disturbed  by  it 

26.  Sleep. — Yawning  and  drowsiness.— Nightly  restlessness. — Eh-eams: 
of  travelling ;  of  swimming ;  of  yellow  water ;  of  corpses ;  of  assassins. 

27.  Fever. — Feet  and  body  generally  constantly  cold  and  damp. — Heat 
and  transient  perspiration. — Flushes  of  heat  in  face. — Cold  sweat  on  face 
and  all  over  body. 


Hura  Crepitans. 


Sand-box.    Monkey's  dinner-bell.    N,  O,  Euphorbiaces.    Tincture 

of  seeds. 

OUnieftl.— Blindness.    Diarrhcea.    Sore-throat.    Vomiting. 

Charaoteristics. — ''The  curious,  rounded,  hard-shelled  fruits  are 
about  the  size  of  an  orange,  and  have  as  many  deep  furrows  as  there 
are  cells,  each  cell  containing  a  single  flattened  seed.  When  the  fruit 
is  ripe  and  exposed  to  a  dry  atmosphere,  it  bursts  with  great  force, 
accompanied  by  a  loud,  sharp  crack  like  the  report  of  a  pistol^  for 
which  reason  it  is  often  called  the  Monkey's  Dinner-bell.  The  seeds 
are  emetic,  in  a  green  state  violently  purgative,  but  when  dry, 
according  to  Lunan,  they  lose  this  property.  An  oil  is  extracted  from 
them,  and  sometimes  used  as  a  purgative,  about  twenty  drops  of  it 
being  equal  in  action  to  a  tablespoonf  ul  of  castor  oil.    A  venomous 


HYDRANGEA  ARBORESCENS  917 

milky  juice  is  abundant  in  all  parts  of  the  plant,  and  if  it  be  applied 
to  the  eye  causes  almost  immediate  blindness."  The  Treasury  of 
Botany f  from  which  I  quote  the  above,  only  recognises  one  species  of 
Hura,  H.  crepitans.  But  Mure  compares  nis  Hura  with  H.  crepitans. 
They  are  probably  varieties  of  the  same  species,  the  properties  of  the 
milk  of  the  two  being  the  same.  The  observed  effects  of  H.  crep. 
were  from  eating  the  seeds.  Burning  in  throat ;  vomiting  and  purging ; 
suffocation  ;  headache,  were  the  main  symptoms  coniplained  of. 

Relations* — Compare : — Hur.    bras.,    Ricinus,    Croton.  ;    Caps, 
(burning  in  throat  not  >  by  water).    Antidoted  by :  Camph.,  Op. 

BTMPTOMB. 

8.  Head.— The  one  who  had  eaten  the  shell  with  the  seed  was  seized 
with  violent  vomiting  with  headache. 

9.  Throat. — It  soon  began  to  warm  and  scald  his  palate  and  throat-^ 
Violent  burning  in  throat. 

II.  Stomach.— If  a  person  eats  even  a  single  kernel  he  is  usually 
attacked  with  severe  vomiting  and  purging  within  a  very  few  minutes.— After 
a  few  hours,  they  experienced  suffocation,  nausea,  violent  burning  in  the 
throat,  not  >  by  water. — ^Those  who  ate  the  seed  without  the  shell,  only 
suffered  from  nausea  and  violent  pain  in  stomach,  vomiting  once,  and  violent 
diarrhcea. 


Hydrangea  Arboresoens. 

Hydrangea   arborescens.     N.  0.  Hydrangeaceae  (or  Saxifragaceae). 
Tincture  of  fresh  leaves  and  young  shoots.    Fluid  extract. 

COinieal.-- Bladder,  catarrh  of  ;  stone  in.    Diabetes.    Gravel.    Prostatic  affec- 
tions.   Urine,  incontinence  of. 

CliaFaoteriBtios. — Like  some  other  members  of  the  Saxifragaceae, 
Hydrang.  has  a  traditional  reputation  as  a  ''  stone-breaking ''  remedy 
having  been  used  in  calculous  diseases  for  many  years.  Dr.  Notting- 
ham, of  Lansing,  says  (Amer.  Horn.,  November  15,  1809)  that  in 
physiological  doses  it  produces  "  giddiness,  oppression  of  the  chest, 
and  acts  as  a  cathartic,  diuretic,  si^dogogue,  and  narcotic.''  He  used  it 
with  brilliant  results  in  the  following  case  :  Mr.  B.,  71,  tall,  slender, 
dark,  was  exceedingly  irritable  and  frequently  subject  to  violent 
paroxysms  of  anger.  For  many  years  he  had  been  accustomed  to 
make  the  most  reckless  use  of  drugs,  and  was  always  requesting  his 
homoeopathic  doctor  to  give  him  "  something  stronger."  For  eight 
years  he  had  suffered  from  vesical  sphincter-irritation,  with  dribbling 
of  urine,  severe  spasms  of  prostate,  renal  catarrh,  yellow  sand  in 
urine,  and  even  small  calculi.  After  persistent  use  of  best  indicated 
remedies  with  no  effect,  the  fluid  extract  of  Hydrang.  was  given,  a 
teaspoonful  every  three  or  four  hours,  and  the  symptoms  disappeared 


9i8  HYDRASTINUM   MURIATICUM 

in  a  remarkably  short  time.  Cooper  has  also  used  this  remedy 
(which,  he  says,  is  the  thirstiest  plant  known)  with  good  effect  in 
diabetes,  in  cases  presenting  great  thirst  with  abdominal  symptoms 
and  in  enlarged  prostate.  It  appears  to  act  strongly  on  the  neck  of 
the  bladder.  Hansen  adds  that  it  is  particularly  useful  for  profuse 
deposits  of  white  amorphous  salts  in  the  urine ;  and  has  arrested  the 
tendency  to  formation  of  calculi:  reUeves  distress  from  renal 
calculus,  with  soreness  over  region  of  kidneys  and  bloody  urine. 

Belatlims. — Compare ;— Berb.,  Sabal.  s.,  Solidago.  v.  a.,  Uva.  uisi., 
Thlaspi  b.  p.^  Ocim.  c. 


Hydrasttninom  MoriatioQm. 

An  alkaloid  of  Hydrastis  canadensis.  C„  H„  NO.  HCL     Trituration 

of  the  crystals. 

CUnloK—FfftronM.    Metrorrhagia. 

ChanotoFlrtkii.— The  alkaloids  of  Hydrastis  have  been  largely 
used  in  the  old  school  as  remedies  for  internal  haemorrhage. 
HydrasUn.  was  found  to  be  inconvenient  by  reason  of  its  irritant 
properties.  Hydrasiinin,^  a  modification  of  HydrasUn,^  proved  to  be 
free  from  this  drawback,  and  its  use  in  fibroid  tumours  has  been 
advocated  by  Dr.  Burford  and  others  in  the  homoeopathic  schooL  A 
case  of  central  uterine  fibroid  tumour  under  my  care,  about  the  size 
of  a  large  oraixge,  and  pressing  on  the  bladder,  causing  bladder 
symptoms,  was  quickly  reduced  in  size  with  the  disappearance  of  all 
troublesome  symptoms  by  Hydrastinin.  3X. 


Hydrastiniim  Muriatioiim. 

Muriate  of  Hydrastia.    C,.  H..  NQs  NCI. 
GllaiML--Otticer.    MotUh,  ulcer  of.    Ozana,    Ulcer. 

GharMtdrisOos.— This  is  the  first  alkaloid  of  Hydrastis  that  was 
isolated.  Hale  commends  it  as  excellent  for  local  applications,  in  the 
strength  of  about  ten  grains  to  eight  ounces,  stronger  or  weaker 
according  to  sensitiveness,  in  cases  of  aphthous  sore  mouth,  ulcers 
(maUgnant  or  simple),  ozaena,  and  generally  in  cases  for  whicb 
Hydfoslis  is  being  given  internally.  The  alkaloids  of  Hydrastis  d^rve 
separate  proving.  Old  school  practitioners  have  used  this  salt  larg^y 
as  an  internal  remedy  in  uterine  haemorTfaage. 


HYDRASTIS  919 

Hydrastis. 

Hydrastis  canadensis.    Golden  Seal.    Orange-root.    Yellow  Puccoon. 
N,  O,  Ranunculaceae.    Tincture  of  the  fresh  root. 

CQiiiieal.— Alcoholism.  Asthma.  Cancer.  Catarrh.  Chancroids.  Constipation. 
Corns.  Dyspepsia.  Eczema  impetiginotdes.  EarSj  affections  of .  Faintness.  Fistula. 
Gastric  catarrh.  Gonorrhcea.  Hsemorrhoids.  Jaundice.  Leucorrhaa.  Lip,  cancer 
of.  Liver,  affections  of.  Lumbago.  Lupus.  Menorrhagia.  Metrorrhagia.  Month, 
sore.  Nails,  affections  of.  Nipples,  sore.  Noises  in  the  head.  Nursing-women, 
sore  mouth  of.  Ozcena.  Placenta,  adherent.  Post-nasal  catarrh  Rectum,  affections 
of.  Sciatica.  Seborrhoea.  Stomach,  affections  of.  Syphilis.  T^te,  disordered. 
Throat-deafness.  Throat,  sore.  Torque,  affections  of.  Typhus.  Ulcers.  Uterus, 
affections  of. 

ChaPaot6rl8tio8.— The  so-called  root  of  Hydrastis  from  which 
the  tincture  is  made  is  really  a  perennial  underground  stem,  thick, 
knotty,  and  yellow.  The  yellow  colour  is  very  intense,  and  it  has 
been  used  by  Indians  as  a  dye.  The  plant  is  the  only  specimen  of  its 
genus  among  the  Ranunculaceae.  It  grows  in  shady  woods,  in  rich 
soil,  and  damp  meadows.  The  fruit  is  like  a  raspberry,  and  the  plant 
is  sometimes  called  Ground  Raspberry  in  consequence.  The  medi- 
cinal properties  of  Hydrast.  were  known  to  the  aborigines  of  America. 
The  first  mention  of  it  in  medical  literature  is  by  Rafinesque  (Medical 
Botany^  1828).  Hale  quotes  him  as  saying  that  it  is  ''tonic,  ophthal- 
mic, detergent,"  and  that  "  it  is  said  to  enter  into  compound  remedies 
for  cancer,  acting  as  a  detergent  tonic,  and  the  Cherokees  are 
supposed  to  use  it  in  that  disease.''  This  is  important  as  showing 
that  the  traditional  reputation  of  the  plant  agrees  with  the  results  of 
later  experience.  For  though  by  no  means  a  specific  in  all  cases  of 
cancer,  it  is  in  cancer  cases  that  /fy^iras/.  has  won  its  chief  fame;  and 
I  think  it  may  fairly  be  said  that  more  cases  of  cancer  have  been 
cured  with  it  than  with  any  other  single  remedy.  Thanks  to  the 
excellent  provings  that  have  been  made  by  homceopaths  and 
the  careful  observations  of  able  practitioners,  we  are  in  a  position 
to  use  the  remedy  with  much  greater  precision  than  formerly.  In 
very  many  cancer  cases  there  is  what  has  been  termed  a  ''  pre-can- 
cerous  stage,"  a  period  of  imdefined  ill-health  without  any  discernible 
new  growth.  This  stage  is  generally  marked  by  symptoms  of 
dyspepsia,  and  this  frequently  takes  \ht  Hydrastis  type,  which  has  been 
well  described  by  A.  C.  Clifton.  The  facial  expression  is  dull,  heavy, 
sodden-looking ;  yellowish-white  in  colour.  The  tongue  is  large, 
flabby  and  sUmy-looking ;  bluish-white  under  the  fur  (which  is 
yellow,  slimy,  and  sticky),  and  indented  by  the  teeth.  Eructations 
generally  sour,  at  times  putrid.  Appetite  bad,  the  power  of  digesting 
bread  and  vegetables  especially  weak  and  causing  eructations. 
Weight  at  stomach,  with  fulness,  empty  aching  **  gone  "  feeling  (this 
is  a  grand  characteristic  of  Hydrast,,  and  it  is  constant,  not  occurring 
at  special  times  like  that  of  SuL,  &c.).  <  After  a  meaL  The  action 
of  the  bowels  is  either  infrequent  and  constipated,  or  frequent 
with  loose,  soft,  light-coloured  stools.      Clifton  found  this  type  of 


920  HYDRASTIS 

dyspepsia  occur  frequently  in  phthisical  families,  and  often  cured  it ; 
and  even  in  cases  of  actual  phthisis  this  type  is  not  uncommon,  the 
loss  of  appetite  and  "goneness''  being  especially  prominent  In 
dyspepsia  Clifton  found  the  tincture  and  lower  attenuations  answer 
best ;  in  catarrh  of  nose  and  fauces  the  higher  were  better.  Catarrh 
of  almost  all  mucous  surfaces  is  caused  by  Hydrastis — ^nasal  catarrh, 
pharyngeal,  bronchial,  gastric,  duodenal,  intestinal,  urethral  (gonor- 
rhoea, gleet),  vaginal.  The  characteristic  catarrh  is  yellow  (the 
leading  colour  of  the  drug)  or  white ;  tou^  and  stringy.  The  action 
on  the  skin  is  no  less  marked.  Garth  Wilkinson  found  it  externally 
and  internally  an  excellent  remedy  in  small-pox.  Eczema  impetigi- 
noides,  drying  into  crusts  and  burning  like  fire,  has  been  cured  with 
an  application  of  one  part  Hydras,  f  to  nine  of  glycerine.  The 
burning  was  removed  at  once.  (I  once  saw  a  woman,  60,  who  had 
been  given  Hydrasi.  f  gtt.  v.  in  water  three  times  a  day,  after  a  week 
come  out  in  a  scarlet  rash,  raised  and  nodular,  exceeduigly  irritable, 
especially  at  night.  It  was  on  every  part  of  the  body  except  the  face, 
and  was  worst  on  buttocks  and  elbows.  It  remained  out  a  week. 
The  patient  at  the  same  time  became  very  ill  with  sickness  and 
general  digestive  disorder.)  The  skin  may  be  jaundiced.  There  is 
excessive  sweat,  especially  of  armpits  or  genitals  ;  offensive  ulcers ; 
chancroids ;  fissures.  The  female  genital  organs  are  vety  much 
affected :  Metrorrhagia,  leucorrhoea,  pruritus  vulvae,  scirrhus  of  uterus ; 
of  breasts  ;  sore  mouth  of  nursing- women ;  sore  nipples.  Weiss  gave  a 
woman,  31,  who  had  had  adherent  placenta  in  several  confinements  in 
succession,  HydrasL  3X  three  drops  daily  from  the  fourth  month  during 
her  last  three  pregnancies,  and  each  terminated  without  adherent 
placenta.  Four  other  cases  of  habitual  adherent  placenta  were 
successfully  treated  in  the  same  way.  There  is  much  backache  of 
severe  character  in  connection  with  many  of  the  HydrasL  conditions. 
Sometimes  it  awakens  patients  in  the  night.  Like  many  other 
"  yellow  "  medicines,  it  has  a  marked  action  on  the  liver,  causing 
jaundice  and  liver  enlargement  Cases  of  cancer  of  the  liver  have 
been  reported  cured  by  it  Fulness,  goneness,  and  constipation  are  the 
leading  indications.  The  constipation  of  HydrasL  is  a  leading  feature 
of  the  pathogenesis.  There  is  torpor  of  ttie  bowels ;  stools  lumpy, 
covered  with  yellowish  tough  mucus  ;  with  the  constipation  continual 
pain  in  head,  Sad  taste  in  mouth.  HydrasL  has  been  a  good  deal  used 
in  bronchial  catarrhs  with  the  characteristic  tenacious  secretion.  In 
one  case  an  over-dose  brought  on  a  characteristic  attack  of  asthma 
{H.  W.J  xxxiv.  293).  The  dose  was  gtt  xx  of  the  liquid  extract,  and 
Miodowski,  who  reported  the  case,  thought  there  was  pulmonary 
oedema  secondary  to  cardiac  weakness  induced  by  the  drug.  It  is 
worthy  of  note  that  most  remedies  which  powerfully  act  on  the  skin 
will  also  cause  an  asthmatic  state.  The  S3rmptoms  generally  are  <  at 
night.  Skin  symptoms  are  <  from  warmth;  from  washing,  &c. 
The  catarrhal  symptoms  are  <  from  harsh,  dry  winds  ;  out  of  doors. 
Rest  >  ;  motion  <.  There  is  <  by  touch ;  clothing  feels  uncom- 
fortable about  groins.    Pressure  >  many  symptoms. 

Relations* — AniidoUd   by :   Sul.  (head   symptoms   and   sciatic 
pains).  //  antidotes:  Merc,  and  Chlorate  of  potass.    Compare:  Am.  m., 


HYDRASTIS  921 

Ant.  c,  Kali,  bi.,  and  Puis,  (mucous  membranes) ;  Alo.,  Collins., 
Sep.,  Sul.  (lower  bowel) ;  Berb.,  Dig.,  Gels.,  Lye,  Pod.,  Merc,  (gastro- 
duodenal  catarrh,  involving  bile  ducts) ;  Nux  v.  (gastric  catarrh  of 
alcoholism) ;  Merc,  con,  Euphras.  (nasal  catarrh) ;  Hepar  (syphilitic 
ozaena,  after  abuse  of  mercury  or  iodide  of  potash) ;  Ars.,  Bapt., 
Con.,  Condur.,  Kreas.,  Phytol.  (cancer  of  breast) ;  Chi;  (intermittent) ; 
Strychn.  (spinal  cord) ;  Chel.  (cancer  of  breast ;  liver  affections) ; 
Sang,  (burnt  sensation  on  tongue) ;  Kali  bi.  (hair  sensation) ;  Ars., 
Aur.  mur.,  Hydrocot,  Ant  t,  Bapt,  Thuj. 

8TMPTOM8. 

I.  Mind.— Forgetful ;  cannot  remember  what  he  is  reading  or  talking 
about. — Irritable ;  disposed  to  be  spiteful. — Gloomy,  taciturn,  disagreeable. — 
Moaning  with  occasional  outcries  from  pain. — Depression  ;  sure  of  death  and 
desires  it. 

3.  Head. — Feeling  as  if  intoxicated;  headache;  weakness. — Dull, 
heavy  frontal  headache  over  eyes ;  catarrhal. — Sharp  cutting  in  temples  and 
over  eyes ;  <  over  1. ;  >  from  pressing  with  the  hand. — Dull  frontal  head- 
ache, with  duU  pain  in  hypogastrium  and  small  of  back. — Severe  frontal 
headache  ;  as  if  brain  being  pressed  against  frontal  bones. — ^Vertex  headache 
every  other  day,  commencing  at  1 1  a.m.,  with  nausea,  retching  and  anguish. 
— Dull  heavy  pain  in  occiput  (1.) — Aching  in  cerebellum,  first  r.,  later  1.  side. 
— Myalgic  headache  in  integuments  of  scalp  and  muscles  of  neck. — Eczema 
on  margin  of  hair  in  front ;  <  coming  from  the  cold  into  a  warm  room  ; 
oozes  after  washing.— (Seborrhoea  sicca). 

3.  Eyes. — Profuse  secretion  of  tears ;  smarting  and  burning  of  eyes 
and  lids. — Lids  agglutinated  ;  blepharitis  marginalis. — Opacity  of  the  cornea. 
— Ophthalmia  ;  catarrhal ;  scrofulous,  with  or  without  ulceration ;  thick 
mucous  discharge. — Dark  greenish-yellow  conjunctiva. 

4.  Ears. — Roaring  in  the  ears ;  like  machinery. — Pain  in  r.  ear ; 
it  disappeared  and  was  followed  immediately  by  fulness  in  forehead  and  pain 
over  1.  eye. — Sharp  pain  back  of  r.  ear  passing  to  shoulder. — Otorrhcea,  thick 
mucous  discharge  (fetid). — Partial  stoppage  of  Eustachian  tube. — ^Throat 
deafness. 

5.  Nose. — ^Tickling,  like  a  hair  in  r.  nostril. — Constant  discharge  of 
thick  white  mucus  ;  frontal  headache. — Secretion  runs  more  from  posterior 
nares,  thick  and  tenacious. — Coryza  watery,  excoriating;  burning,  smarting 
and  rawness  in  nose  (more  r,  nostril) ;  discharge  scanty  in  room,  profuse  out 
of  doors ;  rawness  in  throat  and  chest. — Sneezing,  with  fulness  over  eyes,  dull 
frontal  headache,  pain  in  r.  breast  and  down  arms. — ^Air  feels  cold  in  nose. — 
Nosebleed,  1.  nostril,  with  burning  rawness ;  followed  by  itching. — Soreness 
of  cartilaginous  septum,  bleeding  when  touched;  inner  edge  of  r.  ala  sore 
and  thickened. — Ozsena,  with  bloody,  purulent  discharge. 

6.  Face. — Expression  weary,  dull,  skin  pale,  or  yellow-white. — Erysipe- 
latous eruption  following  flushes  of  heat.^AphthaB  on  the  lips.— (Epithelial 
cancer  of  lip.) — ^Tenacious  mucus  hangs  in  shreds  from  mouth. 

8.  Mouth.— Taste  flat;  peppery.— Tongue  swollen,  shows  marks  of 
teeth  ;  coated  white  or  with  a  yellow  stripe.— Tongue  as  if  burned  or  scalded, 
later  a  vesicle  forms  on  the  tip. — Excessive  secretion  of  thick,  tenacious 


924  HYDROCOTYLE  ASIATICA 

thighs,  with  aching;  pulse  slow. — Heat  in  flushes. — Great  heat  of  whole 
body. — Constant  dull  burning  pains  all  the  evening. — Gastric,  bilious  «• 
typhoid  forms  of  fever,  with  gastric  disturbances,  jaundice  and  great 
debility  following. 


Hydrocotyle  Asiatica. 

Indian  Pennywort  (India  and  South  Africa).    N.  0.  Umbelliferas. 
Tincture  of  whole  fresh  plant. 

Cllnfeal.— iioi^  rosacea.  Constipation.  Elephantiasis  arahum.  Favus.  Gangrene 
after  amputation.  Gonorrhoea.  Gout.  Ichthyosis.  Leprosy.  Leucorrhcea.  Liver, 
contraction  of.  Lupus,  Neuralgia  orbitalis.  Skin,  affections  of.  Syphilis.  Uterus^ 
follicular  inflammation  of.    Vagina,  pruritus  of. 

Charaoteristios. — Hydrocot.  has  been  long  known  as  an  Indian 
remedy.  Boileau  was  the  first  to  use  it  as  a  remedy  in  leprosy.  It 
has  been  tested  pathogenetically  and  clinically,  and  its  place  has  been 
fairly  well  defined.  The  skin  and  the  female  generative  organs  are 
the  chief  seats  of  the  drug's  action  ;  though  the  Uver,  the  nerves,  and 
the  mucous  membranes  are  also  powerfully  acted  upon.  A  great 
variety  of  skin  affections  have  been  cured  with  it ;  acne,  eczema, 
pemphigus,  lupus,  copper-coloured  eruption  ;  papular  eruption  on 
face ;  intolerable  itching  in  various  places.  Auduit  (H.  /?.,  ix.  434) 
cured  this  case :  Girl,  20,  weak  and  sickly-looking,  since  childhood 
troubled  with  glandular  swellings,  for  eight  years  had  lupus  exedens 
of  nose.  (Her  mother  had  coppery  eruption  on  face.^  On  right  of 
nose  was  a  button  the  size  of  a  sixpence  covered  witn  a  thick  crust 
covering  yellow  pus  mixed  with  blood.  Margins  irregular  and  livid. 
Five  other  buttons  size  of  lentils  near  root  of  nose  both  sides. 
Hydroc.  was  given  in  6, 3,  ^,  and  i8th  potencies  in  succession,  with  inter- 
missions, and  completely  cured  in  five  months.  Other  indications 
are :  Stomatitis,  aphthous  and  syphilitic.  Irritation  of  the  neck  of 
the  bladder ;  increased  secretion  of  urine.  Heat  and  itching  in  vagina. 
Weight  in  uterus.  Granular  ulceration.  Hydrocotyle  acts  on  the  male 
sexual  organs  also,  causing  weight  in  the  ''  male  uterus,"  the  prostate 
gland.  Gouty  and  rheumatic  disorders.  Affections  of  the  trigeminus 
nerve.  Bruised  feeling  in  all  the  muscles.  A  patient  of  mine  who 
was  taking  Hydroc,  for  eczema  with  advantage  complained  of  per- 
sistent dreaming  all  the  time  he  was  asleep  ;  and  an  unpleasant 
mouth  on  waking  in  the  morning. 

Beiations. — Compare:  Hydrast.  (lupus)  ;  Fer.  pic.  (lupus)  ;  Hura 
geprosy)  ;  Thlaspi  b,  p.,  Fraxinus  (uterine  affections) ;  Mitchella, 
Eu.  purp..  Apis,  Hydran.  (irritation  of  neck  of  bladder). 


STMPTOMS. 


I.    Mind. — Gloomy  thoughts. — Misanthropy. — Inclination  for  solitude. 
— Indifference. — ^Gaiety  (reaction). — Loquacity  (reaction). 


HYDROCOTYLE   ASIATICA  925 

s.  Head.— Vertigo ;  with  torpor. — Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head; 
heaviness. — Painful  drawing  in  almost  all  cranial  nerves. — Neuralgic  pain  in 
external  frontal  nerve. — Intense  pain  with  some  swelling  in  posterior  part  of 
skull. — Occiput  acutely  sensitive,  esp.  to  touch. — ^Constriction  of  back  part 
of  skull  and  integuments. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  look  unsteady. — Injection  of  palpebral  conjunctiva. — 
Pricking  in  eyes. — ^Vision  dim ;  dazzling. 

4*  Ears. — Pain  in  1.  internal  meatus  auditorius. — ^Throbbing  in  r.  ear ; 
ringing  in  (L),  with  stoppage. — Confused  noise  in  1. ;  blowing  sound. 

5.  Nose.— Swelling  of  nose.— Tickling ;  <  1.  nostril— Feeling  as  before 
bleeding. — Stoppage  of  nose. — Coryza ;  dry. — Bleeding. — (Lupus  exedens  of 
nose). 

6.  Face. — Intoxicated  expression. — Intermittent  pain  in  1.  cheek-bone. 
8.    Mouth. — Whitish  spots  on  1.  upper  and  under  sides  of  tongue. — 

Impediment  in  speech. — Redness  of  velum  palati,  with  pain  on  swallowing, 
<  by  food. — Hyperemia  of  buccal  mucous  membrane.— Saliva  increased. — 
Taste  insipid  or  bitter ;  unpleasant  in  morning. 

g.  Throat. — ^Tonsils  red. — Pricking  in  pharynx. — Disorder  of  constrictor 
muscles  of  pharynx. — CBsophagus  dry  and  rough ;  burning  and  pricking  in 
oesophagus. 

11.  Stomach. — Loathing  of  food. — Anorexia ;  then  strong  appetite. — 
Aversion  to  tobacco  -  smoking. — Eructations  frequent ;  acid. — Nausea. — 
Swelling  of  stomach.— Contraction ;  cramplike  pain. — Sensation  as  if  gases 
collected  into  a  ball.-^Anxiety  in  region  of  stomach. — Heat  in  stomach  region 
spreading  out  like  a  bar. 

12.  Abdomen.— Borborygmi  in  different  parts. — Flatus.— Violent  con- 
tractions of  intestines. — Pain;  every  five  minutes;  <  transverse  colon. — 
Constriction. — Sensation  as  if  all  organs  were  in  motion. — Pain  in  upper  part 
of  liver. — Obstruction  in  hepatic  region. — Heat  in  hypogastrium. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — ^Weight  in  rectum. — Burning  in  anus.— Itching 
in  anus. — Ineffectual  desire  for  stool, — Stools  dry,  dark. — Stools  increased. — 
Stools  easier. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Slight  formication  in  kidney. — Irritation  of  neck 
of  bladder. — Constriction  of  bladder. — Frequent  desire  to  urinate. — Irritation 
of  urethra. —Urine  increased. — Urine  becomes  brown  on  cooling. — Urine 
turbid,  without  sediment. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs.— Drawing  in  spermatic  cords,  <  1. — 
Scrotum  relaxed. — Impotence. — Indifference  to  intercourse. — Feeling  of 
weight  in  prostate  gland. 

lO.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Vulva,  vagina  and  cervix  red. — Heat  in 
bottom  of  vagina ;  pricking  and  itching  at  its  orifice. — Leucorrhoea  increased. 
Pain  in  ovarian  region. — ^Weight  in  uterus. — Pain  in  whole  uterus,  esp.  1.  side. 
— Severe  labour-like  pain  in  uterus  and  appendages. 

17, 18.  Respiratory  Organs  and  Chest.— Pricking  in  vicinity  of 
glottis. — Dryness  of  windpipe;  of  ventricles  of  larynx. — ^Voice  weak. — 
Speaking  soon  fatigues. — Irritation  of  air-passages. — Difficult  expectoration  of 
bronchial  mucus. — Breath  short. — Oppression  of  chest,  which  suddenly  ceases 
and  then  returns  at  longer  or  shorter  intervals. 

19.    Heart  and  Pulse. — Cardiac  spasm. — Constriction  of  heart;  with 


926  HYDROCYANICUM  ACIDUM 

quiet  and  regular  pulse,  or  with  a  few  separate  beats  in  certain  arteries,  or 
witfa  hot  flushes  in  diflEerent  parts  of  the  face. — Irregular  beating  of  heart — 
Pulse  stronger  and  fuller. 

ao.  Neck  and  Back.— Renewal  of  old  rheumatic  pidns  in  I.  riioniboid, 
<  pressure. — Bruised  pain  in  loins. — Obstruction  in  r^on  of  kidneys,  with 
heaviness. 

ai.  Limte. — Contractions  of  forearms  and  legs.-^Irresistible  inclination 
to  stretch. — Pain  in  all  joints ;  <  1. ;  pain  in  all  muscles. — Sensation  as  if 
hot  water  ran  through  marrow  of  bones. 

as.  Upper  Limb8.^Weariness  in  all  musdes  <tf  shoulders. — Qrampy 
numbness  of  r.  forearm,  hand,  and  fingers. — Pain  in  finger-joints. 

93.  Lower  Ldmte. — Gait  unsteady. — Inability  to  stand. — Sharp  pains 
in  hips. — ^Weariness  in  muscles  of  thighs,  with  crampy  movements  in  calves. 

14.  Generalities.-— Bruised  feeling  in  all  muscles;  on  waldng.— 
Wandering  pains  in  muscles  of  chest  and  legs. — Drawings  in  several  muscles. 
— Malaise.— Weariness  (with  depression,  heaviness,  and  dulness) ;  dull  feeling 
throughout  the  system  generally ;  and  unfitness  for  everything. 

95.  Skin. — Spots  ahnost  circular,  with  raised  scaly  edges. — Yellowish 
spots  on  l^s. — Erysipelatous  redness. — Red  points  on  eyelids,  L  side  of  neck 
and  both  hands. — Red  spots,  covered  with  whitish  scales,  on  1.  side  of  neck. — 
Lilac-coloured  spot,  shaped  like  an  ear,  on  sole ;  the  skin  over  it  is  depressed, 
and  walking  is  painful.— Erythema  on  face,  neck,  back,  chest,  arms,  and 
thighs ;  with  much  itching ;  with  copious  sweat. — ^Miliary  eruptions  on  neck, 
back,  and  chest. — Sudamina  on  abdomen. — Papules  on  face. — Pustules  on 
chest. — Pricking  on  difiFerent  parts. — Itching  in  several  phtoes ;  itching  at  tip 
of  nose  (in  one  who  had  chilblain  there  every  year). 

a5.  Sleep.— -Yawning  and  stretching.— Sleepiness ;  in  the  daytime- 
Heavy,  dreamless  sleep. — Persistent  dreaming  all  the  time  he  was  asleep ; 
mouth  in  unpleasant  state  in  morning. 

97.  Fever. — Shivering  in  aftemooa — Cold  bands  and  feet,  witii  general 
condition  resembling  precursory  stage  of  fever,  without  alteration  of  pulse. — 
Sensation  of  coldness  in  forearm,  hand,  1.  foot,  and  leg ;  >  by  rubbing,  but 
returning  when  the  nibbing  ceased. — ^Febrile  movements. — Heat:  of  skill ;  in 
bones  of  leg ;  in  1.  tibia ;  in  face  in  flushes ;  in  difFerent  parts  of  face  in 
flushes,  esp.  temporal  regions.— Profuse  sweat. 


Hydrooyanioom  Aoidom. 

Prussic  Acid.  HCN.  One  measure  of  the  dilute  acid  of  B.P.  to  two 
measures  of  rectified  spirit  makes  the  ist  centesimal  dilution  ; 
rectified  spirit  for  all  above. 

CliBloaL— ilif^'fM  pectoris.  Asthma,  Cholera  Asiatica.  Colic  (horses).  Con'* 
vulsions.  Dyspepsia.  Epilepsy.  Hemiplegia.  Hiccough,  Labour^  convulsums 
in.  Stings,  Stomach,  catarrh  of.  Sunstoke.  Tetanus,  Uraemic  convulsiQiis. 
Whooping-cough. 

Gharaoteristilos. — The  pathogenesis  of  Hcyan,  ac.  is  mainly  com- 
posed of  symptoms  observeo  in  poisoning  cases  and  clinically  verified, 


HYDROCYANICUM   ACIDUM  927 

but  it  has  also  been  proved  by  Joerg  and  his  pupils.    Hen,  is  one  of 
the  deadliest  and  most  rapidly  acting  of  poisons.    Hence  its  applic- 
ability in  cases  of  critical  intensity,  such  as  the  collapse  stage  of 
cholera,  when  it  supervenes  on  sudden  cessation  of  all  discharges ; 
convulsions  during  severe  attacks  of  illness.    It  acts  powerfully  on  the 
cceliac  ganglia,  causing  intestinal  cramps  and  colics.    Convulsions  and 
paralysis  are  the  leading  notes  of  the  medicine's  action.    In  the  con- 
vulsions the  body  is  stmened  and  thrown  back ;  cramp  in  nape  of 
neck  is  very  characteristic  ;  breathing  comes  in  paroxysms  ;  jaws  set ; 
foaming  at  mouth  ;  face  flushed,  bluish  tint    A.  H.  Croucher  cured  a 
boy,  3^.  of  convulsions.    First  attack  occurred  six  months  previously. 
His  fatner's  sister  had  died  of  epilepsy.    Before  the  fits  came  on  he 
could  walk  well,  but  could  not  afterwards.     The  fits  occurred  at 
intervals  of  about  three  weeks  when  a  succession  of  them  occurred, 
each  lasting  about  five  minutes,  during  two  or  three  days.    During  the 
intervals  between  the  fits  he  would  generally  scream.    In  the  morning 
on  awaking,  patient  cried  out,  then  convulsions  occurred  ;  body  and 
limbs  convulsed,  eyelids  twitched  but  remained  open,  eyeballs  turned 
up  and  to  right    Seemed  quite  unconscious.    Hen.  2x,  one  drop  three 
times  a  day,  increased  afterwards  to  two  drops  and  continued  for  a 
fortnight.     No  more  convulsions,  but  three  months  later  a  rash 
developed  all  over  him. — ^The  characteristic  blue  tint  of   Hen,  is 
apparent  after  death  in  some  poisoning  cases  :  livid  spots  on  limbs ; 
nails  violet.     In  one  case  there  was  a  brilliant  violent  hue  all  over. 
The  tetanic  spasm  of  Hen.  is  persistent  and  tonic,  and  has  none  of  the 
reflex  excitability  of  the  Nux  state.    Hen.  acts  most  powerfully  on  the 
muscles  of  face,  jaws,  and  back ;  the  risus  sardonicus  is  pronounced  ; 
Uvidity ;  frothing.     It  acts  on  the  medulla  and  through  the  vagus 
nerve  on  heart  and  respiration.    The  breathing  is  irregular  and 
gasping.    The  heart  is  greatly  disturbed  ;  blueness  and  coldness  of 
surface  ;  pulse  feeble,  imperceptible.    The  patient  clutches  at  the 
heart  as  if  in  distress.    The  prostration  of  Hon.  is  profound  :  drinks 
roll  audibly  into  the  stomach.    It  cured  a  boy  of  four  of  fever  who 
had  this  symptom  :  ^'  when  swallowing  a  teaspoonful  of  liauid  it 
sounds  like  water  roUing  into  an  empty  barrel.*'  Paralysis  attacxs  first 
the  lower,  then  the  upper  limbs.    A  dry  tearing  cough  <  at  night  is 
among  the  symptoms  of  Hen, ;  and  it  reheves  a  similar  cough  often  met 
with  in  consumptives.    For  it  must  not  be  imagined  that  the  remedy 
is  only  of  use  in  desperate  cases  of  acute  illness ;  it  answers  to  its 
minute  individual  symptoms  just  as  truly  as  does  Camph.^  but  it  is 
only  those  who  know  the  drug  in  the  higher  as  well  as  the  lower 
attenuations  who  will  be  able  to  profit  by  a  knowledge  of  these. 
'^  Feels  as  if  a  cloud  were  going  over  his  brain,''  is  a  symptom  Cash 
removed  with  Hen.  in  a  case  of  sunstroke.    There  is  much  disturbance 
of  the  digestion,  which  is  <  after  eating.    The  headache  is  <  at  night 
and  the  vertigo  <  in  the  open  air.    Coldness  is  a  great  feature  with 
the  remedy,  marble  coldness  within  and  without    Blue  tinge  of  the 
skin  is  also  characteristic. 

Relations. — ^The  closest  analogues  are  Camph.,  Lauro.,  and 
Amygd.  It  i^  antidoted  by :  Camph,,  Coff.,  Ipec,  Nux,  Op.,  Ver. 
Compare :    Canlph.  (cholera,  coldness) ;  Helod.  (coldness) ;  Cicut. 


928  HYDROCYANICUM  ACIDUM 

(^inal  cord  ;  cran^i  in  nape) ;  Con.  (paralysis  ^reading  from  below 
upward)  ;  CEnanth.  (epilepsy)  ;  Lanro.  (dry  tidding  coag|h  ;  Lanro. 
has  also  a  con^  with  jeily-like  sputa  dotted  with  bloody  points)  ; 
Lach.  ;  Tabaa  (asphyxia)  ;  HelL,  Solania  (paralysis  of  lungs  and 
heart) ;  Nuz  (tetanus,  but  (k  di£Ferent  type). 

BTMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind.--Depressioa  ;  disoonragement— Anguish  and  oppression  ; 
anguish  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ;  fear  of  imaginary  ills.— Very  gneat  irnta- 
bihty ;  sadness ;  peevish  temper ;  inc^iacity  for  laboor. — Inability  to  think ; 
memory  enfeebled;  aversion  to  all  menbd  fadgne. — Could  not  remain  in 
middle  of  road  when  a  vehicle  approached  even  at  a  considerable  distance  ; 
was  forced,  as  it  were,  against  his  will,  to  stand  aside  without  waiting  for  it  to 
come  nearer  (after  recovery  from  poisoning). 

a.  Head. — Head  confused  and  weighty ;  giddiness  with  sinking  of  the 
body ;  giddiness,  sometimes  with  a  feeling  as  of  intoxication. — ^Dulness  of  the 
senses,  sometimes  with  apparent  wavering  of  objects,  and  of  a  veil  before  the 
eyes,  with  di£Bcolty  to  stand  on  rising  from  a  stooping  or  sitting  posture ; 
symptoms  <  in  the  open  air. — ^Vertigo,  sometimes  with  staggering,  the 
patient  feels  as  though  something  moved  in  the  air  and  drew  him  along 
with  it,  or  else  as  if  everything  revolved  about  him. — Feels  as  if  a  cloud  were 
going  over  his  brain  (cured  in  a  case  of  sunstroke). — Cephalalgia  with  vertigo ; 
stunning  cephalalgia,  dull  pain  in  the  forehead,  b^inning  at  the  temples. — 
Head  heavy  and  stupid. — Headache,  only  at  night — Pressive  cephalalgia  in 
the  forehead,  or  else  at  the  occiput  to  the  1.  towards  the  forehead. — Violent 
headache  in  sinciput  and  occiput,  from  vertex  to  forehead  and  orbits  of  the 
eyes ;  in  the  side  of  the  head  (r.  or  1.)  esp.  in  vertex  and  forehead ;  at 
different  parts  of  the  head. — ^Tension  in  frontal  region.— Shootings  in  the 
head,  sometimes  in  one  place,  sometimes  in  another. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  half  open;  reversed;  protruding  from  the  head; 
immoveable ;  difficulty  to  move  the  eyeballs. — Pupils  dilated  and  immove- 
able ;  insensible  to  light. — Eyelids  wide  open,  immoveable,  as  if  paralysed ; 
spasmodic  quivering  in  the  upper  eyelids. — Dimness  of  si^t ;  cloudiness  and 
mist  (gauze)  before  the  eyes ;  amaurotic  blindness. 

4.  Ears.— Aching  in  the  interior  of  both  ears ;  sometimes  with  roaring 
(buzzing)  and  ringing. — Hardness  of  hearing. 

5.  Nose. — Smarting  in  the  upper  part  of  nostrils. — Dilation  of  the  ate 
nasi,  which  have  a  bluish  tint. — Dryness  of  the  nose. 

6.  Face. — Puffing  of  the  face ;  oval  visage  ;  visage  wears  a  look  of  age ; 
pale  and  bluish ;  complexion  earthy  and  grey. — ^Expression  of  beatitude  in 
the  countenance. — Contortion  of  comers  of  mouth ;  trismus ;  frightful  con- 
traction of  the  facial  muscles. 

8.  Mouth. — Dryness  of  mouth.— Augmented  secretion  of  saliva.— 
Tongue  coated,  sometimes  white,  afterwards  dark  and  dingy ;  contraction  at 
the  root ;  sensation  of  coldness  on  the  tongue ;  burning  at  the  tip  of  the 
tongue ;  paralysis  and  stiffness  of  the  tongue,  which  often  protrudes  from  the 
mouth ;  loss  of  speech. — Pains  in  the  palate ;  inflammation  of  the  palate. 

Q.    Throat. — Spasms  in  the  back  part  of  the  throat,  and  the  oesophagus. 


HYDROCYANICUM  ACIDUM  92$ 

— Scraping  in  the  throat,  and  in  the  gullet ;  painful  scraping  in  the  throat  ; 
heat  in  the  throat  and  in  the  oesophagus ;  burning  in  palate,  throat,  and 
cesophagus ;  inflammation  of  the  throat,  and  of  the  oesophagus. 

zz.  Stomach.— Taste :  sweetish  ;  fetid,  acrid,  and  irritating  ;  much  gas 
in  the  mouth,  with  taste  of  prussic  acid. — ^Anorexia,  repugnance  to  food. — 
Adypsia,  with  heat  throughout  the  body ;  ardent  thirst. — Loathing,  inclination 
to  vomit ;  vomiting  of  a  black  liquid. — Pains  in  stomach  ;  sensation  of  cold- 
ness in  stomach,  sometimes  with  lancinations ;  pressure  and  squeezing  in  pit 
of  stomach,  with  great  oppression. — Fluids  enter  stomach  with  gurgling  noise. 
— Great  sinking  at  pit  of  stomach. — Spasmodic  contractions  in  the  stomach. — 
Heat  and  burning  in  stomach. — Inflammation  of  the  stomach  and  intestines. — 
Pulsative  pain  in  the  precordial  region. 

Z2.  Abdomen. — Coldness  of  the  whole  abdomen  (with  stitches),  some- 
times alternated  with  burning.— Rumbling  and  borborygmi  in  the  abdomen ; 
flabby  inflation  of  the  abdomen. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Involuntary  stools. — Involuntary  stools,  hiccough, 
and  great  prostration. — Sudden  cessation  of  all  discharges.— Cholera  sicca. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Retention  of  urine  ;  frequent  emission  of  urine ; 
copious  emission  of  an  aqueous  urine,  pale  or  a  pale  yellow,  depositing  a  turbid 
cloud. — Urine  with  sediment  thick  and  reddish. — Involuntary  emission  of 
urine. — Burning  in  the  urethra. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Painful  scraping  and  burning  in  the  larynx  ; 
inflammation  of  the  larynx ;  sensation  of  swelling  of  the  larynx ;  constriction 
of  the  throat ;  tickling  in  the  larynx,  sometimes  lancinations  and  draggings  ; 
roughness  and  hoarseness  of  the  voice. — Loud  voice, — Frequent  coughing, 
caused  by  smarting  (pricking)  in  the  lar3mx  and  trachea. — Haemoptysis. — 
Respiration  rattling,  groaning,  slow,  very  difiicult,  with  mucous  rale. — Difficulty 
of  respiration  by  reason  of  the  lancinations  in  the  larynx. — ^Want  to  breathe 
deeply. — Respiration  profound,  frequent,  and  stertorous. — ^Anxious  respiration. 
— Paralysis  of  the  lungs. 

18.  Chest. — Oppression  of  the  chest,  asthma,  sometimes  painful. — Feeling 
of  suffocation,  with  severe  pains  in  the  chest. — Great  oppression  and  constric- 
tion of  the  chest. — Sharp  pains  in  the  chest. — ^Aching  in  r.  side  of  chest. — 
Lancinations  in  the  1.  side,  below  inferior  cartilage  of  sternum  or  thereabout, 
in  the  chest,  on  breathing  deeply. 

19.  Heart. — Pains  and  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  heart. — Palpitations 
of  the  heart. — Irregular  movements  of  the  heart ;  feeble  action  of  the  heart. 
— (Angina  pectoris ;  sudden  outcry ;  long  fainting  spells ;  suffocation  with 
torturing  pains  in  chest ;  irregular,  feeble  heart-movements.) 

84.  Generalities. — Speedy  failing  and  weakness  of  the  limbs,  esp.  of  the 
thighs;  extreme  weakness  and  weariness;  nervous  weakness. — Spasms; 
spasms  at  the  back ;  spasms  of  face  and  jaws ;  convulsions. — Paralysis  of 
inferior  extremities,  afterwards  of  the  upper  ones ;  loss  of  sensation,  then 
stiffness  of  the  parts;  trembling  and  staggering,  immobility,  insensibility; 
stiffness  of  the  body.— Cataleptic  attacks ;  great  flexibiUty  of  the  limbs ; 
pulsations  of  the  heart  become  slower,  weaker,  less  appreciable,  until  lethargy 
supervenes ;  diminution  of  vital  heat — Muscles  of  back  and  face  principally 
affected. — ^Activity  of  the  senses  stimulated ;  internal  feeling  of  ease ;  gentle 
languor  with  sensation  of  agreeable  weariness. — Dulness  of  the  senses,  and 
VOL.  I.  60 


930  HYDROPHOBINUM 

insensibility  to  external  influences  ;  disappearance  of  all  pain ;  insensibility ; 
loss  of  consciousness  ;  wandering  of  the  senses ;  shivering  and  lassitude. 

85.  Skin. — Itching  in  various  places,  esp.  between  the  chin  and  lips. — 
Small  red  pustules  on  hip ;  burning  itching  vesicles  on  upper  extremities,  and 
neck. — Dryness  of  the  skin. — General  pallor  with  a  bluish  tint — ^Varicose 
ulcers  on  legs. 

90.  Sleep. — Frequent  yawning,  sometimes  with  shuddering  and  spasm 
of  the  skin. — Drowsiness,  sometimes  uncontrollable,  or  else  after  a  meal; 
heavy  sleep  in  the  morning ;  continued  inclination  to  sleep ;  coma  vigil ; 
sonmolency. — Wakefulness  ;  to  sleep  is  difficult,  almost  impossible  ;  frequent 
awakening. — Lively  dreams,  without  connection  ;  anxious,  disquieting  dreams, 
dreams  of  death. 

97.  Fever.~<3hiUiness ;  frequent  shudderings,  esp.  after  midnight  or  in 
the  morning ;  shivering,  with  yawning  or  with  thirst— Coldness  of  the  limbs ; 
sensation  of  cold  internally  and  externally. — Coldness  within  and  without— 
Fever,  shivering,  afterwards  burning  heat ;  heat  in  the  head,  with  coldness  of 
the  extremities,  heat  and  sweat  over  the  whole  body,  in  the  afternoon  ; 
general  febrile  agitation,  with  intense  excitement;  heat,  at  intervals,  and 
irregular  motion  of  the  heart — During  the  shivering,  giddiness  and  vertigo ; 
during  the  shudderings,  mist  before  the  sight. 


Hydrophobinmn. 


Lyssin.  The  nosode  of  rabies.  Trituration  of  sugar  of  milk  saturated 
with  the  saliva  of  a  rabid  dog.  Triturations  might  also  be  made 
of  Pasteur's  strongest  virus. 

CUaioaL — Bubo.  Clairvoyance.  Convulsions.  Corns,  pains  in.  Diairhcca. 
Dysentery.  Fever.  Hair,  oiliness  of.  Headache.  Hydrophobia.  Hypersensitive- 
ness.  Landry's  paralysis.  Leucorrhoea.  Lyssophobia.  Mania.  Nervousness. 
Neuralgia.  (Esophagus,  stricture  of.  Paralysis.  Pregnancy,  convulsions  of  ;  tooth- 
ache o7.  Respiratory  paralysis.  Salivation.  Satyriasis.  Sciatica.  Sunstroke. 
Tetanus.   Ulcers.    Uterus,  prolapse  of.    Vaginismus.    Wounds,  too  rapid  healing  of. 

Chanoterirtios, — Hering  was  the  first  (1833)  to  prove,  and  to 
suggest  the  employment  of  this  nosode  in  medicine  ;  and  of  late 
years  it  has  become  notorious  through  the  experiments  of  Pasteur. 
Pasteur's  method  of  administration  is  very  difiEerent  from  that 
employed  by  homoeopaths,  but  he  is  working  on  homoeopathic  lines 
in  seeking  to  neutralise  a  virus  in  the  system  by  introducing  a 
modification  of  the  same  virus.  His  experiments  led  him  to  produce 
the  rabic  poison  in  a  highly  intensified  form  in  the  spinal  cords  of 
rabbits.  He  then  modified  its  intensity  in  different  degrees  by 
exposure  to  air  for  a  longer  or  shorter  period.  Patients  who  come 
to  the  Institute  are  inoculated  first  with  the  least  potent,  and  later 
with  the  most  potent  "  vaccin,"  after  which  they  are  pronounced 
"cured."  The  "cure"  is,  however,  extremely  uncertain,  as  the 
degree  of  susceptibility  to  the  poison  is  unknown  in  any  case,  and 


HYDROPHOBINUM  931 

many  hundreds  of  the  patients  subjected  to  the  inoculations  have 
died  of  the  disease.  Pasteur's  first  method  was  admitted  to  be  too 
strong,  and  was  soon  modified ;  a  number  of  patients  having  died 
from  the  inoculations.  One  of  these  cases  I  investigated,  and  the 
symptoms  were  sufi&ciently  striking  to  deserve  recording.  The 
patient  was  Arthur  Wilde,  of  Rotherham,  aged  29,  and  I  received 
the  account  from  his  mother,  who  nursed  him  through  his  illness. 
He  had  been  bitten  severely  by  a  man  suffering  from  hydrophobia, 
and  was  persuaded,  much  against  his  wish,  to  go  to  Pasteur.  This  he  did 
a  few  days  after  the  bite,  retiuning  on  October  19, 1886,  after  undergo- 
ing the  course.  On  Saturday,  October  30,  he  complained  of  a  pricking 
sensation  below  the  ribs  in  the  right  side,  in  the  part  where  the 
injections  had  been  made.  Pressure  relieved  the  pain  somewhat. 
That  evening  he  vomited,  and  the  vomiting  continued,  and  he  became 
very  prostrate.  On  Monday  the  prostration  was  intense,  vomiting 
continued ;  restiess ;  skin  cool,  perspiring  ;  quite  conscious.  The 
spots  where  the  inoculations  were  made  were  dark  and  Uvid. 
Twitching  occurred  every  few  hours,  sometimes  more  violentiy 
than  others ;  most  marked  on  the  abdomen.  From  Monday 
through  Tuesday  he  was  making  a  pecuUar  loud  noise,  something 
like  a  waggoner  driving  horses,  "  bis  *'  "  whoo,"  though  he  had 
never  had  to  do  with  horses.  He  seemed  completely  helpless. 
On  Tuesday  night  vomiting  ceased  and  he  began  to  froth  a  great 
deal.  Early  on  Wednesday  morning  he  began  to  talk  thick.  His 
breathing,  which  had  been  peculiar  aU  through — he  would  hold 
his  breath  for  a  long  time  when  making  the  noise  and  then  breathe 
rapidly  for  a  few  breaths — ^became  very  bad  at  3  a.m.  on  Wednesday. 
He  died  shortiy  after  12,  having  been  apparentiy  conscious  to  the 
end  though  unable  to  speak  for  the  last  hour.  The  frothing  had 
increased  up  to  the  time  of  his  death  and  he  seemed  to  choke  with  it. 
This  case  was  paralleled  by  that  of  Goffi,  an  attendant  at  St.  Thomas' 
Hospital,  who  was  bitten  by  a  cat  and  sent  to  Pasteur.  On  his  return 
he  was  taken  ill,  and  his  case  was  at  first  diagnosed  as  Landry's 
paralysis,  but  finally  proved  (by  experiments  made  with  his  spinal  cord) 
to  be  "  paralytic  rabies,"  the  result  of  inoculation.  It  was  after  the 
occurrence  of  these  and  similar  "  accidents  "  that  the  intensity  of  the 
"  vaccins  "  was  reduced.  It  would  be  well  to  have  as  an  alternative 
preparation,  Hydrophobinum  Pastcurianum^  obtained  from  Pasteur's 
vaccin,  to  meet  conditions  similar  to  these.  The  pathogenesis  of 
HydroL  is  made  up  partiy  of  symptoms  observed  in  rabid  animals 
and  human  patients,  but  chiefly  of  symptoms  developed  in  the 
provings.  The  remedy  has  been  pretty  extensively  used  in  practice, 
not  only  in  cases  of  hydrophobia,  but  in  many  disorders  in  which  the 
keynote  symptoms  have  been  present.  These  are  :  Exquisite  sensitive- 
ness to  breath  of  air;  to  bright  objects,  especially  the  surface  of  water; 
to  sounds,  and  most  of  all  to  the  sound  of  running  water.  Even  the 
thought  01  it  is  enough  to  bring  on  an  aggravation  or  a  convul- 
sion. Cases  of  dysentery  with  pain  and  tenesmus  on  hearing 
water  running  from  a  tap  have  been  cured  with  Hydrob,  Cannot 
bear  heat  of  sun.  Thirst,  with  inability  to  swallow.  Copious 
viscid  sahva.    A  great  variety  of  mental  disturbances  occur.    Rapid 


932  HYDROPHOBINUM 

speech  and  impatience  are  very  noticeable.  The  mental  irritalHlily 
is  as  great  as  that  of  the  senses  and  dangerously  violent  temper  is 
developed.  The  irritation  is  further  shown  in  the  sexoal  organs. 
Suffocating  feelings  were  experienced  tnr  several  perscms.  Stalling, 
and  sighing  respiration.  The  effects  of  bites  of  non-rabid  dogs  have 
been  removed  by  this  nosode.  Hydrob,  is  a  close  analogue  of  many  of 
the  animal  poisons,  especially  Laches.^  and  I  have  no  doubt  when 
clinically  developed  it  will  prove  to  be  equallv  important  Marked 
symptoms  appear  in  every  part  of  the  body  and  mind.  Many 
symptoms  are  <  by  stooping ;  by  motion  generally.  Sensitive  to  any 
changed  position.  Bending  head  backwa^  >  pain  in  neck.  Throws 
head  bade  when  sneezing.  Heat  of  sun  <,  it  is  unbearable.  Hot 
steam  directed  to  bitten  place  >  burning  pain  in  it.  >  Turkish  bath. 
Damp  warm  air  oppressed  him.  Sensitive  to  least  breath  of  air ;  air 
of  agreeable  temperature  feels  cold.  Slightest  draught  <.  Cold  air 
>  headache.  <  From  slightest  toudb  ;  from  rimng  in  carriage. 
[In  the  Schema,  the  symptoms  observed  in  cases  of  the  disease 
are  marked  (RV  tiiose  observed  in  Pasteur  cases  (P),  the  rest  are  the 
symptoms  of  tne  provings  with  some  clinical  additions.] 

Relations. — The  remedies  most  closely  related  to  Hydrob.  are 
those  which  have  cured  cases  of  the  disease — Bell.,  Stnun.,  Hyo., 
Fagus,  A^ve,  Laches.,  Canth.,  and  the  animal  poisons  generally. 
Lachesis  is  a  very  dose  ally  «  from  sun  ;  bluish  discoloration  of 
wounds  ;  irritability  ;  <  warm,  damp  air  ;  from  touch  and  pressure  ; 
though  the  late  evolution  of  the  symptoms  of  Hdphb.  contrasts  with 
the  lightning-like  rapidity  of  snake-venom  effects).  Compare  also  :  in 
ascending  paralysis,  Gels.,  Con. ;  in  respiratory  paralysis,  Solania,  Bell., 
Dulc. ;  in  sexual  exdtement,  Canth.,  Pic.  ac.  Graph. ;  in  intolerance 
of  sun,  Gels.,  Glon.,  Nat.,  Lach.,  Apis ;  in  effects  of  carriage-riding, 
Coccul. ;  desire  to  urinate  on  seeing  running  water,  Canth.,  SuL  ; 
convulsions  from  dazzling  light,  Stram. ;  consdousness  of  womb, 
Helon.  ;  viscid  saliva,  Epipheg.,  Hydras. ;  hurried  speech,  Hyo. ; 
in  coldness,  Helod.  It  follows  well :  Tabac.  (headache) ;  Arg.  n. 
(uterine  disease) ;  Stram.  (neuralgia).    Is  followed  well  by  :  Nat  m. 

OauMtioii.— Dog-bites. 

BTHPTOHB. 

I.  Mind. — Loss  of  consciousness  sometimes  at  an  early  stage,  but  not 
generally  until  a  short  time  before  death  (R.). — Does  not  hear  or  see  persons 
around  him  (R.). — Memory  for  single  words  much  improved. — ^Thoughts  of 
something  terrible  going  to  happen  come  into  his  mind  against  his  will ;  feels 
impelled  to  do  reckless  things,  such  as  throwing  a  chUd,  which  he  carries  in 
his  armSi  through  the  window. — ^They  appredate  the  formidable  character  of 
the  disease  and  speak  frequently  with  a  remarkably  quick  and  sharp  articu- 
lation of  the  impending  fatal  results  (R.). — During  the  tranquil  intervals, 
responded  correctiy  to  questions  put  to  him,  recognised  those  around  him, 
and  with  a  presentiment  of  impending  death,  begged  them  to  pray  for  him 
and  not  leave  him  alone  (R.). — Most  commonly  the  mental  faculties  are  in  a 
superior  state  of  excitement,  shown  by  quick  perception,  amazing  acnteness 
of  understanding  and  rapidity  with  which  they  answer  questions  (R.). — ^It 


HYDROPHOBINUM  933 

seems  to  her  as  if  two  entirely  different  trains  of  thought  influenced  her  at 
the  same  time. — During  convulsions,  mental  illusions  and  hallucinations  ;  in 
intervals  of  consciousness  mental  Unities  are  retained  (R.). — Imagine  that 
they  are  abused,  and  energetically  defend  themselves  against  attacks  and 
insults,  which  in  reality  are  products  of  their  own  fancy  (R.). — Fancies  he  is 
blown  at  by  several  persons,  some  of  whom  are  not  present  (R.). — ^Thinks  he 
is  a  dog  or  a  bird,  and  runs  up  and  down,  chirping  and  twittering,  until  he 
falls  down  fainting  (R.). — Strange  notions  and  apprehensions  during  preg- 
nancy.— Insane  ideas  enter  his  head ;  for  instance,  to  throw  a  glass  of  water, 
which  he  is  carrying  in  his  hand,  into  some  one's  face,  or  to  stab  his  flesh  with 
the  knife  he  is  holding,  and  the  like. — (Mania  spermatica  in  stallions.) — 
Inclination  to  be  rude  and  abusive,  to  bite  and  strike. — ^A  strong  and 
uncontrollable  impulse  to  do  certain  acts ;  to  spring  at  and  bite  any  moving 
object  that  came  within  reach ;  dog  (R.). — Lament  with  great  anxiety  their 
inability  to  relieve  thirst  which  afflicts,  and  by  various  contrivances  endeavour 
eagerly  to  drink  (R.). — Break  out  of  their  stables  furiously  and  run  or  jump 
over  ditches  and  fences  (sheep). — Not  afraid  of  dogs,  but  dislikes  to  see  them 
because  their  sight  renews  her  fear  (lyssophobia,  after  bite  by  non-rabid 
dog). — Exhilarated,  felt  as  if  he  had  received  joyful  intelligence.— lU-humour. — 
Hypersensitiveness  of  all  the  senses. — On  a  watch  held  to  scrobiculum  he  sees 
the  hour  and  minute  hands  (R.). — He  says  he  can  see  hands  on  dial  plate  of 
church  clock  (R.). — He  could  hear  what  was  spoken  in  next  room,  and  counted 
coppers  in  a  room  below  him  (R.) — Linen  dipped  in  sugar  water,  put  on  pit  of 
stomach,  gives  a  sweet  taste  in  mouth  (R.). — ^Copper,  if  in  his  room,  makes  him 
restless  and  full  of  pains  (R.). — Sometimes  he  would  control  inclination  to 
stool  by  a  strong  efFort  of  will,  but  effort  caused  much  nervous  irritation. — 
Attacks  of  nervous  headache  become  awful  and  insupportable  if  he  hears 
water  run  out  of  a  hydrant. — ^When  he  hears  water  poured  out,  or  if  he  hears 
it  run,  or  if  he  sees  it,  he  becomes  very  irritable,  nervous  ;  it  causes  desire  for 
stool  and  other  ailments. — ^The  mere  sight  of  a  drinking  vessel  containing 
water  is  intolerable;  they  turn  away  their  faces,  shriek  out  loud,  beckon 
anxiously  with  hands  to  have  water  removed,  for  voice  and  breath  fail  (R).-^ 
Thinking  of  fluids  of  any  kind,  even  of  blood,  brings  on  convulsions. 

s.  Head. — Peculiar  lightness  in  head ;  lightness  after  nausea. — ^A  slow 
vacillation  or  wavering  of  the  head,  from  something  being  loose  in  upper  part 
of  head.— Rush  of  blood  to  head  :  while  lying  down ;  from  chest  upward,  with 
toothache;  during  pregnancy;  when  rising. — Maddening  outward  pressing 
pain  in  forehead  ;  he  presses  his  head  against  the  wall. — Beating,  throbbing 
headache ;  most  severe  in  r,  temple  and  above  r.  eye ;  each  bone  feels 
shattered  and  sore;  from  temple  to  temple. — ^Violent  headache,  most  in 
temples  and  forehead,  <  during  day  and  from  stooping  and  stirring  at>out. — 
Frequent  pressure  on  vertex,  as  if  a  cast,  which  fitted  top  of  head,  was 
pressing  it  down. — Headaches  from  bites  of  dogs,  rabid  or  not. — In  rare 
cases  serous  effusion  in  opaque  subarachnoid  tissue  and  lateral  ventricle,  and 
also  increased  adherence  of  membranes  of  brain  to  convolutions  (R.). — ^At 
noon  slight  headache,  lasting  all  day. — Burning  aching  from  1.  side  of  occiput 
down  neck. — ^Violent  headache  and  backache.— Irritable  headache,  touching 
head  makes  it  ache;  very  sensitive  scalp. — Hair  which  is  usually  dry  has 
become  very  oily. — Scalp  feels  contracted  and  pinched. 


934  HYDROPHOBINUM 

3.  Eyes. — Sensitive  to  light.— Sight  of  water :  agitation ;  rfspews  idea  ci 
pain  ;  causes  convulsions  (pregnancy).— False  vision,  dulness  ol  sight,  together 
with  dilatation  of  pupils,  sometimes  actual  blindness.— Vision  much  impah^ 
or  absent ;  lasts  twelve  hours. — Clairvoyance. — Pain  in  small  spot  over  r.  eye- 
brow, <  writing. — Eyes  are  wild,  rolling,  staring  and  livid  (R). — Swelling  of 
eyelids  after  bite  of  dogs  (cm-ed  in  sheep). — Extreme  ulceration  of  e3re,  lids 
closed  and  puffed  up  by  pus  (in  sheep). 

4.  Ears.— Conversation  in  vicinity  of  patient  may  throw  him  into  a 
most  violent  agitation  (R.). — Hearing  water  poured  out  in  next  room  makes 
him  very  irritable  and  nervous. — ^Clairaudient. 

5.  Nose. — Strong  odours  may  start  spasms.^The  greatest  sensibility  to 
smell  of  tobacco;  tastes  snuff  while  box.  is  one  foot  distant — Frequent 
sneezing,  mostiy  early  in  morning  or  late  in  evening,  as  if  a  coryza  would 
begin ;  also  when  looking  at  something  bright,  and  from  every  little  dust 

6.  Face. — Both  jaws  feel  stiff ;  tingling  in  cheek-bones. — Gnawing  and 
crawling  sensation  in(r.)  zygoma. — Facial  muscles  become  variously  contorted, 
countenance  changes  its  aspect  f requentiy. — Face  sweat :  with  sensation  oi 
heat ;  with  flushes. — ^The  jawbones  feel  sore  ;  aching  in  lower  jaw. — Masseter 
muscles  not  affected  by  spasms. — Lower  jaw  stiff  and  painful ;  with  inclination 
to  yawn ;  with  headache ;  imagines  he  cannot  open  his  mouth. — Spasms  with 
froth  before  mouth  (R.). 

7.  Teeth. — Grinding  of  teeth. — ^Toothache  and  other  complaints  during 
pregnancy,  with  internal  ebullition  of  blood  from  chest  to  head ;  head  feels  as 
if  filled  with  air  to  bursting. 

8.  Mouth. — Difficult,  incorrect  speech  (stricture  of  throat). — ^Tongue 
coated  with  foam  (R). — Pricking  sensation  under  tongue. — Ranula  returns 
periodically,  with  dryness  of  mouth,  <  in  afternoon,  soreness  when  chewing  ; 
with  haemorrhoids  and  constipation. — Feeling  of  coldness  in  mouth,  like 
essence  of  peppermint — Severe  pain  passing  from  mouth  upward  through 
head  and  down  into  neck.— Tough,  short  frothy  phlegm  in  mouth  (horse). — 
When  vomiting  ceased,  frothing  at  the  mouth  began  and  was  so  excessive  as 
nearly  to  choke  him  (P.). — Frothed  at  mouth,  attempted  to  spit  out  with 
much  difficulty  (before  death). — Saliva  more  viscid,  constant  spitting,  feeling 
of  general  malaise. — Entire  mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  phar3mx  was  of 
an  equally  distributed  pink  without  any  swelling. 

9.  Throat. — Slight  redness  of  palate  and  throat,  with  spasm  of 
oesophagus  and  difficult  speech. — Sore  throat,  as  after  swallowing  red 
pepper. — Cooling  sensation  in  oesophagus. — Sore  throat,  constant  desire  to 
swallow;  much  saliva  and  feeling  as  if  beaten. — Periodical  spasm  of 
oesophagus,  continual  painful  inclination  to  swallow  without  being  able 
to  swallow  anything;  constriction  is  most  severe  when  taking  water  into 
mouth,  if  he  tried  to  swallow  it  forcibly,  he  had  burning  and  stinging  in  the 
throat,  cough  and  retching  which  forced  fluid  from  his  mouth ;  difficult  speech. 

10.  Appetite.— ^Voracious  appetite ;  swallowed  wheat  without  chewing. — 
Excessive  desire  for  salt— Abnormal  cravings  during  pregnancy.— Aversion 
to  fat  food  and  drink;  there  remains  a  long  greasy  aftertaste,  <  after 
mutton, — ^Wann  drinks,  such  as  milk,  soups  and  wine,  are  more  easQy 
taken  than  water. — Inability  to  take  solid  food,  or  else  it  is  consumed  with 
greatest  difficulty. 


HYDROPHOBINUM  935 

II.  Stomach.— Nausea :  with  giddiness,  headache  and  pale  face  after 
diarrhoea  ;  food  does  not  taste  right ;  and  loss  of  appetite  in  evening ;  lo  to 
II  p.m. — Gagging  when  he  forcibly  attempts  to  swallow  water,  forces  it  out 
of  his  mouth. — Nausea  and  vomiting  after  diarrhoea. — ^Vomiting  of  food ;  of 
fluid  whUe  drinking,  followed  by  faintness  ;  of  what  was  eaten  at  supper,  at 
night  in  sleep.— Vomiting  throughout  three  days,  with  prostration  and  rest- 
lessness ;  when  vomiting  ceased  frothing  began  and  nearly  choked  him  (P.). — 
Great  oppression  in  stomach,  has  to  open  her  clothes. 

IS.  Abdomen.— A  pressing  p^in :  in  r.  side,  near  last  ribs,  with 
breathing;  in  hypochondria,  after  quick  walking. — Painful  throbbing  as 
if  an  ai3scess  was  forming  in  region  of  spleen,  but  very  deep  in,  exact 
locality  is  half-way  between  median  line  and  outline  of  1.  side ;  it  lasted 
eight  days ;  with  it  departed  remnant  of  a  similar  affection  in  this  locality, 
against  which  eleven  years  of  allopathic  treatment  had  proved  of  no  avail. — 
Tearing  from  1.  hyphochondriac  region  to  r. — General  soreness  in  whole  of 
lower  abdomen. — Rigidity  of  muscles  of  abdomen. — Pain  in  both  groins ;  in 
r.,  two  small  kernels  under  skin,  very  painful. — Inguinal  glands  very  much 
swollen,  they  pain  for  two  hours. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus.— Tenesmus  during  and  after  stool.— Dysenteric 
stools  with  tenesmus ;  renewed  as  soon  as  he  hears  or  sees  water  run. — ^When 
in  the  morning  some  water  was  poured  out  from  pitcher  into  basin,  pain  and 
desire  to  stool  returned. — Diarrhoea  :  with  much  pain,  most .  during  day, 
eighteen  hours  after  dose,  lasting  twenty-four  hours,  with  pain  in  lower  part 
of  bowels ;  <  in  morning ;  followed  by  nausea  as  if  she  would  have  to  vomit ; 
attended  with  violent  pains  early  in  morning ;  after  stitches  in  side. — Stools  of 
bloody  mucus. — Involuntary  stools. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urine  too  scanty  and  high-coloured  (cured  in  a 
case  of  camp  diarrhoea). — Constant  desire  to  urinate  on  seeing  running 
water ;  urinates  a  little  at  a  time. — Prostatic  juice  passes  after  urinating. 

15.  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Lasdviousness  :  after  eating,  with  feeling 
of  weakness  in  parts ;  with  erections  in  afternoon. — Strong  erections,  without 
sexual  excitement  or  thoughts,  in  evening,  while  undressing  in  a  cold  room. — 
Sexual  indifference  with  erections,  even  during  act  of  coition,  which  is 
perfectly  performed. — Increased  sexual  desire  (dropsy  of  spine  with  sheep ; 
hydrophobia  of  sheep). — Priapism,  with  frequent  seminal  emissions. — Saty- 
riasis in  a  stallion  ;  hot  breath  streamed  from  nostrils. — Semen  is  discharged 
too  late  or  not  at  all  during  coition. — No  emission  during  coition,  but 
afterwards  semen  escaped  unconsciously  in  sleep. — Glans  is  dry  and  sticks 
to  foreskin. — Hydrocele. — ^Atrophy  of  testicles  ;  testicles  diminish  in  size,  first 
1.  then  r. — Complaints  resulting  from  abnormal  sexual  desire. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs. — Pain  in  1.  ovarian  region,  uneasiness 
there. — Increase  of  uterine  sensitiveness,  conscious  of  having  a  womb. — With 
a  painful  sensitiveness  of  womb,  slight  degree  of  prolapsus,  so  that  after  any 
considerable  physical  effort  there  would  be  a  strong  conviction  that  it  was 
prolapsed. — ^Any  change  of  position  that  would  tilt  or  rotate  os  uteri  would 
cause  much  pain. — Prolapsus  uteri  of  seven  years'  standing. — Severe  leucorrhoea, 
with  pains  in  back  and  lower  part  of  bowels,  sore  vagina. — Sensitiveness  of 
vagina  rendering  coition  quite  painful. — ^Weakness  in  back,  with  copious 
catamenia. — During  pregnancy :  strange  notions,  desires  or  cravings ;  rush 


936  HYDROPHOBINUM 

of  blood  from  chest  upward;  toothache,  backache  and  other  complaints; 
great  sense  of  bearing  down  ;  intense  pain  from  inflammation  of  os  and  cervix 
(formerly  treated  with  caustic);  great  soreness  in  lower  part  of  back  and 
bowels. — Spasms  excited  whenever  she  attempts  to  drink  water,  or  if  she 
hears  it  poured  from  one  vessel  into  another  ;  sight  or  soond  of  water  a£Fects 
unpleasantly,  even  though  desiring  water  (puerperal  convulsions). — Since 
cessation  of  lochia  a  severe  leucorrhoea  ;  pain  in  back  and  lower  part  of 
bowels ;  soreness  of  vagina. — Both  breasts  swollen  when  waking  in  morning, 
she  can  hardly  get  up ;  three  mornings  in  succession ;  same  swelling  of  breasts 
at  night  when  opening  her  dress. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Voice  altered  in  tone ;  tones  mnch 
suppressed ;  hoarse ;  rough ;  harsh  and  weak  (last  stage) ;  shrill,  inarticiilate 
sounds  ;  shrill  sounds  of  utmost  despair,  or  occasioned  by  violent  expirations  ; 
very  shrill  and  piercing  bark,  changing  near  its  termination  into  a  distressing, 
continuous  howl  (dogs). — Epiglottis  crisp  and  dry  (R.). — Sighing,  with  pain  in 
heart. — Dyspnoea :  with  flatulency,  cough  and  rattling  in  chest ;  with  sighing, 
groaning  respiration;  from  cardiac  pain;  <  l3ring  down. — Oppression  in 
breathing  before  a  severe  suffocative  attack,  induced  by  spasmodic  con- 
tractions of  respiratory  muscles,  combined  with  spasmodic,  alarming 
constriction  of  pharynx. — Breathing  during  paroxysm  gasping,  irregular 
and  usually  quite  rapid,  often  with  decided  dyspnoea. — Breathing  peculiar ; 
held  for  a  time,  and  then  a  few  rapid  breaths  (P.).— Frothed  at  the  mouth 
very  much  ;  almost  choked  with  it  (P.). 

18.  Chest.— Chest  and  abdomen  feel  expanded ;  expanding  chest  seems 
to  invigorate  him,  though  it  usually  fatigues. 

zg.  Heart  and  Pulse.— Stitches  in  heart  from  ringing  of  church 
bells. — Stitches  in  heart,  <  when  walking;  they  would  kill  him  if  they 
continued. — Heart  had  for  three  months  not  been  free  from  a  sticking, 
drawing,  squeezing  pain,  result  of  an  attack  of  rheumatism  and  oM, 
together  with  a  palpitation  and  difficulty  of  breathing. — ^Violent  pain  in 
heart,  as  if  it  would  burst  or  had  needles  running  into  it — Pain  in  cardiac 
region,  to  which  he  is  subject,  is  <  half  an  hour  after  the  dose,  but  much 
>  in  several  days. — Heart  palpitated  violently  and  felt  as  if  it  was  coming 
up  into  throat ;  drank  several  mouthf  uls  of  water,  which  relieved.     . 

50.  Neck  and  Back. — Pressing  in  neck  and  up  back  of  head. — 
Backache  and  headache. — Considerable  pain  in  lower  part  of  back,  with 
soreness  felt  through  to  pubic  region. 

51.  Limbs.— Weight  and  heaviness  of  legs  and  shoulders. — Severe 
twitching  in   arms  and   legs,  much  resembling  chorea. 

88.  Upper  Limbs. — Cramp  in  arms. — ^The  pain  up  arm  was  followed 
by  cramps  and  drawing  in  back  and  limbs  of  bitten  side. — ^Weakness  in 
arms. — Right  arm  becomes  so  heavy  and  inactive  that  writing  is  too  great  an 
exertion,  and  he  allows  arm  to  drop. — Hand  trembles  so  much  he  can  scarcely 
write. — Hands  numb,  with  headache. 

93.  Lower  Limbs. — Feeling  as  if  hip  bones  would  slip  out  of  their 
sockets,  >  by  resting  hands  on  hips. — ^A  pressive  pain  in  r.  hip  bone,  goes 
from  there  to  middle  of  sacral  bones. — L.  hip  aches  in  bone. — ^Along  1.  sciatic 
nerve  a  dull  pain,  returning  periodically  ;  <  when  rising  from  sitting. — 
Twitching  in  legs.— Weakness  in  leg»  when  going  upstairs. — Each  dose  he 


HYDROPHOBINUM  937 

had  taken  made  him  feel  as  if  he  was  getting  corns  on  every  toe,  his  real 
corns  felt  remarkably  well  and  did  not  pain  him  at  all. 

84.  Qeneralitles — Drawing  from  neck  to  forehead,  immediately  followed 
by  sparks  before  eyes  and  vanishing  of  sight ;  red  face ;  involuntary  grinding 
of  teeth ;  second  attack ;  the  first  was  felt  in  head  after  washing  in  morning ; 
seven  days  after  bite  of  mad  dog  {Bellad,,  three  doses,  Hyas.  interpolated  once 
a  day). — ^Acute  ascending  paralysis  (Landry's  disease)  diagnosed  in  early 
stage  (P.). — Bitten  by  a  mad  dog  in  sixth  year  in  several  places ;  became 
somnambulistic  ten  years  after. — Severe  nervous  twitches  in  whole  body 
all  day.— Twitching  of  muscles  throughout  entire  body  (R.).— Twitching  of 
tendons  with  tendency  to  general  convulsions  (R.). — Prostration  beyond 
description  (P.). — ^Twitching  every  few  minutes;  sometimes  more  violently 
than  others ;  most  marked  in  abdominal  walls  (P.). — Makes  a  peculiar  noise 
like  a  waggoner  driving  horses  (P.). 

25.  Skin. — Quick  tendency  of  the  wound  to  heal  (the  same  in  leprosy). — 
Biting,  itching  in  various  parts  of  body,  <  by  scratching. — Bluish  discolor- 
ation of  bitten  place  (after  Laches). — Pustules  on  forehead  ;  around  inflamed 
eye ;  on  finger  (after  bite). — Malignant  ulcers  from  bite  of  a  dog. — Red  scar 
from  bite  of  a  dog. — £)ark,  livid-marks  where  inoculations  were  made; 
pricking  sensation  in  them,  causing  him  to  continually  press  his  side,  which 
relieved  temporarily  (P.).— -Cancerous  sores. 

90.  Sleep. — Inclination  to  yawn,  with  stiffness  of  lower  jaw. — Frequent 
yawning  without  sleepiness,  particularly  when  hearing  others  yawn. — 
Insomnia ;  sleepless  in  spite  of  narcotics  (R.). — Starting  in  sleep,  afternoon. — 
On  waking  is  morose,  inclined  to  be  angry. — In  morning,  after  exciting 
dreams,  much  fatigued,  feels  tired  in  sacrum  and  back. — On  awaking  from 
siesta  numbness  in  head. 

97.  Fever. — Paroxysms  of  intense  coldness  with  pain  in  spine. — Chilly 
feeling,  more  down  r.  (bitten)  arm. — Became  cold  in  bed  at  3  a.m.,  although 
covered  with  four  blankets ;  lasted  about  one  hour. — Chills  intermixed  and 
followed  by  heat  and  cold  sweat.— Cannot  bear  heat  of  sun. — Fever  every 
evening,  commencing  at  dusk  and  lasting  until  bedtime  (midnight). — He  feels 
the  pulse  beat  through  the  body ;  from  time  to  time  there  is  a  surging  through 
throat  into  head,  like  a  slow  wave.— Sensation  of  heat  felt  internally  and 
externally  through  entire  body,  no  external  warmth,  it  forces  perspiration 
out  on  face  as  from  weakness,  and  is  accompanied  by  lassitude  and  aching 
in  legs. — Restless,  skin  cool,  perspiring,  quite  conscious  (P.). — ^At  9  p.m.  a 
dripping  warm  perspiration  from  whole  r.  hand,  from  wrist  to  nails; 
afterwards  hands  and  fingers  stiff,  she  can  hardly  bend  them  (R.).— Skin 
covered  with  a  clammy  sweat  (last  stage)  (R.). — Skin  moist,  even  covered 
with  sweat;  during  spells,  limbs  cold  and  livid. — Much  better  after  per- 
spiring.— (A  number  of  cures  of  hydrophobia  have  been  reported  from  forced 
perspirations,  and  esp.  from  prolonged  and  repeated  use  of  the  Turkish  bath. 
This  is  known  as  the  Buisson  treatment,  from  Dr.  Buisson  who  originated  it.) 
— Intermittent  fever. 


938  HYOSCYAMINUM 


Hydrophyllum  Yirgiiiianiim. 

Virginian  Waterleaf.    N.  O.  Hydrophyllaceae.    Tincture  of  fresh 

plant  in  flower. 

flifateal  — Eyo,  inflammation  of.    Rhus  poisoning. 

Chaimeterlttios.— The  Hydrophyllaceae  are  nearly  allied  to  the 
Borages.  They  grow  among  moist,  shady  rocks,  and  they  derive 
their  name  from  me  circumstance  that  in  spring  a  small  quantity  of 
water  is  held  in  the  cavity  of  each  leaf.  The  older  writers  speak  of 
HydrophyU  v.  as  an  antidote  to  Rhus  poisoning.  The  only  homoeo- 
pathic experience  on  record  is  that  of  Dr.  Hoyt,  of  Indiana,  which  is 
recorded  bv  Hale.  Ten  minutes  after  gathering  a  cluster  of  the 
beautiful  blue  flowers,  Hoyt  noticed  his  eyes  began  to  water  and 
bum,  with  slight  itching.  By  the  time  he  reached  home  he  was 
su£fering  severely,  eyelids  swollen,  sclerotics  fiery  red,  some  sensitive- 
ness to  light.  The  symptoms  continued  throug)i  afternoon  and 
evening  and  kept  him  awake  some  time.  In  the  morning,  the  lids 
were  agglutinated  and  eyes  sensitive  to  light.  The  burning  and  smart- 
ing were  less,  but  lachrymation  remained,  and  it  was  a  week  before  the 
eyes  were  quite  right.  Later  on  Dr.  Hoyt  tested  the  remedy  in  one 
case  of  catarrhal  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  which  it  cured  ''like 
magic."  It  needs  further  proving  that  it  may  have  its  position 
defined.    It  should  prove  to  be  a  good  adjunct  to  Euphrasia, 


Hyoscyaminmn. 


Hyoscyamine.  A  crystalline  alkaloid  of  Hyoscyamus  Niger,  d,  H,3 
NO3.  Trituration  or  solution  of  the  sulphate  and  hydro- 
bromate.  (A  non-crystallisable  alkaloid,  Hyoscine,  is  also  used 
in  medicine  in  the  form  of  the  hydrobromate.) 

Clialoal. — Ciliary  neuralgia ;  spasm.  Delirium.  Fevers.  Mania.  Nervoosiiess. 
Paralysis  agitans.  Sleeplessness.  Spinal  sclerosis.  Throat,  sore.  Typhus  fever. 
Vision,  disordered. 

Charaotevistios. — Hyos.  suL  is  a  very  powerful  poison  obtained 
from  Hyos.  nig.  It  is  sometimes  used  by  occulists  in  place  of  Atropine 
to  dilate  the  pupils  for  the  purposes  of  ophthalmoscopic  examination, 
and  like  Atropine  it  has  the  property  of  causing  dryness  of  the  mouth 
and  fauces  in  some  cases.  Two  cases  have  been  recorded  in  which, 
whilst  dilating  the  pupil,  it  caused  intense  boring  pain  in  the  eyes 
from  cramp  of  the  ciUary  muscle.  Dr.  H.  A.  Hutchinson,  who  took 
gr.  i  of  Hyos,  sul,j  became  flushed,  arteries  throbbing,  lost  power  of 
co-ordination,  fell  into  a  comatose  sleep,  pulse  138,  respiration  36, 
temperature  106"^  F.,  entire  relaxation  of  voluntary  muscles,  except 


HYOSCYAMINUM  939 

occasional  spasmodic  movement  of  arms  and  legs.  The  hydrobromaie 
of  HyosctnCf  gr.  ^,  in  solution,  caused  in  a  tall,  robust  lady,  of  33  : 
Numbness  of  body  and  limbs,  dry  throat,  dim  vision,  flushed  face, 
rambling  talk,  dilated  pupils. — No  specific  differences  between  the 
two  alkaloids  have  been  observed.  The  majority  of  the  symptoms  of 
the  Schema  are  the  effect  of  the  Sulphate^  which  was  extensively 
proved  by  Hariey.  Hyos.  hydrobro.  3X  trit  has  been  reported  curative 
in  a  case  resembling  paralysis  agitans  after  excessive  use  of  alcohol  and 
tobacco  ;  and  in  highlv  excitable,  nervous  children  who  have  been 
frightened.  The  hydrohromate  of  Hyoscyamine  is  credited  with  reUeving 
the  tremors  (right  side)  in  a  case  of  paralysis  agitans,  the  curative 
effect  having  followed  instillation  of  the  alkaloid  into  the  eve  for 
another  purpose.  With  the  4X  attenuation  of  Merk^s,  Hyos,  hydrobro,^ 
Delameter  relieves  the  tremors  of  disseminated  sclerosis. 
Relations* — Compare : — Hyos.  nig.,  Bell.,  Atrop.,  Stram. 

STMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Delirium  violent,  failed  to  recognise  his  family,  saw  animals 
about  him,  next  day  remembered  nothing  that  had  passed  except  the  dreams 
of  animals. — Wakeful,  quiet,  and  usually  pleasing  delirium,  with  illusions  of 
sight ;  or  great  sleepiness,  and  when  aroused  lapsing  into  dreamy  sleep, 
broken  by  occasional  mutterings  and  jerking  of  limbs. — Clear  when  engaged 
in  conversation,  but  dreamy  when  undisturbed,  eyes  wide  open,  he  reached 
to  an  object  on  the  table  and  looked  about  on  the  floor,  when  questioned 
said  that  he  thought  something  had  dropped  from  the  table,  and  that  the 
walls  appeared  to  move ;  afterwards  quiet,  but  meddlesome  when  not  engaged 
in  conversation,  grasping  at  objects,  attempting  to  remove  them  before  the 
hand  reached  them ;  when  left  sdone  he  lapsed  into  f orgetf ulness  and  dreamy, 
meddlesome  delirium,  picking  at  objects  ;  having  reached  them  after  unsuc- 
cessful efforts  he  fumbled  with  them  till  he  dropped  them,  then  on  attempting 
to  pick  them  up  lost  his  balance ;  when  aroused  he  rubbed  his  hand,  gaped, 
answered  readily,  a  remark  excited  a  risibility  which  he  could  not  restrain, 
and  occasionally  the  suppressed  chuckle  burst  into  a  hearty  laugh. — Dulness, 
heaviness. — Difficulty  in  concentrating  thoughts. — Coma,  with  relaxation  of 
voluntary  muscles,  except  occasional  spasmodic  movements  of  arms  and  legs. 

8.  Head. — Headache  ;  congestion  of  head  and  face,  violent  throbbing 
of  carotids  with  every  impulse  of  heart. — Drunkenness,  nausea,  and  vomiting. 
— Giddiness :  with  staggering  on  rising  from  a  seat ;  with  staggering  on 
walking ;  weight  across  forehead. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  suffused ;  sclerotic  and  conjunctiva  injected. — Eyeballs 
restless. — A  most  intense  boring  pain  in  eyes  (an  hour  after  instillation, 
probably  due  to  cramp  of  ciliary  muscle). — Pupils  dilated  ;  and  insensible. — 
Vision  misty ;  letters  run  together,  can  read  fine  print  only  at  distance  of  a 
yard  ;  double  vision. — ^Yellow  vision. — ^Vision  perverted  as  to  colour  and  size ; 
she  thought  some  pills  in  a  box  were  larger  than  others ;  inability  to  read 
unless  the  print  was  within  two  or  three  inches  of  the  nose. 

6.    Face. — Face  flushed  and  hot;  esp.  cheeks. — Heavy  look. 

8.  Mouth. — ^Tongue  :  dry  and  brown ;  at  centre ;  also  with  clamminess 
of  rest  of  mouth ;  hard ;  and  rough,  except  margins. — Hard  and  soft  palates 


940  HYOSCYAMUS 

dry  and  ^azed,  afterwards  tongue  and  palates  covered  with  a  sticky,  acid, 
offensive  secretion,  as  after  Belladonna. — ^Tongne  and  throat  so  dry  that 
articulation  was  indistinct.^Forepart  and  margins  of  tongue  wet  with  acid 
secretion.— Dryness  of  mouth ;  except  gums. — Mouth  :  clammy  and  moist, 
exhaling  an  offensive  odour  ;  suddenly  moist ;  sensation  of  mastic  in  it 

9.    Throat. — Dryness  of  throat :  with  moisture  oi  mouth  ;  of  pharynx ; 
with  difficult  swallowing. 

IX.    Stomach.— Vomiting  during  the  coma. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Urging,  dysuria,  and  discharge  in  a  feeble 
dribbling  stream,  partial  retention  (urine  contained  Hyoscyaminum). — Urine 
changed  from  high-coloured  to  glaucous  green ;  from  acid  to  alfeUine  and 
opalescent  on  boiling ;  and  on  standing  a  deposit  of  triple  phosphates,  the 
specific  gravity  increased. — Urine  pale,  specific  gravity  decreased. 

17.    Respiratory  Organs. — Dry,  tracheal  cough. — Rapid  respiration. 

xg.  Heart  and  Pulse. — Heart's  action  excited  and  rapid. — Pulse 
increased  in  rapidity,  force,  and  volume;  then  slow;  then  decreased  in 
rapidity,  force,  and  volume. — Pulse  rapid  ;  then  slow  and  soft. — Pulse  slow ; 
and  at  first  increased  in  force  and  volume. 

ax.  Limhs. — Limbs  jerking  occasionally,  and  fidgety. — Inability  to  walk. 
— Inability  to  rise  from  his  chair  or  walk  without  assistance,  and  as  he  sat, 
twitching  now  and  then  of  the  extensors  of  the  legs,  so  as  to  advance  the  foot 
with  a  little  jerk.— Weakness  of  legs ;  of  feet,  so  that  I  could  only  walk  by 
fixing  eyes  on  the  ground. 

S6.  Sleep. — ^Yawning;  and  sighing;  and  tired  feeling.— Sleepiness. — 
Either  wakeful  or  excessively  somnolent ;  sleep  broken  by  mutterings  and 
slight  jerking  of  the  limbs. 

27.  Fever.— Heat  of  skin  with  dryness.— Pulse  138,  full  and  hard ; 
respirations  34  to  40 ;  temperature  106  F. 


HyoBoyamus. 


Hyoscamus  niger.    Henbane.    N.  0.  Solanaceas.    Tincture  of 

fresh  plant. 

CUBlflsL— Amaurosis.  Angina  pectoris.  Bladder,  paralysis  of.  Bnmchitis, 
Chorea.  Coma  vigil.  Omgh,  DcUrium  tremens.  Diarrhoea.  Dysmenorrfaoea. 
Enteric feuer.  Epilepsy.  Epistaxis.  Erotomania,  Eye^aJfection$qf,  Haemoptysis. 
Haemorrhages.  Hiccough.  Hydrophobia.  Hypochondriasis.  Lochia,  suppre^ed. 
Mania.  Meningitis.  Mind,  affections  of.  Neuralgia.  Night-blindness.  Nympho- 
mania. Paralysis.  Paralysis  agitans.  Parotitis.  Pneumonia,  Puerperal  mania. 
Rage.  Sleept  disordered.  Stamnwring,  Tetanus.  Toothache.  Urine,  retention  of. 
Vision,  disorders  of. 

CSiapactariBtics* — Hyoscyamus  ("  Hog[-bean '')  is  nearly  allied  to 
Belladonna  botanically,  and  in  pathogenetic  action  the  two  drugs  are 
much  alike  in  their  main  featm-es.  But  when  examined  dosely 
their  differences  are  sufficiently  well  marked  to  render  their  dis- 
tinction easy.    Though  sometimes  growing  near  rivers,  BclL  flourishes 


HYOSCYAMUS  941 

best  in  a  chalky  soil.  Hyo.  is  found  growing  on  old  rubbish  heaps, 
near  ruins,  on  roadsides,  and  sometimes  by  the  seashore.  The  flower 
of  Bell  is  of  a  dull,  purplish  brown  ;  ot  Hyo.  a  dirty  yellow,  with 
claret-coloured  streaks.  BM.  is  a  smooth  plant,  whilst /(yo.  is  densely 
covered  with  thickly  woven  hairs,  and  by  a  sticky,  heavy-smelling 
exudation.  A  case  of  poisoning  by  Hyoscyatnus  seeds,  put  into  soup 
instead  of  celery  seeds,  communicated  to  the  Titncs  (May  14,  1892), 
bv  Mr.  F.  Mackamess,  one  of  the  su£Ferers,  gives  a  good  general 
idea  of  the  drug's  action.  '^  About  ten  minutes  after  talang  the  soup 
I  began  to  feel  quite  dizzy,  and  could  hardly  swallow  me  food  I 
was  eating,  which  tasted  as  if  it  was  nothing  but  dust  and  ashes.  At 
the  same  time  my  wife  became  so  faint  that  she  asked  me  to  help  her 
up  to  her  room  at  once.  This  I  did  with  some  difficulty,  having  to 
hold  on  to  the  bannister  with  one  hand  while  I  supported  her  with 
the  other.  At  the  same  time,  also,  our  sight  became  blurred,  our 
mouths  and  throats  parched,  and  we  began  to  feel  cold.  I  tried  in 
vain  to  get  warm  by  sitting  over  the  drawing-room  fire,  but  only  felt 
intensely  drowsy.  .  .  •  When  Dr.  Martin  arrived  I  had  great  difficulty 
not  only  in  gettmg  up  to  receive  him,  but  in  making  him  understand 
what  had  happened,  so  indistinct  was  my  articukition.  However, 
from  the  dilatation  of  our  eyes,  the  parched  condition  of  our  tongues, 
and  the  state  of  our  pulse  (my  wife's  having  gone  up  to  140),  he,  of 
course,  saw  that  we  had  been  badly  poisoned,  and  prescribea  drastic 
remedies  which  saved  us  probably  from  very  serious  consequences ; 
for  even  the  next  day  our  sight  was  still  defective,  and  my  wife's 
hands  were  slightly  paralysed."  Dr.  W.  S.  Mills  communicated  to 
N.  A,  J.  H,,  November,  1899,  an  experience  of  his  own.  A  patient  had 
objected  to  the  taste  of  water  in  which  Hyo,  ^  had  been  mixed,  so  Dr. 
Mills  took  a  teaspoonful  just  to  taste  it.  ''A  few  moments  later  I 
found  that  it  produced  a  queer  feeling  throughout  the  l>ody.  I  felt  as 
though  without  weight,  as  though  I  walked  through  and  on  air.  My 
head  felt  light.  I  had  an  insane  desire  to  laugh  and  shout.  It  was 
only  by  the  utmost  use  of  my  will-power  that  I  could  keep  myself 
from  doing  something  ridiculous.  Even  when  I  forced  myself  to 
think  of  my  position  of  responsibility  as  medical  attendant  on  this 
very  sick  man,  and  the  absolute  necessity  of  keeping  my  wits  about 
me,  it  was  hard  for  me  to  restrain  my  hilarity.  I  can  liken  the 
condition  only  to  one  of  mild  hilarious  intoxication — a  '  funny  drunk.' 
I  knew  I  was  silly,  but  I  could  not  help  it.  To  keep  myself  from 
losing  my  dignity  before  the  nurses  and  the  family,  I  locked  myself 
in  the  bathroom  for  a  few  minutes  and  made  faces  at  myself  in  the 
mirror."  The  condition  passed  off  in  half  an  hour.  These  two 
experiences,  brief  as  they  were,  cover  a  large  share  of  the  ground 
occupied  by  Hyo,  The  delirium  of  Hyo,  is  more  of  the  low,  muttering 
type,  whilst  that  of  Bell,  tends  to  be  violent  and  furious.  Hyo,  also 
has  nts  of  ungovernable  ra^,  but  the  violence  is  not  so  sustained  as 
that  of  Bell.  The  face  of  Bell,  is  red,  of  Hyo.  pale  or  bluish.  Hyo. 
corresponds  to  a  greater  variety  of  cases  of  melancholia  than  BdL, 
and  here  one  aresit  characteristic  is  ''suspicion,"  so  frequently  met 
with  in  cases  ofinsanity  or  of  those  on  the  tx>rderland.  A  patient  of 
mine,  a  clever  lawyer,  suffering  from  nervous  breakdown,  had  had  to 


942  HYOSCYAMUS 

abandon  his  business  entirely  some  time  before  he  came  under  my 
care.  He  had  improved  consideraMy,  when  I  heard  from  his  wife  in 
the  country  that  he  had  had  a  kind  of  a  fit,  and  became  cold  and 
senseless,  his  face  working  much.  After  that  he  fell  asleep,  and  had 
another  attack  an  hour  and  a  half  later.  After  this  he  was  suspicions, 
and  said  that  his  wife  was  poisoning  him.  I  sent  a  single  dose  of 
Hyo.  im,  to  be  given  in  food  or  in  drink  without  his  knowing.  It 
was  repeated  once  a  week.  He  began  to  improve  forthwith,  and  in 
a  few  months  was  perfectly  restored  to  health ;  though  some  other 
medicines  were  given  later  on.  In  this  case  there  was  an  additional 
indication  for  Hyo,  in  the  working  of  the  muscles  of  the  face. 
Twitching  is  one  of  the  grand  characteristics  of  Hyo.  "  Every 
muscle  in  the  body  twitches,  from  the  eyes  to  the  toes,"  clonic 
spasms :  twitching  of  groups  of  muscles ;  spasms  in  general ;  with 
unconsciousness.  Another  feature  of  the  Hyo.  insanity  is  uncovering. 
This  is  not  because  the  patient  feels  too  warm  (for  Hyo.,  like  the 
other  Solanids,  is  a  chilly  remedy),  but  because  they  will  not  remain 
covered :  nymphomania ;  lascivious  mania ;  Ues  naked  in  bed  and 
chatters.  There  are  violent  outbreaks  in  the  delirium  of  Hyo.^  but 
they  cannot  be  kept  up  (as  are  those  of  B^.),  on  account  of  the 
weakness.  Hyo.  corresponds  to  the  typhoid  state :  tongue  diy  and 
unwieldv,  sensorium  so  clouded  that  if  the  patient  be  aroused  to 
answer  he  faUs  back  into  a  stupor  again.  The  sight  is  disordered  ; 
sees  things  too  large  or  too  near  and  grasps  at  them  ;  picks  the  bed- 
clothes and  mutters.  Twitchings,  subsultus  tendinum,  and  picking 
at  the  l)ed-clothes.  Teeth  covered  with  sordes.  Involuntary 
passage  of  urine  and  fseces.  When  influenza  takes  the  typhoid  form 
it  often  finds  its  remedy  in  Hyo.  (I  rapidly  cured  a  boy  in  whom 
influenza  attacked  the  meninges  of  the  brain  with  pains  in  the  head, 
especially  forehead,  piercing  to  the  brain.)  Parotitis  with  metastasis 
to  brain.  Hyo.  is  suited  to  many  pulmonary  conditions.  Hie 
characteristic  cough  is  <  on  lying  down,  almost  completely  removed 
by  sitting  up,  <  at  night,  <  after  eating,  drinking  or  talking.  Cou^ 
from  elongated  uvula.  The  drowsiness  of  Hyo.  has  another  side  in 
restlessness.  The  patient  lies  awake  for  hours ;  children  twitch  in 
sleep,  cry  out,  tremble,  and  awake  frightened.  Hyo.  is  one  of  our  best 
remedies  in  toothache,  having  well-defined  symptoms.  It  is  also  an 
ancient  domestic  remedy  for  toothache,  the  application  being  peculiar. 
A  penny  is  made  hot  in  the  fire,  and  when  taken  out  a  pinch  of 
Henbane  seeds  is  dropped  on  it  and  fumes  come  away.  A  wineglass 
is  inverted  over  it,  and  this  is  soon  filled  with  the  fumes,  and  apph^  to 
the  mouth,  when  the  fumes  are  inhaled.  The  popular  idea  is  that  the 
fumes  expel  the  '*  worms  "  of  toothache,  but,  as  Lauder  Brunton  has 
shown  {H.  W.J  XXV.  286),  the  supposed  "  worms  "  are  the  embryos  of 
the  seeds  forcibly  expelled  on  the  rupture  of  the  seed  coats  by  the 
heat.  Hyo.  30  is  one  of  the  most  useful  remedies  in  restlessness  iand 
sleeplessness.  Hyo.  is  suited  to  nervous,  irritable,  excitable,  sanguine 
people ;  to  light-haired  people.  The  symptoms  of  Hyo.  are  <  by 
touch  ;  the  abdomen  is  sore  to  touch  ;  <  evening  and  night ;  <  lying 
down ;  <  from  cold  and  cold  air.  >  From  sitting  up  ;  motion  ; 
walking ;   warmth.     <  From  mental  affections  ;  jealousy ;  unhappy 


HYOSCYAMUS  943 

love  ;  approaching  menstruation  ;  commencing  menstruation  ;  during 
menstruation. 

RelationB. — Antidoted  by :  Vinegar,  Citric  acid,  Bell.,  Chi.,  Stram. 
It  antidotes:  Ether,  Bell.,  Stram.,  Merc.  Is  fallowed  well  by:  Bell., 
Puis.,  Stram.,  Ver.,  Phos.  Follows  well  :  Bell.,  Nux,  Op.,  Rhus. 
Compare :  Suppression  of  lochia,  Nux,  Secal.,  Con.,  Col.,  Pul.  ; 
loquacity,  Stram.,  Lach.,  Op.,  Cup.,  Ver.  ;  gossiping,  babWing,  Ver. 
(religious  subjects,  Ver.) ;  difficult  swallowing  of  liquids,  Hydrob.,  Bell., 
Cans.,  Con.,  Ign.,  Lach.,  Lye,  Pho.  Convulsions  from  fright  or 
worms,  Cin.  Every  muscle  of  the  body  twitching,  Nux  (but  Nux 
retains  consciousness,  Hyo.  has  unconsciousness) ;  cough  <  lying  down, 
Dros.  ;  (>  lying  down,  Mang.,  Fer^ ;  cough  <  at  night,  after  eating, 
drinking,  talking,  singing,  Dros.,  Phos. ;  haemoptysis  of  drunkards, 
Nux,  Op. ;  meningitis.  Bell  (Bell,  has  <  from  shaking  head ;  from 
sitting  with  head  bent  forward ;  Hyo.  has  >  from  both)  ;  tickling 
cough  >  in  warm  air,  Rumex  ;  convulsions,  spasms,  twitchings, 
Cic.  V,, ;  chorea,  Stram.,*  Ver.,  Agar  ;  jealousy.  Apis,  Ign. ;  waves 
through  head.  Act.  r.  ;  mania,  Stram.  (Stram.  has  desire  for  light  and 
company,  Hyo.  aversion  to  both  ;  Stram.  uncovers  whole  body,  Hyo. 
especially. the  genitals;  sexual  mania,  Grat,  Calc.  ph.;  Stram.  sees 
objects — mice,  dogs,  &c. — ^rise  from  every  corner  and  come  towards 
him) ;  sees  ghosts  and  demons.  Plat.,  Kah  bro. ;  fears  being  poisoned, 
Glo.,  Rhus,  Kali  bro.,  Bapt ;  hiccough,  Ign.  (Ign.  after  emotions, 
Hyo.  after  abdominal  operations) ;  spasms,  twitchings,  Ign.,  Tarent  ; 
levitation,  Phos.  ac,  Sticta  pul..  Hyp.  ;  fits  of  ungovernable  rage. 
Staph.  Teste  puts  Hyo.  in  the  Mur.  ac.  group  with  Viol.  od.  He 
also  puts  it  in  the  Bell,  group. 

Causation. — ^Jealousy.    Lochia,  suppressed.    Milk,  suppressed. 

STMPTOMS. 

I.  Mind. — Melancholy. — Melancholy  from  unfortunate  love,  with  rage 
or  inclination  to  laugh  at  ever3rthing. — ^Anthropophobia. — Suspicious. — 
Anguish  and  fear. — Fright  followed  by  convulsions  and  starts  from  sleep. — 
Desire  to  run  away  from  the  house  at  night. — Fear  of  being  betrayed  or 
poisoned. — Disposition  to  make  a  jest  of  everything. — Loquacity. — ^Talks  more 
than  usual,  more  animatedly  and  hurriedly. — ^Jealousy ;  with  rage  and 
delirium.— Unfortunate  love  with  jealousy,  with  rage  and  incoherent  speech. 
— Peevish  and  quarrelsome  humour. — Rage,  with  desire  to  strike  and  to  kill. — 
Stupor,  with  plaintive  cries,  esp.  on  the  slightest  touch,  and  complete 
apathy. — Loss  of  memory. — Delirium  without  consciousness ;  does  not  know 
anybody,  and  has  no  wants  (except  thirst). — Loss  of  consciousness,  with 
eyes  closed,  and  raving  about  business. — Delirium  tremens,  with  clonic 
spasms;  unconsciousness  and  aversion  to  light  and  company. — Delirium, 
sometimes  with  trembling,  and  fits  of  epileptic  convulsions. — Delirium,  sees 
ghosts,  demons,  &c. — Wandering  thoughts. — Perversion  of  every  action. — 
Mania,  with  loss  of  consciousness  ;  or  with  bufFoonery  and  ridiculous 
gestures. — Lascivious  mania,  and  occasional  mutterings  ;  uncovers  his  whole 
body. 

a.    Head. — Confusion  and  heaviness  of  the  head. — ^Vertigo,  as  from 


944  HYOSCYAMUS 

intoxication,  or  with  obscuration  of  the  si^it — ^Attacks  of  cerebral  congestion, 
with  loss  of  consdoosness  and  snoring  (with  delirium  ;  answering  all  questions 
properly;  popils  dilated). — Headache,  as  from  omcussion  of  the  brain. — 
Congestion  c^  blood  to  the  head ;  red,  qwrkling  eyes ;  face  pnrple-red  ; 
<  in  the  evening. — Pressive  and  numbing  pain  in  the  forehead,  esp. 
after  a  meal. — Headache  as  if  brain  shattered  amd  shaken,  when  walking. — 
Pressive,  stupefjring  headache,  esp.  in  forehead,  occurring  in  alternation  with 
needle-like  stitches,  particularly  on  L  side. — Forehead  feels  as  if  screwed 
inward. — Sticking  in  head  over  r.  eye,  when  coupling. — Violent  throblxng 
headache,  waking  him  at  night ;  with  throbbing  carotids. — Headache  in  base  of 
tjraan. — Brain  feels  as  if  loose. — Constrictive  obstruction  in  the  forehead. — 
Sensation  of  fluctuation,  or  of  commotion  in  the  brain,  esp.  on  walking. — Heat, 
and  tingling  in  the  head. — Inflammation  of  the  brain,  with  unconsdonsness ; 
heat  and  tingling  in  the  head ;  violent  pulsation  in  the  head,  like  waves ;  the 
head  shakes;  <  from  becoming  cold  and  after  eating,  >  by  bending 
the  head  forward  (stooping)  and  from  heat. — Hydrocephalus,  with  stapor ; 
the  head  is  shaken  to  and  fro ;  sensation  of  swashing  in  the  head. — Heat  of 
the  head,  with  general  coldness  of  the  body,  without  thirst — Liability  to  catch 
cold  in  the  head,  principally  from  dry,  cold  air. — Headache,  alternately  widi 
pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck. — ^Waving  or  shaking  of  the  head  from  one  side 
to  the  other ;  with  loss  of  consciousness  and  red  sparkling  eyes. 

3.  Eyes. — Eyes  downcast  and  dulL — Eyes  red,  fixed,  convulsed,  and 
prominent. — Spasmodic  movement  of  the  eyes. — Redness  of  the  sclerotica. — 
Swelling  of  the  eyelids. — Strabismus. — Staring,  distorted  eyes. — Contortion  <rf 
the  eyes.— Quivering  in  the  eye. — Spasmodic  closing  of  the  eyelids. — Inability 
to  open  the  eyelids. — Pupils  dilated. — Dimness  of  sights-Myopia,  or  pres- 
byopia.— Errors  of  vision. — Diplopia. — Objects  seem  to  be  much  larger  than 
they  are  in  reality,  or  else  of  a  red  colour. — Objects  have  coloured  borders, 
chiefly  yellow. — Nocturnal  blindness. — ^Weatmess  of  sight,  as  from  incipient 
amaurosis. 

4.  Ears. — Buzzing  in  the  ears. — Hardness  of  hearing,  as  if  stunned. 

5.  Nose. — Epistaxis. — Cramp-like  pressure  at  the  root  of  the  nose  and 
the  zygomata. — Dryness  of  nose. — Nostrils  sooty. — Loss  of  smell. 

6.  Face. — Face :  cold,  pale  bluish,  or  puffed  and  blood-red. — Face 
flushed,  excited ;  bloated ;  dark-red. — ^Twitching  of  muscles  of  face. — Distorted, 
bluish  face,  with  mouth  wide  open. — Cramp-like  pressure  on  the  cheek-bone. — 
Dryness  of  the  lips.— <^ramps  in  the  jaw. — Lock-jaw. — Heat  and  redness  of 
the  face. 

7.  Teeth. — Pulsative  and  tearing  pains  in  teeth,  from  cheek  to  fore- 
head, esp.  after  a  chill  in  the  cold  air,  or  in  the  morning,  and  often  with 
congestion  of  the  head,  heat  and  redness  of  the  face,  swelling  of  the  gums, 
and  spasms  in  the  throat^Toothache  driving  to  despair;  in  sensitive, 
nervous,  excitable  persons ;  causing  spasmodic  jerks  of  fingers,  hands,  arms, 
and  face  muscles.— Teeth  feel  too  long. — ^Toothache  <  from  cold  air, 
morning.— Dentition. — Pulsating  toothache,  as  from  inflammation  of  the 
periosteum.— Painful  drawing  in  a  single  tooth,  here  and  there,  as  if  a  tooth 
were  becoming  pithy.— Toothache  during  sweat — Tearing  in  the  gums,  with 
buzzing  and  sensation  as  if  the  teeth  were  loose. — Clenching  of  the  teeth. — 
Grating  teeth.— Teeth  covered  with  mucus. 


HYOSCYAMUS  945 

8.  Mouth.— Dr3mess  in  the  mouth. — Salivation  of  a  salt  taste. — 
Sanguineous  saliva. — Foam  at  the  mouth.— -Fetid  exhalations  from  the  mouth, 
perceptible  to  the  patient. — Heat  and  numbness  of  the  tongue,  as  if  it  had  been 
burned. — ^Tongue  dry,  and  loaded  with  a  brownish  coating. — Redness  of 
the  tongue. — Utters  inarticulate  sounds. — Paralysis  of  the  tongue. — Loss  of 
speech. 

g.  Throat. — Dryness  and  burning  heat  of  the  throat — Stinging  dry- 
ness of  fauces. — Constriction  in  the  throat,  and  inability  to  swallow  liquids. — 
Elongation  of  the  uvula. 

ID.  Appetite. — Loss  of  taste. — Bulimy,  with  violent  thirst,  with  inability 
to  swallow.-^Thirst  with  drinking  but  little  at  a  time. — Ehread  of  drinking. — 
Hiccough,  esp.  after  a  meal  (with  spasms  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen). — 
After  a  meal,  headache,  intoxication,  great  anguish,  and  sadness. — Alter 
drinking,  convulsions. 

II.  Stomach. — Nausea,  on  pressing  the  epigastrium. — Bitter  eructations. 
•—Retching  and  vomiting,  with  cutting  pains  which  extort  cries. — Vomiting 
and  retching  after  coughing. — ^Aqueous  vomiting,  with  vertigo. — ^Vomiting 
of  mucus  (sanguineous)  and  of  blood,  of  a  deep  red,  sometimes  with  convul- 
sions, choking,  pains  in  the  pit  of  stomach,  great  exhaustion,  and  coldness  in 
the  limbs. — ^Vomiting  of  aliments,  immediately  after  a  meal,  and  sometimes 
with  violent  pain  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach. — Cramps  (colic)  in  the  stomach 
in  periodical  attacks,  and  >  by  vomiting. — Painful  sensitiveness  of  the 
epigastrium  to  the  touch. — Inflammation  of  the  stomach,  with  burning  pain. 

la.  Abdomen. — Dull  pains  in  the  hepatic  region. — ^Abdomen  tight, 
inflated,  painful  when  touched. — Cramp-like  pains  in  the  abdomen,  and 
cuttings,  sometimes  accompanied  by  vomitings,  pains  in  the  head,  and  cries. — 
Shootings  in  the  umbiliod  region,  on  walking  and  breathing. — Pain,  as 
from  excoriation  in  the  abdominal  muscles,  on  coughing. — Spasms  and 
rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with  hiccough. 

13.  Stool  and  Anus. — Constipation.— Frequent  want  to  evacuate,  with 
scanty  and  unfrequent  relief. — ^Watery  diarrhoea. — Painless  diarrhoea. — 
Mucous  diarrhoea.— Diarrhoea  of  lying-in  women. — ^The  stool  is  small  in  size. 
— Involuntary  evacuations,  from  paralysis  of  the  sphincter  ant. — Haemorrhoids ; 
profusely  bleeding. 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Retention  of  urine,  with  pressure  in  the  bladder. 
— Retention  of  urine  in  child-bed. — Frequent  want  to  make  water,  with  scanty 
emission. — Urine  copious  and  clear,  like  water. — Involuntary  emission  of 
urine,  as  from  paralysis  of  the  bladder. 

15*  Male  Sexual  Organs. — Increase  of  sexual  desire,  lascivious; 
exposes  his  person. — ^Impotence. 

i6.  Female  Sexual  Organs.-— Lascivious,  uncovers  sexual  parts.— 
Lascivious  furor,  without  modesty. — Excited  sexual  desire  without  excited 
fancy.  —  Catamenia  more  abundant  —  Suppression  of  the  catamenia.  — 
Suppressed  lochia. — Spasms  of  pregnant  women,  esp.  during  parturi- 
tion. —  Puerperal  fever.  —  Metrorrhagia^  of  a  bright-coloured  blood.  — 
Metrorrhagia,  the  blood  pale,  with  convulsions. — During  the  catamenia, 
delirium,  flux  of  urine,  sweat  and  convulsive  trembling. — Bdore  the  catamenia, 
hysterical  cramps  and  fits  of  lau^ter. — During  the  menses,  convulsive 
trembling  of  the  hands  and  feet ;  sev^e  headache ;  profuse  perspiration. 
VOL.  L  61 


946  HYOSCYAMUS 

17.  Respiratory  Organs.— Catarrh,  with  aocumtilation  of  mucos  in 
the  larynx  and  in  the  trachea,  rendering  the  speech  and  the  vcnce  indistinct — 
Constant  cough  when  lying  down,  which  ceases  on  rising  op. — Fits  ci 
coughing,  as  in  the  whooping*cough. — Cramp-like  cough  at  night,  esp.  when 
l3ring  down,  sometimes  with  redness  of  the  face,  and  vomiting  of  mucus.— 
The  cough  is  <  at  night  (after  midnight),  when  at  rest,  during  sleq>,  in 
the  cold  air,  from  eating  and  drinking. — Dry,  shaking,  sobbing  cough,  with 
pain,  as  of  excoriation,  in  the  abdominal  muscles. — ^Dry,  spasmodic  cough  at 
night  (in  old  persons)  from  continuous  tickling  in  the  throat  (as  if  the  palate  or 
uvula  were  too  long).--Greenish  expectoration  with  the  congh.-*Con^  with 
expectoration  of  blood,  and  convulsions.-— Vicdent  spasmodic  001:^ ;  short  con- 
secutive  coughs,  caused  by  a  tickling  sensation  in  the  throat,  as  if  some  mncns 
were  lodged  in  it ;  during  the  day,  expectoration  of  saltish-tasting  mucos^  or 
of  bright-red  blood,  mixed  with  clots. — Haemoptysis,  blood  bright-red  with 
spasms.*- Hemoptysis  of  drunkards. 

18.  Chest.— Slow,  rattling  breathing.— Oppression,  and  embarrassed  and 
rattling  respiration. — Pressure  on  r.  side  <rf  chest,  with  great  anxiety  and 
shortness  of  breath,  on  going  up  stairs. — Spasms  in  the  chest,  with  shortness 
of  breath,  which  forces  the  patient  to  bend  forward.— Shootings  in  the 
sides  of  the  chest — (Inflammation  of  the  lungs.) 

19.  Heart.— Pressure,  tightness^  and  anxiety  in  precordial  r^on. — 
Oppression  of  heart  with  transient  stitches. — Tearing,  sticking  in  heart. — 
Vicrient  stitch  in  precordial  region. — Soreness  in  spots  to  1.  of  nipple  alter- 
nating with  stitches. — Soreness,  tightness  of  heart  region. — Hearts  action 
violent;  tremulous;  irregular. — Palpitation,  unable  to  move  body  without 
greatest  anxiety ;  apprehension  of  su£Focation,  or  swooning ;  unquenchable 
thirst  in  morning ;  frequent  copious  discharge  of  limpid  urine. — Pulse :  full, 
hard,  strong ;  ra^d,  intermitting ;  slow,  small ;  scarcely  perceptible. 

90.  Neck  and  Back.— Tettery  spots  on  the  nape  of  the  neck.— Pains 
in  the  back,  and  esp.  in  the  lumbar  region,  with  swelling  of  the  feet — 
Lancinations  in  the  loins,  and  shoulder-blades. 

as.  Upper  Limtw.— Trembling  of  the  arms  and  of  the  hands,  e^.  in 
evening,  after  movement. — Painful  numbness  and  sti£Fness  of  hands. — Swelling 
of  hands. — Fists  clenched,  with  retraction  of  the  thumbs  (in  convulsive  fits). 
— Carphologia  (picking  of  the  bed  cover  or  of  the  face). — Fingers  lode  and 
feel  too  thick. — Hands  slightly  paralysed. 

83.  Lower  Limbs.— Painful  cramps  in  the  (anterior  part  of  the)  thighs, 
and  calves  of  the  legs,  which  contract  the  legs. — Gangrenous  spots  and  vesides 
on  the  legs. — Sti£Fness  and  lassitude  in  the  joint  of  the  knee.— Coldness  and 
swelling  of  the  feet— Contraction  of  the  toes  when  walking  and  ascending. 

94.  Generalities. — Incisive  tearing,  and  dull  pulling  in  the  limbs  and 
joints. — Limbs,  cold,  trembling  and  numbed.— Convulsive  movements  and 
shaking  of  some  of  the  limbs,  or  of  the  whole  body,  sometimes  on  malring  the 
slightest  effort  to  swallow  liquid.— Spasms  and  convulsions  (with  watery 
diarrhoea).— Jerking  of  the  feet  and  of  the  hands.— Epfleptic  fits,  sometimes 
with  bluish  colour  and  pu£Eing  of  the  face,  involuntary  emission  of  orine, 
foaming  at  the  mouth,  drawing  back  of  the  thumbs,  sensation  of  hunger  and 
ci  gnawing  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  eyes  prominent,  cries»  grinding  of  the 
teeth,  &c.— Epileptic  convulsions,  alternately  with  attacks  of  cerebral  conges- 


HYPERICUM  947 

tion  (apoplectic  fit). — Convulsions  resembling  St.  Vitus'  dance. — Convulsions, 
with  cries,  great  anguish,  oppression  of  the  chest  and  loss  of  consciousness. — 
After  the  epileptic  convulsions,  profound  sleep,  with  snoring. — Uncommon 
sinking  of  strength. — Fainting  fits  (repeated  attacks). — Great  weakness  and 
debility. — Sensation  of  levitation;  as  if  walking  on  and  through  air. — 
Paralysis. — ^Jerking  of  the  tendons  (subsultus). — ^The  majority  of,  and  the 
principal  symptoms,  manifest  themselves  after  eating  or  drinking,  as  well  as 
in  the  evening. 

35.  Skin. — Skin  dry  and  rough. — Hot,  dry,  brittle  skin. — Miliary  eruption. 
— Eruption  of  dry  pimples^  like  confluent  small-pox. — Brownish  (or  g^gre- 
nous)  spots  on  the  body,  from  time  to  time  (as  in  typhus). — Frequent,  large 
furunculi. — Spots  and  gangrenous  vesicles  on  different  parts. — Rash  from  the 
abuse  of  Belladonna, — Bleeding  of  ulcers. 

06.  Sleep. — Somnolency,  like  coma  vigil. — Retarded  sleep,  or  sleepless- 
ness caused  by  excessive  nervous  excitement,  or  by  great  anguish,  sometimes 
with  convulsions  and  starts. — Nightly  sleeplessness. — Child  sobs  and  cries  in 
sleep  without  waking. — Profound,  comatose  sleep,  with  convulsions  and 
involuntary  movements  of  the  limbs,  esp.  the  hands. — ^When  sleeping, 
carphologia ;  or  smiling  countenance ;  or  starts  with  fright. 

27.  Fever. — Shuddering  from  head  to  foot. — Burning  heat  of  the  body, 
and  esp.  of  the  head.— Fever,  with  fits  of  epilepsy,  great  weakness,  flames  before 
the  eyes,  and  congestion  in  the  head,  quartan  or  quotidian  type. — Pulse  quick 
(full  hard),  with  swelling  of  the  veins  (arteries). — Universal  coldness  over  the 
whole  body,  with  heat  of  face,  ascending  from  the  feet. — Nightly  coldness, 
extending  over  the  back  from  the  small  of  the  back. — Heat  in  the  evening, 
with  thirst  (congestion  of  blood  to  the  head),  and  putrid  taste. — Debilitating 
perspiration  during  sleep. — Cold,  sour-smelling  perspirations. — Perspiration, 
principally  on  the  legs. 


Hypericum. 


Hypericum  perforatum,    H.   perfoliatum.    St  John's  Wort.  N.  O, 
Hypericaceae.    Tincture  of  whole  fresh  plant. 


-After-pains.  Asthma.  Bites.  Brachial  neuralgia.  Breast,  affec- 
tions of.  Brain,  concussion  of.  Bruises.  Bunions.  Compound  fractures. 
Corns.  Coxalgia.  Diarrhoea.  Gunshot  wounds.  Haemorrhoids.  Headache. 
H]fdrophobia.  Hypersensitiveness.  Impotence.  Labour,  effects  of.  Meningitis. 
Mind,  2dBFections  of.  Neuralgia.  Operations,  effects  of.  Panaritium.  Paralysis. 
Rheumatism.  Scars.  Sciatica.  Spastic  paralysis.  Spinal  concussion.  Spinal 
irritation.    Stiff-neck.    Tetanus.    Ulceration.    Whooping-cough.    Wounds, 

CharaoteristlOB. — ^The  leaves  of  various  species  of  Hypericum  are 
sprinkled  with  pellucid  dots  and  black  glands  which  contain  an 
essential  oil.  These,  which  are  most  conspicuous  in  H.  perforatum^ 
have  evidently  given  the  signature  which  has  led  to  the  chief  use  of 
the  plant  in  medicine,  namely,  as  a  remedy  for  wounds  or  perforations 
of  the  integuments.    The  leaves,  moreover,  are  lance-shaped.    The 


948  HYPERICUM 

leaves  of  H.  androsamum^  commonly  called  Tatsan  {UmU  UMimc)^ 
applied  to  fresh  wounds  from  olden  time.  The  word  Hypericum 
means  ''  sub-heather  "  (uw6  and  ip€uai)j  indicating  its  manifest  relation  to 
the  heaths,  which  at  once  leads  us  to  think  of  Ledum.  The  proving 
of  Hyp.  by  Muller  and  others  is  very  complete  and  brings  ont  tbe  relation 
of  the  drug  to  wounds  and  their  consequences  and  also  its  applica- 
bility in  maladies  of  other  kinds.  Crawling  sensations  in  hands  and 
feet ;  they  felt  fuzzy ;  sticking  in  them  as  from  needles.  Tearing,  rtien- 
matiCy  shaking  pains ;  paralj^c  weakness.  One  of  the  provers  had  on 
waking  at  4  a.m.  a  feeling  as  though  she  were  suspended  and  not 
lying  in  bed,  at  another  time  as  though  she  were  lying  veiy  heavy  in 
bed.  The  former  condition  has  led  to  cures  in  ^ects  ot  accidents 
attended  with  the  sensation  ''  as  if  being  lifted  high  into  the  air  ;  and 
great  anxiety  lest  she  should  foil  from  this  hd^t"  The  particular 
kinds  of  wounds  for  which  Hyp.  has  been  found  of  signal  service  are 
wounds  of  parts  rich  in  nerves,  brain,  spine  (^inal  irritation  from 
falls),  coccyx,  finger-ends ;  wounds  from  stepping  on  nails,  or  any 
punctured  wounds.  The  characteristic  of  the  Hyp.  wounds  is  that 
they  are  very  sensitive  to  touch  (Led.  punctures  are  not  particularly 
sensitive]).  W.  J.  Guernsey  (H.  P.,  x.  475^  relates  the  following  case : 
A  tx>y,  nine,  was  bitten  by  a  pet  rat  on  the  first  finger  of  left  hand. 
Nothing  particular  was  observed  at  the  time,  but  some  time  after,  he 
became  ill,  and  when  Dr.  Guernsey  was  called  his  state  was  alarming. 
The  boy  could  talk  with  great  difiiculty ;  teeth  firmly  locked  ;  con- 
scious ;  neck  so  stiff  the  head  could  scarcely  be  moved.  There  was 
more  tenderness  about  the  wound  than  the  appearance  would  indicate. 
Hence  Hyp.  was  preferred  to  Led.     It  was  given  (8  p.m.)  in  the 

Sooth,  dissolved  in  water,  at  first  every  fifteen  minutes  ;  later  every  two 
ours.  At  3  a.m.  there  was  improvement,  he  fell  asleep,  and  thenext 
morning  was  practically  convalescent  Hyp.  is  called  for  in  nervous 
depression  following  wounds  ;  effects  of  shock,  fright  and  mesmerism. 
Ulceration  and  sloughing  of  wounds.  Hard,  dry,  yellow  crusts  form  on 
healing  wound.  Bunions  and  corns  when  the  pain  is  excruciating. 
Not  only  is  the  pain  sense  exalted,  there  is  exaltation  of  the  senses  of 
hearing  and  smell.  Violent  labour-pains  and  after-pains.  Tym- 
panitic distension  of  abdomen,  cutting  pains.  Gilchrist  says  Hyp.  3X, 
given  at  intervals  of  twenty  minutes  for  twelve  hours  or  longer,  seems 
to  control  perfectly  the  pain  following  laparotomy.  But  it  must  not 
be  thought  that  Hyp.  has  no  sphere  outside  wounds  and  their  effects. 
Like  Arnica  it  has  many  uses  in  the  respiratory  sphere.  It  has  cured 
asthma  <  in  foggy  weather ;  the  attacks  were  >  by  copious  expec- 
toration. Whooping-cough  <  6  to  10  p.m.  Tightness  of  chest ; 
stinging  <  on  moving.  Summer  diarrhcea  with  eruption.  P^pita- 
tion  and  local  congestions,  with  or  without  haemorrhage  and  nervous 
depression,  following  wounds.  Roehrig  (H.  R.,  xii  40)  considers 
Hyperic.  externally  and  internally  the  nearest  thing  to  a  specific  in 
bleeding  piles.  He  gives  it  to  pneumonia  patients  who  have  pfles  ; 
it  cures  the  pneumonia  and  prevents  the  arrest  of  the  flux,  always  a 
dangerous  symptom  in  these  cases.  Ussher  {H.  PT.,  xxvii.  500)  con- 
firms this  ;  "  pain,  bleeding  and  tenderness "  are  his  indications. 
^*  It  s^ems  to  suit  the  plethoric,  with  great  soreness."    He  uses  the 


HYPERICUM  949 

IX.  Toothache  >  lying  on  affected  side  and  keeping  quiet.  Hyp,  is 
sensitive  to  cold  :  <  in  cold  air  ;  in  damp ;  in  fog.  The  hacking 
cough  is  <  from  heat  as  well  as  by  cold  air.  All  symptoms  <  by 
least  exposure.    <  From  touch. 

Reiktioilfu — Antidoted  by :  Ars.  (weakness  or  sickness  on  moving) ; 
Cham,  (pains  in  face).  It  aniidoUs :  Effects  of  mesmerism  (Sulph.). 
Compare :  Aco.,  Cham.,  Coff.  (exalted  sensitiveness) ;  Am.,  Calend., 
Led.,  Ruta,  Con.,  Bellis,  Staph.,  Al.  cep.  (wounds) ;  Hydrob.,  Lach. 
(bite^  ;  Nux  (tetanus) ;  Gels.,  Lathyrus  ;  spastic  paralysis. 

Oansatloii.— Fright.    Bites,    wounds.    Shock. 


STMPTOMS. 

X.  Mind. — Makes  mistakes  in  writing ;  omits  letters ;  forgets  what  she 
wanted  to  say. — ^Talks  wildly  in  night  after  4  a.m.  while  asleep ;  appre- 
hensive;  gasped  for  breath. — Mental  excitement  as  after  drinking  tea. — 
Weakness  of  memory. — Great  nervous  depression  following  wounds. — 
Irritable. — Removes  consequences  of  fright  and  effects  of  shock. 

a.  Head. — Great  heaviness  in  the  head. — Confusion,  vertigo,  and 
heaviness. — ^Tearing  stitches  in  the  brain. — Buzzing  sensation  in  vertex  at 
night  as  if  something  living  were  in  brain. — Pulsation,  heat  and  burning  in 
the  vertex  (afternoon). — Sensation  in  the  forehead  as  if  touched  by  an  icy 
cold  hand.---Sensation  as  if  the  head  became  elongated. — Headache,  extending 
into  zygoma  or  cheek. — Headache,  with  sore  eyes,  after  a  fall. — Hair  moist, 
rest  of  body  burning  hot. 

3.  Eyes. — Sticking  through  (r.)  eye. — Burning  stinging  in  tarsi. — Stye 
on  1.  lower  lid. 

4.  Ears. — Sticking  through  (r.)  ear  in  evening. — Itching  in  r.  meatus. — 
Sensitiveness  of  hearing  during  menses. 

5*  Nose. — Pain  in  bridge  of  nose  on  rising. — Sore  within  nose ;  itching ; 
continually  picking  it. — Dryness  of  nose ;  with  sneezing ;  of  1.  nostril  with 
crusts  in  it. — Smell  very  acute. 

6.  Face. — Hot  and  bloated.— Tension  in  the  cheek. — Tearing  in 
cheek;  in  1.  zygoma. — Eruption  around  mouth  and  on  r,  ear. — ^Yellowish 
green  scabs  with  cracking  and  moisture. 

8.  Mouth. — Dryness  of  the  lips  and  mouth. — Dry,  burning  heat  in 
mouth. — ^Tongue :  coated  white ;  or  dirty  yellow.— Taste  :  insipid ;  of  blood. 
—Thirst,  with  feeling  of  heat  in  mouth. 

Q.  Throat.— Sensation  as  of  a  worm  moving  in  throat. — Hot  risings  in 
oesophagus  after  a  fright,  or  with  anxious  feelings. 

II.  Stomach.— Great  thirst— Desire  for  warm  drinks.— Eructation  on 
drinking  water. — Desire  for  wine ;  pickles. — ^Appetite  increased  morning  and 
evening. — Pressure  at  the  stomach  on  eating  but  little. — Nausea  and  inclina- 
tion to  vomit 

18.  Abdomen. — Sticking  in  the  stomach;  in  r.  hypochondrium. — 
Tympanitic  distension  of  abdomen;  relieved  by  a  stool.— (Effects  of 
laparotomy). 

13.    Stool  and  Aqus.— Loose,  bilious,  yellow  stools  evening  or  morning. 


950  HYPERICUM 

—Summer  diarrhoBa  with  eruption. — DiairhoM  driving  out  of  bed  in  mornii^. 
— ^Very  unusual  severe  urging.— Constipation ;  violent  tenesmus,  with  dis- 
charge of  a  hard  little  ball ;  with  nausea. — Rectum  feels  dry,  morning. — 
Hemorrhoids. — Burning,  biting,  and  feeling  of  dryness  in  rectum. — (Piles» 
with  much  pain,  bleeding,  and  great  soreness.) 

14.  Urinary  Organs. — Nightly  urging  to  urinate,  with  vertigo. — 
Desire  to  urinate,  with  violent  tearing  in  the  genital  (M-gauis. — Swelling  and 
hardness  of  female  urethra,  with  burning  soreness  and  sensitiveness. 

16.  Female  Sexual  Organs.— Menses  too  late  ;  headache ;  sickening 
pain  in  abdomen ;  sensitive  to  noises. — ^Tension  in  r^on  of  uterus,  as  from 
a  tight  bandage. — Leucorrhoea.— After-pains  after  instrumental  delivery. — 
Scirrhus  of  breast  from  injury. 

17.  Respiratory  Organs. — Hoarseness;  Scraping  and  roughness  in 
larynx,  upper  part  of  pharynx  and  nares  in  foggy  weather. — ^Asthma  <  in 
foggy  weather.  —  Frequent  dry  hacking  cough  ;  shorty  barking  oou^.  — 
Whooping-cough,  <  6  to  10  p.m. 

z8.  Chest. — ^Anxiety  in  chest  in  forenoon,  with  short  breath. — Stitches 
in  the  chest,  below  the  breasts.— Stitches  from  within  outward,  through  L 
breast  and  sternum,  <  from  motion. — Pressure  and  burning  in  the  chest — 
Tightness  in  the  chest.— <  In  foggy  weather.— (Pneumonia  in  persons  who 
have  piles.)-— Stinging  in  1.  chest,  <  when  moving. 

19.  Heart.—- The  heart  feels  as  though  it  would  fall  down,  in  the  evening. 
— Palpitation. —  Pulse  rapid  and  hard. —  Local  congestions  and  capillary 
erethism,  with  or  without  haemorrhages  and  great  nervous  depression, 
following  wounds. 

so.  Neck  and  Back. — ^After  a  fall,  slightest  motion  of  arms  or  neck 
extorts  cries.— Cervical  vertebrae  very  sensitive  to  the  touch.— Conse- 
quence of  spinal  concussion.— Violent  pains  and  inability  to  walk  or  stoop, 
after  a  fall  on  the  coccyx.— Aching  pain  and  sensation  of  lameness  in  the 
small  of  the  back. — Stitches  in  the  small  of  the  back. — Lies  on  back  jerking 
head  backward. 

82.  Limbs.^Caimot  walk,  from  affection  of  the  spine. — Feeling  of 
weakness  and  trembling  of  all  the  limbs, — Sensation  of  lameness  of  the  1.  arm 
and  r.  foot — ^Articular  rheumatism  (knees  mostly),  much  effusion,  muddy 
urine. — Rheumatism  of  small  joints. — Numbness  and  crawling  in  the  limbs 
hands,  and  feet. — Hands  and  feet  feel  fuzzy.— Compound  fractures.— Affec- 
tions of  joints. 

98.  Upper  Limbs. — Stitches  on  the  top  of  the  shoulder  at  every 
inspiration. — Flying  pains  in  r.  shoulder. — Neuialgia  and  paralytic  pain  in  L 
upper  arm. — ^Tension  in  both  arms  and  in  the  hands. — Numbness  in  L  arm, 
>  by  rubbing. 

83*  Lower  Llmtw. — Sensation  as  if  the  1.  foot  was  strained  or  dis- 
located.— ^The  feet  feel  pithy,  as  if  pricked  with  needles. — Fearful  sharp  pain 
in  knees,  could  hardly  touch  them. — Coxalgia  after  confinement— Sciatica, 
rheumatism  ;  from  injury. — L.  leg  numb,  cold  while  sitting. — Effects  of 
running  nail  or  pin  into  foot. — Feet  much  swollen. 

84*  Generalities. — Consequences  of  shock  or  fright — Prevents  lockjaw 
from  wounds  in  soles,  in  fingers,  and  in  palms  of  the  hands. — Convulsions 
from  blows  or  concussions, — ^Aiter  a  fall,  slightest  motion  of  arms  or  neck 


HYPERICUM  951 

extorts  cries. — Flesh  sore,  feels  bruised  all  over. — Injuries  to  parts  rich  in 
sentient  nerves,  esp.  fingers,  toes,  and  matrices  of  nails. — Mechanical  injuries, 
wounds  by  nails  or  splinters  in  the  feet,  needles  under  the  nails,  squeezing, 
hammering  ;  of  the  toes  and  fingers,  esp.  the  tips  of  the  fingers ;  when  the 
nerves  have  been  lacerated,  wounded,  torn,  with  excruciating  pains. — 
Lacerations,  when  intolerable,  excruciating  pain  shows  nerves  are  severely 
involved. — Next  to  the  nervous  tissues,  the  joints  are  affected. — Sensation 
as  of  being  lifted  up  high  into  air. 

85.  Skin.  —  Smarting  eruption,  like  nettle-rash,  on  the  hands.  — 
Painful  scars  in  tissues  rich  in  nerves. 

86.  Sleep. — Constant  drowsiness. — Spasmodic  jerks  in  arms  or  legs  on 
going  to  sleep;  twitchings. — Dreams:  with  activity,  travelling;  vivid; 
distressing. — ^At  4  a.m.  talks  nonsense  in  sleep,  distorted  staring  eyes, 
throbbing  arteries.— Wakes  4  a.m.  with  sense  of  levitation. — On  awaking : 
weary,  >  by  noon ;  feels  refreshed  ;  bowels  distended. 

87.  Fever. — Pulse  hard,  accelerated. — Shuddering  over  the  whole  body, 
with  desire  to  urinate.— Heat,  with  delirium  ;  wild,  staring  look  ;  hot  head  ; 
throbbing  of  the  carotids  ;  bright-red,  bloated  face  ;  moist  hair  on  the  head  ; 
burning  heat  of  the  skin  ;  great  oppression  and  anguish. 


END  OF   VOL.   I. 


UMWm  BROTBBKS,  THE  ORISHAlf  PRISB^  WOKUTO  AND  LOinX>N. 


^. 


/ 


